project gutenberg’ the work of edgar allan poe, by edgar allan poe 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the work of edgar allan poe 
volum 3 (of 5) of the raven edit 

author: edgar allan poe 

releas date: may 19, 2008 [ebook #2149] 
last updated: march 20, 2017 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook the work OF edgar allan poe *** 




produc by david widger 





the work OF edgar allan poe 

IN five volum 

volum 3 

the raven edit 


contents: 

narr OF A. gordon pym 
ligeia 
morella 
A tale OF the rag mountain 
the spectacl 
king pest 
three sunday IN A week 





narr OF A. gordon pym 

introductori note 
prefac 
upon my return to the unit state a few month ago, after the 
extraordinari seri of adventur in the south sea and elsewhere, of 
which an account is given in the follow pages, accid threw me 
into the societi of sever gentlemen in richmond, va., who felt deep 
interest in all matter relat to the region I had visited, and who 
were constantli urg it upon me, as a duty, to give my narr to 
the public. I had sever reasons, however, for declin to do so, some 
of which were of a natur altogeth private, and concern no person but 
myself; other not so much so. one consider which deter me wa 
that, have kept no journal dure a greater portion of the time in 
which I wa absent, I fear I should not be abl to write, from mere 
memory, a statement so minut and connect as to have the _appear 
_of that truth it would realli possess, bar onli the natur and 
unavoid exagger to which all of us are prone when detail 
event which have had power influenc in excit the imagin 
faculties. anoth reason was, that the incid to be narrat were 
of a natur so posit marvel that, unsupport as my assert 
must necessarili be (except by the evid of a singl individual, and 
he a half-bre indian), I could onli hope for belief among my family, 
and those of my friend who have had reason, through life, to put faith 
in my veracity--th probabl be that the public at larg would 
regard what I should put forth as mere an impud and ingeni 
fiction. A distrust in my own abil as a writer was, nevertheless, 
one of the princip caus which prevent me from compli with the 
suggest of my advisers. 

among those gentlemen in virginia who express the greatest interest 
in my statement, more particularli in regard to that portion of it 
which relat to the antarct ocean, wa mr. poe, late editor of 
the “southern literari messenger,” a monthli magazine, publish by mr. 
thoma W. white, in the citi of richmond. He strongli advis me, 
among others, to prepar at onc a full account of what I had seen 
and undergone, and trust to the shrewd and common-sens of the 
public--insisting, with great plausibility, that howev roughly, as 
regard mere authorship, my book should be got up, it veri uncouthness, 
if there were any, would give it all the better chanc of be receiv 
as truth. 

notwithstand thi representation, I did not make up my mind to do as 
he suggested. He afterward propos (find that I would not stir in 
the matter) that I should allow him to draw up, in hi own words, a 
narr of the earlier portion of my adventures, from fact afford 
by myself, publish it in the “southern messenger” _under the garb 
of fiction. _to this, perceiv no objection, I consented, stipul 
onli that my real name should be retained. two number of the pretend 
fiction appeared, consequently, in the “messenger” for januari and 
februari (1837), and, in order that it might certainli be regard as 
fiction, the name of mr. poe wa affix to the articl in the tabl of 
content of the magazine. 

the manner in which thi ruse wa receiv ha induc me at length to 
undertak a regular compil and public of the adventur in 
question; for I found that, in spite of the air of fabl which had been 
so ingeni thrown around that portion of my statement which appear 
in the “messenger” (without alter or distort a singl fact), 
the public were still not at all dispos to receiv it as fable, and 
sever letter were sent to mr. p.’ address, distinctli express 
a convict to the contrary. I thenc conclud that the fact of my 
narr would prove of such a natur as to carri with them suffici 
evid of their own authenticity, and that I had consequ littl 
to fear on the score of popular incredulity. 

this_ exposé _be made, it will be seen at onc how much of what 
follow I claim to be my own writing; and it will also be understood 
that no fact is misrepres in the first few page which were written 
by mr. poe. even to those reader who have not seen the “messenger,” 
it will be unnecessari to point out where hi portion end and my own 
commences; the differ in point of style will be readili perceived. 

A. G. pym. 




chapter 1 

MY name is arthur gordon pym. My father wa a respect trader in 
sea-stor at nantucket, where I wa born. My matern grandfath wa 
an attorney in good practice. He wa fortun in everi thing, and had 
specul veri success in stock of the edgarton new bank, as it 
wa formerli called. By these and other mean he had manag to lay by a 
toler sum of money. He wa more attach to myself, I believe, than 
to ani other person in the world, and I expect to inherit the most 
of hi properti at hi death. He sent me, at six year of age, to 
the school of old mr. ricketts, a gentleman with onli one arm and of 
eccentr manners--h is well known to almost everi person who ha 
visit new bedford. I stay at hi school until I wa sixteen, when I 
left him for mr. E. ronald’ academi on the hill. here I becam intim 
with the son of mr. barnard, a sea-captain, who gener sail in the 
employ of lloyd and vredenburgh--mr. barnard is also veri well known in 
new bedford, and ha mani relations, I am certain, in edgarton. hi son 
wa name augustus, and he wa nearli two year older than myself. He 
had been on a whale voyag with hi father in the john donaldson, and 
wa alway talk to me of hi adventur in the south pacif ocean. 
I use frequent to go home with him, and remain all day, and sometim 
all night. We occupi the same bed, and he would be sure to keep me 
awak until almost light, tell me stori of the nativ of the 
island of tinian, and other place he had visit in hi travels. At 
last I could not help be interest in what he said, and by degre 
I felt the greatest desir to go to sea. I own a sailboat call the 
ariel, and worth about seventy-f dollars. she had a half-deck or 
cuddy, and wa rig sloop-fashion--i forget her tonnage, but she would 
hold ten person without much crowding. In thi boat we were in the 
habit of go on some of the maddest freak in the world; and, when I 
now think of them, it appear to me a thousand wonder that I am aliv 
to-day. 

I will relat one of these adventur by way of introduct to a 
longer and more moment narrative. one night there wa a parti at mr. 
barnard’s, and both augustu and myself were not a littl intox 
toward the close of it. As usual, in such cases, I took part of hi 
bed in prefer to go home. He went to sleep, as I thought, veri 
quietli (it be near one when the parti broke up), and without say 
a word on hi favorit topic. It might have been half an hour from the 
time of our get in bed, and I wa just about fall into a doze, 
when he suddenli start up, and swore with a terribl oath that he 
would not go to sleep for ani arthur pym in christendom, when there wa 
so gloriou a breez from the southwest. I never wa so astonish in 
my life, not know what he intended, and think that the wine and 
liquor he had drunk had set him entir besid himself. He proceed 
to talk veri coolly, however, say he knew that I suppos him 
intoxicated, but that he wa never more sober in hi life. He wa onli 
tired, he added, of lie in bed on such a fine night like a dog, and 
wa determin to get up and dress, and go out on a frolic with the 
boat. I can hardli tell what possess me, but the word were no sooner 
out of hi mouth than I felt a thrill of the greatest excit and 
pleasure, and thought hi mad idea one of the most delight and most 
reason thing in the world. It wa blow almost a gale, and the 
weather wa veri cold--it be late in october. I sprang out of bed, 
nevertheless, in a kind of ecstasy, and told him I wa quit as brave 
as himself, and quit as tire as he wa of lie in bed like a dog, 
and quit as readi for ani fun or frolic as ani augustu barnard in 
nantucket. 

We lost no time in get on our cloth and hurri down to the boat. 
she wa lie at the old decay wharf by the lumber-yard of pankey & 
co., and almost thump her side out against the rough logs. augustu 
got into her and bail her, for she wa nearli half full of water. thi 
be done, we hoist jib and mainsail, kept full, and start boldli 
out to sea. 

the wind, as I befor said, blew freshli from the southwest. the night 
wa veri clear and cold. augustu had taken the helm, and I station 
myself by the mast, on the deck of the cuddy. We flew along at a great 
rate--neith of us have said a word sinc cast loos from the 
wharf. I now ask my companion what cours he intend to steer, and 
what time he thought it probabl we should get back. He whistl for a 
few minutes, and then said crustily: “_i_ am go to sea--_you_ may go 
home if you think proper.” turn my eye upon him, I perceiv at onc 
that, in spite of hi assum _nonchalance_, he wa greatli agitated. 
I could see him distinctli by the light of the moon--hi face wa 
paler than ani marble, and hi hand shook so excess that he could 
scarc retain hold of the tiller. I found that someth had gone 
wrong, and becam serious alarmed. At thi period I knew littl 
about the manag of a boat, and wa now depend entir upon the 
nautic skill of my friend. the wind, too, had suddenli increased, as 
we were fast get out of the lee of the land--stil I wa asham 
to betray ani trepidation, and for almost half an hour maintain a 
resolut silence. I could stand it no longer, however, and spoke to 
augustu about the proprieti of turn back. As before, it wa nearli 
a minut befor he made answer, or took ani notic of my suggestion. 
“by-and-by,” said he at length--“tim enough--hom by-and-by.” I had 
expect a similar reply, but there wa someth in the tone of these 
word which fill me with an indescrib feel of dread. I again 
look at the speaker attentively. hi lip were perfectli livid, and 
hi knee shook so violent togeth that he seem scarc abl to 
stand. “for god’ sake, augustus,” I screamed, now heartili frightened, 
“what ail you?--what is the matter?--what _are_ you go to do?” 
“matter!” he stammered, in the greatest appar surprise, let go 
the tiller at the same moment, and fall forward into the bottom of 
the boat--“matter--why, noth is the--matter--go home--d--d--don’t 
you see?” the whole truth now flash upon me. I flew to him and rais 
him up. He wa drunk--beastli drunk--h could no longer either stand, 
speak, or see. hi eye were perfectli glazed; and as I let him go 
in the extrem of my despair, he roll like a mere log into the 
bilge-water, from which I had lift him. It wa evid that, dure 
the evening, he had drunk far more than I suspected, and that hi 
conduct in bed had been the result of a highly-concentr state of 
intoxication--a state which, like madness, frequent enabl the victim 
to imit the outward demeanour of one in perfect possess of hi 
senses. the cool of the night air, however, had had it usual 
effect--th mental energi began to yield befor it influence--and the 
confus percept which he no doubt then had of hi peril situat 
had assist in hasten the catastrophe. He wa now thoroughli 
insensible, and there wa no probabl that he would be otherwis for 
mani hours. 

It is hardli possibl to conceiv the extrem of my terror. the fume 
of the wine late taken had evaporated, leav me doubli timid and 
irresolute. I knew that I wa altogeth incap of manag the 
boat, and that a fierc wind and strong ebb tide were hurri us to 
destruction. A storm wa evid gather behind us; we had neither 
compass nor provisions; and it wa clear that, if we held our present 
course, we should be out of sight of land befor daybreak. these 
thoughts, with a crowd of other equal fearful, flash through my 
mind with a bewild rapidity, and for some moment paralyz me 
beyond the possibl of make ani exertion. the boat wa go 
through the water at a terribl rate--ful befor the wind--no reef in 
either jib or mainsail--run her bow complet under the foam. It 
wa a thousand wonder she did not broach to--augustu have let go 
the tiller, as I said before, and I be too much agit to think of 
take it myself. By good luck, however, she kept steady, and gradual 
I recov some degre of presenc of mind. still the wind wa 
increas fearfully, and whenev we rose from a plung forward, the 
sea behind fell comb over our counter, and delug us with water. I 
wa so utterli benumbed, too, in everi limb, as to be nearli unconsci 
of sensation. At length I summon up the resolut of despair, 
and rush to the mainsail let it go by the run. As might have been 
expected, it flew over the bows, and, get drench with water, 
carri away the mast short off by the board. thi latter accid alon 
save me from instant destruction. under the jib only, I now boom 
along befor the wind, ship heavi sea occasion over the 
counter, but reliev from the terror of immedi death. I took the 
helm, and breath with greater freedom as I found that there yet 
remain to us a chanc of ultim escape. augustu still lay senseless 
in the bottom of the boat; and as there wa immin danger of hi 
drown (the water be nearli a foot deep just where he fell), I 
contriv to rais him partial up, and keep him in a sit position, 
by pass a rope round hi waist, and lash it to a ringbolt in the 
deck of the cuddy. have thu arrang everi thing as well as I could 
in my chill and agit condition, I recommend myself to god, and 
made up my mind to bear whatev might happen with all the fortitud in 
my power. 

hardli had I come to thi resolution, when, suddenly, a loud and long 
scream or yell, as if from the throat of a thousand demons, seem to 
pervad the whole atmospher around and abov the boat. never while I 
live shall I forget the intens agoni of terror I experienc at that 
moment. My hair stood erect on my head--i felt the blood congeal 
in my veins--mi heart ceas utterli to beat, and without have onc 
rais my eye to learn the sourc of my alarm, I tumbl headlong and 
insens upon the bodi of my fallen companion. 

I found myself, upon reviving, in the cabin of a larg whaling-ship (the 
penguin) bound to nantucket. sever person were stand over me, and 
augustus, paler than death, wa busili occupi in chafe my hands. 
upon see me open my eyes, hi exclam of gratitud and joy 
excit altern laughter and tear from the rough-look personag 
who were present. the mysteri of our be in exist wa now 
soon explained. We had been run down by the whaling-ship, which wa 
close-hauled, beat up to nantucket with everi sail she could ventur 
to set, and consequ run almost at right angl to our own 
course. sever men were on the look-out forward, but did not perceiv 
our boat until it wa an imposs to avoid come in contact--their 
shout of warn upon see us were what so terribl alarm me. the 
huge ship, I wa told, rode immedi over us with as much eas as 
our own littl vessel would have pass over a feather, and without the 
least percept impedi to her progress. not a scream aros from 
the deck of the victim--ther wa a slight grate sound to be heard 
mingl with the roar of wind and water, as the frail bark which wa 
swallow up rub for a moment along the keel of her destroyer--but 
thi wa all. think our boat (which it will be rememb wa 
dismasted) some mere shell cut adrift as useless, the captain (captain 
E. T. V. block, of new london) wa for proceed on hi cours without 
troubl himself further about the matter. luckily, there were two 
of the look-out who swore posit to have seen some person at our 
helm, and repres the possibl of yet save him. A discuss 
ensued, when block grew angry, and, after a while, said that “it wa no 
busi of hi to be etern watch for egg-shells; that the ship 
should not put about for ani such nonsense; and if there wa a man run 
down, it wa nobody’ fault but hi own, he might drown and be dammed” 
or some languag to that effect. henderson, the first mate, now took the 
matter up, be justli indignant, as well as the whole ship’ crew, 
at a speech evinc so base a degre of heartless atrocity. He 
spoke plainly, see himself upheld by the men, told the captain he 
consid him a fit subject for the gallows, and that he would disobey 
hi order if he were hang for it the moment he set hi foot on shore. 
He strode aft, jostl block (who turn pale and made no answer) 
on one side, and seiz the helm, gave the word, in a firm voice, 
hard-a-lee! the men flew to their posts, and the ship went cleverli 
about. all thi had occupi nearli five minutes, and it wa suppos to 
be hardli within the bound of possibl that ani individu could be 
saved--allow ani to have been on board the boat. yet, as the reader 
ha seen, both augustu and myself were rescued; and our deliver 
seem to have been brought about by two of those almost inconceiv 
piec of good fortun which are attribut by the wise and piou to the 
special interfer of providence. 

while the ship wa yet in stays, the mate lower the jolly-boat and 
jump into her with the veri two men, I believe, who spoke up as have 
seen me at the helm. they had just left the lee of the vessel (the moon 
still shine brightly) when she made a long and heavi roll to windward, 
and henderson, at the same moment, start up in hi seat bawl out 
to hi crew to back water. He would say noth else--rep hi cri 
impatiently, back water! back water! the men put back as speedili as 
possible, but by thi time the ship had gone round, and gotten fulli 
under headway, although all hand on board were make great exert 
to take in sail. In despit of the danger of the attempt, the mate clung 
to the main-chain as soon as they came within hi reach. anoth huge 
lurch now brought the starboard side of the vessel out of water nearli 
as far as her keel, when the caus of hi anxieti wa render obviou 
enough. the bodi of a man wa seen to be affix in the most singular 
manner to the smooth and shine bottom (the penguin wa copper and 
copper-fastened), and beat violent against it with everi movement 
of the hull. after sever ineffectu efforts, made dure the lurch 
of the ship, and at the immin risk of swamp the boat I wa final 
disengag from my peril situat and taken on board--for the bodi 
prove to be my own. It appear that one of the timber-bolt have 
start and broken a passag through the copper, it had arrest my 
progress as I pass under the ship, and fasten me in so extraordinari 
a manner to her bottom. the head of the bolt had made it way through 
the collar of the green baiz jacket I had on, and through the back part 
of my neck, forc itself out between two sinew and just below the 
right ear. I wa immedi put to bed--although life seem to be 
total extinct. there wa no surgeon on board. the captain, however, 
treat me with everi attention--to make amends, I presume, in the eye 
of hi crew, for hi atroci behaviour in the previou portion of the 
adventure. 

In the meantime, henderson had again put off from the ship, although 
the wind wa now blow almost a hurricane. He had not been gone mani 
minut when he fell in with some fragment of our boat, and shortli 
afterward one of the men with him assert that he could distinguish a 
cri for help at interv amid the roar of the tempest. thi induc 
the hardi seamen to persever in their search for more than half an 
hour, although repeat signal to return were made them by captain 
block, and although everi moment on the water in so frail a boat wa 
fraught to them with the most immin and deadli peril. indeed, it is 
nearli imposs to conceiv how the small jolli they were in could 
have escap destruct for a singl instant. she wa built, however, 
for the whale service, and wa fitted, as I have sinc had reason to 
believe, with air-boxes, in the manner of some life-boat use on the 
coast of wales. 

after search in vain for about the period of time just mentioned, 
it wa determin to get back to the ship. they had scarc made thi 
resolv when a feebl cri aros from a dark object that float rapidli 
by. they pursu and soon overtook it. It prove to be the entir deck 
of the ariel’ cuddy. augustu wa struggl near it, appar in the 
last agonies. upon get hold of him it wa found that he wa attach 
by a rope to the float timber. thi rope, it will be remembered, I 
had myself tie around hi waist, and made fast to a ringbolt, for 
the purpos of keep him in an upright position, and my so doing, 
it appeared, had been ultim the mean of preserv hi life. the 
ariel wa slightli put together, and in go down her frame natur 
went to pieces; the deck of the cuddy, as might have been expected, wa 
lifted, by the forc of the water rush in, entir from the 
main timbers, and float (with other fragments, no doubt) to the 
surface--augustu wa buoy up with it, and thu escap a terribl 
death. 

It wa more than an hour after be taken on board the penguin befor 
he could give ani account of himself, or be made to comprehend the 
natur of the accid which had befallen our boat. At length he becam 
thoroughli aroused, and spoke much of hi sensat while in the water. 
upon hi first attain ani degre of consciousness, he found himself 
beneath the surface, whirl round and round with inconceiv 
rapidity, and with a rope wrap in three or four fold tightli about 
hi neck. In an instant afterward he felt himself go rapidli upward, 
when, hi head strike violent against a hard substance, he again 
relaps into insensibility. upon onc more reviv he wa in fuller 
possess of hi reason--thi wa still, however, in the greatest 
degre cloud and confused. He now knew that some accid had 
occurred, and that he wa in the water, although hi mouth wa abov 
the surface, and he could breath with some freedom. possibly, at thi 
period the deck wa drift rapidli befor the wind, and draw him 
after it, as he float upon hi back. Of course, as long as he could 
have retain thi position, it would have been nearli imposs that 
he should be drowned. present a surg threw him directli athwart the 
deck, and thi post he endeavor to maintain, scream at interv 
for help. just befor he wa discov by mr. henderson, he had been 
oblig to relax hi hold through exhaustion, and, fall into the sea, 
had given himself up for lost. dure the whole period of hi struggl 
he had not the faintest recollect of the ariel, nor of the matter in 
connexion with the sourc of hi disaster. A vagu feel of terror 
and despair had taken entir possess of hi faculties. when he wa 
final pick up, everi power of hi mind had fail him; and, as 
befor said, it wa nearli an hour after get on board the penguin 
befor he becam fulli awar of hi condition. In regard to myself--i 
wa resuscit from a state border veri nearli upon death (and 
after everi other mean had been tri in vain for three hour and a 
half) by vigor friction with flannel bath in hot oil--a proceed 
suggest by augustus. the wound in my neck, although of an ugli 
appearance, prove of littl real consequence, and I soon recov from 
it effects. 

the penguin got into port about nine o’clock in the morning, after 
encount one of the severest gale ever experienc off nantucket. 
both augustu and myself manag to appear at mr. barnard’ in time for 
breakfast--which, luckily, wa somewhat late, owe to the parti over 
night. I suppos all at the tabl were too much fatigu themselv to 
notic our jade appearance--of course, it would not have born a veri 
rigid scrutiny. schoolboys, however, can accomplish wonder in the way 
of deception, and I verili believ not one of our friend in nantucket 
had the slightest suspicion that the terribl stori told by some sailor 
in town of their have run down a vessel at sea and drown some thirti 
or forti poor devils, had refer either to the ariel, my companion, 
or myself. We two have sinc veri frequent talk the matter over--but 
never without a shudder. In one of our convers augustu frankli 
confess to me, that in hi whole life he had at no time experienc 
so excruci a sens of dismay, as when on board our littl boat 
he first discov the extent of hi intoxication, and felt himself 
sink beneath it influence. 




chapter 2 

IN no affair of mere prejudice, pro or con, do we deduc infer 
with entir certainty, even from the most simpl data. It might be 
suppos that a catastroph such as I have just relat would have 
effectu cool my incipi passion for the sea. On the contrary, I 
never experienc a more ardent long for the wild adventur incid 
to the life of a navig than within a week after our miracul 
deliverance. thi short period prove ampli long enough to eras from 
my memori the shadows, and bring out in vivid light all the pleasur 
excit point of color, all the picturesqueness, of the late peril 
accident. My convers with augustu grew daili more frequent and 
more intens full of interest. He had a manner of relat hi stori 
of the ocean (more than one half of which I now suspect to have 
been sheer fabrications) well adapt to have weight with one of 
my enthusiast tempera and somewhat gloomi although glow 
imagination. It is strange, too, that he most strongli enlist my 
feel in behalf of the life of a seaman, when he depict hi more 
terribl moment of suffer and despair. for the bright side of the 
paint I had a limit sympathy. My vision were of shipwreck and 
famine; of death or captiv among barbarian hordes; of a lifetim 
drag out in sorrow and tears, upon some gray and desol rock, in 
an ocean unapproach and unknown. such vision or desires--for they 
amount to desires--ar common, I have sinc been assured, to the whole 
numer race of the melancholi among men--at the time of which I speak 
I regard them onli as prophet glimps of a destini which I felt 
myself in a measur bound to fulfil. augustu thoroughli enter into my 
state of mind. It is probable, indeed, that our intim communion had 
result in a partial interchang of character. 

about eighteen month after the period of the ariel’ disaster, the 
firm of lloyd and vredenburgh (a hous connect in some manner with the 
messieur enderby, I believe, of liverpool) were engag in repair 
and fit out the brig grampu for a whale voyage. she wa an old 
hulk, and scarc seaworthi when all wa done to her that could be 
done. I hardli know whi she wa chosen in prefer to other good 
vessel belong to the same owners--but so it was. mr. barnard wa 
appoint to command her, and augustu wa go with him. while the 
brig wa get ready, he frequent urg upon me the excel of 
the opportun now offer for indulg my desir of travel. He found 
me by no mean an unwil listener--yet the matter could not be so 
easili arranged. My father made no direct opposition; but my mother went 
into hyster at the bare mention of the design; and, more than all, 
my grandfather, from whom I expect much, vow to cut me off with 
a shill if I should ever broach the subject to him again. these 
difficulties, however, so far from abat my desire, onli ad fuel to 
the flame. I determin to go at all hazards; and, have made known my 
intent to augustus, we set about arrang a plan by which it 
might be accomplished. In the meantim I forbor speak to ani of my 
relat in regard to the voyage, and, as I busi myself ostens 
with my usual studies, it wa suppos that I had abandon the design. 
I have sinc frequent examin my conduct on thi occas with 
sentiment of displeasur as well as of surprise. the intens hypocrisi 
I made use of for the further of my project--an hypocrisi pervad 
everi word and action of my life for so long a period of time--could 
onli have been render toler to myself by the wild and burn 
expect with which I look forward to the fulfil of my 
long-cherish vision of travel. 

In pursuanc of my scheme of deception, I wa necessarili oblig to 
leav much to the manag of augustus, who wa employ for the 
greater part of everi day on board the grampus, attend to some 
arrang for hi father in the cabin and cabin hold. At night, 
however, we were sure to have a confer and talk over our hopes. 
after nearli a month pass in thi manner, without our hit upon 
ani plan we thought like to succeed, he told me at last that he had 
determin upon everyth necessary. I had a relat live in new 
bedford, a mr. ross, at whose hous I wa in the habit of spend 
occasion two or three week at a time. the brig wa to sail about 
the middl of june (june, 1827), and it wa agre that, a day or two 
befor her put to sea, my father wa to receiv a note, as usual, 
from mr. ross, ask me to come over and spend a fortnight with robert 
and emmet (hi sons). augustu charg himself with the indit of 
thi note and get it delivered. have set out as supposed, for new 
bedford, I wa then to report myself to my companion, who would contriv 
a hiding-plac for me in the grampus. thi hiding-place, he assur me, 
would be render suffici comfort for a resid of mani 
days, dure which I wa not to make my appearance. when the brig had 
proceed so far on her cours as to make ani turn back a matter out 
of question, I should then, he said, be formal instal in all 
the comfort of the cabin; and as to hi father, he would onli laugh 
heartili at the joke. vessel enough would be met with by which a letter 
might be sent home explain the adventur to my parents. 

the middl of june at length arrived, and everi thing had been matured. 
the note wa written and delivered, and on a monday morn I left the 
hous for the new bedford packet, as supposed. I went, however, straight 
to augustus, who wa wait for me at the corner of a street. It had 
been our origin plan that I should keep out of the way until dark, and 
then slip on board the brig; but, as there wa now a thick fog in our 
favor, it wa agre to lose no time in secret me. augustu led the 
way to the wharf, and I follow at a littl distance, envelop in a 
thick seaman’ cloak, which he had brought with him, so that my person 
might not be easili recognized. just as we turn the second corner, 
after pass mr. edmund’ well, who should appear, stand right in 
front of me, and look me full in the face, but old mr. peterson, my 
grandfather. “why, bless my soul, gordon,” said he, after a long pause, 
“why, why,--whos dirti cloak is that you have on?” “sir!” I replied, 
assuming, as well as I could, in the exig of the moment, an air 
of offend surprise, and talk in the gruffest of all imagin 
tones--“sir! you are a sum’mat mistaken--mi name, in the first place, 
bee’nt noth at all like goddin, and i’d want you for to know better, 
you blackguard, than to call my new obercoat a darti one.” for my life 
I could hardli refrain from scream with laughter at the odd manner in 
which the old gentleman receiv thi handsom rebuke. He start back 
two or three steps, turn first pale and then excess red, threw up 
hi spectacles, then, put them down, ran full tilt at me, with 
hi umbrella uplifted. He stop short, however, in hi career, as if 
struck with a sudden recollection; and presently, turn round, hobbl 
off down the street, shake all the while with rage, and mutter 
between hi teeth: “won’t do--new glasses--thought it wa gordon--d--d 
good-for-noth salt water long tom.” 

after thi narrow escap we proceed with greater caution, and arriv 
at our point of destin in safety. there were onli one or two of 
the hand on board, and these were busi forward, do someth to the 
forecastl combings. captain barnard, we knew veri well, wa engag 
at lloyd and vredenburgh’s, and would remain there until late in the 
evening, so we had littl to apprehend on hi account. augustu went 
first up the vessel’ side, and in a short while I follow him, without 
be notic by the men at work. We proceed at onc into the cabin, 
and found no person there. It wa fit up in the most comfort 
style--a thing somewhat unusu in a whaling-vessel. there were four 
veri excel staterooms, with wide and conveni berths. there wa 
also a larg stove, I took notice, and a remark thick and valuabl 
carpet cover the floor of both the cabin and staterooms. the ceil 
wa full seven feet high, and, in short, everi thing appear of a more 
roomi and agreeabl natur than I had anticipated. augustus, however, 
would allow me but littl time for observation, insist upon the 
necess of my conceal myself as soon as possible. He led the way 
into hi own stateroom, which wa on the starboard side of the brig, and 
next to the bulkheads. upon entering, he close the door and bolt it. 
I thought I had never seen a nicer littl room than the one in which I 
now found myself. It wa about ten feet long, and had onli one berth, 
which, as I said before, wa wide and convenient. In that portion of 
the closet nearest the bulkhead there wa a space of four feet square, 
contain a table, a chair, and a set of hang shelv full of books, 
chiefli book of voyag and travels. there were mani other littl 
comfort in the room, among which I ought not to forget a kind of 
safe or refrigerator, in which augustu point out to me a host of 
delicacies, both in the eat and drink department. 

He now press with hi knuckl upon a certain spot of the carpet in 
one corner of the space just mentioned, let me know that a portion 
of the flooring, about sixteen inch square, had been neatli cut out 
and again adjusted. As he pressed, thi portion rose up at one end 
suffici to allow the passag of hi finger beneath. In thi manner 
he rais the mouth of the trap (to which the carpet wa still fasten 
by tacks), and I found that it led into the after hold. He next lit a 
small taper by mean of a phosphor match, and, place the light in a 
dark lantern, descend with it through the opening, bid me follow. 
I did so, and he then pull the cover upon the hole, by mean of a nail 
driven into the under side--th carpet, of course, resum it origin 
posit on the floor of the stateroom, and all trace of the apertur 
be concealed. 

the taper gave out so feebl a ray that it wa with the greatest 
difficulti I could grope my way through the confus mass of lumber 
among which I now found myself. By degrees, however, my eye becam 
accustom to the gloom, and I proceed with less trouble, hold 
on to the skirt of my friend’ coat. He brought me, at length, 
after creep and wind through innumer narrow passages, to an 
iron-bound box, such as is use sometim for pack fine earthenware. 
It wa nearli four feet high, and full six long, but veri narrow. two 
larg empti oil-cask lay on the top of it, and abov these, again, a 
vast quantiti of straw matting, pile up as high as the floor of 
the cabin. In everi other direct around wa wedg as close as 
possible, even up to the ceiling, a complet chao of almost everi 
speci of ship-furniture, togeth with a heterogen medley of 
crates, hampers, barrels, and bales, so that it seem a matter no less 
than miracul that we had discov ani passag at all to the box. I 
afterward found that augustu had purpos arrang the stowag in thi 
hold with a view to afford me a thorough concealment, have had onli 
one assist in the labour, a man not go out in the brig. 

My companion now show me that one of the end of the box could be 
remov at pleasure. He slip it asid and display the interior, at 
which I wa excess amused. A mattress from one of the cabin berth 
cover the whole of it bottom, and it contain almost everi articl 
of mere comfort which could be crowd into so small a space, allow 
me, at the same time, suffici room for my accommodation, either in a 
sit posit or lie at full length. among other things, there were 
some books, pen, ink, and paper, three blankets, a larg jug full of 
water, a keg of sea-biscuit, three or four immens bologna sausages, an 
enorm ham, a cold leg of roast mutton, and half a dozen bottl of 
cordial and liqueurs. I proceed immedi to take possess of my 
littl apartment, and thi with feel of higher satisfaction, I am 
sure, than ani monarch ever experienc upon enter a new palace. 
augustu now point out to me the method of fasten the open end 
of the box, and then, hold the taper close to the deck, show me a 
piec of dark whipcord lie along it. this, he said, extend from my 
hiding-plac throughout all the necessari wind among the lumber, to a 
nail which wa driven into the deck of the hold, immedi beneath the 
trap-door lead into hi stateroom. By mean of thi cord I should be 
enabl readili to trace my way out without hi guidance, provid ani 
unlooked-for accid should render such a step necessary. He now took 
hi departure, leav with me the lantern, togeth with a copiou 
suppli of taper and phosphorous, and promis to pay me a visit as 
often as he could contriv to do so without observation. thi wa on the 
seventeenth of june. 

I remain three day and night (a nearli as I could guess) in my 
hiding-plac without get out of it at all, except twice for the 
purpos of stretch my limb by stand erect between two crate just 
opposit the opening. dure the whole period I saw noth of augustus; 
but thi occas me littl uneasiness, as I knew the brig wa 
expect to put to sea everi hour, and in the bustl he would not easili 
find opportun of come down to me. At length I heard the trap 
open and shut, and present he call in a low voice, ask if all wa 
well, and if there wa ani thing I wanted. “nothing,” I replied; “I am 
as comfort as can be; when will the brig sail?” “she will be under 
weigh in less than half an hour,” he answered. “I came to let you know, 
and for fear you should be uneasi at my absence. I shall not have a 
chanc of come down again for some time--perhap for three or four 
day more. all is go on right aboveboard. after I go up and close the 
trap, do you creep along by the whipcord to where the nail is driven in. 
you will find my watch there--it may be use to you, as you have no 
daylight to keep time by. I suppos you can’t tell how long you have 
been buried--onli three days--thi is the twentieth. I would bring the 
watch to your box, but am afraid of be missed.” with thi he went up. 

In about an hour after he had gone I distinctli felt the brig in motion, 
and congratul myself upon have at length fairli commenc a 
voyage. satisfi with thi idea, I determin to make my mind as easi 
as possible, and await the cours of event until I should be 
permit to exchang the box for the more roomy, although hardli more 
comfortable, accommod of the cabin. My first care wa to get the 
watch. leav the taper burning, I grope along in the dark, follow 
the cord through wind innumerable, in some of which I discov 
that, after toil a long distance, I wa brought back within a foot or 
two of a former position. At length I reach the nail, and secur the 
object of my journey, return with it in safety. I now look over 
the book which had been so thought provided, and select the 
expedit of lewi and clark to the mouth of the columbia. with thi 
I amus myself for some time, when, grow sleepy, I extinguish the 
light with great care, and soon fell into a sound slumber. 

upon awaken I felt strang confus in mind, and some time elaps 
befor I could bring to recollect all the variou circumst of 
my situation. By degrees, however, I rememb all. strike a light, I 
look at the watch; but it wa run down, and there were, consequently, 
no mean of determin how long I slept. My limb were greatli cramped, 
and I wa forc to reliev them by stand between the crates. 
present feel an almost raven appetite, I bethought myself of the 
cold mutton, some of which I had eaten just befor go to sleep, and 
found excellent. what wa my astonish in discov it to be in a 
state of absolut putrefaction! thi circumst occas me great 
disquietude; for, connect it with the disord of mind I experienc 
upon awakening, I began to suppos that I must have slept for an 
inordin long period of time. the close atmospher of the hold might 
have had someth to do with this, and might, in the end, be product 
of the most seriou results. My head ach excessively; I fanci that I 
drew everi breath with difficulty; and, in short, I wa oppress with 
a multitud of gloomi feelings. still I could not ventur to make ani 
disturb by open the trap or otherwise, and, have wound up the 
watch, content myself as well as possible. 

throughout the whole of the next tediou twenty-four hour no person 
came to my relief, and I could not help accus augustu of the 
grossest inattention. what alarm me chiefli was, that the water in 
my jug wa reduc to about half a pint, and I wa suffer much from 
thirst, have eaten freeli of the bologna sausag after the loss of my 
mutton. I becam veri uneasy, and could no longer take ani interest in 
my books. I wa overpowered, too, with a desir to sleep, yet trembl 
at the thought of indulg it, lest there might exist some pernici 
influence, like that of burn charcoal, in the confin air of the 
hold. In the meantim the roll of the brig told me that we were far in 
the main ocean, and a dull hum sound, which reach my ear as if 
from an immens distance, convinc me no ordinari gale wa blowing. I 
could not imagin a reason for the absenc of augustus. We were sure 
far enough advanc on our voyag to allow of my go up. some accid 
might have happen to him--but I could think of none which would 
account for hi suffer me to remain so long a prisoner, except, 
indeed, hi have suddenli die or fallen overboard, and upon thi idea 
I could not dwell with ani degre of patience. It wa possibl that we 
had been baffl by head winds, and were still in the near vicin of 
nantucket. thi notion, however, I wa forc to abandon; for such be 
the case, the brig must have frequent gone about; and I wa entir 
satisfied, from her continu inclin to the larboard, that she had 
been sail all along with a steadi breez on her starboard quarter. 
besides, grant that we were still in the neighborhood of the 
island, whi should not augustu have visit me and inform me of 
the circumstance? ponder in thi manner upon the difficulti of 
my solitari and cheerless condition, I resolv to wait yet anoth 
twenty-four hours, when, if no relief were obtained, I would make my way 
to the trap, and endeavour either to hold a parley with my friend, 
or get at least a littl fresh air through the opening, and a further 
suppli of water from the stateroom. while occupi with thi thought, 
however, I fell in spite of everi exert to the contrary, into a state 
of profound sleep, or rather stupor. My dream were of the most terrif 
description. everi speci of calam and horror befel me. among other 
miseri I wa smother to death between huge pillows, by demon of 
the most ghastli and feroci aspect. immens serpent held me in their 
embrace, and look earnestli in my face with their fear shine 
eyes. then deserts, limitless, and of the most forlorn and awe-inspir 
character, spread themselv out befor me. immens tall trunk of 
trees, gray and leafless, rose up in endless success as far as the 
eye could reach. their root were conceal in wide-spread morasses, 
whose dreari water lay intens black, still, and altogeth terrible, 
beneath. and the strang tree seem endow with a human vitality, and 
wave to and fro their skeleton arms, were cri to the silent water 
for mercy, in the shrill and pierc accent of the most acut agoni 
and despair. the scene changed; and I stood, nake and alone, amidst the 
burn sand-plain of sahara. At my feet lay crouch a fierc lion 
of the tropics. suddenli hi wild eye open and fell upon me. with 
a conclus bound he sprang to hi feet, and laid bare hi horribl 
teeth. In anoth instant there burst from hi red throat a roar like 
the thunder of the firmament, and I fell impetu to the earth. 
stifl in a paroxysm of terror, I at last found myself partial 
awake. My dream, then, wa not all a dream. now, at least, I wa in 
possess of my senses. the paw of some huge and real monster were 
press heavili upon my bosom--hi hot breath wa in my ear--and hi 
white and ghastli fang were gleam upon me through the gloom. 

had a thousand live hung upon the movement of a limb or the utter 
of a syllable, I could have neither stir nor spoken. the beast, 
whatev it was, retain hi posit without attempt ani immedi 
violence, while I lay in an utterli helpless, and, I fancied, a die 
condit beneath him. I felt that my power of bodi and mind were fast 
leav me--in a word, that I wa perishing, and perish of sheer 
fright. My brain swam--i grew deadli sick--mi vision failed--even the 
glare eyebal abov me grew dim. make a last strong effort, I at 
length breath a faint ejacul to god, and resign myself to 
die. the sound of my voic seem to arous all the latent furi of the 
animal. He precipit himself at full length upon my body; but what 
wa my astonishment, when, with a long and low whine, he commenc 
lick my face and hand with the greatest eagerness, and with the 
most extravag demonstr of affect and joy! I wa bewildered, 
utterli lost in amazement--but I could not forget the peculiar whine 
of my newfoundland dog tiger, and the odd manner of hi caress I well 
knew. It wa he. I experienc a sudden rush of blood to my temples--a 
giddi and overpow sens of deliver and reanimation. I rose 
hurriedli from the mattress upon which I had been lying, and, throw 
myself upon the neck of my faith follow and friend, reliev the 
long oppress of my bosom in a flood of the most passion tears. 

As upon a former occas my concept were in a state of the greatest 
indistinct and confus after leav the mattress. for a long time 
I found it nearli imposs to connect ani ideas; but, by veri slow 
degrees, my think faculti returned, and I again call to memori 
the sever incid of my condition. for the presenc of tiger I tri 
in vain to account; and after busi myself with a thousand differ 
conjectur respect him, wa forc to content myself with rejoic 
that he wa with me to share my dreari solitude, and render me comfort 
by hi caresses. most peopl love their dogs--but for tiger I had an 
affect far more ardent than common; and never, certainly, did 
ani creatur more truli deserv it. for seven year he had been my 
insepar companion, and in a multitud of instanc had given 
evid of all the nobl qualiti for which we valu the animal. I 
had rescu him, when a puppy, from the clutch of a malign littl 
villain in nantucket who wa lead him, with a rope around hi neck, 
to the water; and the grown dog repaid the obligation, about three year 
afterward, by save me from the bludgeon of a street robber. 

get now hold of the watch, I found, upon appli it to my ear, that 
it had again run down; but at thi I wa not at all surprised, be 
convinced, from the peculiar state of my feelings, that I had slept, 
as before, for a veri long period of time, how long, it wa of cours 
imposs to say. I wa burn up with fever, and my thirst wa almost 
intolerable. I felt about the box for my littl remain suppli of 
water, for I had no light, the taper have burnt to the socket of the 
lantern, and the phosphorus-box not come readili to hand. upon find 
the jug, however, I discov it to be empty--tiger, no doubt, have 
been tempt to drink it, as well as to devour the remnant of mutton, 
the bone of which lay, well picked, by the open of the box. the 
spoil meat I could well spare, but my heart sank as I thought of the 
water. I wa feebl in the extreme--so much so that I shook all over, 
as with an ague, at the slightest movement or exertion. To add to my 
troubles, the brig wa pitch and roll with great violence, and 
the oil-cask which lay upon my box were in momentari danger of fall 
down, so as to block up the onli way of ingress or egress. I felt, also, 
terribl suffer from sea-sickness. these consider determin 
me to make my way, at all hazards, to the trap, and obtain immedi 
relief, befor I should be incapacit from do so altogether. 
have come to thi resolve, I again felt about for the phosphorus-box 
and tapers. the former I found after some littl trouble; but, not 
discov the taper as soon as I had expect (for I rememb veri 
nearli the spot in which I had place them), I gave up the search for 
the present, and bid tiger lie quiet, began at onc my journey 
toward the trap. 

In thi attempt my great feebl becam more than ever apparent. 
It wa with the utmost difficulti I could crawl along at all, and 
veri frequent my limb sank suddenli from beneath me; when, fall 
prostrat on my face, I would remain for some minut in a state 
border on insensibility. still I struggl forward by slow degrees, 
dread everi moment that I should swoon amid the narrow and intric 
wind of the lumber, in which event I had noth but death to expect 
as the result. At length, upon make a push forward with all the energi 
I could command, I struck my forehead violent against the sharp corner 
of an iron-bound crate. the accid onli stun me for a few moments; 
but I found, to my inexpress grief, that the quick and violent 
roll of the vessel had thrown the crate entir across my path, so as 
effectu to block up the passage. with my utmost exert I could 
not move it a singl inch from it position, it be close wedg 
in among the surround box and ship-furniture. It becam necessary, 
therefore, enfeebl as I was, either to leav the guidanc of the 
whipcord and seek out a new passage, or to climb over the obstacle, and 
resum the path on the other side. the former altern present too 
mani difficulti and danger to be thought of without a shudder. In my 
present weak state of both mind and body, I should infal lose 
my way if I attempt it, and perish miser amid the dismal and 
disgust labyrinth of the hold. I proceeded, therefore, without 
hesitation, to summon up all my remain strength and fortitude, and 
endeavour, as I best might, to clamber over the crate. 

upon stand erect, with thi end in view, I found the undertak even 
a more seriou task than my fear had led me to imagine. On each side of 
the narrow passag aros a complet wall of variou heavi lumber, which 
the least blunder on my part might be the mean of bring down upon my 
head; or, if thi accid did not occur, the path might be effectu 
block up against my return by the descend mass, as it wa in front 
by the obstacl there. the crate itself wa a long and unwieldi box, 
upon which no foothold could be obtained. In vain I attempted, by everi 
mean in my power, to reach the top, with the hope of be thu enabl 
to draw myself up. had I succeed in reach it, it is certain that 
my strength would have prove utterli inadequ to the task of get 
over, and it wa better in everi respect that I failed. At length, in 
a desper effort to forc the crate from it ground, I felt a strong 
vibrat in the side next me. I thrust my hand eagerli to the edg 
of the planks, and found that a veri larg one wa loose. with my 
pocket-knife, which, luckily, I had with me, I succeeded, after great 
labour, in pri it entir off; and get it through the aperture, 
discovered, to my exceed joy, that there were no board on the 
opposit side--in other words, that the top wa wanting, it be the 
bottom through which I had forc my way. I now met with no import 
difficulti in proceed along the line until I final reach the 
nail. with a beat heart I stood erect, and with a gentl touch 
press against the cover of the trap. It did not rise as soon as I 
had expected, and I press it with somewhat more determination, 
still dread lest some other person than augustu might be in hi 
state-room. the door, however, to my astonishment, remain steady, and 
I becam somewhat uneasy, for I knew that it had formerli requir 
but littl or no effort to remov it. I push it strongly--it wa 
nevertheless firm: with all my strength--it still did not give way: with 
rage, with fury, with despair--it set at defianc my utmost efforts; and 
it wa evident, from the unyield natur of the resistance, that the 
hole had either been discov and effectu nail up, or that some 
immens weight had been place upon it, which it wa useless to think of 
removing. 

My sensat were those of extrem horror and dismay. In vain I 
attempt to reason on the probabl caus of my be thu entombed. I 
could summon up no connect chain of reflection, and, sink on the 
floor, gave way, unresistingly, to the most gloomi imaginings, in 
which the dread death of thirst, famine, suffocation, and prematur 
inter crowd upon me as the promin disast to be encountered. 
At length there return to me some portion of presenc of mind. I 
arose, and felt with my finger for the seam or crack of the aperture. 
have found them, I examin them close to ascertain if they emit 
ani light from the state-room; but none wa visible. I then forc the 
blade of my pen-knif through them, until I met with some hard obstacle. 
scrape against it, I discov it to be a solid mass of iron, which, 
from it peculiar wavi feel as I pass the blade along it, I conclud 
to be a chain-cable. the onli cours now left me wa to retrac my 
way to the box, and there either yield to my sad fate, or tri so to 
tranquil my mind as to admit of my arrang some plan of escape. 
I immedi set about the attempt, and succeeded, after innumer 
difficulties, in get back. As I sank, utterli exhausted, upon the 
mattress, tiger threw himself at full length by my side, and seem as 
if desirous, by hi caresses, of consol me in my troubles, and urg 
me to bear them with fortitude. 

the singular of hi behavior at length forcibl arrest my 
attention. after lick my face and hand for some minutes, he would 
suddenli ceas do so, and utter a low whine. upon reach out my 
hand toward him, I then invari found him lie on hi back, with hi 
paw uplifted. thi conduct, so frequent repeated, appear strange, 
and I could in no manner account for it. As the dog seem distressed, 
I conclud that he had receiv some injury; and, take hi paw in my 
hands, I examin them one by one, but found no sign of ani hurt. I 
then suppos him hungry, and gave him a larg piec of ham, which he 
devour with avidity--afterward, however, resum hi extraordinari 
manoeuvres. I now imagin that he wa suffering, like myself, the 
torment of thirst, and wa about adopt thi conclus as the true 
one, when the idea occur to me that I had as yet onli examin hi 
paws, and that there might possibl be a wound upon some portion of hi 
bodi or head. the latter I felt care over, but found nothing. On 
pass my hand, however, along hi back, I perceiv a slight erect 
of the hair extend complet across it. probe thi with my finger, 
I discov a string, and trace it up, found that it encircl the 
whole body. upon a closer scrutiny, I came across a small slip of what 
had the feel of letter paper, through which the string had been 
fasten in such a manner as to bring it immedi beneath the left 
shoulder of the animal. 




chapter 3 

the thought instantli occur to me that the paper wa a note from 
augustus, and that some unaccount accid have happen to 
prevent hi reliev me from my dungeon, he had devis thi method of 
acquaint me with the true state of affairs. trembl with eagerness, 
I now commenc anoth search for my phosphoru match and tapers. 
I had a confus recollect of have put them care away just 
befor fall asleep; and, indeed, previous to my last journey to the 
trap, I had been abl to rememb the exact spot where I had deposit 
them. but now I endeavor in vain to call it to mind, and busi myself 
for a full hour in a fruitless and vexati search for the miss 
articles; never, surely, wa there a more tantal state of anxieti 
and suspense. At length, while grope about, with my head close to the 
ballast, near the open of the box, and outsid of it, I perceiv 
a faint glimmer of light in the direct of the steerage. greatli 
surprised, I endeavor to make my way toward it, as it appear to 
be but a few feet from my position. scarc had I move with thi 
intention, when I lost sight of the glimmer entirely, and, befor I 
could bring it into view again, wa oblig to feel along by the box 
until I had exactli resum my origin situation. now, move my head 
with caution to and fro, I found that, by proceed slowly, with great 
care, in an opposit direct to that in which I had at first started, 
I wa enabl to draw near the light, still keep it in view. 
present I came directli upon it (have squeez my way through 
innumer narrow windings), and found that it proceed from some 
fragment of my match lie in an empti barrel turn upon it side. I 
wa wonder how they came in such a place, when my hand fell upon two 
or three piec of taper wax, which had been evid mumbl by the 
dog. I conclud at onc that he had devour the whole of my suppli 
of candles, and I felt hopeless of be ever abl to read the note of 
augustus. the small remnant of the wax were so mash up among other 
rubbish in the barrel, that I despair of deriv ani servic from 
them, and left them as they were. the phosphorus, of which there wa 
onli a speck or two, I gather up as well as I could, and return 
with it, after much difficulty, to my box, where tiger had all the while 
remained. 

what to do next I could not tell. the hold wa so intens dark that 
I could not see my hand, howev close I would hold it to my face. the 
white slip of paper could bare be discerned, and not even that when 
I look at it directly; by turn the exterior portion of the retina 
toward it--that is to say, by survey it slightli askance, I found 
that it becam in some measur perceptible. thu the gloom of my prison 
may be imagined, and the note of my friend, if inde it were a note 
from him, seem onli like to throw me into further trouble, by 
disquiet to no purpos my alreadi enfeebl and agit mind. 
In vain I revolv in my brain a multitud of absurd expedi for 
procur light--such expedi precis as a man in the perturb 
sleep occas by opium would be apt to fall upon for a similar 
purpose--each and all of which appear by turn to the dreamer the 
most reason and the most preposter of conceptions, just as the 
reason or imagin faculti flicker, alternately, one abov the 
other. At last an idea occur to me which seem rational, and which 
gave me caus to wonder, veri justly, that I had not entertain 
it before. I place the slip of paper on the back of a book, and, 
collect the fragment of the phosphoru match which I had brought 
from the barrel, laid them togeth upon the paper. I then, with the 
palm of my hand, rub the whole over quickly, yet steadily. A clear 
light diffus itself immedi throughout the whole surface; and had 
there been ani write upon it, I should not have experienc the 
least difficulty, I am sure, in read it. not a syllabl wa there, 
however--noth but a dreari and unsatisfactori blank; the illumin 
die away in a few seconds, and my heart die away within me as it went. 

I have befor state more than onc that my intellect, for some period 
prior to this, had been in a condit nearli border on idiocy. there 
were, to be sure, momentari interv of perfect sanity, and, now and 
then, even of energy; but these were few. It must be rememb that 
I had been, for mani day certainly, inhal the almost pestilenti 
atmospher of a close hold in a whale vessel, and for a long portion 
of that time but scantili suppli with water. for the last fourteen 
or fifteen hour I had none--nor had I slept dure that time. salt 
provis of the most excit kind had been my chief, and, indeed, 
sinc the loss of the mutton, my onli suppli of food, with the except 
of the sea-biscuit; and these latter were utterli useless to me, as 
they were too dri and hard to be swallow in the swollen and parch 
condit of my throat. I wa now in a high state of fever, and in 
everi respect exceedingli ill. thi will account for the fact that mani 
miser hour of despond elaps after my last adventur with the 
phosphorus, befor the thought suggest itself that I had examin onli 
one side of the paper. I shall not attempt to describ my feel 
of rage (for I believ I wa more angri than ani thing else) when the 
egregi oversight I had commit flash suddenli upon my perception. 
the blunder itself would have been unimportant, had not my own folli and 
impetuos render it otherwise--in my disappoint at not find 
some word upon the slip, I had childishli torn it in piec and thrown 
it away, it wa imposs to say where. 

from the worst part of thi dilemma I wa reliev by the sagac of 
tiger. have got, after a long search, a small piec of the note, I put 
it to the dog’ nose, and endeavor to make him understand that he must 
bring me the rest of it. To my astonishment, (for I had taught him none 
of the usual trick for which hi breed are famous,) he seem to enter 
at onc into my meaning, and, rummag about for a few moments, soon 
found anoth consider portion. bring me this, he paus awhile, 
and, rub hi nose against my hand, appear to be wait for 
my approv of what he had done. I pat him on the head, when he 
immedi made off again. It wa now some minut befor he came 
back--but when he did come, he brought with him a larg slip, which 
prove to be all the paper missing--it have been torn, it seems, 
onli into three pieces. luckily, I had no troubl in find what few 
fragment of the phosphoru were left--b guid by the indistinct 
glow one or two of the particl still emitted. My difficulti had 
taught me the necess of caution, and I now took time to reflect upon 
what I wa about to do. It wa veri probable, I considered, that some 
word were written upon that side of the paper which had not been 
examined--but which side wa that? fit the piec togeth gave me 
no clew in thi respect, although it assur me that the word (if there 
were any) would be found all on one side, and connect in a proper 
manner, as written. there wa the greater necess of ascertain the 
point in question beyond a doubt, as the phosphoru remain would be 
altogeth insuffici for a third attempt, should I fail in the one I 
wa now about to make. I place the paper on a book as before, and sat 
for some minut thought revolv the matter over in my mind. At 
last I thought it bare possibl that the written side might have 
some uneven on it surface, which a delic sens of feel might 
enabl me to detect. I determin to make the experi and pass 
my finger veri care over the side which first present itself. 
nothing, however, wa perceptible, and I turn the paper, adjust it 
on the book. I now again carri my forefing cautious along, when 
I wa awar of an exceedingli slight, but still discern glow, which 
follow as it proceeded. this, I knew, must aris from some veri minut 
remain particl of the phosphoru with which I had cover the paper 
in my previou attempt. the other, or under side, then, wa that on 
which lay the writing, if write there should final prove to be. 
again I turn the note, and went to work as I had previous done. 
have rub in the phosphorus, a brillianc ensu as before--but thi 
time sever line of ms. in a larg hand, and appar in red ink, 
becam distinctli visible. the glimmer, although suffici bright, 
wa but momentary. still, had I not been too greatli excited, there 
would have been ampl time enough for me to perus the whole three 
sentenc befor me--for I saw there were three. In my anxiety, however, 
to read all at once, I succeed onli in read the seven conclud 
words, which thu appeared--“blood--your life depend upon lie close.” 

had I been abl to ascertain the entir content of the note--th full 
mean of the admonit which my friend had thu attempt to convey, 
that admonition, even although it should have reveal a stori of 
disast the most unspeakable, could not, I am firmli convinced, have 
imbu my mind with one tith of the harrow and yet indefin 
horror with which I wa inspir by the fragmentari warn thu 
received. and “blood,” too, that word of all words--so rife at all time 
with mystery, and suffering, and terror--how trebli full of import did 
it now appear--how chilli and heavili (disjointed, as it thu was, from 
ani forego word to qualifi or render it distinct) did it vagu 
syllabl fall, amid the deep gloom of my prison, into the innermost 
recess of my soul! 

augustu had, undoubtedly, good reason for wish me to remain 
concealed, and I form a thousand surmis as to what they could 
be--but I could think of noth afford a satisfactori solut of 
the mystery. just after return from my last journey to the trap, and 
befor my attent had been otherwis direct by the singular conduct 
of tiger, I had come to the resolut of make myself heard at all 
event by those on board, or, if I could not succeed in thi directly, 
of tri to cut my way through the orlop deck. the half certainti which 
I felt of be abl to accomplish one of these two purpos in the last 
emergency, had given me courag (which I should not otherwis have had) 
to endur the evil of my situation. the few word I had been abl to 
read, however, had cut me off from these final resources, and I now, for 
the first time, felt all the miseri of my fate. In a paroxysm of despair 
I threw myself again upon the mattress, where, for about the period of 
a day and night, I lay in a kind of stupor, reliev onli by momentari 
interv of reason and recollection. 

At length I onc more arose, and busi myself in reflect upon the 
horror which encompass me. for anoth twenty-four hour it wa 
bare possibl that I might exist without water--for a longer time I 
could not do so. dure the first portion of my imprison I had made 
free use of the cordial with which augustu had suppli me, but they 
onli serv to excit fever, without in the least degre assuag 
thirst. I had now onli about a gill left, and thi wa of a speci of 
strong peach liqueur at which my stomach revolted. the sausag were 
entir consumed; of the ham noth remain but a small piec of the 
skin; and all the biscuit, except a few fragment of one, had been eaten 
by tiger. To add to my troubles, I found that my headach wa increas 
momentarily, and with it the speci of delirium which had distress me 
more or less sinc my first fall asleep. for some hour past it had 
been with the greatest difficulti I could breath at all, and now each 
attempt at so do wa attend with the most depress spasmod 
action of the chest. but there wa still anoth and veri differ 
sourc of disquietude, and one, indeed, whose harass terror had 
been the chief mean of arous me to exert from my stupor on the 
mattress. It aros from the demeanor of the dog. 

I first observ an alter in hi conduct while rub in the 
phosphoru on the paper in my last attempt. As I rubbed, he ran hi nose 
against my hand with a slight snarl; but I wa too greatli excit at 
the time to pay much attent to the circumstance. soon afterward, 
it will be remembered, I threw myself on the mattress, and fell into 
a speci of lethargy. present I becam awar of a singular hiss 
sound close at my ears, and discov it to proceed from tiger, who wa 
pant and wheez in a state of the greatest appar excitement, hi 
eyebal flash fierc through the gloom. I spoke to him, when he 
repli with a low growl, and then remain quiet. present I relaps 
into my stupor, from which I wa again awaken in a similar manner. 
thi wa repeat three or four times, until final hi behaviour 
inspir me with so great a degre of fear, that I becam fulli aroused. 
He wa now lie close by the door of the box, snarl fearfully, 
although in a kind of undertone, and grind hi teeth as if strongli 
convulsed. I had no doubt whatev that the want of water or the 
confin atmospher of the hold had driven him mad, and I wa at a loss 
what cours to pursue. I could not endur the thought of kill him, 
yet it seem absolut necessari for my own safety. I could distinctli 
perceiv hi eye fasten upon me with an express of the most deadli 
animosity, and I expect everi instant that he would attack me. At last 
I could endur my terribl situat no longer, and determin to make 
my way from the box at all hazards, and dispatch him, if hi opposit 
should render it necessari for me to do so. To get out, I had to 
pass directli over hi body, and he alreadi seem to anticip my 
design--miss himself upon hi fore-leg (a I perceiv by the 
alter posit of hi eyes), and display the whole of hi white 
fangs, which were easili discernible. I took the remain of the 
ham-skin, and the bottl contain the liqueur, and secur them about 
my person, togeth with a larg carving-knif which augustu had left 
me--then, fold my cloak around me as close as possible, I made a 
movement toward the mouth of the box. No sooner did I do this, than the 
dog sprang with a loud growl toward my throat. the whole weight of hi 
bodi struck me on the right shoulder, and I fell violent to the left, 
while the enrag anim pass entir over me. I had fallen upon my 
knees, with my head buri among the blankets, and these protect 
me from a second furiou assault, dure which I felt the sharp teeth 
press vigor upon the woollen which envelop my neck--yet, 
luckily, without be abl to penetr all the folds. I wa now 
beneath the dog, and a few moment would place me complet in hi 
power. despair gave me strength, and I rose boldli up, shake him from 
me by main force, and drag with me the blanket from the mattress. 
these I now threw over him, and befor he could extric himself, I had 
got through the door and close it effectu against hi pursuit. 
In thi struggle, however, I had been forc to drop the morsel of 
ham-skin, and I now found my whole stock of provis reduc to a 
singl gill of liqueur. As thi reflect cross my mind, I felt 
myself actuat by one of those fit of pervers which might be 
suppos to influenc a spoil child in similar circumstances, and, 
rais the bottl to my lips, I drain it to the last drop, and dash 
it furious upon the floor. 

scarc had the echo of the crash die away, when I heard my name 
pronounc in an eager but subdu voice, issu from the direct of 
the steerage. So unexpect wa anyth of the kind, and so intens wa 
the emot excit within me by the sound, that I endeavour in vain 
to reply. My power of speech total failed, and in an agoni of terror 
lest my friend should conclud me dead, and return without attempt 
to reach me, I stood up between the crate near the door of the box, 
trembl convulsively, and gasp and struggl for utterance. had 
a thousand word depend upon a syllable, I could not have spoken 
it. there wa a slight movement now audibl among the lumber somewher 
forward of my station. the sound present grew less distinct, then 
again less so, and still less. shall I ever forget my feel at thi 
moment? He wa going--mi friend, my companion, from whom I had a right 
to expect so much--h wa going--h would abandon me--h wa gone! He 
would leav me to perish miserably, to expir in the most horribl and 
loathesom of dungeons--and one word, one littl syllable, would save 
me--yet that singl syllabl I could not utter! I felt, I am sure, more 
than ten thousand time the agoni of death itself. My brain reeled, 
and I fell, deadli sick, against the end of the box. 

As I fell the carving-knif wa shaken out from the waist-band of my 
pantaloons, and drop with a rattl sound to the floor. never did 
ani strain of the richest melodi come so sweetli to my ears! with the 
intensest anxieti I listen to ascertain the effect of the nois upon 
augustus--for I knew that the person who call my name could be no one 
but himself. all wa silent for some moments. At length I again heard 
the word “arthur!” repeat in a low tone, and one full of hesitation. 
reviv hope loosen at onc my power of speech, and I now scream 
at the top of my voice, “augustus! oh, augustus!” “hush! for god’ sake 
be silent!” he replied, in a voic trembl with agitation; “I will be 
with you immediately--a soon as I can make my way through the hold.” 
for a long time I heard him move among the lumber, and everi moment 
seem to me an age. At length I felt hi hand upon my shoulder, and he 
placed, at the same moment, a bottl of water to my lips. those onli who 
have been suddenli redeem from the jaw of the tomb, or who have known 
the insuffer torment of thirst under circumst as aggrav as 
those which encompass me in my dreari prison, can form ani idea of the 
unutter transport which that one long draught of the richest of all 
physic luxuri afforded. 

when I had in some degre satisfi my thirst, augustu produc from 
hi pocket three or four boil potatoes, which I devour with the 
greatest avidity. He had brought with him a light in a dark lantern, and 
the grate ray afford me scarc less comfort than the food and 
drink. but I wa impati to learn the caus of hi protract absence, 
and he proceed to recount what had happen on board dure my 
incarceration. 




chapter 4 

the brig put to sea, as I had supposed, in about an hour after he had 
left the watch. thi wa on the twentieth of june. It will be rememb 
that I had then been in the hold for three days; and, dure thi 
period, there wa so constant a bustl on board, and so much run 
to and fro, especi in the cabin and staterooms, that he had had no 
chanc of visit me without the risk of have the secret of the trap 
discovered. when at length he did come, I had assur him that I wa 
do as well as possible; and, therefore, for the two next day he 
felt but littl uneasi on my account--still, however, watch an 
opportun of go down. It wa not until the fourth day that he found 
one. sever time dure thi interv he had made up hi mind to let 
hi father know of the adventure, and have me come up at once; but we 
were still within reach distanc of nantucket, and it wa doubtful, 
from some express which had escap captain barnard, whether he 
would not immedi put back if he discov me to be on board. 
besides, upon think the matter over, augustus, so he told me, could 
not imagin that I wa in immedi want, or that I would hesitate, 
in such case, to make myself heard at the trap. when, therefore, he 
consid everyth he conclud to let me stay until he could meet 
with an opportun of visit me unobserved. this, as I said before, 
did not occur until the fourth day after hi bring me the watch, 
and the seventh sinc I had first enter the hold. He then went down 
without take with him ani water or provisions, intend in the first 
place mere to call my attention, and get me to come from the box to 
the trap,--when he would go up to the stateroom and thenc hand me down 
a supply. when he descend for thi purpos he found that I wa asleep, 
for it seem that I wa snore veri loudly. from all the calcul 
I can make on the subject, thi must have been the slumber into which 
I fell just after my return from the trap with the watch, and which, 
consequently, must have last for more than three entir day and 
night at the veri least. latterly, I have had reason both from my own 
experi and the assur of others, to be acquaint with the strong 
soporif effect of the stench aris from old fish-oil when close 
confined; and when I think of the condit of the hold in which I wa 
imprisoned, and the long period dure which the brig had been use as a 
whale vessel, I am more inclin to wonder that I awok at all, after 
onc fall asleep, than that I should have slept uninterruptedli for 
the period specifi above. 

augustu call to me at first in a low voic and without close the 
trap--but I made him no reply. He then shut the trap, and spoke to me in 
a louder, and final in a veri loud tone--stil I continu to snore. 
He wa now at a loss what to do. It would take him some time to make hi 
way through the lumber to my box, and in the meanwhil hi absenc would 
be notic by captain barnard, who had occas for hi servic everi 
minute, in arrang and copi paper connect with the busi of 
the voyage. He determined, therefore, upon reflection, to ascend, and 
await anoth opportun of visit me. He wa the more easili induc 
to thi resolve, as my slumber appear to be of the most tranquil 
nature, and he could not suppos that I had undergon ani inconveni 
from my incarceration. He had just made up hi mind on these point 
when hi attent wa arrest by an unusu bustle, the sound of 
which proceed appar from the cabin. He sprang through the trap 
as quickli as possible, close it, and threw open the door of hi 
stateroom. No sooner had he put hi foot over the threshold than a 
pistol flash in hi face, and he wa knock down, at the same moment, 
by a blow from a handspike. 

A strong hand held him on the cabin floor, with a tight grasp upon 
hi throat; still he wa abl to see what wa go on around him. 
hi father wa tie hand and foot, and lie along the step of the 
companion-way, with hi head down, and a deep wound in the forehead, 
from which the blood wa flow in a continu stream. He spoke not a 
word, and wa appar dying. over him stood the first mate, eye 
him with an express of fiendish derision, and deliber search 
hi pockets, from which he present drew forth a larg wallet and a 
chronometer. seven of the crew (among whom wa the cook, a negro) were 
rummag the stateroom on the larboard for arms, where they soon 
equip themselv with musket and ammunition. besid augustu and 
captain barnard, there were nine men altogeth in the cabin, and these 
among the most ruffianli of the brig’ company. the villain now went 
upon deck, take my friend with them after have secur hi arm 
behind hi back. they proceed straight to the forecastle, which wa 
fasten down--two of the mutin stand by it with axes--two also 
at the main hatch. the mate call out in a loud voice: “do you hear 
there below? tumbl up with you, one by one--now, mark that--and no 
grumbling!” It wa some minut befor ani one appeared:--at last an 
englishman, who had ship as a raw hand, came up, weep piteously, 
and entreat the mate, in the most humbl manner, to spare hi life. 
the onli repli wa a blow on the forehead from an axe. the poor fellow 
fell to the deck without a groan, and the black cook lift him up in 
hi arm as he would a child, and toss him deliber into the sea. 
hear the blow and the plung of the body, the men below could now 
be induc to ventur on deck neither by threat nor promises, until a 
proposit wa made to smoke them out. A gener rush then ensued, 
and for a moment it seem possibl that the brig might be retaken. 
the mutineers, however, succeed at last in close the forecastl 
effectu befor more than six of their oppon could get up. 
these six, find themselv so greatli outnumb and without arms, 
submit after a brief struggle. the mate gave them fair words--no 
doubt with a view of induc those below to yield, for they had no 
difficulti in hear all that wa said on deck. the result prove hi 
sagacity, no less than hi diabol villainy. all in the forecastl 
present signifi their intent of submitting, and, ascend one 
by one, were pinion and then thrown on their backs, togeth with the 
first six--ther be in all, of the crew who were not concern in the 
mutiny, twenty-seven. 

A scene of the most horribl butcheri ensued. the bound seamen were 
drag to the gangway. here the cook stood with an axe, strike each 
victim on the head as he wa forc over the side of the vessel by the 
other mutineers. In thi manner twenty-two perished, and augustu had 
given himself up for lost, expect everi moment hi own turn to come 
next. but it seem that the villain were now either weary, or in 
some measur disgust with their bloodi labour; for the four remain 
prisoners, togeth with my friend, who had been thrown on the deck with 
the rest, were respit while the mate sent below for rum, and the whole 
murder parti held a drunken carouse, which last until sunset. they 
now fell to disput in regard to the fate of the survivors, who lay 
not more than four pace off, and could distinguish everi word said. 
upon some of the mutin the liquor appear to have a soften 
effect, for sever voic were heard in favor of releas the captiv 
altogether, on condit of join the mutini and share the profits. 
the black cook, howev (who in all respect wa a perfect demon, 
and who seem to exert as much influence, if not more, than the 
mate himself), would listen to no proposit of the kind, and rose 
repeatedli for the purpos of resum hi work at the gangway. 
fortun he wa so far overcom by intox as to be easili 
restrain by the less bloodthirsti of the party, among whom wa a 
line-manager, who went by the name of dirk peters. thi man wa the 
son of an indian squaw of the tribe of upsarokas, who live among the 
fast of the black hills, near the sourc of the missouri. hi 
father wa a fur-trader, I believe, or at least connect in some manner 
with the indian trading-post on lewi river. peter himself wa one of 
the most ferocious-look men I ever beheld. He wa short in stature, 
not more than four feet eight inch high, but hi limb were of 
herculean mould. hi hands, especially, were so enorm thick and 
broad as hardli to retain a human shape. hi arms, as well as legs, 
were bow in the most singular manner, and appear to possess no 
flexibl whatever. hi head wa equal deformed, be of immens 
size, with an indent on the crown (like that on the head of most 
negroes), and entir bald. To conceal thi latter deficiency, which 
did not proceed from old age, he usual wore a wig form of ani 
hair-lik materi which present itself--occasion the skin of a 
spanish dog or american grizzli bear. At the time spoken of, he had on a 
portion of one of these bearskins; and it ad no littl to the natur 
feroc of hi countenance, which betook of the upsaroka character. the 
mouth extend nearli from ear to ear, the lip were thin, and seemed, 
like some other portion of hi frame, to be devoid of natur pliancy, 
so that the rule express never vari under the influenc of ani 
emot whatever. thi rule express may be conceiv when it is 
consid that the teeth were exceedingli long and protruding, and 
never even partial covered, in ani instance, by the lips. To pass thi 
man with a casual glance, one might imagin him to be convuls with 
laughter, but a second look would induc a shudder acknowledgment, 
that if such an express were indic of merriment, the merriment 
must be that of a demon. Of thi singular be mani anecdot were 
preval among the seafar men of nantucket. these anecdot went to 
prove hi prodigi strength when under excitement, and some of them 
had given rise to a doubt of hi sanity. but on board the grampus, it 
seems, he wa regarded, at the time of the mutiny, with feel more of 
deris than of anyth else. I have been thu particular in speak 
of dirk peters, because, feroci as he appeared, he prove the main 
instrument in preserv the life of augustus, and becaus I shall 
have frequent occas to mention him hereaft in the cours of my 
narrative--a narrative, let me here say, which, in it latter portions, 
will be found to includ incid of a natur so entir out of the 
rang of human experience, and for thi reason so far beyond the limit 
of human credulity, that I proceed in utter hopeless of obtain 
credenc for all that I shall tell, yet confid trust in time 
and progress scienc to verifi some of the most import and most 
improb of my statements. 

after much indecis and two or three violent quarrels, it wa 
determin at last that all the prison (with the except of 
augustus, whom peter insist in a jocular manner upon keep as hi 
clerk) should be set adrift in one of the smallest whaleboats. the 
mate went down into the cabin to see if captain barnard wa still 
living--for, it will be remembered, he wa left below when the mutin 
came up. present the two made their appearance, the captain pale as 
death, but somewhat recov from the effect of hi wound. He spoke 
to the men in a voic hardli articulate, entreat them not to set him 
adrift, but to return to their duty, and promis to land them wherev 
they chose, and to take no step for bring them to justice. He might 
as well have spoken to the winds. two of the ruffian seiz him by the 
arm and hurl him over the brig’ side into the boat, which had been 
lower while the mate went below. the four men who were lie on the 
deck were then unti and order to follow, which they did without 
attempt ani resistance--augustu be still left in hi pain 
position, although he struggl and pray onli for the poor 
satisfact of be permit to bid hi father farewell. A hand of 
sea-biscuit and a jug of water were now hand down; but neither mast, 
sail, oar, nor compass. the boat wa tow astern for a few minutes, 
dure which the mutin held anoth consultation--it wa then 
final cut adrift. By thi time night had come on--ther were neither 
moon nor star visible--and a short and ugli sea wa running, although 
there wa no great deal of wind. the boat wa instantli out of sight, 
and littl hope could be entertain for the unfortun suffer who 
were in it. thi event happened, however, in latitud 35 degre 30’ 
north, longitud 61 degre 20’ west, and consequ at no veri great 
distanc from the bermuda islands. augustu therefor endeavor to 
consol himself with the idea that the boat might either succeed in 
reach the land, or come suffici near to be fallen in with by 
vessel off the coast. 

all sail wa now put upon the brig, and she continu her origin 
cours to the southwest--th mutin be bent upon some pirat 
expedition, in which, from all that could be understood, a ship wa to 
be intercept on her way from the cape verd island to porto rico. No 
attent wa paid to augustus, who wa unti and suffer to go about 
anywher forward of the cabin companion-way. dirk peter treat him 
with some degre of kindness, and on one occas save him from 
the brutal of the cook. hi situat wa still one of the most 
precarious, as the men were continu intoxicated, and there wa no 
reli upon their continu good-humor or careless in regard to 
himself. hi anxieti on my account he represented, however, as the most 
distress result of hi condition; and, indeed, I had never reason to 
doubt the sincer of hi friendship. more than onc he had resolv 
to acquaint the mutin with the secret of my be on board, but wa 
restrain from so doing, partli through recollect of the atroc 
he had alreadi beheld, and partli through a hope of be abl soon to 
bring me relief. for the latter purpos he wa constantli on the watch; 
but, in spite of the most constant vigilance, three day elaps after 
the boat wa cut adrift befor ani chanc occurred. At length, on the 
night of the third day, there came on a heavi blow from the eastward, 
and all hand were call up to take in sail. dure the confus which 
ensued, he made hi way below unobserved, and into the stateroom. 
what wa hi grief and horror in discov that the latter had 
been render a place of deposit for a varieti of sea-stor and 
ship-furniture, and that sever fathom of old chain-cable, which had 
been stow away beneath the companion-ladder, had been drag thenc 
to make room for a chest, and were now lie immedi upon the trap! 
To remov it without discoveri wa impossible, and he return on 
deck as quickli as he could. As he came up, the mate seiz him by the 
throat, and demand what he had been do in the cabin, wa about 
fling him over the larboard bulwark, when hi life wa again 
preserv through the interfer of dirk peters. augustu wa now put 
in handcuff (of which there were sever pair on board), and hi feet 
lash tightli together. He wa then taken into the steerage, and thrown 
into a lower berth next to the forecastl bulkheads, with the assur 
that he should never put hi foot on deck again “until the brig wa no 
longer a brig.” thi wa the express of the cook, who threw him into 
the berth--it is hardli possibl to say what precis mean intend by 
the phrase. the whole affair, however, prove the ultim mean of my 
relief, as will present appear. 




chapter 5 

for some minut after the cook had left the forecastle, augustu 
abandon himself to despair, never hope to leav the berth alive. 
He now came to the resolut of acquaint the first of the men who 
should come down with my situation, think it better to let me take my 
chanc with the mutin than perish of thirst in the hold,--for it had 
been ten day sinc I wa first imprisoned, and my jug of water wa not 
a plenti suppli even for four. As he wa think on thi subject, 
the idea came all at onc into hi head that it might be possibl 
to commun with me by the way of the main hold. In ani other 
circumstances, the difficulti and hazard of the undertak would have 
prevent him from attempt it; but now he had, at all events, littl 
prospect of life, and consequ littl to lose, he bent hi whole 
mind, therefore, upon the task. 

hi handcuff were the first consideration. At first he saw no method 
of remov them, and fear that he should thu be baffl in the veri 
outset; but upon a closer scrutini he discov that the iron could 
be slip off and on at pleasure, with veri littl effort or 
inconvenience, mere by squeez hi hand through them,--thi speci 
of manacl be altogeth ineffectu in confin young persons, 
in whom the smaller bone readili yield to pressure. He now unti hi 
feet, and, leav the cord in such a manner that it could easili 
be readjust in the event of ani person’ come down, proceed to 
examin the bulkhead where it join the berth. the partit here wa 
of soft pine board, an inch thick, and he saw that he should have 
littl troubl in cut hi way through. A voic wa now heard at the 
forecastl companion-way, and he had just time to put hi right hand 
into it handcuff (the left had not been removed) and to draw the rope 
in a slipknot around hi ankle, when dirk peter came below, follow by 
tiger, who immedi leap into the berth and lay down. the dog had 
been brought on board by augustus, who knew my attach to the animal, 
and thought it would give me pleasur to have him with me dure the 
voyage. He went up to our hous for him immedi after first take 
me into the hold, but did not think of mention the circumst upon 
hi bring the watch. sinc the mutiny, augustu had not seen him 
befor hi appear with dirk peters, and had given him up for lost, 
suppos him to have been thrown overboard by some of the malign 
villain belong to the mate’ gang. It appear afterward that he had 
crawl into a hole beneath a whale-boat, from which, not have room to 
turn round, he could not extric himself. peter at last let him out, 
and, with a speci of good feel which my friend knew well how to 
appreciate, had now brought him to him in the forecastl as a companion, 
leav at the same time some salt junk and potatoes, with a can of 
water, he then went on deck, promis to come down with someth more 
to eat on the next day. 

when he had gone, augustu freed both hand from the manacl and 
unfasten hi feet. He then turn down the head of the mattress on 
which he had been lying, and with hi penknif (for the ruffian had 
not thought it worth while to search him) commenc cut vigor 
across one of the partit planks, as close as possibl to the floor 
of the berth. He chose to cut here, because, if suddenli interrupted, he 
would be abl to conceal what had been done by let the head of the 
mattress fall into it proper position. for the remaind of the day, 
however, no disturb occurred, and by night he had complet divid 
the plank. It should here be observ that none of the crew occupi the 
forecastl as a sleeping-place, live altogeth in the cabin sinc 
the mutiny, drink the wine and feast on the sea-stor of captain 
barnard, and give no more heed than wa absolut necessari to the 
navig of the brig. these circumst prove fortun both for 
myself and augustus; for, had matter been otherwise, he would have 
found it imposs to reach me. As it was, he proceed with confid 
in hi design. It wa near daybreak, however, befor he complet the 
second divis of the board (which wa about a foot abov the first 
cut), thu make an apertur quit larg enough to admit hi passag 
through with facil to the main orlop deck. have got here, he made 
hi way with but littl troubl to the lower main hatch, although in so 
do he had to scrambl over tier of oil-cask pile nearli as high as 
the upper deck, there be bare room enough left for hi body. upon 
reach the hatch he found that tiger had follow him below, squeez 
between two row of the casks. It wa now too late, however, to attempt 
get to me befor dawn, as the chief difficulti lay in pass 
through the close stowag in the lower hold. He therefor resolv to 
return, and wait till the next night. with thi design, he proceed to 
loosen the hatch, so that he might have as littl detent as possibl 
when he should come again. No sooner had he loosen it than tiger 
sprang eagerli to the small open produced, snuf for a moment, and 
then utter a long whine, scratch at the same time, as if anxiou 
to remov the cover with hi paws. there could be no doubt, from 
hi behaviour, that he wa awar of my be in the hold, and augustu 
thought it possibl that he would be abl to get to me if he put him 
down. He now hit upon the expedi of send the note, as it wa 
especi desir that I should make no attempt at forc my way out 
at least under exist circumstances, and there could be no certainti 
of hi get to me himself on the morrow as he intended. after-ev 
prove how fortun it wa that the idea occur to him as it did; 
for, had it not been for the receipt of the note, I should undoubtedli 
have fallen upon some plan, howev desperate, of alarm the crew, and 
both our live would most probabl have been sacrif in consequence. 

have conclud to write, the difficulti wa now to procur the 
materi for so doing. An old toothpick wa soon made into a pen; and 
thi by mean of feel altogether, for the between-deck wa as 
dark as pitch. paper enough wa obtain from the back of a letter--a 
duplic of the forg letter from mr. ross. thi had been the origin 
draught; but the handwrit not be suffici well imitated, 
augustu had written another, thrust the first, by good fortune, into 
hi coat-pocket, where it wa now most opportun discovered. ink alon 
wa thu wanting, and a substitut wa immedi found for thi by 
mean of a slight incis with the pen-knif on the back of a finger 
just abov the nail--a copiou flow of blood ensuing, as usual, from 
wound in that vicinity. the note wa now written, as well as it could 
be in the dark and under the circumstances. It briefli explain that a 
mutini had taken place; that captain barnard wa set adrift; and that I 
might expect immedi relief as far as provis were concerned, but 
must not ventur upon make ani disturbance. It conclud with these 
words: “_i have scrawl thi with blood--your life depend upon lie 
close._” 

thi slip of paper be tie upon the dog, he wa now put down the 
hatchway, and augustu made the best of hi way back to the forecastle, 
where he found no reason to believ that ani of the crew had been in 
hi absence. To conceal the hole in the partition, he drove hi knife in 
just abov it, and hung up a pea-jacket which he found in the berth. hi 
handcuff were then replaced, and also the rope around hi ankles. 

these arrang were scarc complet when dirk peter came below, 
veri drunk, but in excel humour, and bring with him my friend’ 
allow of provis for the day. thi consist of a dozen larg 
irish potato roasted, and a pitcher of water. He sat for some time on 
a chest by the berth, and talk freeli about the mate and the gener 
concern of the brig. hi demeanour wa exceedingli capricious, and 
even grotesque. At one time augustu wa much alarm by odd conduct. 
At last, however, he went on deck, mutter a promis to bring hi 
prison a good dinner on the morrow. dure the day two of the crew 
(harpooners) came down, accompani by the cook, all three in nearli the 
last stage of intoxication. like peters, they made no scrupl of talk 
unreservedli about their plans. It appear that they were much divid 
among themselv as to their ultim course, agre in no point, 
except the attack on the ship from the cape verd islands, with 
which they were in hourli expect of meeting. As far as could be 
ascertained, the mutini had not been brought about altogeth for the 
sake of booty; a privat piqu of the chief mate’ against captain 
barnard have been the main instigation. there now seem to be two 
princip faction among the crew--on head by the mate, the other by 
the cook. the former parti were for seiz the first suitabl vessel 
which should present itself, and equip it at some of the west india 
island for a pirat cruise. the latter division, however, which wa 
the stronger, and includ dirk peter among it partisans, were bent 
upon pursu the cours origin laid out for the brig into the south 
pacific; there either to take whale, or act otherwise, as circumst 
should suggest. the represent of peters, who had frequent 
visit these regions, had great weight, apparently, with the mutineers, 
wavering, as they were, between half-engend notion of profit and 
pleasure. He dwelt on the world of novelti and amus to be found 
among the innumer island of the pacific, on the perfect secur 
and freedom from all restraint to be enjoyed, but, more particularly, on 
the delici of the climate, on the abund mean of good living, 
and on the voluptu beauti of the women. As yet, noth had been 
absolut determin upon; but the pictur of the hybrid line-manag 
were take strong hold upon the ardent imagin of the seamen, and 
there wa everi possibl that hi intent would be final carri 
into effect. 

the three men went away in about an hour, and no one els enter the 
forecastl all day. augustu lay quiet until nearli night. He then freed 
himself from the rope and irons, and prepar for hi attempt. A bottl 
wa found in one of the berths, and thi he fill with water from the 
pitcher left by peters, store hi pocket at the same time with cold 
potatoes. To hi great joy he also came across a lantern, with a small 
piec of tallow candl in it. thi he could light at ani moment, as he 
had in hi possess a box of phosphoru matches. when it wa quit 
dark, he got through the hole in the bulkhead, have taken the 
precaut to arrang the bedcloth in the berth so as to convey the 
idea of a person cover up. when through, he hung up the pea-jacket 
on hi knife, as before, to conceal the aperture--thi manoeuvr be 
easili effected, as he did not readjust the piec of plank taken out 
until afterward. He wa now on the main orlop deck, and proceed to 
make hi way, as before, between the upper deck and the oil-cask to 
the main hatchway. have reach this, he lit the piec of candle, and 
descended, grope with extrem difficulti among the compact stowag of 
the hold. In a few moment he becam alarm at the insuffer stench 
and the close of the atmosphere. He could not think it possibl 
that I had surviv my confin for so long a period breath so 
oppress an air. He call my name repeatedly, but I made him no 
reply, and hi apprehens seem thu to be confirmed. the brig wa 
roll violently, and there wa so much nois in consequence, that it 
wa useless to listen for ani weak sound, such as those of my breath 
or snoring. He threw open the lantern, and held it as high as possible, 
whenev an opportun occurred, in order that, by observ the light, 
I might, if alive, be awar that succor wa approaching. still noth 
wa heard from me, and the supposit of my death began to assum the 
charact of certainty. He determined, nevertheless, to forc a passage, 
if possible, to the box, and at least ascertain beyond a doubt the truth 
of hi surmises. He push on for some time in a most pitiabl state of 
anxiety, until, at length, he found the pathway utterli block up, and 
that there wa no possibl of make ani farther way by the cours 
in which he had set out. overcom now by hi feelings, he threw himself 
among the lumber in despair, and wept like a child. It wa at thi 
period that he heard the crash occas by the bottl which I had 
thrown down. fortunate, indeed, wa it that the incid occurred--for, 
upon thi incident, trivial as it appears, the thread of my destini 
depended. mani year elapsed, however, befor I wa awar of thi fact. 
A natur shame and regret for hi weak and indecis prevent 
augustu from confid to me at onc what a more intim and 
unreserv communion afterward induc him to reveal. upon find hi 
further progress in the hold imped by obstacl which he could not 
overcome, he had resolv to abandon hi attempt at reach me, and 
return at onc to the forecastle. befor condemn him entir on thi 
head, the harass circumst which embarrass him should be taken 
into consideration. the night wa fast wear away, and hi absenc 
from the forecastl might be discovered; and inde would necessarili be 
so, if he should fail to get back to the berth by daybreak. hi candl 
wa expir in the socket, and there would be the greatest difficulti 
in retrac hi way to the hatchway in the dark. It must be allowed, 
too, that he had everi good reason to believ me dead; in which event 
no benefit could result to me from hi reach the box, and a world of 
danger would be encount to no purpos by himself. He had repeatedli 
called, and I had made him no answer. I had been now eleven day and 
night with no more water than that contain in the jug which he had 
left with me--a suppli which it wa not at all probabl I had hoard in 
the begin of my confinement, as I had everi caus to expect a speedi 
release. the atmospher of the hold, too, must have appear to him, 
come from the compar open air of the steerage, of a natur 
absolut poisonous, and by far more intoler than it had seem to 
me upon my first take up my quarter in the box--th hatchway at that 
time have been constantli open for mani month previous. add to these 
consider that of the scene of bloodsh and terror so late 
wit by my friend; hi confinement, privations, and narrow escap 
from death, togeth with the frail and equivoc tenur by which he 
still existed--circumst all so well calcul to prostrat everi 
energi of mind--and the reader will be easili brought, as I have been, 
to regard hi appar fall off in friendship and in faith with 
sentiment rather of sorrow than of anger. 

the crash of the bottl wa distinctli heard, yet augustu wa not sure 
that it proceed from the hold. the doubt, however, wa suffici 
induc to persevere. He clamber up nearli to the orlop deck by 
mean of the stowage, and then, watch for a lull in the pitch of 
the vessel, he call out to me in as loud a tone as he could command, 
regardless, for the moment, of be overheard by the crew. It will 
be rememb that on thi occas the voic reach me, but I wa 
so entir overcom by violent agit as to be incap of reply. 
confident, now, that hi worst apprehens were well founded, he 
descended, with a view of get back to the forecastl without loss 
of time. In hi hast some small box were thrown down, the nois 
occas by which I heard, as will be recollected. He had made 
consider progress on hi return when the fall of the knife again 
caus him to hesitate. He retrac hi step immediately, and, 
clamber up the stowag a second time, call out my name, loudli as 
before, have watch for a lull. thi time I found voic to answer. 
overjoy at discov me to be still alive, he now resolv to brave 
everi difficulti and danger in reach me. have extric himself as 
quickli as possibl from the labyrinth of lumber by which he wa hem 
in, he at length struck into an open which promis better, and 
finally, after a seri of struggles, arriv at the box in a state of 
utter exhaustion. 




chapter 6 

the lead particular of thi narrat were all that augustu 
commun to me while we remain near the box. It wa not 
until afterward that he enter fulli into all the details. He wa 
apprehens of be missed, and I wa wild with impati to leav 
my detest place of confinement. We resolv to make our way at onc 
to the hole in the bulkhead, near which I wa to remain for the present, 
while he went through to reconnoiter. To leav tiger in the box wa what 
neither of us could endur to think of, yet, how to act otherwis wa 
the question. He now seem to be perfectli quiet, and we could not even 
distinguish the sound of hi breath upon appli our ear close 
to the box. I wa convinc that he wa dead, and determin to open the 
door. We found him lie at full length, appar in a deep stupor, 
yet still alive. No time wa to be lost, yet I could not bring myself to 
abandon an anim who had now been twice instrument in save my life, 
without some attempt at preserv him. We therefor drag him along 
with us as well as we could, although with the greatest difficulti and 
fatigue; augustus, dure part of the time, be forc to clamber 
over the impedi in our way with the huge dog in hi arms--a feat 
to which the feebl of my frame render me total inadequate. At 
length we succeed in reach the hole, when augustu got through, and 
tiger wa push in afterward. all wa found to be safe, and we did 
not fail to return sincer thank to god for our deliver from the 
immin danger we had escaped. for the present, it wa agre that I 
should remain near the opening, through which my companion could readili 
suppli me with a part of hi daili provision, and where I could have the 
advantag of breath an atmospher compar pure. 

In explan of some portion of thi narrative, wherein I have spoken 
of the stowag of the brig, and which may appear ambigu to some of my 
reader who may have seen a proper or regular stowage, I must here state 
that the manner in which thi most import duti had been perform 
on board the grampu wa a most shame piec of neglect on the part 
of captain barnard, who wa by no mean as care or as experienc a 
seaman as the hazard natur of the servic on which he wa 
employ would seem necessarili to demand. A proper stowag cannot be 
accomplish in a careless manner, and mani most disastr accidents, 
even within the limit of my own experience, have arisen from neglect 
or ignor in thi particular. coast vessels, in the frequent hurri 
and bustl attend upon take in or discharg cargo, are the most 
liabl to mishap from the want of a proper attent to stowage. the 
great point is to allow no possibl of the cargo or ballast shift 
posit even in the most violent roll of the vessel. with thi end, 
great attent must be paid, not onli to the bulk taken in, but to the 
natur of the bulk, and whether there be a full or onli a partial cargo. 
In most kind of freight the stowag is accomplish by mean of a 
screw. thus, in a load of tobacco or flour, the whole is screw so 
tightli into the hold of the vessel that the barrel or hogsheads, upon 
discharging, are found to be complet flattened, and take some time 
to regain their origin shape. thi screwing, however, is resort to 
princip with a view of obtain more room in the hold; for in a 
full load of ani such commod as flour or tobacco, there can be no 
danger of ani shift whatever, at least none from which inconveni 
can result. there have been instances, indeed, where thi method of 
screw ha result in the most lament consequences, aris from 
a caus altogeth distinct from the danger attend upon a shift of 
cargo. A load of cotton, for example, tightli screw while in certain 
conditions, ha been known, through the expans of it bulk, to rend a 
vessel asund at sea. there can be no doubt either that the same result 
would ensu in the case of tobacco, while undergo it usual cours 
of fermentation, were it not for the interstic consequ upon the 
rotund of the hogsheads. 

It is when a partial cargo is receiv that danger is chiefli to be 
apprehend from shifting, and that precaut should be alway taken 
to guard against such misfortune. onli those who have encount a 
violent gale of wind, or rather who have experienc the roll of 
a vessel in a sudden calm after the gale, can form an idea of the 
tremend forc of the plunges, and of the consequ terribl impetu 
given to all loos articl in the vessel. It is then that the necess 
of a cautiou stowage, when there is a partial cargo, becom obvious. 
when lying-to (especi with a small head sail), a vessel which is not 
properli model in the bow is frequent thrown upon her beam-ends; 
thi occur even everi fifteen or twenti minut upon an average, yet 
without ani seriou consequ resulting, provid there be a proper 
stowage. If this, however, ha not been strictli attend to, in the 
first of these heavi lurch the whole of the cargo tumbl over to the 
side of the vessel which lie upon the water, and, be thu prevent 
from regain her equilibrium, as she would otherwis necessarili do, 
she is certain to fill in a few second and go down. It is not too much 
to say that at least one-half of the instanc in which vessel have 
founder in heavi gale at sea may be attribut to a shift of cargo 
or of ballast. 

when a partial cargo of ani kind is taken on board, the whole, after 
be first stow as compactli as may be, should be cover with a 
layer of stout shifting-boards, extend complet across the vessel. 
upon these board strong temporari stanchion should be erected, 
reach to the timber above, and thu secur everi thing in it 
place. In cargo consist of grain, or ani similar matter, addit 
precaut are requisite. A hold fill entir with grain upon 
leav port will be found not more than three fourth full upon 
reach it destination--this, too, although the freight, when measur 
bushel by bushel by the consignee, will overrun by a vast deal (on 
account of the swell of the grain) the quantiti consigned. thi 
result is occas by settl dure the voyage, and is the more 
percept in proport to the rough of the weather experienced. 
If grain loos thrown in a vessel, then, is ever so well secur by 
shifting-board and stanchions, it will be liabl to shift in a long 
passag so greatli as to bring about the most distress calamities. 
To prevent these, everi method should be employ befor leav port 
to settl the cargo as much as possible; and for thi there are mani 
contrivances, among which may be mention the drive of wedg into 
the grain. even after all thi is done, and unusu pain taken to 
secur the shifting-boards, no seaman who know what he is about will 
feel altogeth secur in a gale of ani violenc with a cargo of 
grain on board, and, least of all, with a partial cargo. yet there are 
hundr of our coast vessels, and, it is likely, mani more from the 
port of europe, which sail daili with partial cargoes, even of the most 
danger species, and without ani precaut whatever. the wonder 
is that no more accid occur than do actual happen. A lament 
instanc of thi heedless occur to my knowledg in the case of 
captain joel rice of the schooner firefly, which sail from richmond, 
virginia, to madeira, with a cargo of corn, in the year 1825. the 
captain had gone mani voyag without seriou accident, although he wa 
in the habit of pay no attent whatev to hi stowage, more than 
to secur it in the ordinari manner. He had never befor sail with 
a cargo of grain, and on thi occas had the corn thrown on board 
loosely, when it did not much more than half fill the vessel. for the 
first portion of the voyag he met with noth more than light breezes; 
but when within a day’ sail of madeira there came on a strong gale from 
the N. N. E. which forc him to lie-to. He brought the schooner to the 
wind under a double-reef foresail alone, when she rode as well as ani 
vessel could be expect to do, and ship not a drop of water. toward 
night the gale somewhat abated, and she roll with more unsteadi 
than before, but still did veri well, until a heavi lurch threw her upon 
her beam-end to starboard. the corn wa then heard to shift bodily, the 
forc of the movement burst open the main hatchway. the vessel 
went down like a shot. thi happen within hail of a small sloop from 
madeira, which pick up one of the crew (the onli person saved), and 
which rode out the gale in perfect security, as inde a jolli boat 
might have done under proper management. 

the stowag on board the grampu wa most clumsili done, if stowag 
that could be call which wa littl better than a promiscu huddl 
togeth of oil-cask {*1} and ship furniture. I have alreadi spoken of 
the condit of articl in the hold. On the orlop deck there wa space 
enough for my bodi (a I have stated) between the oil-cask and the 
upper deck; a space wa left open around the main hatchway; and sever 
other larg space were left in the stowage. near the hole cut through 
the bulkhead by augustu there wa room enough for an entir cask, and 
in thi space I found myself comfort situat for the present. 

By the time my friend had got safe into the berth, and readjust 
hi handcuff and the rope, it wa broad daylight. We had made a narrow 
escap indeed; for scarc had he arrang all matters, when the mate 
came below, with dirk peter and the cook. they talk for some time 
about the vessel from the cape verds, and seem to be excess 
anxiou for her appearance. At length the cook came to the berth in 
which augustu wa lying, and seat himself in it near the head. I 
could see and hear everi thing from my hiding-place, for the piec cut 
out had not been put back, and I wa in momentari expect that the 
negro would fall against the pea-jacket, which wa hung up to conceal 
the aperture, in which case all would have been discovered, and our 
live would, no doubt, have been instantli sacrificed. our good fortun 
prevailed, however; and although he frequent touch it as the vessel 
rolled, he never press against it suffici to bring about a 
discovery. the bottom of the jacket had been care fasten to the 
bulkhead, so that the hole might not be seen by it swing to one 
side. all thi time tiger wa lie in the foot of the berth, and 
appear to have recov in some measur hi faculties, for I could 
see him occasion open hi eye and draw a long breath. 

after a few minut the mate and cook went above, leav dirk peter 
behind, who, as soon as they were gone, came and sat himself down in 
the place just occupi by the mate. He began to talk veri sociabl with 
augustus, and we could now see that the greater part of hi appar 
intoxication, while the two other were with him, wa a feint. He 
answer all my companion’ question with perfect freedom; told him 
that he had no doubt of hi father’ have been pick up, as there 
were no less than five sail in sight just befor sundown on the day he 
wa cut adrift; and use other languag of a consolatori nature, 
which occas me no less surpris than pleasure. indeed, I began to 
entertain hopes, that through the instrument of peter we might 
be final enabl to regain possess of the brig, and thi idea I 
mention to augustu as soon as I found an opportunity. He thought 
the matter possible, but urg the necess of the greatest caution 
in make the attempt, as the conduct of the hybrid appear to be 
instig by the most arbitrari capric alone; and, indeed, it wa 
difficult to say if he wa at ani moment of sound mind. peter went 
upon deck in about an hour, and did not return again until noon, when he 
brought augustu a plenti suppli of junk beef and pudding. Of this, 
when we were left alone, I partook heartily, without return through 
the hole. No one els came down into the forecastl dure the day, and 
at night, I got into augustus’ berth, where I slept soundli and sweetli 
until nearli daybreak, when he awaken me upon hear a stir upon 
deck, and I regain my hiding-plac as quickli as possible. when the 
day wa fulli broke, we found that tiger had recov hi strength 
almost entirely, and gave no indic of hydrophobia, drink a 
littl water that wa offer him with great appar eagerness. dure 
the day he regain all hi former vigour and appetite. hi strang 
conduct had been brought on, no doubt, by the deleteri qualiti of the 
air of the hold, and had no connexion with canin madness. I could not 
suffici rejoic that I had persist in bring him with me from 
the box. thi day wa the thirtieth of june, and the thirteenth sinc 
the grampu made sail from nantucket. 

On the second of juli the mate came below drunk as usual, and in an 
excess good-humor. He came to augustus’ berth, and, give him a 
slap on the back, ask him if he thought he could behav himself if 
he let him loose, and whether he would promis not to be go into the 
cabin again. To this, of course, my friend answer in the affirmative, 
when the ruffian set him at liberty, after make him drink from a flask 
of rum which he drew from hi coat-pocket. both now went on deck, and I 
did not see augustu for about three hours. He then came below with the 
good news that he had obtain permiss to go about the brig as he 
pleas anywher forward of the mainmast, and that he had been order 
to sleep, as usual, in the forecastle. He brought me, too, a good 
dinner, and a plenti suppli of water. the brig wa still cruis for 
the vessel from the cape verds, and a sail wa now in sight, which wa 
thought to be the one in question. As the event of the ensu eight 
day were of littl importance, and had no direct bear upon the main 
incid of my narrative, I will here throw them into the form of a 
journal, as I do not wish to omit them altogether. 

juli 3. augustu furnish me with three blankets, with which I 
contriv a comfort bed in my hiding-place. No one came below, 
except my companion, dure the day. tiger took hi station in the 
berth just by the aperture, and slept heavily, as if not yet entir 
recov from the effect of hi sickness. toward night a flaw of wind 
struck the brig befor sail could be taken in, and veri nearli capsiz 
her. the puff die away immediately, however, and no damag wa done 
beyond the split of the foretopsail. dirk peter treat augustu 
all thi day with great kind and enter into a long convers 
with him respect the pacif ocean, and the island he had visit 
in that region. He ask him whether he would not like to go with the 
mutin on a kind of explor and pleasur voyag in those quarters, 
and said that the men were gradual come over to the mate’ views. 
To thi augustu thought it best to repli that he would be glad to go 
on such an adventure, sinc noth better could be done, and that ani 
thing wa prefer to a pirat life. 

juli 4th. the vessel in sight prove to be a small brig from liverpool, 
and wa allow to pass unmolested. augustu spent most of hi time 
on deck, with a view of obtain all the inform in hi power 
respect the intent of the mutineers. they had frequent and 
violent quarrel among themselves, in one of which a harpooner, jim 
bonner, wa thrown overboard. the parti of the mate wa gain ground. 
jim bonner belong to the cook’ gang, of which peter wa a partisan. 

juli 5th. about daybreak there came on a stiff breez from the west, 
which at noon freshen into a gale, so that the brig could carri 
noth more than her trysail and foresail. In take in the 
foretopsail, simms, one of the common hands, and belong also to 
the cook’ gang, fell overboard, be veri much in liquor, and wa 
drowned--no attempt be made to save him. the whole number of person 
on board wa now thirteen, to wit: dirk peters; seymour, the black 
cook; jones, greely, hartman roger and william allen, all of the 
cook’ party; the mate, whose name I never 
learned; absalom hicks, wilson, john hunti richard parker, of the mate’ 
party;--besid augustu and myself. 

juli 6th. the gale last all thi day, blow in heavi squalls, 
accompani with rain. the brig took in a good deal of water through her 
seams, and one of the pump wa kept continu going, augustu be 
forc to take hi turn. just at twilight a larg ship pass close 
by us, without have been discov until within hail. the ship wa 
suppos to be the one for which the mutin were on the lookout. the 
mate hail her, but the repli wa drown in the roar of the gale. 
At eleven, a sea wa ship amidships, which tore away a great portion 
of the larboard bulwarks, and did some other slight damage. toward 
morn the weather moderated, and at sunris there wa veri littl 
wind. 

juli 7th. there wa a heavi swell run all thi day, dure which the 
brig, be light, roll excessively, and mani articl broke loos in 
the hold, as I could hear distinctli from my hiding-place. I suffer 
a great deal from sea-sickness. peter had a long convers thi day 
with augustus, and told him that two of hi gang, greeli and allen, had 
gone over to the mate, and were resolv to turn pirates. He put sever 
question to augustu which he did not then exactli understand. dure 
a part of thi even the leak gain upon the vessel; and littl could 
be done to remedi it, as it wa occas by the brig' straining, and 
take in the water through her seams. A sail wa thrummed, and got 
under the bows, which aid us in some measure, so that we began to gain 
upon the leak. 

juli 8th. A light breez sprang up at sunris from the eastward, when 
the mate head the brig to the southwest, with the intent of make 
some of the west india island in pursuanc of hi pirat designs. No 
opposit wa made by peter or the cook--at least none in the hear 
of augustus. all idea of take the vessel from the cape verd wa 
abandoned. the leak wa now easili kept under by one pump go everi 
three quarter of an hour. the sail wa drawn from beneath the bows. 
spoke two small schooner dure the day. 

juli 9th. fine weather. all hand employ in repair bulwarks. peter 
had again a long convers with augustus, and spoke more plainli than 
he had done heretofore. He said noth should induc him to come into 
the mate’ views, and even hint hi intent of take the brig out 
of hi hands. He ask my friend if he could depend upon hi aid in such 
case, to which augustu said, “yes,” without hesitation. peter then 
said he would sound the other of hi parti upon the subject, and went 
away. dure the remaind of the day augustu had no opportun of 
speak with him privately. 




chapter 7 

juli 10. spoke a brig from rio, bound to norfolk. weather hazy, with 
a light baffl wind from the eastward. to-day hartman roger died, 
have been attack on the eighth with spasm after drink a glass of 
grog. thi man wa of the cook’ party, and one upon whom peter place 
hi main reliance. He told augustu that he believ the mate had 
poison him, and that he expected, if he did not be on the look-out, 
hi own turn would come shortly. there were now onli himself, jones, and 
the cook belong to hi own gang--on the other side there were five. 
He had spoken to jone about take the command from the mate; but the 
project have been coolli received, he had been deter from press 
the matter ani further, or from say ani thing to the cook. It wa 
well, as it happened, that he wa so prudent, for in the afternoon the 
cook express hi determin of side with the mate, and went over 
formal to that party; while jone took an opportun of quarrel 
with peters, and hint that he would let the mate know of the plan 
in agitation. there wa now, evidently, no time to be lost, and peter 
express hi determin of attempt to take the vessel at all 
hazards, provid augustu would lend him hi aid. My friend at onc 
assur him of hi willing to enter into ani plan for that purpose, 
and, think the opportun a favour one, made known the fact 
of my be on board. At thi the hybrid wa not more astonish than 
delighted, as he had no relianc whatev upon jones, whom he alreadi 
consid as belong to the parti of the mate. they went below 
immediately, when augustu call to me by name, and peter and myself 
were soon made acquainted. It wa agre that we should attempt to 
retak the vessel upon the first good opportunity, leav jone 
altogeth out of our councils. In the event of success, we were to 
run the brig into the first port that offered, and deliv her up. the 
desert of hi parti had frustrat peters’ design of go into the 
pacific--an adventur which could not be accomplish without a crew, 
and he depend upon either get acquit upon trial, on the score 
of insan (which he solemnli avow had actuat him in lend hi 
aid to the mutiny), or upon obtain a pardon, if found guilty, through 
the represent of augustu and myself. our deliber were 
interrupt for the present by the cri of, “all hand take in sail,” and 
peter and augustu ran up on deck. 

As usual, the crew were nearli all drunk; and, befor sail could be 
properli taken in, a violent squall laid the brig on her beam-ends. By 
keep her away, however, she righted, have ship a good deal of 
water. scarc wa everyth secure, when anoth squall took the 
vessel, and immedi afterward another--no damag be done. there 
wa everi appear of a gale of wind, which, indeed, shortli came on, 
with great fury, from the northward and westward. all wa made as snug 
as possible, and we laid-to, as usual, under a close-reef foresail. As 
night drew on, the wind increas in violence, with a remark heavi 
sea. peter now came into the forecastl with augustus, and we resum 
our deliberations. 

We agre that no opportun could be more favour than the present 
for carri our design into effect, as an attempt at such a moment 
would never be anticipated. As the brig wa snugli laid-to, there would 
be no necess of manoeuvr her until good weather, when, if we 
succeed in our attempt, we might liber one, or perhap two of the 
men, to aid us in take her into port. the main difficulti wa the 
great disproport in our forces. there were onli three of us, and in 
the cabin there were nine. all the arm on board, too, were in their 
possession, with the except of a pair of small pistol which peter 
had conceal about hi person, and the larg seaman’ knife which 
he alway wore in the waistband of hi pantaloons. from certain 
indications, too--such, for example, as there be no such thing as 
an axe or a handspik lie in their customari places--w began to fear 
that the mate had hi suspicions, at least in regard to peters, and that 
he would let slip no opportun of get rid of him. It wa clear, 
indeed, that what we should determin to do could not be done too soon. 
still the odd were too much against us to allow of our proceed 
without the greatest caution. 

peter propos that he should go up on deck, and enter into 
convers with the watch (allen), when he would be abl to throw him 
into the sea without trouble, and without make ani disturbance, by 
seiz a good opportunity, that augustu and myself should then come 
up, and endeavour to provid ourselv with some kind of weapon from 
the deck, and that we should then make a rush together, and secur the 
companion-way befor ani opposit could be offered. I object to 
this, becaus I could not believ that the mate (who wa a cun 
fellow in all matter which did not affect hi superstiti prejudices) 
would suffer himself to be so easili entrapped. the veri fact of there 
be a watch on deck at all wa suffici proof that he wa upon the 
alert,--it not be usual except in vessel where disciplin is most 
rigidli enforced, to station a watch on deck when a vessel is lying-to 
in a gale of wind. As I address myself principally, if not altogether, 
to person who have never been to sea, it may be as well to state the 
exact condit of a vessel under such circumstances. lying-to, or, 
in sea-parlance, “laying-to,” is a measur resort to for variou 
purposes, and effect in variou manners. In moder weather it 
is frequent done with a view of mere bring the vessel to a 
stand-still, to wait for anoth vessel or ani similar object. If 
the vessel which lies-to is under full sail, the manoeuvr is usual 
accomplish by throw round some portion of her sails, so as to let 
the wind take them aback, when she becom stationary. but we are now 
speak of lying-to in a gale of wind. thi is done when the wind 
is ahead, and too violent to admit of carri sail without danger of 
capsizing; and sometim even when the wind is fair, but the sea too 
heavi for the vessel to be put befor it. If a vessel be suffer to 
scud befor the wind in a veri heavi sea, much damag is usual done 
her by the ship of water over her stern, and sometim by the 
violent plung she make forward. thi manoeuvre, then, is seldom 
resort to in such case, unless through necessity. when the vessel 
is in a leaki condit she is often put befor the wind even in the 
heaviest seas; for, when lying-to, her seam are sure to be greatli 
open by her violent straining, and it is not so much the case when 
scudding. often, too, it becom necessari to scud a vessel, either when 
the blast is so exceedingli furiou as to tear in piec the sail which 
is employ with a view of bring her head to the wind, or when, 
through the fals model of the frame or other causes, thi main 
object cannot be effected. 

vessel in a gale of wind are laid-to in differ manners, accord 
to their peculiar construction. some lie-to best under a foresail, and 
this, I believe, is the sail most usual employed. larg square-rig 
vessel have sail for the express purpose, call storm-staysails. 
but the jib is occasion employ by itself,--sometim the jib 
and foresail, or a double-reef foresail, and not unfrequ the 
after-sails, are made use of. foretopsail are veri often found to 
answer the purpos better than ani other speci of sail. the grampu 
wa gener laid-to under a close-reef foresail. 

when a vessel is to be laid-to, her head is brought up to the wind just 
so nearli as to fill the sail under which she lie when haul flat aft, 
that is, when brought diagon across the vessel. thi be done, 
the bow point within a few degre of the direct from which the wind 
issues, and the windward bow of cours receiv the shock of the waves. 
In thi situat a good vessel will ride out a veri heavi gale of wind 
without ship a drop of water, and without ani further attent 
be requisit on the part of the crew. the helm is usual lash 
down, but thi is altogeth unnecessari (except on account of the nois 
it make when loose), for the rudder ha no effect upon the vessel when 
lying-to. indeed, the helm had far better be left loos than lash veri 
fast, for the rudder is apt to be torn off by heavi sea if there be no 
room for the helm to play. As long as the sail holds, a well model 
vessel will maintain her situation, and ride everi sea, as if instinct 
with life and reason. If the violenc of the wind, however, should tear 
the sail into piec (a feat which it requir a perfect hurrican to 
accomplish under ordinari circumstances), there is then immin danger. 
the vessel fall off from the wind, and, come broadsid to the sea, 
is complet at it mercy: the onli resourc in thi case is to put her 
quietli befor the wind, let her scud until some other sail can be 
set. some vessel will lie-to under no sail whatever, but such are not 
to be trust at sea. 

but to return from thi digression. It had never been customari with the 
mate to have ani watch on deck when lying-to in a gale of wind, and the 
fact that he had now one, coupl with the circumst of the miss 
axe and handspikes, fulli convinc us that the crew were too well on 
the watch to be taken by surpris in the manner peter had suggested. 
something, however, wa to be done, and that with as littl delay as 
practicable, for there could be no doubt that a suspicion have 
been onc entertain against peters, he would be sacrif upon the 
earliest occasion, and one would certainli be either found or made upon 
the break of the gale. 

augustu now suggest that if peter could contriv to remove, under 
ani pretext, the piec of chain-cabl which lay over the trap in the 
stateroom, we might possibl be abl to come upon them unawar by mean 
of the hold; but a littl reflect convinc us that the vessel roll 
and pitch too violent for ani attempt of that nature. 

By good fortun I at length hit upon the idea of work upon the 
superstiti terror and guilti conscienc of the mate. It will be 
rememb that one of the crew, hartman rogers, had die dure the 
morning, have been attack two day befor with spasm after drink 
some spirit and water. peter had express to us hi opinion that thi 
man had been poison by the mate, and for thi belief he had reasons, 
so he said, which were incontrovertible, but which he could not be 
prevail upon to explain to us--thi wayward refus be onli in 
keep with other point of hi singular character. but whether or not 
he had ani better ground for suspect the mate than we had ourselves, 
we were easili led to fall in with hi suspicion, and determin to act 
accordingly. 

roger had die about eleven in the forenoon, in violent convulsions; 
and the corps present in a few minut after death one of the most 
horrid and loathsom spectacl I ever rememb to have seen. the 
stomach wa swollen immensely, like that of a man who ha been drown 
and lain under water for mani weeks. the hand were in the same 
condition, while the face wa shrunken, shrivelled, and of a chalki 
whiteness, except where reliev by two or three glare red blotch 
like those occas by the erysipelas: one of these blotch extend 
diagon across the face, complet cover up an eye as if with 
a band of red velvet. In thi disgust condit the bodi had been 
brought up from the cabin at noon to be thrown overboard, when the mate 
get a glimps of it (for he now saw it for the first time), and 
be either touch with remors for hi crime or struck with terror at 
so horribl a sight, order the men to sew the bodi up in it 
hammock, and allow it the usual rite of sea-burial. have given these 
directions, he went below, as if to avoid ani further sight of hi 
victim. while prepar were make to obey hi orders, the gale came 
on with great fury, and the design wa abandon for the present. the 
corpse, left to itself, wa wash into the larboard scuppers, where 
it still lay at the time of which I speak, flounder about with the 
furiou lurch of the brig. 

have arrang our plan, we set about put it in execut as 
speedili as possible. peter went upon deck, and, as he had anticipated, 
wa immedi accost by allen, who appear to be station more as 
a watch upon the forecastl than for ani other purpose. the fate of 
thi villain, however, wa speedili and silent decided; for peters, 
approach him in a careless manner, as if about to address him, seiz 
him by the throat, and, befor he could utter a singl cry, toss 
him over the bulwarks. He then call to us, and we came up. our first 
precaut wa to look about for someth with which to arm ourselves, 
and in do thi we had to proceed with great care, for it wa 
imposs to stand on deck an instant without hold fast, and 
violent sea broke over the vessel at everi plung forward. It wa 
indispensable, too, that we should be quick in our operations, for everi 
minut we expect the mate to be up to set the pump going, as it wa 
evid the brig must be take in water veri fast. after search 
about for some time, we could find noth more fit for our purpos 
than the two pump-handles, one of which augustu took, and I the other. 
have secur these, we strip off the shirt of the corps and 
drop the bodi overboard. peter and myself then went below, leav 
augustu to watch upon deck, where he took hi station just where allen 
had been placed, and with hi back to the cabin companionway, so that, 
if ani of the mate' gang should come up, he might suppos it wa the 
watch. 

As soon as I got below I commenc disguis myself so as to repres 
the corps of rogers. the shirt which we had taken from the bodi aid 
us veri much, for it wa of singular form and character, and easili 
recognizable--a kind of smock, which the deceas wore over hi other 
clothing. It wa a blue stockinett, with larg white stripe run 
across. have put thi on, I proceed to equip myself with a fals 
stomach, in imit of the horribl deform of the swollen corpse. 
thi wa soon effect by mean of stuf with some bedclothes. I 
then gave the same appear to my hand by draw on a pair of white 
woollen mittens, and fill them in with ani kind of rag that offer 
themselves. peter then arrang my face, first rub it well over 
with white chalk, and afterward blotch it with blood, which he took 
from a cut in hi finger. the streak across the eye wa not forgotten 
and present a most shock appearance. 




chapter 8 

AS I view myself in a fragment of looking-glass which hung up in 
the cabin, and by the dim light of a kind of battle-lantern, I wa 
so impress with a sens of vagu awe at my appearance, and at the 
recollect of the terrif realiti which I wa thu representing, 
that I wa seiz with a violent tremour, and could scarc summon 
resolut to go on with my part. It wa necessary, however, to act with 
decision, and peter and myself went upon deck. 

We there found everyth safe, and, keep close to the bulwarks, 
the three of us crept to the cabin companion-way. It wa onli partial 
closed, precaut have been taken to prevent it be suddenli 
push to from without, by mean of place billet of wood on the upper 
step so as to interfer with the shutting. We found no difficulti in 
get a full view of the interior of the cabin through the crack 
where the hing were placed. It now prove to have been veri fortun 
for us that we had not attempt to take them by surprise, for they were 
evid on the alert. onli one wa asleep, and he lie just at the 
foot of the companion-ladder, with a musket by hi side. the rest were 
seat on sever mattresses, which had been taken from the berth and 
thrown on the floor. they were engag in earnest conversation; and 
although they had been carousing, as appear from two empti jugs, with 
some tin tumbler which lay about, they were not as much intox 
as usual. all had knives, one or two of them pistols, and a great mani 
musket were lie in a berth close at hand. 

We listen to their convers for some time befor we could make 
up our mind how to act, have as yet resolv on noth determinate, 
except that we would attempt to paralyz their exertions, when we should 
attack them, by mean of the apparit of rogers. they were discuss 
their pirat plans, in which all we could hear distinctli was, that 
they would unit with the crew of a schooner _hornet_, and, if possible, 
get the schooner herself into their possess preparatori to some 
attempt on a larg scale, the particular of which could not be made out 
by either of us. 

one of the men spoke of peters, when the mate repli to him in a low 
voic which could not be distinguished, and afterward ad more 
loudly, that “he could not understand hi be so much forward with the 
captain’ brat in the forecastle, and he thought the sooner both of them 
were overboard the better.” To thi no answer wa made, but we could 
easili perceiv that the hint wa well receiv by the whole party, and 
more particularli by jones. At thi period I wa excess agitated, 
the more so as I could see that neither augustu nor peter could 
determin how to act. I made up my mind, however, to sell my life as 
dearli as possible, and not to suffer myself to be overcom by ani 
feel of trepidation. 

the tremend nois made by the roar of the wind in the rigging, and 
the wash of the sea over the deck, prevent us from hear what wa 
said, except dure momentari lulls. In one of these, we all distinctli 
heard the mate tell one of the men to “go forward, have an eye upon 
them, for he want no such secret do on board the brig.” It wa 
well for us that the pitch of the vessel at thi moment wa so 
violent as to prevent thi order from be carri into instant 
execution. the cook got up from hi mattress to go for us, when a 
tremend lurch, which I thought would carri away the masts, threw him 
headlong against one of the larboard stateroom doors, burst it open, 
and creat a good deal of other confusion. luckily, neither of 
our parti wa thrown from hi position, and we had time to make a 
precipit retreat to the forecastle, and arrang a hurri plan of 
action befor the messeng made hi appearance, or rather befor he put 
hi head out of the companion-hatch, for he did not come on deck. 
from thi station he could not notic the absenc of allen, and he 
accordingli bawl out, as if to him, repeat the order of the 
mate. peter cri out, “ay, ay,” in a disguis voice, and the cook 
immedi went below, without entertain a suspicion that all wa 
not right. 

My two companion now proceed boldli aft and down into the cabin, 
peter close the door after him in the same manner he had found it. 
the mate receiv them with feign cordiality, and told augustu that, 
sinc he had behav himself so well of late, he might take up hi 
quarter in the cabin and be one of them for the future. He then pour 
him out a tumbler half full of rum, and made him drink it. all thi I 
saw and heard, for I follow my friend to the cabin as soon as the 
door wa shut, and took up my old point of observation. I had 
brought with me the two pump-handles, one of which I secur near the 
companion-way, to be readi for use when required. 

I now steadi myself as well as possibl so as to have a good view of 
all that wa pass within, and endeavour to nerv myself to the task 
of descend among the mutin when peter should make a signal to 
me, as agre upon. present he contriv to turn the convers upon 
the bloodi deed of the mutiny, and by degre led the men to talk 
of the thousand superstit which are so univers current among 
seamen. I could not make out all that wa said, but I could plainli see 
the effect of the convers in the counten of those present. 
the mate wa evid much agitated, and presently, when some one 
mention the terrif appear of rogers’ corpse, I thought he wa 
upon the point of swooning. peter now ask him if he did not think it 
would be better to have the bodi thrown overboard at onc as it wa too 
horribl a sight to see it flounder about in the scuppers. At thi 
the villain absolut gasp for breath, and turn hi head slowli 
round upon hi companions, as if implor some one to go up and perform 
the task. No one, however, stirred, and it wa quit evid that the 
whole parti were wound up to the highest pitch of nervou excitement. 
peter now made me the signal. I immedi threw open the door of the 
companion-way, and, descending, without utter a syllable, stood erect 
in the midst of the party. 

the intens effect produc by thi sudden apparit is not at all 
to be wonder at when the variou circumst are taken into 
consideration. usually, in case of a similar nature, there is left in 
the mind of the spectat some glimmer of doubt as to the realiti of 
the vision befor hi eyes; a degre of hope, howev feeble, that he 
is the victim of chicanery, and that the apparit is not actual a 
visit from the old world of shadows. It is not too much to say that 
such remnant of doubt have been at the bottom of almost everi such 
visitation, and that the appal horror which ha sometim been 
brought about, is to be attributed, even in the case most in point, 
and where most suffer ha been experienced, more to a kind of 
anticip horror, lest the apparit might possibl be real, than 
to an unwav belief in it reality. but, in the present instance, it 
will be seen immediately, that in the mind of the mutin there 
wa not even the shadow of a basi upon which to rest a doubt that 
the apparit of roger wa inde a revivif of hi disgust 
corpse, or at least it spiritu image. the isol situat of the 
brig, with it entir inaccess on account of the gale, confin 
the appar possibl mean of decept within such narrow and 
definit limits, that they must have thought themselv enabl to 
survey them all at a glance. they had now been at sea twenty-four days, 
without hold more than a speak commun with ani vessel 
whatever. the whole of the crew, too--at least all whom they had the 
most remot reason for suspect to be on board--wer assembl in the 
cabin, with the except of allen, the watch; and hi gigant statur 
(he wa six feet six inch high) wa too familiar in their eye to 
permit the notion that he wa the apparit befor them to enter their 
mind even for an instant. add to these consider the awe-inspir 
natur of the tempest, and that of the convers brought about by 
peters; the deep impress which the loathsom of the actual corps 
had made in the morn upon the imagin of the men; the excel 
of the imit in my person, and the uncertain and waver light 
in which they beheld me, as the glare of the cabin lantern, swing 
violent to and fro, fell dubious and fit upon my figure, and 
there will be no reason to wonder that the decept had even more than 
the entir effect which we had anticipated. the mate sprang up from the 
mattress on which he wa lying, and, without utter a syllable, fell 
back, stone dead, upon the cabin floor, and wa hurl to the leeward 
like a log by a heavi roll of the brig. Of the remain seven, there 
were but three who had at first ani degre of presenc of mind. the 
four other sat for some time root appar to the floor, the most 
pitiabl object of horror and utter despair my eye ever encountered. 
the onli opposit we experienc at all wa from the cook, john hunt, 
and richard parker; but they made but a feebl and irresolut defence. 
the two former were shot instantli by peters, and I fell parker with 
a blow on the head from the pump-handl which I had brought with me. In 
the meantime, augustu seiz one of the musket lie on the floor 
and shot anoth mutin wilson through the breast. there were now but 
three remaining; but by thi time they had becom arous from their 
lethargy, and perhap began to see that a decept had been practis 
upon them, for they fought with great resolut and fury, and, but for 
the immens muscular strength of peters, might have ultim got the 
better of us. these three men were--jones, greely, and absolom hicks. 
jone had thrown augustu to the floor, stab him in sever place 
along the right arm, and would no doubt have soon dispatch him 
(a neither peter nor myself could immedi get rid of our own 
antagonists), had it not been for the time aid of a friend, upon whose 
assist we, surely, had never depended. thi friend wa no other than 
tiger. with a low growl, he bound into the cabin, at a most critic 
moment for augustus, and throw himself upon jones, pin him to the 
floor in an instant. My friend, however, wa now too much injur to 
render us ani aid whatever, and I wa so encumb with my disguis 
that I could do but little. the dog would not leav hi hold upon the 
throat of jones--peters, nevertheless, wa far more than a match for the 
two men who remained, and would, no doubt, have dispatch them sooner, 
had it not been for the narrow space in which he had to act, and the 
tremend lurch of the vessel. present he wa enabl to get hold 
of a heavi stool, sever of which lay about the floor. with thi he 
beat out the brain of greeli as he wa in the act of discharg a 
musket at me, and immedi afterward a roll of the brig throw 
him in contact with hicks, he seiz him by the throat, and, by dint of 
sheer strength, strangl him instantaneously. thus, in far less time 
than I have taken to tell it, we found ourselv master of the brig. 

the onli person of our oppon who wa left aliv wa richard parker. 
thi man, it will be remembered, I had knock down with a blow from the 
pump-handl at the commenc of the attack. He now lay motionless by 
the door of the shatter stateroom; but, upon peter touch him with 
hi foot, he spoke, and entreat for mercy. hi head wa onli slightli 
cut, and otherwis he had receiv no injury, have been mere stun 
by the blow. He now got up, and, for the present, we secur hi hand 
behind hi back. the dog wa still growl over jones; but, upon 
examination, we found him complet dead, the blood issu in a stream 
from a deep wound in the throat, inflicted, no doubt, by the sharp teeth 
of the animal. 

It wa now about one o’clock in the morning, and the wind wa still 
blow tremendously. the brig evid labour much more than usual, 
and it becam absolut necessari that someth should be done with a 
view of eas her in some measure. At almost everi roll to leeward 
she ship a sea, sever of which came partial down into the cabin 
dure our scuffle, the hatchway have been left open by myself when I 
descended. the entir rang of bulwark to larboard had been swept away, 
as well as the caboose, togeth with the jollyboat from the counter. 
the creak and work of the mainmast, too, gave indic that it 
wa nearli sprung. To make room for more stowag in the afterhold, the 
heel of thi mast had been step between deck (a veri reprehens 
practice, occasion resort to by ignor ship-builders), so that 
it wa in immin danger of work from it step. but, to crown all 
our difficulties, we plum the well, and found no less than seven feet 
of water. 

leav the bodi of the crew lie in the cabin, we got to work 
immedi at the pumps--parker, of course, be set at liberti to 
assist us in the labour. augustus’ arm wa bound up as well as we could 
effect it, and he did what he could, but that wa not much. however, we 
found that we could just manag to keep the leak from gain upon us 
by have one pump constantli going. As there were onli four of us, thi 
wa sever labour; but we endeavour to keep up our spirits, and look 
anxious for daybreak, when we hope to lighten the brig by cut 
away the mainmast. 

In thi manner we pass a night of terribl anxieti and fatigue, and, 
when the day at length broke, the gale had neither abat in the least, 
nor were there ani sign of it abating. We now drag the bodi 
on deck and threw them overboard. our next care wa to get rid of the 
mainmast. the necessari prepar have been made, peter cut away 
at the mast (have found axe in the cabin), while the rest of us stood 
by the stay and lanyards. As the brig gave a tremend lee-lurch, the 
word wa given to cut away the weather-lanyards, which be done, the 
whole mass of wood and rig plung into the sea, clear of the brig, 
and without do ani materi injury. We now found that the vessel 
did not labour quit as much as before, but our situat wa still 
exceedingli precarious, and in spite of the utmost exertions, we 
could not gain upon the leak without the aid of both pumps. the 
littl assist which augustu could render us wa not realli of ani 
importance. To add to our distress, a heavi sea, strike the brig to 
the windward, threw her off sever point from the wind, and, befor 
she could regain her position, anoth broke complet over her, and 
hurl her full upon her beam-ends. the ballast now shift in a mass 
to leeward (the stowag had been knock about perfectli at random for 
some time), and for a few moment we thought noth could save us from 
capsizing. presently, however, we partial righted; but the ballast 
still retain it place to larboard, we lay so much along that it wa 
useless to think of work the pumps, which inde we could not have 
done much longer in ani case, as our hand were entir raw with 
the excess labour we had undergone, and were bleed in the most 
horribl manner. 

contrari to parker’ advice, we now proceed to cut away the foremast, 
and at length accomplish it after much difficulty, owe to the 
posit in which we lay. In go overboard the wreck took with it the 
bowsprit, and left us a complet hulk. 

So far we had had reason to rejoic in the escap of our longboat, 
which had receiv no damag from ani of the huge sea which had come on 
board. but we had not long to congratul ourselves; for the foremast 
have gone, and, of course, the foresail with it, by which the brig had 
been steadied, everi sea now made a complet breach over us, and in 
five minut our deck wa swept from stem to stern, the longboat 
and starboard bulwark torn off, and even the windlass shatter into 
fragments. It was, indeed, hardli possibl for us to be in a more 
pitiabl condition. 

At noon there seem to be some slight appear of the gale’ abating, 
but in thi we were sadli disappointed, for it onli lull for a few 
minut to blow with redoubl fury. about four in the afternoon it wa 
utterli imposs to stand up against the violenc of the blast; and, 
as the night close in upon us, I had not a shadow of hope that the 
vessel would hold togeth until morning. 

By midnight we had settl veri deep in the water, which wa now up to 
the orlop deck. the rudder went soon afterward, the sea which tore it 
away lift the after portion of the brig entir from the water, 
against which she thump in her descent with such a concuss as would 
be occas by go ashore. We had all calcul that the rudder 
would hold it own to the last, as it wa unusu strong, be rig 
as I have never seen one rig either befor or since. down it main 
timber there ran a success of stout iron hooks, and other in the 
same manner down the stern-post. through these hook there extend 
a veri thick wrought-iron rod, the rudder be thu held to the 
stern-post and swing freeli on the rod. the tremend forc of the 
sea which tore it off may be estim by the fact, that the hook in 
the stern-post, which ran entir through it, be clinch on the 
inside, were drawn everi one of them complet out of the solid wood. 

We had scarc time to draw breath after the violenc of thi shock, 
when one of the most tremend wave I had then ever known broke right 
on board of us, sweep the companion-way clear off, burst in the 
hatchways, and fill everi inch of the vessel with water. 




chapter 9 

luckily, just befor night, all four of us had lash ourselv firmli 
to the fragment of the windlass, lie in thi manner as flat upon the 
deck as possible. thi precaut alon save us from destruction. As 
it was, we were all more or less stun by the immens weight of water 
which tumbl upon us, and which did not roll from abov us until we 
were nearli exhausted. As soon as I could recov breath, I call aloud 
to my companions. augustu alon replied, saying: “it is all over with 
us, and may god have merci upon our souls!” by-and-bi both the other 
were enabl to speak, when they exhort us to take courage, as there 
wa still hope; it be impossible, from the natur of the cargo, that 
the brig could go down, and there be everi chanc that the gale would 
blow over by the morning. these word inspir me with new life; for, 
strang as it may seem, although it wa obviou that a vessel with a 
cargo of empti oil-cask would not sink, I had been hitherto so confus 
in mind as to have overlook thi consider altogether; and the 
danger which I had for some time regard as the most immin wa 
that of foundering. As hope reviv within me, I made use of everi 
opportun to strengthen the lash which held me to the remain 
of the windlass, and in thi occup I soon discov that my 
companion were also busy. the night wa as dark as it could possibl 
be, and the horribl shriek din and confus which surround us it 
is useless to attempt describing. our deck lay level with the sea, or 
rather we were encircl with a tower ridg of foam, a portion of 
which swept over us everi instant. It is not too much to say that our 
head were not fairli out of the water more than one second in three. 
although we lay close together, no one of us could see the other, 
or, indeed, ani portion of the brig itself, upon which we were so 
tempestu hurl about. At interv we call one to the other, 
thu endeavour to keep aliv hope, and render consol and 
encourag to such of us as stood most in need of it. the feebl 
condit of augustu made him an object of solicitud with us all; and 
as, from the lacer condit of hi right arm, it must have been 
imposs for him to secur hi lash with ani degre of 
firmness, we were in momentari expect of find that he had gone 
overboard--yet to render him aid wa a thing altogeth out of the 
question. fortunately, hi station wa more secur than that of ani 
of the rest of us; for the upper part of hi bodi lie just beneath 
a portion of the shatter windlass, the seas, as they tumbl in upon 
him, were greatli broken in their violence. In ani other situat than 
thi (into which he had been accident thrown after have lash 
himself in a veri expos spot) he must inevit have perish befor 
morning. owe to the brig’ lie so much along, we were all less 
liabl to be wash off than otherwis would have been the case. the 
heel, as I have befor stated, wa to larboard, about one half of the 
deck be constantli under water. the seas, therefore, which struck us 
to starboard were much broken, by the vessel’ side, onli reach us 
in fragment as we lay flat on our faces; while those which came from 
larboard be what are call back-wat seas, and obtain littl 
hold upon us on account of our posture, had not suffici forc to drag 
us from our fastenings. 

In thi fright situat we lay until the day broke so as to show 
us more fulli the horror which surround us. the brig wa a mere 
log, roll about at the merci of everi wave; the gale wa upon the 
increase, if ani thing, blow inde a complet hurricane, and there 
appear to us no earthli prospect of deliverance. for sever hour 
we held on in silence, expect everi moment that our lash would 
either give way, that the remain of the windlass would go by the board, 
or that some of the huge seas, which roar in everi direct around 
us and abov us, would drive the hulk so far beneath the water that we 
should be drown befor it could regain the surface. By the merci of 
god, however, we were preserv from these immin dangers, and about 
midday were cheer by the light of the bless sun. shortli afterward 
we could perceiv a sensibl diminut in the forc of the wind, when, 
now for the first time sinc the latter part of the even before, 
augustu spoke, ask peters, who lay closest to him, if he thought 
there wa ani possibl of our be saved. As no repli wa at first 
made to thi question, we all conclud that the hybrid had been drown 
where he lay; but presently, to our great joy, he spoke, although veri 
feebly, say that he wa in great pain, be so cut by the tight 
of hi lash across the stomach, that he must either find mean of 
loosen them or perish, as it wa imposs that he could endur 
hi miseri much longer. thi occas us great distress, as it wa 
altogeth useless to think of aid him in ani manner while the 
sea continu wash over us as it did. We exhort him to bear hi 
suffer with fortitude, and promis to seiz the first opportun 
which should offer itself to reliev him. He repli that it would soon 
be too late; that it would be all over with him befor we could help 
him; and then, after moan for some minutes, lay silent, when we 
conclud that he had perished. 

As the even drew on, the sea had fallen so much that scarc more 
than one wave broke over the hulk from windward in the cours of five 
minutes, and the wind had abat a great deal, although still blow a 
sever gale. I had not heard ani of my companion speak for hours, and 
now call to augustus. He replied, although veri feebly, so that 
I could not distinguish what he said. I then spoke to peter and to 
parker, neither of whom return ani answer. 

shortli after thi period I fell into a state of partial insensibility, 
dure which the most pleas imag float in my imagination; such as 
green trees, wave meadow of ripe grain, process of danc girls, 
troop of cavalry, and other phantasies. I now rememb that, in all 
which pass befor my mind’ eye, motion wa a predomin idea. thus, 
I never fanci ani stationari object, such as a house, a mountain, or 
ani thing of that kind; but windmills, ships, larg birds, balloons, 
peopl on horseback, carriag drive furiously, and similar move 
objects, present themselv in endless succession. when I recov 
from thi state, the sun was, as near as I could guess, an hour high. 
I had the greatest difficulti in bring to recollect the variou 
circumst connect with my situation, and for some time remain 
firmli convinc that I wa still in the hold of the brig, near the box, 
and that the bodi of parker wa that of tiger. 

when I at length complet came to my senses, I found that the wind 
blew no more than a moder breeze, and that the sea wa compar 
calm; so much so that it onli wash over the brig amidships. My left 
arm had broken loos from it lashings, and wa much cut about the 
elbow; my right wa entir benumbed, and the hand and wrist swollen 
prodigi by the pressur of the rope, which had work from the 
shoulder downward. I wa also in great pain from anoth rope which 
went about my waist, and had been drawn to an insuffer degre of 
tightness. look round upon my companions, I saw that peter still 
lived, although a thick line wa pull so forcibl around hi loin as 
to give him the appear of be cut nearli in two; as I stirred, he 
made a feebl motion to me with hi hand, point to the rope. augustu 
gave no indic of life whatever, and wa bent nearli doubl across a 
splinter of the windlass. parker spoke to me when he saw me moving, 
and ask me if I had not suffici strength to releas him from hi 
situation, say that if I would summon up what spirit I could, and 
contriv to unti him, we might yet save our lives; but that otherwis 
we must all perish. I told him to take courage, and I would endeavor to 
free him. feel in my pantaloons’ pocket, I got hold of my penknife, 
and, after sever ineffectu attempts, at length succeed in open 
it. I then, with my left hand, manag to free my right from it 
fastenings, and afterward cut the other rope which held me. upon 
attempting, however, to move from my position, I found that my leg 
fail me altogether, and that I could not get up; neither could I 
move my right arm in ani direction. upon mention thi to parker, he 
advis me to lie quiet for a few minutes, hold on to the windlass 
with my left hand, so as to allow time for the blood to circulate. do 
this, the numb present began to die away so that I could move 
first one of my legs, and then the other, and, shortli afterward I 
regain the partial use of my right arm. I now crawl with great 
caution toward parker, without get on my legs, and soon cut loos 
all the lash about him, when, after a short delay, he also recov 
the partial use of hi limbs. We now lost no time in get loos the 
rope from peters. It had cut a deep gash through the waistband of hi 
woollen pantaloons, and through two shirts, and made it way into hi 
groin, from which the blood flow out copious as we remov the 
cordage. No sooner had we remov it, however, than he spoke, and seem 
to experi instant relief--b abl to move with much greater eas 
than either parker or myself--thi wa no doubt owe to the discharg 
of blood. 

We had littl hope that augustu would recover, as he evinc no sign 
of life; but, upon get to him, we discov that he had mere 
swoon from the loss of blood, the bandag we had place around hi 
wound arm have been torn off by the water; none of the rope which 
held him to the windlass were drawn suffici tight to occas hi 
death. have reliev him from the fastenings, and got him clear of 
the broken wood about the windlass, we secur him in a dri place to 
windward, with hi head somewhat lower than hi body, and all three of 
us busi ourselv in chafe hi limbs. In about half an hour he came 
to himself, although it wa not until the next morn that he gave 
sign of recogn ani of us, or had suffici strength to speak. By 
the time we had thu got clear of our lash it wa quit dark, and it 
began to cloud up, so that we were again in the greatest agoni lest it 
should come on to blow hard, in which event noth could have save us 
from perishing, exhaust as we were. By good fortun it continu veri 
moder dure the night, the sea subsid everi minute, which gave 
us great hope of ultim preservation. A gentl breez still blew 
from the N. w., but the weather wa not at all cold. augustu wa lash 
care to windward in such a manner as to prevent him from slip 
overboard with the roll of the vessel, as he wa still too weak to 
hold on at all. for ourselv there wa no such necessity. We sat close 
together, support each other with the aid of the broken rope 
about the windlass, and devis method of escap from our fright 
situation. We deriv much comfort from take off our cloth and 
wring the water from them. when we put them on after this, they felt 
remark warm and pleasant, and serv to invigor us in no littl 
degree. We help augustu off with his, and wrung them for him, when he 
experienc the same comfort. 

our chief suffer were now those of hunger and thirst, and when we 
look forward to the mean of relief in thi respect, our heart sunk 
within us, and we were induc to regret that we had escap the 
less dread peril of the sea. We endeavoured, however, to consol 
ourselv with the hope of be speedili pick up by some vessel 
and encourag each other to bear with fortitud the evil that might 
happen. 

the morn of the fourteenth at length dawned, and the weather still 
continu clear and pleasant, with a steadi but veri light breez from 
the N. W. the sea wa now quit smooth, and as, from some caus which we 
could not determine, the brig did not lie so much along as she had done 
before, the deck wa compar dry, and we could move about with 
freedom. We had now been better than three entir day and night 
without either food or drink, and it becam absolut necessari that we 
should make an attempt to get up someth from below. As the brig wa 
complet full of water, we went to thi work despondently, and with 
but littl expect of be abl to obtain anything. We made a kind 
of drag by drive some nail which we broke out from the remain of the 
companion-hatch into two piec of wood. ty these across each other, 
and fasten them to the end of a rope, we threw them into the cabin, 
and drag them to and fro, in the faint hope of be thu abl to 
entangl some articl which might be of use to us for food, or which 
might at least render us assist in get it. We spent the greater 
part of the morn in thi labour without effect, fish up noth 
more than a few bedclothes, which were readili caught by the nails. 
indeed, our contriv wa so veri clumsi that ani greater success wa 
hardli to be anticipated. 

We now tri the forecastle, but equal in vain, and were upon the 
brink of despair, when peter propos that we should fasten a rope to 
hi body, and let him make an attempt to get up someth by dive 
into the cabin. thi proposit we hail with all the delight which 
reviv hope could inspire. He proceed immedi to strip off hi 
cloth with the except of hi pantaloons; and a strong rope wa 
then care fasten around hi middle, be brought up over 
hi shoulder in such a manner that there wa no possibl of it 
slipping. the undertak wa one of great difficulti and danger; for, 
as we could hardli expect to find much, if any, provis in the cabin 
itself, it wa necessari that the diver, after let himself down, 
should make a turn to the right, and proceed under water a distanc of 
ten or twelv feet, in a narrow passage, to the storeroom, and return, 
without draw breath. 

everyth be ready, peter now descend in the cabin, go down 
the companion-ladd until the water reach hi chin. He then plung 
in, head first, turn to the right as he plunged, and endeavour to 
make hi way to the storeroom. In thi first attempt, however, he wa 
altogeth unsuccessful. In less than half a minut after hi go down 
we felt the rope jerk violent (the signal we had agre upon when 
he desir to be drawn up). We accordingli drew him up instantly, but so 
incauti as to bruis him badli against the ladder. He had brought 
noth with him, and had been unabl to penetr more than a veri 
littl way into the passage, owe to the constant exert he found it 
necessari to make in order to keep himself from float up against the 
deck. upon get out he wa veri much exhausted, and had to rest full 
fifteen minut befor he could again ventur to descend. 

the second attempt met with even wors success; for he remain so long 
under water without give the signal, that, becom alarm for hi 
safety, we drew him out without it, and found that he wa almost at the 
last gasp, having, as he said, repeatedli jerk at the rope without 
our feel it. thi wa probabl owe to a portion of it have becom 
entangl in the balustrad at the foot of the ladder. thi balustrad 
was, indeed, so much in the way, that we determin to remov it, if 
possible, befor proceed with our design. As we had no mean of 
get it away except by main force, we all descend into the water 
as far as we could on the ladder, and give a pull against it with our 
unit strength, succeed in break it down. 

the third attempt wa equal unsuccess with the two first, and it 
now becam evid that noth could be done in thi manner without the 
aid of some weight with which the diver might steadi himself, and keep 
to the floor of the cabin while make hi search. for a long time we 
look about in vain for someth which might answer thi purpose; but 
at length, to our great joy, we discov one of the weather-forechain 
so loos that we had not the least difficulti in wrench it off. 
have fasten thi secur to one of hi ankles, peter now made hi 
fourth descent into the cabin, and thi time succeed in make hi way 
to the door of the steward’ room. To hi inexpress grief, however, 
he found it locked, and wa oblig to return without effect an 
entrance, as, with the greatest exertion, he could remain under water 
not more, at the utmost extent, than a singl minute. our affair now 
look gloomi indeed, and neither augustu nor myself could refrain from 
burst into tears, as we thought of the host of difficulti which 
encompass us, and the slight probabl which exist of our final 
make an escape. but thi weak wa not of long duration. throw 
ourselv on our knee to god, we implor hi aid in the mani danger 
which beset us; and aros with renew hope and vigor to think what 
could yet be done by mortal mean toward accomplish our deliverance. 




chapter 10 

shortli afterward an incid occur which I am induc to look upon 
as more intens product of emotion, as far more replet with the 
extrem first of delight and then of horror, than even ani of the 
thousand chanc which afterward befel me in nine long years, crowd 
with event of the most startl and, in mani cases, of the most 
unconceiv and unconceiv character. We were lie on the deck near 
the companion-way, and debat the possibl of yet make our way 
into the storeroom, when, look toward augustus, who lay front 
myself, I perceiv that he had becom all at onc deadli pale, and that 
hi lip were quiver in the most singular and unaccount manner. 
greatli alarmed, I spoke to him, but he made me no reply, and I wa 
begin to think that he wa suddenli taken ill, when I took notic 
of hi eyes, which were glare appar at some object behind me. I 
turn my head, and shall never forget the ecstat joy which thrill 
through everi particl of my frame, when I perceiv a larg brig 
bear down upon us, and not more than a coupl of mile off. I sprung 
to my feet as if a musket bullet had suddenli struck me to the heart; 
and, stretch out my arm in the direct of the vessel, stood in 
thi manner, motionless, and unabl to articul a syllable. peter 
and parker were equal affected, although in differ ways. the former 
danc about the deck like a madman, utter the most extravag 
rhodomontades, intermingl with howl and imprecations, while the 
latter burst into tears, and continu for mani minut weep like a 
child. 

the vessel in sight wa a larg hermaphrodit brig, of a dutch build, 
and paint black, with a tawdri gilt figure-head. she had evid 
seen a good deal of rough weather, and, we supposed, had suffer 
much in the gale which had prove so disastr to ourselves; for her 
foretopmast wa gone, and some of her starboard bulwarks. when we first 
saw her, she was, as I have alreadi said, about two mile off and to 
windward, bear down upon us. the breez wa veri gentle, and what 
astonish us chiefli was, that she had no other sail set than her 
foremast and mainsail, with a fli jib--of cours she came down but 
slowly, and our impati amount nearli to phrensy. the awkward 
manner in which she steered, too, wa remark by all of us, even 
excit as we were. she yaw about so considerably, that onc or twice 
we thought it imposs she could see us, or imagin that, have seen 
us, and discov no person on board, she wa about to tack and make 
off in anoth direction. upon each of these occas we scream and 
shout at the top of our voices, when the stranger would appear to 
chang for a moment her intention, and again hold on toward us--thi 
singular conduct be repeat two or three times, so that at last we 
could think of no other manner of account for it than by suppos 
the helmsman to be in liquor. 

No person wa seen upon her deck until she arriv within about a 
quarter of a mile of us. We then saw three seamen, whom by their dress 
we took to be hollanders. two of these were lie on some old sail near 
the forecastle, and the third, who appear to be look at us with 
great curiosity, wa lean over the starboard bow near the bowsprit. 
thi last wa a stout and tall man, with a veri dark skin. He seem 
by hi manner to be encourag us to have patience, nod to us in 
a cheer although rather odd way, and smile constantly, so as to 
display a set of the most brilliantli white teeth. As hi vessel drew 
nearer, we saw a red flannel cap which he had on fall from hi head into 
the water; but of thi he took littl or no notice, continu hi 
odd smile and gesticulations. I relat these thing and circumst 
minutely, and I relat them, it must be understood, precis as they 
_appear _to us. 

the brig came on slowly, and now more steadili than before, and--i 
cannot speak calmli of thi event--our heart leap up wildli within 
us, and we pour out our whole soul in shout and thanksgiv to 
god for the complete, unexpected, and gloriou deliver that wa so 
palpabl at hand. Of a sudden, and all at once, there came waft over 
the ocean from the strang vessel (which wa now close upon us) a 
smell, a stench, such as the whole world ha no name for--no concept 
of--hellish--utterli suffocating--insufferable, inconceivable. I gasp 
for breath, and turn to my companions, perceiv that they were paler 
than marble. but we had now no time left for question or surmise--th 
brig wa within fifti feet of us, and it seem to be her intent to 
run under our counter, that we might board her without put out a 
boat. We rush aft, when, suddenly, a wide yaw threw her off full five 
or six point from the cours she had been running, and, as she pass 
under our stern at the distanc of about twenti feet, we had a full view 
of her decks. shall I ever forget the tripl horror of that spectacle? 
twenty-f or thirti human bodies, among whom were sever females, lay 
scatter about between the counter and the galley in the last and most 
loathsom state of putrefaction. We plainli saw that not a soul live in 
that fate vessel! yet we could not help shout to the dead for help! 
yes, long and loudli did we beg, in the agoni of the moment, that those 
silent and disgust imag would stay for us, would not abandon us to 
becom like them, would receiv us among their goodli company! We were 
rave with horror and despair--thoroughli mad through the anguish of 
our grievou disappointment. 

As our first loud yell of terror broke forth, it wa repli to by 
something, from near the bowsprit of the stranger, so close resembl 
the scream of a human voic that the nicest ear might have been startl 
and deceived. At thi instant anoth sudden yaw brought the region of 
the forecastl for a moment into view, and we beheld at onc the origin 
of the sound. We saw the tall stout figur still lean on the bulwark, 
and still nod hi head to and fro, but hi face wa now turn from 
us so that we could not behold it. hi arm were extend over the rail, 
and the palm of hi hand fell outward. hi knee were lodg upon 
a stout rope, tightli stretched, and reach from the heel of the 
bowsprit to a cathead. On hi back, from which a portion of the shirt 
had been torn, leav it bare, there sat a huge sea-gull, busili 
gorg itself with the horribl flesh, it bill and talon deep buried, 
and it white plumag spatter all over with blood. As the brig move 
farther round so as to bring us close in view, the bird, with much 
appar difficulty, drew out it crimson head, and, after eye us 
for a moment as if stupefied, aros lazili from the bodi upon which it 
had been feasting, and, fli directli abov our deck, hover there 
a while with a portion of clot and liver-lik substanc in it beak. 
the horrid morsel drop at length with a sullen splash immedi 
at the feet of parker. may god forgiv me, but now, for the first time, 
there flash through my mind a thought, a thought which I will not 
mention, and I felt myself make a step toward the ensanguin spot. 
I look upward, and the eye of augustu met my own with a degre of 
intens and eager mean which immedi brought me to my senses. I 
sprang forward quickly, and, with a deep shudder, threw the fright 
thing into the sea. 

the bodi from which it had been taken, rest as it did upon the rope, 
had been easili sway to and fro by the exert of the carnivor 
bird, and it wa thi motion which had at first impress us with the 
belief of it be alive. As the gull reliev it of it weight, 
it swung round and fell partial over, so that the face wa fulli 
discovered. never, surely, wa ani object so terribl full of awe! the 
eye were gone, and the whole flesh around the mouth, leav the teeth 
utterli naked. this, then, wa the smile which had cheer us on to 
hope! thi the--but I forbear. the brig, as I have alreadi told, pass 
under our stern, and made it way slowli but steadili to leeward. with 
her and with her terribl crew went all our gay vision of deliver 
and joy. deliber as she went by, we might possibl have found mean 
of board her, had not our sudden disappoint and the appal 
natur of the discoveri which accompani it laid entir prostrat 
everi activ faculti of mind and body. We had seen and felt, but 
we could neither think nor act, until, alas! too late. how much our 
intellect had been weaken by thi incid may be estim by the 
fact, that when the vessel had proceed so far that we could perceiv 
no more than the half of her hull, the proposit wa serious 
entertain of attempt to overtak her by swimming! 

I have, sinc thi period, vainli endeavour to obtain some clew to the 
hideou uncertainti which envelop the fate of the stranger. her build 
and gener appearance, as I have befor stated, led us to the belief 
that she wa a dutch trader, and the dress of the crew also sustain 
thi opinion. We might have easili seen the name upon her stern, and, 
indeed, taken other observations, which would have guid us in make 
out her character; but the intens excit of the moment blind us 
to everi thing of that nature. from the saffron-lik hue of such of the 
corps as were not entir decayed, we conclud that the whole of her 
compani had perish by the yellow fever, or some other virul diseas 
of the same fear kind. If such were the case (and I know not what 
els to imagine), death, to judg from the posit of the bodies, must 
have come upon them in a manner aw sudden and overwhelming, in a 
way total distinct from that which gener character even 
the most deadli pestil with which mankind are acquainted. It is 
possible, indeed, that poison, accident introduc into some of 
their sea-stores, may have brought about the disaster, or that the 
eat of some unknown venom speci of fish, or other marin animal, 
or ocean bird, might have induc it--but it is utterli useless to 
form conjectur where all is involved, and will, no doubt, remain for 
ever involved, in the most appal and unfathom mystery. 




chapter 11 

WE spent the remaind of the day in a condit of stupid lethargy, 
gaze after the retreat vessel until the darkness, hide her from 
our sight, recal us in some measur to our senses. the pang 
of hunger and thirst then returned, absorb all other care and 
considerations. nothing, however, could be done until the morning, 
and, secur ourselv as well as possible, we endeavour to snatch 
a littl repose. In thi I succeed beyond my expectations, sleep 
until my companions, who had not been so fortunate, arous me at 
daybreak to renew our attempt at get up provis from the hull. 

It wa now a dead calm, with the sea as smooth as I have ever known 
it,--th weather warm and pleasant. the brig wa out of sight. We 
commenc our oper by wrench off, with some trouble, anoth of 
the forechains; and have fasten both to peters’ feet, he again made 
an endeavour to reach the door of the storeroom, think it possibl 
that he might be abl to forc it open, provid he could get at it 
in suffici time; and thi he hope to do, as the hulk lay much more 
steadili than before. 

He succeed veri quickli in reach the door, when, loosen one of 
the chain from hi ankle, he made everi exert to forc the passag 
with it, but in vain, the framework of the room be far stronger than 
wa anticipated. He wa quit exhaust with hi long stay under water, 
and it becam absolut necessari that some other one of us should take 
hi place. for thi servic parker immedi volunteered; but, after 
make three ineffectu efforts, found that he could never even succeed 
in get near the door. the condit of augustus’ wound arm 
render it useless for him to attempt go down, as he would be 
unabl to forc the room open should he reach it, and it accordingli now 
devolv upon me to exert myself for our common deliverance. 

peter had left one of the chain in the passage, and I found, upon 
plung in, that I had not suffici balanc to keep me firmli down. 
I determined, therefore, to attempt no more, in my first effort, than 
mere to recov the other chain. In grope along the floor of the 
passag for this, I felt a hard substance, which I immedi grasped, 
not have time to ascertain what it was, but return and ascend 
instantli to the surface. the prize prove to be a bottle, and our joy 
may be conceiv when I say that it wa found to be full of port 
wine. give thank to god for thi time and cheer assistance, we 
immedi drew the cork with my penknife, and, each take a moder 
sup, felt the most indescrib comfort from the warmth, strength, 
and spirit with which it inspir us. We then care recork the 
bottle, and, by mean of a handkerchief, swung it in such a manner that 
there wa no possibl of it get broken. 

have rest a while after thi fortun discovery, I again descended, 
and now recov the chain, with which I instantli came up. I then 
fasten it on and went down for the third time, when I becam fulli 
satisfi that no exert whatever, in that situation, would enabl 
me to forc open the door of the storeroom. I therefor return in 
despair. 

there seem now to be no longer ani room for hope, and I could perceiv 
in the counten of my companion that they had made up their 
mind to perish. the wine had evid produc in them a speci 
of delirium, which, perhaps, I had been prevent from feel by the 
immers I had undergon sinc drink it. they talk incoherently, 
and about matter unconnect with our condition, peter repeatedli 
ask me question about nantucket. augustus, too, I remember, 
approach me with a seriou air, and request me to lend him a 
pocket-comb, as hi hair wa full of fish-scales, and he wish to get 
them out befor go on shore. parker appear somewhat less affected, 
and urg me to dive at random into the cabin, and bring up ani articl 
which might come to hand. To thi I consented, and, in the first 
attempt, after stay under a full minute, brought up a small leather 
trunk belong to captain barnard. thi wa immedi open in the 
faint hope that it might contain someth to eat or drink. We found 
nothing, however, except a box of razor and two linen shirts. I now 
went down again, and return without ani success. As my head came 
abov water I heard a crash on deck, and, upon get up, saw that my 
companion had ungrat taken advantag of my absenc to drink the 
remaind of the wine, have let the bottl fall in the endeavour 
to replac it befor I saw them. I remonstr with them on the 
heartless of their conduct, when augustu burst into tears. the 
other two endeavour to laugh the matter off as a joke, but I hope 
never again to behold laughter of such a species: the distort of 
counten wa absolut frightful. indeed, it wa appar that the 
stimulus, in the empti state of their stomachs, had taken instant and 
violent effect, and that they were all exceedingli intoxicated. with 
great difficulti I prevail upon them to lie down, when they fell veri 
soon into a heavi slumber, accompani with loud stertor breathing. 

I now found myself, as it were, alon in the brig, and my reflections, 
to be sure, were of the most fear and gloomi nature. No prospect 
offer itself to my view but a linger death by famine, or, at the 
best, by be overwhelm in the first gale which should spring up, 
for in our present exhaust condit we could have no hope of live 
through another. 

the gnaw hunger which I now experienc wa nearli insupportable, and 
I felt myself capabl of go to ani length in order to appeas 
it. with my knife I cut off a small portion of the leather trunk, and 
endeavour to eat it, but found it utterli imposs to swallow a 
singl morsel, although I fanci that some littl allevi of my 
suffer wa obtain by chew small piec of it and spit 
them out. toward night my companion awoke, one by one, each in an 
indescrib state of weak and horror, brought on by the wine, 
whose fume had now evaporated. they shook as if with a violent ague, 
and utter the most lament cri for water. their condit 
affect me in the most live degree, at the same time caus me to 
rejoic in the fortun train of circumst which had prevent 
me from indulg in the wine, and consequ from share their 
melancholi and most distress sensations. their conduct, however, 
gave me great uneasi and alarm; for it wa evid that, unless 
some favour chang took place, they could afford me no assist in 
provid for our common safety. I had not yet abandon all idea of be 
abl to get up someth from below; but the attempt could not possibl 
be resum until some one of them wa suffici master of himself to 
aid me by hold the end of the rope while I went down. parker appear 
to be somewhat more in possess of hi sens than the others, and I 
endeavoured, by everi mean in my power, to rous him. think that a 
plung in the sea-wat might have a benefici effect, I contriv to 
fasten the end of a rope around hi body, and then, lead him to the 
companion-way (he remain quit passiv all the while), push him in, 
and immedi drew him out. I had good reason to congratul myself 
upon have made thi experiment; for he appear much reviv and 
invigorated, and, upon get out, ask me, in a ration manner, whi 
I had so serv him. have explain my object, he express himself 
indebt to me, and said that he felt greatli better from the immersion, 
afterward convers sensibl upon our situation. We then resolv to 
treat augustu and peter in the same way, which we immedi did, 
when they both experienc much benefit from the shock. thi idea of 
sudden immers had been suggest to me by read in some medic 
work the good effect of the shower-bath in a case where the patient wa 
suffer from _mania a potu_. 

find that I could now trust my companion to hold the end of the 
rope, I again made three or four plung into the cabin, although it wa 
now quit dark, and a gentl but long swell from the northward render 
the hulk somewhat unsteady. In the cours of these attempt I succeed 
in bring up two case-knives, a three-gallon jug, empty, and a 
blanket, but noth which could serv us for food. I continu my 
efforts, after get these articles, until I wa complet exhausted, 
but brought up noth else. dure the night parker and peter occupi 
themselv by turn in the same manner; but noth come to hand, we 
now gave up thi attempt in despair, conclud that we were exhaust 
ourselv in vain. 

We pass the remaind of thi night in a state of the most intens 
mental and bodili anguish that can possibl be imagined. the morn of 
the sixteenth at length dawned, and we look eagerli around the horizon 
for relief, but to no purpose. the sea wa still smooth, with onli a 
long swell from the northward, as on yesterday. thi wa the sixth day 
sinc we had tast either food or drink, with the except of the 
bottl of port wine, and it wa clear that we could hold out but a veri 
littl while longer unless someth could be obtained. I never saw 
before, nor wish to see again, human be so utterli emaci as 
peter and augustus. had I met them on shore in their present condit 
I should not have had the slightest suspicion that I had ever beheld 
them. their counten were total chang in character, so that I 
could not bring myself to believ them realli the same individu with 
whom I had been in compani but a few day before. parker, although sadli 
reduced, and so feebl that he could not rais hi head from hi bosom, 
wa not so far gone as the other two. He suffer with great patience, 
make no complaint, and endeavour to inspir us with hope in everi 
manner he could devise. for myself, although at the commenc of 
the voyag I had been in bad health, and wa at all time of a delic 
constitution, I suffer less than ani of us, be much less reduc in 
frame, and retain my power of mind in a surpris degree, while the 
rest were complet prostrat in intellect, and seem to be 
brought to a speci of second childhood, gener simper in 
their expressions, with idiot smiles, and utter the most absurd 
platitudes. At intervals, however, they would appear to reviv suddenly, 
as if inspir all at onc with a conscious of their condition, when 
they would spring upon their feet in a momentari flash of vigour, and 
speak, for a short period, of their prospects, in a manner altogeth 
rational, although full of the most intens despair. It is possible, 
however, that my companion may have entertain the same opinion of 
their own condit as I did of mine, and that I may have 
unwittingli been guilti of the same extravag and imbecil as 
themselves--thi is a matter which cannot be determined. 

about noon parker declar that he saw land off the larboard quarter, 
and it wa with the utmost difficulti I could restrain him from plung 
into the sea with the view of swim toward it. peter and augustu 
took littl notic of what he said, be appar wrap up in moodi 
contemplation. upon look in the direct point out, I could not 
perceiv the faintest appear of the shore--indeed, I wa too well 
awar that we were far from ani land to indulg in a hope of that 
nature. It wa a long time, nevertheless, befor I could convinc parker 
of hi mistake. He then burst into a flood of tears, weep like a 
child, with loud cri and sobs, for two or three hours, when becom 
exhausted, he fell asleep. 

peter and augustu now made sever ineffectu effort to swallow 
portion of the leather. I advis them to chew it and spit it out; but 
they were too excess debilit to be abl to follow my advice. I 
continu to chew piec of it at intervals, and found some relief from 
so doing; my chief distress wa for water, and I wa onli prevent from 
take a draught from the sea by rememb the horribl consequ 
which thu have result to other who were similarli situat with 
ourselves. 

the day wore on in thi manner, when I suddenli discov a sail to the 
eastward, and on our larboard bow. she appear to be a larg ship, and 
wa come nearli athwart us, be probabl twelv or fifteen mile 
distant. none of my companion had as yet discov her, and I forbor 
to tell them of her for the present, lest we might again be disappoint 
of relief. At length upon her get nearer, I saw distinctli that she 
wa head immedi for us, with her light sail filled. I could now 
contain myself no longer, and point her out to my fellow-sufferers. 
they immedi sprang to their feet, again indulg in the most 
extravag demonstr of joy, weeping, laugh in an idiot 
manner, jumping, stamp upon the deck, tear their hair, and pray 
and curs by turns. I wa so affect by their conduct, as well as 
by what I consid a sure prospect of deliverance, that I could not 
refrain from join in with their madness, and gave way to the impuls 
of my gratitud and ecstasi by lie and roll on the deck, clap 
my hands, shouting, and other similar acts, until I wa suddenli call 
to my recollection, and onc more to the extrem human miseri and 
despair, by perceiv the ship all at onc with her stern fulli 
present toward us, and steer in a direct nearli opposit to that 
in which I had at first perceiv her. 

It wa some time befor I could induc my poor companion to believ 
that thi sad revers in our prospect had actual taken place. they 
repli to all my assert with a stare and a gestur impli that 
they were not to be deceiv by such misrepresentations. the conduct of 
augustu most sensibl affect me. In spite of all I could say or do to 
the contrary, he persist in say that the ship wa rapidli near 
us, and in make prepar to go on board of her. some seawe 
float by the brig, he maintain that it wa the ship’ boat, and 
endeavour to throw himself upon it, howl and shriek in the most 
heartrend manner, when I forcibl restrain him from thu cast 
himself into the sea. 

have becom in some degre pacified, we continu to watch the ship 
until we final lost sight of her, the weather becom hazy, with 
a light breez spring up. As soon as she wa entir gone, parker 
turn suddenli toward me with an express of counten which made 
me shudder. there wa about him an air of self-possess which I had 
not notic in him until now, and befor he open hi lip my heart 
told me what he would say. He proposed, in a few words, that one of us 
should die to preserv the exist of the others. 




chapter 12 

I had for some time past, dwelt upon the prospect of our be reduc 
to thi last horribl extremity, and had secretli made up my mind to 
suffer death in ani shape or under ani circumst rather than resort 
to such a course. nor wa thi resolut in ani degre weaken by the 
present intens of hunger under which I laboured. the proposit had 
not been heard by either peter or augustus. I therefor took parker 
aside; and mental pray to god for power to dissuad him from the 
horribl purpos he entertained, I expostul with him for a long 
time, and in the most supplic manner, beg him in the name of 
everi thing which he held sacred, and urg him by everi speci of 
argument which the extrem of the case suggested, to abandon the idea, 
and not to mention it to either of the other two. 

He heard all I said without attempt to controvert ani of my 
arguments, and I had begun to hope that he would be prevail upon to do 
as I desired. but when I had ceas speaking, he said that he knew veri 
well all I had said wa true, and that to resort to such a cours wa 
the most horribl altern which could enter into the mind of man; 
but that he had now held out as long as human natur could be sustained; 
that it wa unnecessari for all to perish, when, by the death of one, 
it wa possible, and even probable, that the rest might be final 
preserved; ad that I might save myself the troubl of tri to turn 
him from hi purpose, hi mind have been thoroughli made up on the 
subject even befor the appear of the ship, and that onli her 
heav in sight had prevent him from mention hi intent at an 
earlier period. 

I now beg him, if he would not be prevail upon to abandon hi 
design, at least to defer it for anoth day, when some vessel might 
come to our relief; again reiter everi argument I could devise, and 
which I thought like to have influenc with one of hi rough nature. 
He said, in reply, that he had not spoken until the veri last possibl 
moment, that he could exist no longer without susten of some kind, 
and that therefor in anoth day hi suggest would be too late, as 
regard himself at least. 

find that he wa not to be move by anyth I could say in a mild 
tone, I now assum a differ demeanor, and told him that he must be 
awar I had suffer less than ani of us from our calamities; that my 
health and strength, consequently, were at that moment far better than 
hi own, or than that either of peter or augustus; in short, that I wa 
in a condit to have my own way by forc if I found it necessary; 
and that if he attempt in ani manner to acquaint the other with hi 
bloodi and cannib designs, I would not hesit to throw him into the 
sea. upon thi he immedi seiz me by the throat, and draw a 
knife, made sever ineffectu effort to stab me in the stomach; 
an atroc which hi excess debil alon prevent him from 
accomplishing. In the meantime, be rous to a high pitch of anger, I 
forc him to the vessel’ side, with the full intent of throw him 
overboard. He wa save from hi fate, however, by the interfer of 
peters, who now approach and separ us, ask the caus of the 
disturbance. thi parker told befor I could find mean in ani manner to 
prevent him. 

the effect of hi word wa even more terribl than what I had 
anticipated. both augustu and peters, who, it seems, had long secretli 
entertain the same fear idea which parker had been mere the 
first to broach, join with him in hi design and insist upon it 
immedi be carri into effect. I had calcul that one at 
least of the two former would be found still possess of suffici 
strength of mind to side with myself in resist ani attempt to execut 
so dread a purpose, and, with the aid of either one of them, I had no 
fear of be abl to prevent it accomplishment. be disappoint in 
thi expectation, it becam absolut necessari that I should attend 
to my own safety, as a further resist on my part might possibl be 
consid by men in their fright condit a suffici excus 
for refus me fair play in the tragedi that I knew would speedili be 
enacted. 

I now told them I wa will to submit to the proposal, mere 
request a delay of about one hour, in order that the fog which had 
gather around us might have an opportun of lifting, when it wa 
possibl that the ship we had seen might be again in sight. after great 
difficulti I obtain from them a promis to wait thu long; and, as I 
had anticip (a breez rapidli come in), the fog lift befor the 
hour had expired, when, no vessel appear in sight, we prepar to 
draw lots. 

It is with extrem reluct that I dwell upon the appal scene 
which ensued; a scene which, with it minutest details, no after event 
have been abl to effac in the slightest degre from my memory, 
and whose stern recollect will embitt everi futur moment of my 
existence. let me run over thi portion of my narr with as much 
hast as the natur of the event to be spoken of will permit. the onli 
method we could devis for the terrif lottery, in which we were to 
take each a chance, wa that of draw straws. small splinter of wood 
were made to answer our purpose, and it wa agre that I should be 
the holder. I retir to one end of the hulk, while my poor companion 
silent took up their station in the other with their back turn 
toward me. the bitterest anxieti which I endur at ani period of thi 
fear drama wa while I occupi myself in the arrang of the 
lots. there are few condit into which man can possibl fall where he 
will not feel a deep interest in the preserv of hi existence; 
an interest momentarili increas with the frail of the tenur by 
which that exist may be held. but now that the silent, definite, and 
stern natur of the busi in which I wa engag (so differ from 
the tumultu danger of the storm or the gradual approach horror 
of famine) allow me to reflect on the few chanc I had of escap 
the most appal of deaths--a death for the most appal of 
purposes--everi particl of that energi which had so long buoy me up 
depart like feather befor the wind, leav me a helpless prey to 
the most abject and pitiabl terror. I could not, at first, even summon 
up suffici strength to tear and fit togeth the small splinter of 
wood, my finger absolut refus their office, and my knee knock 
violent against each other. My mind ran over rapidli a thousand absurd 
project by which to avoid becom a partner in the aw speculation. 
I thought of fall on my knee to my companions, and entreat them 
to let me escap thi necessity; of suddenli rush upon them, and, 
by put one of them to death, of render the decis by lot 
useless--in short, of everi thing but of go through with the matter 
I had in hand. At last, after wast a long time in thi imbecil 
conduct, I wa recal to my sens by the voic of parker, who urg 
me to reliev them at onc from the terribl anxieti they were enduring. 
even then I could not bring myself to arrang the splinter upon the 
spot, but thought over everi speci of finess by which I could trick 
some one of my fellow-suffer to draw the short straw, as it had been 
agre that whoever drew the shortest of four splinter from my hand wa 
to die for the preserv of the rest. befor ani one condemn me for 
thi appar heartlessness, let him be place in a situat precis 
similar to my own. 

At length delay wa no longer possible, and, with a heart almost 
burst from my bosom, I advanc to the region of the forecastle, 
where my companion were await me. I held out my hand with the 
splinters, and peter immedi drew. He wa free--his, at least, wa 
not the shortest; and there wa now anoth chanc against my escape. 
I summon up all my strength, and pass the lot to augustus. He also 
drew immediately, and he also wa free; and now, whether I should live 
or die, the chanc were no more than precis even. At thi moment 
all the fierc of the tiger possess my bosom, and I felt toward 
my poor fellow-creature, parker, the most intense, the most diabol 
hatred. but the feel did not last; and, at length, with a convuls 
shudder and close eyes, I held out the two remain splinter toward 
him. It wa fulli five minut befor he could summon resolut to 
draw, dure which period of heartrend suspens I never onc open 
my eyes. present one of the two lot wa quickli drawn from my hand. 
the decis wa then over, yet I knew not whether it wa for me or 
against me. No one spoke, and still I dare not satisfi myself by 
look at the splinter I held. peter at length took me by the 
hand, and I forc myself to look up, when I immedi saw by the 
counten of parker that I wa safe, and that he it wa who had been 
doom to suffer. gasp for breath, I fell senseless to the deck. 

I recov from my swoon in time to behold the consumm of the 
tragedi in the death of him who had been chiefli instrument in 
bring it about. He made no resist whatever, and wa stab in 
the back by peters, when he fell instantli dead. I must not dwell 
upon the fear repast which immedi ensued. such thing may be 
imagined, but word have no power to impress the mind with the exquisit 
horror of their reality. let it suffic to say that, have in some 
measur appeas the rage thirst which consum us by the blood of 
the victim, and have by common consent taken off the hands, feet, 
and head, throw them togeth with the entrails, into the sea, we 
devour the rest of the body, piecemeal, dure the four ever memor 
day of the seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth of the 
month. 

On the nineteenth, there come on a smart shower which last fifteen 
or twenti minutes, we contriv to catch some water by mean of a sheet 
which had been fish up from the cabin by our drag just after the gale. 
the quantiti we took in all did not amount to more than half a gallon; 
but even thi scanti allow suppli us with compar strength and 
hope. 

On the twenty-first we were again reduc to the last necessity. the 
weather still remain warm and pleasant, with occasion fog and light 
breezes, most usual from N. to W. 

On the twenty-second, as we were sit close huddl together, 
gloomili revolv over our lament condition, there flash through 
my mind all at onc an idea which inspir me with a bright gleam of 
hope. I rememb that, when the foremast had been cut away, peters, 
be in the windward chains, pass one of the axe into my hand, 
request me to put it, if possible, in a place of security, and that 
a few minut befor the last heavi sea struck the brig and fill her 
I had taken thi axe into the forecastl and laid it in one of the 
larboard berths. I now thought it possibl that, by get at thi 
axe, we might cut through the deck over the storeroom, and thu readili 
suppli ourselv with provisions. 

when I commun thi object to my companions, they utter a feebl 
shout of joy, and we all proceed forthwith to the forecastle. the 
difficulti of descend here wa greater than that of go down in the 
cabin, the open be much smaller, for it will be rememb that 
the whole framework about the cabin companion-hatch had been carri 
away, wherea the forecastle-way, be a simpl hatch of onli about 
three feet square, had remain uninjured. I did not hesitate, however, 
to attempt the descent; and a rope be fasten round my bodi as 
before, I plung boldli in, feet foremost, made my way quickli to the 
berth, and at the first attempt brought up the axe. It wa hail with 
the most ecstat joy and triumph, and the eas with which it had been 
obtain wa regard as an omen of our ultim preservation. 

We now commenc cut at the deck with all the energi of rekindl 
hope, peter and myself take the axe by turns, augustus’ wound arm 
not permit him to aid us in ani degree. As we were still so feebl 
as to be scarc abl to stand unsupported, and could consequ work 
but a minut or two without resting, it soon becam evid that mani 
long hour would be necessari to accomplish our task--that is, to cut an 
open suffici larg to admit of a free access to the storeroom. 
thi consideration, however, did not discourag us; and, work all 
night by the light of the moon, we succeed in effect our purpos by 
daybreak on the morn of the twenty-third. 

peter now volunt to go down; and, have made all arrang 
as before, he descended, and soon return bring up with him a small 
jar, which, to our great joy, prove to be full of olives. have 
share these among us, and devour them with the greatest avidity, 
we proceed to let him down again. thi time he succeed beyond our 
utmost expectations, return instantli with a larg ham and a bottl 
of madeira wine. Of the latter we each took a moder sup, have 
learn by experi the pernici consequ of indulg too 
freely. the ham, except about two pound near the bone, wa not in a 
condit to be eaten, have been entir spoil by the salt water. 
the sound part wa divid among us. peter and augustus, not be abl 
to restrain their appetite, swallow their upon the instant; but I wa 
more cautious, and ate but a small portion of mine, dread the thirst 
which I knew would ensue. We now rest a while from our labors, which 
had been intoler severe. 

By noon, feel somewhat strengthen and refreshed, we again renew 
our attempt at get up provisions, peter and myself go down 
alternately, and alway with more or less success, until sundown. dure 
thi interv we had the good fortun to bring up, altogether, four 
more small jar of olives, anoth ham, a carboy contain nearli three 
gallon of excel cape madeira wine, and, what gave us still more 
delight, a small tortois of the gallipago breed, sever of which had 
been taken on board by captain barnard, as the _grampus_ wa leav 
port, from the schooner _mari pitts_, just return from a seal 
voyag in the pacific. 

In a subsequ portion of thi narr I shall have frequent occas 
to mention thi speci of tortoise. It is found principally, as most 
of my reader may know, in the group of island call the gallipagos, 
which, indeed, deriv their name from the animal--th spanish word 
gallipago mean a fresh-wat terrapin. from the peculiar of their 
shape and action they have been sometim call the eleph tortoise. 
they are frequent found of an enorm size. I have myself seen 
sever which would weigh from twelv to fifteen hundr pounds, 
although I do not rememb that ani navig speak of have seen them 
weigh more than eight hundred. their appear is singular, and even 
disgusting. their step are veri slow, measured, and heavy, their bodi 
be carri about a foot from the ground. their neck is long, and 
exceedingli slender, from eighteen inch to two feet is a veri common 
length, and I kill one, where the distanc from the shoulder to the 
extrem of the head wa no less than three feet ten inches. the head 
ha a strike resembl to that of a serpent. they can exist without 
food for an almost incred length of time, instanc have been 
known where they have been thrown into the hold of a vessel and lain 
two year without nourish of ani kind--b as fat, and, in everi 
respect, in as good order at the expir of the time as when they 
were first put in. In one particular these extraordinari anim bear 
a resembl to the dromedary, or camel of the desert. In a bag at the 
root of the neck they carri with them a constant suppli of water. In 
some instances, upon kill them after a full year’ depriv of all 
nourishment, as much as three gallon of perfectli sweet and fresh water 
have been found in their bags. their food is chiefli wild parsley and 
celery, with purslain, sea-kelp, and prickli pears, upon which latter 
veget they thrive wonderfully, a great quantiti of it be usual 
found on the hillsid near the shore wherev the anim itself is 
discovered. they are excel and highli nutriti food, and have, 
no doubt, been the mean of preserv the live of thousand of seamen 
employ in the whale-fisheri and other pursuit in the pacific. 

the one which we had the good fortun to bring up from the storeroom wa 
not of a larg size, weigh probabl sixty-f or seventi pounds. 
It wa a female, and in excel condition, be exceedingli fat, and 
have more than a quart of limpid and sweet water in it bag. thi 
wa inde a treasure; and, fall on our knee with one accord, we 
return fervent thank to god for so season a relief. 

We had great difficulti in get the anim up through the opening, as 
it struggl were fierc and it strength prodigious. It wa upon the 
point of make it escap from peter’ grasp, and slip back into 
the water, when augustus, throw a rope with a slipknot around it 
throat, held it up in thi manner until I jump into the hole by the 
side of peters, and assist him in lift it out. 

the water we drew care from the bag into the jug; which, it will be 
remembered, had been brought up befor from the cabin. have done this, 
we broke off the neck of a bottl so as to form, with the cork, a kind 
of glass, hold not quit half a gill. We then each drank one of these 
measur full, and resolv to limit ourselv to thi quantiti per day 
as long as it should hold out. 

dure the last two or three days, the weather have been dri and 
pleasant, the bed we had obtain from the cabin, as well as our 
clothing, had becom thoroughli dry, so that we pass thi night (that 
of the twenty-third) in compar comfort, enjoy a tranquil 
repose, after have sup plenti on oliv and ham, with a 
small allow of the wine. be afraid of lose some of our store 
overboard dure the night, in the event of a breez spring up, we 
secur them as well as possibl with cordag to the fragment of the 
windlass. our tortoise, which we were anxiou to preserv aliv as long 
as we could, we threw on it back, and otherwis care fastened. 




chapter 13 

juli 24. thi morn saw us wonder recruit in spirit and 
strength. notwithstand the peril situat in which we were still 
placed, ignor of our position, although certainli at a great distanc 
from land, without more food than would last us for a fortnight even 
with great care, almost entir without water, and float about at 
the merci of everi wind and wave on the merest wreck in the world, still 
the infinit more terribl distress and danger from which we had so 
late and so providenti been deliv caus us to regard what 
we now endur as but littl more than an ordinari evil--so strictli 
compar is either good or ill. 

At sunris we were prepar to renew our attempt at get up 
someth from the storeroom, when, a smart shower come on, with some 
lightning, we turn our attent to the catch of water by mean of 
the sheet we had use befor for thi purpose. We had no other mean of 
collect the rain than by hold the sheet spread out with one of the 
forechain-pl in the middl of it. the water, thu conduct to the 
centre, wa drain through into our jug. We had nearli fill it in 
thi manner, when, a heavi squall come on from the northward, oblig 
us to desist, as the hulk began onc more to roll so violent that 
we could no longer keep our feet. We now went forward, and, lash 
ourselv secur to the remnant of the windlass as before, await the 
event with far more calm than could have been anticip or would 
have been imagin possibl under the circumstances. At noon the wind 
had freshen into a two-reef breeze, and by night into a stiff gale, 
accompani with a tremend heavi swell. experi have taught 
us, however, the best method of arrang our lashings, we weather 
thi dreari night in toler security, although thoroughli drench at 
almost everi instant by the sea, and in momentari dread of be wash 
off. fortunately, the weather wa so warm as to render the water rather 
grate than otherwise. 

juli 25. thi morn the gale had diminish to a mere ten-knot breeze, 
and the sea had gone down with it so consider that we were abl to 
keep ourselv dri upon the deck. To our great grief, however, we found 
that two jar of our olives, as well as the whole of our ham, had been 
wash overboard, in spite of the care manner in which they had been 
fastened. We determin not to kill the tortois as yet, and content 
ourselv for the present with a breakfast on a few of the olives, and 
a measur of water each, which latter we mix half and half, with 
wine, find great relief and strength from the mixture, without the 
distress intox which had ensu upon drink the port. the 
sea wa still far too rough for the renew of our effort at get up 
provis from the storeroom. sever articles, of no import to us 
in our present situation, float up through the open dure the day, 
and were immedi wash overboard. We also now observ that the 
hulk lay more along than ever, so that we could not stand an instant 
without lash ourselves. On thi account we pass a gloomi and 
uncomfort day. At noon the sun appear to be nearli vertical, and 
we had no doubt that we had been driven down by the long success of 
northward and northwesterli wind into the near vicin of the equator. 
toward even we saw sever sharks, and were somewhat alarm by the 
audaci manner in which an enorm larg one approach us. At one 
time, a lurch throw the deck veri far beneath the water, the monster 
actual swam in upon us, flounder for some moment just over the 
companion-hatch, and strike peter violent with hi tail. A heavi 
sea at length hurl him overboard, much to our relief. In moder 
weather we might have easili captur him. 

juli 26. thi morning, the wind have greatli abated, and the sea not 
be veri rough, we determin to renew our exert in the storeroom. 
after a great deal of hard labor dure the whole day, we found that 
noth further wa to be expect from thi quarter, the partit of 
the room have been stove dure the night, and it content swept into 
the hold. thi discovery, as may be supposed, fill us with despair. 

juli 27. the sea nearli smooth, with a light wind, and still from the 
northward and westward. the sun come out hotli in the afternoon, 
we occupi ourselv in dri our clothes. found great relief from 
thirst, and much comfort otherwise, by bath in the sea; in this, 
however, we were forc to use great caution, be afraid of sharks, 
sever of which were seen swim around the brig dure the day. 

juli 28. good weather still. the brig now began to lie along so 
alarmingli that we fear she would eventu roll bottom up. prepar 
ourselv as well as we could for thi emergency, lash our tortoise, 
waterjug, and two remain jar of oliv as far as possibl over to 
the windward, place them outsid the hull below the main-chains. the 
sea veri smooth all day, with littl or no wind. 

juli 29. A continu of the same weather. augustus’ wound arm began 
to evinc symptom of mortification. He complain of drowsi and 
excess thirst, but no acut pain. noth could be done for hi 
relief beyond rub hi wound with a littl of the vinegar from the 
olives, and from thi no benefit seem to be experienced. We did everi 
thing in our power for hi comfort, and trebl hi allow of water. 

juli 30. An excess hot day, with no wind. An enorm shark kept 
close by the hulk dure the whole of the forenoon. We made sever 
unsuccess attempt to captur him by mean of a noose. augustu much 
worse, and evid sink as much from want of proper nourish as 
from the effect of hi wounds. He constantli pray to be reliev from 
hi sufferings, wish for noth but death. thi even we ate the 
last of our olives, and found the water in our jug so putrid that we 
could not swallow it at all without the addit of wine. determin to 
kill our tortois in the morning. 

juli 31. after a night of excess anxieti and fatigue, owe to the 
posit of the hulk, we set about kill and cut up our tortoise. 
He prove to be much smaller than we had supposed, although in good 
condition,--th whole meat about him not amount to more than ten 
pounds. with a view of preserv a portion of thi as long as possible, 
we cut it into fine pieces, and fill with them our three remain 
oliv jar and the wine-bottl (all of which had been kept), pour in 
afterward the vinegar from the olives. In thi manner we put away about 
three pound of the tortoise, intend not to touch it until we had 
consum the rest. We conclud to restrict ourselv to about four 
ounc of the meat per day; the whole would thu last us thirteen days. 
A brisk shower, with sever thunder and lightning, came on about dusk, 
but last so short a time that we onli succeed in catch about 
half a pint of water. the whole of this, by common consent, wa given 
to augustus, who now appear to be in the last extremity. He drank the 
water from the sheet as we caught it (we hold it abov him as he lay 
so as to let it run into hi mouth), for we had now noth left capabl 
of hold water, unless we had chosen to empti out our wine from the 
carboy, or the stale water from the jug. either of these expedi 
would have been resort to had the shower lasted. 

the suffer seem to deriv but littl benefit from the draught. hi 
arm wa complet black from the wrist to the shoulder, and hi feet 
were like ice. We expect everi moment to see him breath hi last. 
He wa fright emaciated; so much so that, although he weigh a 
hundr and twenty-seven pound upon hi leav nantucket, he now did 
not weigh more than forti or fifti at the farthest. hi eye were sunk 
far in hi head, be scarc perceptible, and the skin of hi 
cheek hung so loos as to prevent hi mastic ani food, or even 
swallow ani liquid, without great difficulty. 

august 1. A continu of the same calm weather, with an oppress 
hot sun. suffer exceedingli from thirst, the water in the jug be 
absolut putrid and swarm with vermin. We contrived, nevertheless, 
to swallow a portion of it by mix it with wine; our thirst, however, 
wa but littl abated. We found more relief by bath in the sea, but 
could not avail ourselv of thi expedi except at long intervals, 
on account of the continu presenc of sharks. We now saw clearli that 
augustu could not be saved; that he wa evid dying. We could do 
noth to reliev hi sufferings, which appear to be great. about 
twelv o’clock he expir in strong convulsions, and without have 
spoken for sever hours. hi death fill us with the most gloomi 
forebodings, and had so great an effect upon our spirit that we sat 
motionless by the corps dure the whole day, and never address each 
other except in a whisper. It wa not until some time after dark that 
we took courag to get up and throw the bodi overboard. It wa then 
loathsom beyond expression, and so far decay that, as peter 
attempt to lift it, an entir leg came off in hi grasp. As the mass 
of putrefact slip over the vessel’ side into the water, the glare 
of phosphor light with which it wa surround plainli discov to 
us seven or eight larg sharks, the clash of whose horribl teeth, as 
their prey wa torn to piec among them, might have been heard at 
the distanc of a mile. We shrunk within ourselv in the extrem of 
horror at the sound. 

august 2. the same fear calm and hot weather. the dawn found us in 
a state of pitiabl deject as well as bodili exhaustion. the water 
in the jug wa now absolut useless, be a thick gelatin mass; 
noth but frightful-look worm mingl with slime. We threw it out, 
and wash the jug well in the sea, afterward pour a littl vinegar 
in it from our bottl of pickl tortoise. our thirst could now 
scarc be endured, and we tri in vain to reliev it by wine, which 
seem onli to add fuel to the flame, and excit us to a high degre 
of intoxication. We afterward endeavour to reliev our suffer by 
mix the wine with seawater; but thi instantli brought about the most 
violent retchings, so that we never again attempt it. dure the whole 
day we anxious sought an opportun of bathing, but to no purpose; 
for the hulk wa now entir besieg on all side with sharks--no 
doubt the ident monster who had devour our poor companion on the 
even before, and who were in momentari expect of anoth similar 
feast. thi circumst occas us the most bitter regret and 
fill us with the most depress and melancholi forebodings. We had 
experienc indescrib relief in bathing, and to have thi resourc 
cut off in so fright a manner wa more than we could bear. nor, 
indeed, were we altogeth free from the apprehens of immedi 
danger, for the least slip or fals movement would have thrown us 
at onc within reach of those voraci fish, who frequent thrust 
themselv directli upon us, swim up to leeward. No shout or 
exert on our part seem to alarm them. even when one of the largest 
wa struck with an axe by peter and much wounded, he persist in hi 
attempt to push in where we were. A cloud came up at dusk, but, to our 
extrem anguish, pass over without discharg itself. It is quit 
imposs to conceiv our suffer from thirst at thi period. We 
pass a sleepless night, both on thi account and through dread of the 
sharks. 

august 3. No prospect of relief, and the brig lie still more and more 
along, so that now we could not maintain a foot upon deck at all. 
busi ourselv in secur our wine and tortoise-meat, so that we 
might not lose them in the event of our roll over. got out two stout 
spike from the forechains, and, by mean of the axe, drove them into 
the hull to windward within a coupl of feet of the water, thi not 
be veri far from the keel, as we were nearli upon our beam-ends. To 
these spike we now lash our provisions, as be more secur than 
their former posit beneath the chains. suffer great agoni from 
thirst dure the whole day--no chanc of bath on account of the 
sharks, which never left us for a moment. found it imposs to sleep. 

august 4. A littl befor daybreak we perceiv that the hulk wa 
heel over, and arous ourselv to prevent be thrown off by the 
movement. At first the roll wa slow and gradual, and we contriv to 
clamber over to windward veri well, have taken the precaut to leav 
rope hang from the spike we had driven in for the provision. but 
we had not calcul suffici upon the acceler of the impetus; 
for, present the heel becam too violent to allow of our keep pace 
with it; and, befor either of us knew what wa to happen, we found 
ourselv hurl furious into the sea, and struggl sever fathom 
beneath the surface, with the huge hull immedi abov us. 

In go under the water I had been oblig to let go my hold upon 
the rope; and find that I wa complet beneath the vessel, and 
my strength nearli exhausted, I scarc made a struggl for life, 
and resign myself, in a few seconds, to die. but here again I wa 
deceived, not have taken into consider the natur rebound of 
the hull to windward. the whirl of the water upward, which the vessel 
occas in roll partial back, brought me to the surfac still 
more violent than I had been plung beneath. upon come up I found 
myself about twenti yard from the hulk, as near as I could judge. she 
wa lie keel up, rock furious from side to side, and the sea in 
all direct around wa much agitated, and full of strong whirlpools. 
I could see noth of peters. An oil-cask wa float within a few 
feet of me, and variou other articl from the brig were scatter 
about. 

My princip terror wa now on account of the sharks, which I knew to be 
in my vicinity. In order to deter these, if possible, from approach 
me, I splash the water vigor with both hand and feet as I swam 
toward the hulk, creat a bodi of foam. I have no doubt that to thi 
expedient, simpl as it was, I wa indebt for my preservation; for 
the sea all round the brig, just befor her roll over, wa so crowd 
with these monsters, that I must have been, and realli was, in actual 
contact with some of them dure my progress. By great good fortune, 
however, I reach the side of the vessel in safety, although so utterli 
weaken by the violent exert I had use that I should never have 
been abl to get upon it but for the time assist of peters, who, 
now, to my great joy, made hi appear (have scrambl up to the 
keel from the opposit side of the hull), and threw me the end of a 
rope--on of those which had been attach to the spikes. 

have bare escap thi danger, our attent wa now direct to the 
dread immin of another--that of absolut starvation. our whole 
stock of provis had been swept overboard in spite of all our care in 
secur it; and see no longer the remotest possibl of obtain 
more, we gave way both of us to despair, weep aloud like children, 
and neither of us attempt to offer consol to the other. such 
weak can scarc be conceived, and to those who have never been 
similarli situat will, no doubt, appear unnatural; but it must be 
rememb that our intellect were so entir disord by the long 
cours of privat and terror to which we had been subjected, that we 
could not justli be considered, at that period, in the light of ration 
beings. In subsequ perils, nearli as great, if not greater, I bore 
up with fortitud against all the evil of my situation, and peters, it 
will be seen, evinc a stoical philosophi nearli as incred as hi 
present childlik supin and imbecility--th mental condit made 
the difference. 

the overturn of the brig, even with the consequ loss of the 
wine and turtle, would not, in fact, have render our situat more 
deplor than before, except for the disappear of the bedcloth 
by which we had been hitherto enabl to catch rainwater, and of the jug 
in which we had kept it when caught; for we found the whole bottom, from 
within two or three feet of the bend as far as the keel, togeth with 
the keel itself, thickli cover with larg barnacles, which prove 
to be excel and highli nutriti food. thus, in two import 
respects, the accid we had so greatli dread prove to be a benefit 
rather than an injury; it had open to us a suppli of provis which 
we could not have exhausted, use it moderately, in a month; and it had 
greatli contribut to our comfort as regard position, we be much 
more at ease, and in infinit less danger, than before. 

the difficulty, however, of now obtain water blind us to all the 
benefit of the chang in our condition. that we might be readi to avail 
ourselves, as far as possible, of ani shower which might fall we took 
off our shirts, to make use of them as we had of the sheets--not hoping, 
of course, to get more in thi way, even under the most favor 
circumstances, than half a gill at a time. No sign of a cloud appear 
dure the day, and the agoni of our thirst were nearli intolerable. 
At night, peter obtain about an hour’ disturb sleep, but my 
intens suffer would not permit me to close my eye for a singl 
moment. 

august 5. to-day, a gentl breez spring up carri us through a vast 
quantiti of seaweed, among which we were so fortun as to find eleven 
small crabs, which afford us sever delici meals. their shell 
be quit soft, we ate them entire, and found that they irrit our 
thirst far less than the barnacles. see no trace of shark among the 
seaweed, we also ventur to bathe, and remain in the water for four 
or five hours, dure which we experienc a veri sensibl diminut 
of our thirst. were greatli refreshed, and spent the night somewhat more 
comfort than before, both of us snatch a littl sleep. 

august 6. thi day we were bless by a brisk and continu rain, 
last from about noon until after dark. bitterli did we now regret the 
loss of our jug and carboy; for, in spite of the littl mean we had of 
catch the water, we might have fill one, if not both of them. As 
it was, we contriv to satisfi the crave of thirst by suffer 
the shirt to becom saturated, and then wring them so as to let the 
grate fluid trickl into our mouths. In thi occup we pass the 
entir day. 

august 7. just at daybreak we both at the same instant descri a 
sail to the eastward, and _evid come toward us!_ We hail the 
gloriou sight with a long, although feebl shout of rapture; and began 
instantli to make everi signal in our power, by flare the shirt in 
the air, leap as high as our weak condit would permit, and even by 
halloo with all the strength of our lungs, although the vessel 
could not have been less than fifteen mile distant. however, she 
still continu to near our hulk, and we felt that, if she but held her 
present course, she must eventu come so close as to perceiv us. In 
about an hour after we first discov her, we could clearli see the 
peopl on her decks. she wa a long, low, and rakish-look topsail 
schooner, with a black ball in her foretopsail, and had, apparently, 
a full crew. We now becam alarmed, for we could hardli imagin it 
possibl that she did not observ us, and were apprehens that she 
meant to leav us to perish as we were--an act of fiendish barbarity, 
which, howev incred it may appear, ha been repeatedli perpetu 
at sea, under circumst veri nearli similar, and by be who 
were regard as belong to the human species. {*2} In thi instance, 
however, by the merci of god, we were destin to be most happili 
deceived; for, present we were awar of a sudden commot on the deck 
of the stranger, who immedi afterward ran up a british flag, and, 
haul her wind, bore up directli upon us. In half an hour more 
we found ourselv in her cabin. she prove to be the jane guy, of 
liverpool, captain guy, bound on a seal and trade voyag to the 
south sea and pacific. 




chapter 14 

the _jane guy_ wa a fine-look topsail schooner of a hundr and 
eighti ton burden. she wa unusu sharp in the bows, and on a wind, 
in moder weather, the fastest sailer I have ever seen. her qualities, 
however, as a rough sea-boat, were not so good, and her draught of water 
wa by far too great for the trade to which she wa destined. for thi 
peculiar service, a larger vessel, and one of a light proportion 
draught, is desirable--say a vessel of from three hundr to three 
hundr and fifti tons. she should be bark-rigged, and in other respect 
of a differ construct from the usual south sea ships. It is 
absolut necessari that she should be well armed. she should have, say 
ten or twelv twelve-pound carronades, and two or three long twelves, 
with brass blunderbusses, and water-tight arm-chest for each top. her 
anchor and cabl should be of far greater strength than is requir 
for ani other speci of trade, and, abov all, her crew should be 
numer and efficient--not less, for such a vessel as I have described, 
than fifti or sixti able-bodi men. the jane guy had a crew of 
thirty-five, all abl seamen, besid the captain and mate, but she 
wa not altogeth as well arm or otherwis equipped, as a navig 
acquaint with the difficulti and danger of the trade could have 
desired. 

captain guy wa a gentleman of great urban of manner, and of 
consider experi in the southern traffic, to which he had devot 
a great portion of hi life. He wa deficient, however, in energy, and, 
consequently, in that spirit of enterpris which is here so absolut 
requisite. He wa part owner of the vessel in which he sailed, and wa 
invest with discretionari power to cruis in the south sea for ani 
cargo which might come most readili to hand. He had on board, as usual 
in such voyages, beads, looking-glasses, tinder-works, axes, hatchets, 
saws, adzes, planes, chisels, gouges, gimlets, files, spokeshaves, 
rasps, hammers, nails, knives, scissors, razors, needles, thread, 
crockery-ware, calico, trinkets, and other similar articles. 

the schooner sail from liverpool on the tenth of july, cross the 
tropic of cancer on the twenty-fifth, in longitud twenti degre west, 
and reach sal, one of the cape verd islands, on the twenty-ninth, 
where she took in salt and other necessari for the voyage. On 
the third of august, she left the cape verd and steer southwest, 
stretch over toward the coast of brazil, so as to cross the equat 
between the meridian of twenty-eight and thirti degre west longitude. 
thi is the cours usual taken by vessel bound from europ to the 
cape of good hope, or by that rout to the east indies. By proceed 
thu they avoid the calm and strong contrari current which continu 
prevail on the coast of guinea, while, in the end, it is found to be the 
shortest track, as westerli wind are never want afterward by which 
to reach the cape. It wa captain guy’ intent to make hi first 
stoppag at kerguelen’ land--i hardli know for what reason. On the 
day we were pick up the schooner wa off cape st. roque, in longitud 
thirty-on degre west; so that, when found, we had drift probably, 
from north to south, _not less than five-and-twenti degrees!_ 

On board the jane guy we were treat with all the kind our 
distress situat demanded. In about a fortnight, dure which time 
we continu steer to the southeast, with gentl breez and fine 
weather, both peter and myself recov entir from the effect of 
our late privat and dread sufferings, and we began to rememb 
what had pass rather as a fright dream from which we had been 
happili awakened, than as event which had taken place in sober and 
nake reality. I have sinc found that thi speci of partial oblivion 
is usual brought about by sudden transition, whether from joy 
to sorrow or from sorrow to joy--th degre of forget be 
proport to the degre of differ in the exchange. thus, in my 
own case, I now feel it imposs to realiz the full extent of 
the miseri which I endur dure the day spent upon the hulk. the 
incid are remembered, but not the feel which the incid 
elicit at the time of their occurrence. I onli know, that when they 
did occur, I then thought human natur could sustain noth more of 
agony. 

We continu our voyag for some week without ani incid of 
greater moment than the occasion meet with whaling-ships, and more 
frequent with the black or right whale, so call in contradistinct 
to the spermaceti. these, however, were chiefli found south of the 
twenty-fifth parallel. On the sixteenth of september, be in the 
vicin of the cape of good hope, the schooner encount her first 
gale of ani violenc sinc leav liverpool. In thi neighborhood, but 
more frequent to the south and east of the promontori (we were to 
the westward), navig have often to contend with storm from the 
northward, which rage with great fury. they alway bring with them a 
heavi sea, and one of their most danger featur is the instantan 
chop round of the wind, an occurr almost certain to take place 
dure the greatest forc of the gale. A perfect hurrican will be 
blow at one moment from the northward or northeast, and in the next 
not a breath of wind will be felt in that direction, while from 
the southwest it will come out all at onc with a violenc almost 
inconceivable. A bright spot to the southward is the sure forerunn of 
the change, and vessel are thu enabl to take the proper precautions. 

It wa about six in the morn when the blow came on with a white 
squall, and, as usual, from the northward. By eight it had increas 
veri much, and brought down upon us one of the most tremend sea I 
had then ever beheld. everi thing had been made as snug as possible, 
but the schooner labour excessively, and gave evid of her bad 
qualiti as a seaboat, pitch her forecastl under at everi plung 
and with the greatest difficulti struggl up from one wave befor she 
wa buri in another. just befor sunset the bright spot for which we 
had been on the look-out made it appear in the southwest, and in 
an hour afterward we perceiv the littl headsail we carri flap 
listlessli against the mast. In two minut more, in spite of everi 
preparation, we were hurl on our beam-ends, as if by magic, and a 
perfect wilder of foam made a clear breach over us as we lay. the 
blow from the southwest, however, luckili prove to be noth more than 
a squall, and we had the good fortun to right the vessel without the 
loss of a spar. A heavi cross sea gave us great troubl for a few hour 
after this, but toward morn we found ourselv in nearli as good 
condit as befor the gale. captain guy consid that he had made an 
escap littl less than miraculous. 

On the thirteenth of octob we came in sight of princ edward’ island, 
in latitud 46 degre 53’ s., longitud 37 degre 46’ E. two day 
afterward we found ourselv near possess island, and present 
pass the island of crozet, in latitud 42 degre 59’ s., longitud 
48 degre E. On the eighteenth we made kerguelen’ or desol 
island, in the southern indian ocean, and came to anchor in christma 
harbour, have four fathom of water. 

thi island, or rather group of islands, bear southeast from the cape 
of good hope, and is distant therefrom nearli eight hundr leagues. It 
wa first discov in 1772, by the baron de kergulen, or kerguelen, 
a frenchman, who, think the land to form a portion of an extens 
southern contin carri home inform to that effect, which 
produc much excit at the time. the government, take the matter 
up, sent the baron back in the follow year for the purpos of 
give hi new discoveri a critic examination, when the mistak wa 
discovered. In 1777, captain cook fell in with the same group, and gave 
to the princip one the name of desol island, a titl which 
it certainli well deserves. upon approach the land, however, the 
navig might be induc to suppos otherwise, as the side of most 
of the hills, from septemb to march, are cloth with veri brilliant 
verdure. thi deceit appear is caus by a small plant resembl 
saxifrage, which is abundant, grow in larg patch on a speci 
of crumbl moss. besid thi plant there is scarc a sign of 
veget on the island, if we except some coars rank grass near the 
harbor, some lichen, and a shrub which bear resembl to a cabbag 
shoot into seed, and which ha a bitter and acrid taste. 

the face of the countri is hilly, although none of the hill can be 
call lofty. their top are perpetu cover with snow. there are 
sever harbors, of which christma harbour is the most convenient. It 
is the first to be met with on the northeast side of the island after 
pass cape francois, which form the northern shore, and, by it 
peculiar shape, serv to distinguish the harbour. it project point 
termin in a high rock, through which is a larg hole, form a 
natur arch. the entranc is in latitud 48 degre 40’ s., longitud 
69 degre 6’ E. pass in here, good anchorag may be found under the 
shelter of sever small islands, which form a suffici protect 
from all easterli winds. proceed on eastwardli from thi anchorag 
you come to wasp bay, at the head of the harbour. thi is a small basin, 
complet landlocked, into which you can go with four fathoms, and find 
anchorag in from ten to three, hard clay bottom. A ship might lie 
here with her best bower ahead all the year round without risk. To the 
westward, at the head of wasp bay, is a small stream of excel water, 
easili procured. 

some seal of the fur and hair speci are still to be found on 
kerguelen’ island, and sea eleph abound. the feather tribe are 
discov in great numbers. penguin are veri plenty, and of these 
there are four differ kinds. the royal penguin, so call from it 
size and beauti plumage, is the largest. the upper part of the bodi 
is usual gray, sometim of a lilac tint; the under portion of the 
purest white imaginable. the head is of a glossi and most brilliant 
black, the feet also. the chief beauti of plumage, however, consist in 
two broad stripe of a gold color, which pass along from the head to the 
breast. the bill is long, and either pink or bright scarlet. these bird 
walk erect; with a state carriage. they carri their head high with 
their wing droop like two arms, and, as their tail project from 
their bodi in a line with the legs, the resembl to a human figur 
is veri striking, and would be apt to deceiv the spectat at a casual 
glanc or in the gloom of the evening. the royal penguin which we met 
with on kerguelen’ land were rather larger than a goose. the other 
kind are the macaroni, the jackass, and the rookeri penguin. these 
are much smaller, less beauti in plumage, and differ in other 
respects. 

besid the penguin mani other bird are here to be found, among which 
may be mention sea-hens, blue peterels, teal, ducks, port egmont hens, 
shags, cape pigeons, the nelly, sea swallows, terns, sea gulls, mother 
carey’ chickens, mother carey’ geese, or the great peterel, and, 
lastly, the albatross. 

the great peterel is as larg as the common albatross, and is 
carnivorous. It is frequent call the break-bones, or osprey peterel. 
they are not at all shy, and, when properli cooked, are palat food. 
In fli they sometim sail veri close to the surfac of the water, 
with the wing expanded, without appear to move them in the least 
degree, or make ani exert with them whatever. 

the albatross is one of the largest and fiercest of the south sea birds. 
It is of the gull species, and take it prey on the wing, never come 
on land except for the purpos of breeding. between thi bird and the 
penguin the most singular friendship exists. their nest are 
construct with great uniform upon a plan concert between the two 
species--that of the albatross be place in the centr of a littl 
squar form by the nest of four penguins. navig have agre in 
call an assemblag of such encamp a rookery. these rookeri 
have been often described, but as my reader may not all have seen these 
descriptions, and as I shall have occas hereaft to speak of the 
penguin and albatross, it will not be amiss to say someth here of 
their mode of build and living. 

when the season for incub arrives, the bird assembl in vast 
numbers, and for some day appear to be deliber upon the proper 
cours to be pursued. At length they proceed to action. A level piec of 
ground is selected, of suitabl extent, usual compris three or four 
acres, and situat as near the sea as possible, be still beyond it 
reach. the spot is chosen with refer to it even of surface, and 
that is prefer which is the least encumb with stones. thi 
matter be arranged, the bird proceed, with one accord, and actuat 
appar by one mind, to trace out, with mathemat accuracy, either 
a squar or other parallelogram, as may best suit the natur of the 
ground, and of just suffici size to accommod easili all the bird 
assembled, and no more--in thi particular seem determin upon 
prevent the access of futur straggler who have not particip in 
the labor of the encampment. one side of the place thu mark out run 
parallel with the water’ edge, and is left open for ingress or egress. 

have defin the limit of the rookery, the coloni now begin to clear 
it of everi speci of rubbish, pick up stone by stone, and carri 
them outsid of the lines, and close by them, so as to form a wall on 
the three inland sides. just within thi wall a perfectli level and 
smooth walk is formed, from six to eight feet wide, and extend around 
the encampment--thu serv the purpos of a gener promenade. 

the next process is to partit out the whole area into small squar 
exactli equal in size. thi is done by form narrow paths, veri 
smooth, and cross each other at right angl throughout the entir 
extent of the rookery. At each intersect of these path the nest of 
an albatross is constructed, and a penguin’ nest in the centr of each 
square--thu everi penguin is surround by four albatrosses, and each 
albatross by a like number of penguins. the penguin’ nest consist of a 
hole in the earth, veri shallow, be onli just of suffici depth to 
keep her singl egg from rolling. the albatross is somewhat less simpl 
in her arrangements, erect a hillock about a foot high and two in 
diameter. thi is made of earth, seaweed, and shells. On it summit she 
build her nest. 

the bird take especi care never to leav their nest unoccupi for 
an instant dure the period of incubation, or, indeed, until the young 
progeni are suffici strong to take care of themselves. while the 
male is absent at sea in search of food, the femal remain on duty, and 
it is onli upon the return of her partner that she ventur abroad. the 
egg are never left uncov at all--whil one bird leav the nest the 
other nestl in by it side. thi precaut is render necessari 
by the thiev propens preval in the rookery, the inhabit 
make no scrupl to purloin each other’ egg at everi good 
opportunity. 

although there are some rookeri in which the penguin and albatross are 
the sole population, yet in most of them a varieti of ocean bird 
are to be met with, enjoy all the privileg of citizenship, and 
scatter their nest here and there, wherev they can find room, 
never interfering, however, with the station of the larger species. 
the appear of such encampments, when seen from a distance, is 
exceedingli singular. the whole atmospher just abov the settlement 
is darken with the immens number of the albatross (mingl with the 
smaller tribes) which are continu hover over it, either go to 
the ocean or return home. At the same time a crowd of penguin are 
to be observed, some pass to and fro in the narrow alleys, and some 
march with the militari strut so peculiar to them, around the gener 
promenad ground which encircl the rookery. In short, survey it as 
we will, noth can be more astonish than the spirit of reflect 
evinc by these feather beings, and noth sure can be better 
calcul to elicit reflect in everi well-regul human intellect. 

On the morn after our arriv in christma harbour the chief mate, 
mr. patterson, took the boats, and (although it wa somewhat earli in 
the season) went in search of seal, leav the captain and a young 
relat of hi on a point of barren land to the westward, they have 
some business, whose natur I could not ascertain, to transact in the 
interior of the island. captain guy took with him a bottle, in which wa 
a seal letter, and made hi way from the point on which he wa set on 
shore toward one of the highest peak in the place. It is probabl that 
hi design wa to leav the letter on that height for some vessel 
which he expect to come after him. As soon as we lost sight of him 
we proceed (peter and myself be in the mate’ boat) on our cruis 
around the coast, look for seal. In thi busi we were occupi 
about three weeks, examin with great care everi nook and corner, 
not onli of kerguelen’ land, but of the sever small island in the 
vicinity. our labours, however, were not crown with ani import 
success. We saw a great mani fur seal, but they were exceedingli shy, 
and with the greatest exertions, we could onli procur three hundr 
and fifti skin in all. sea eleph were abundant, especi on the 
western coast of the mainland, but of these we kill onli twenty, and 
thi with great difficulty. On the smaller island we discov a 
good mani of the hair seal, but did not molest them. We return to the 
schooner on the eleventh, where we found captain guy and hi nephew, 
who gave a veri bad account of the interior, repres it as one 
of the most dreari and utterli barren countri in the world. they had 
remain two night on the island, owe to some misunderstanding, on 
the part of the second mate, in regard to the send a jollyboat from 
the schooner to take them off. 




chapter 15 

ON the twelfth we made sail from christma harbour retrac our way to 
the westward, and leav marion’ island, one of crozet’ group, on the 
larboard. We afterward pass princ edward’ island, leav it also on 
our left, then, steer more to the northward, made, in fifteen days, 
the island of tristan d’acunha, in latitud 37 degre 8’ S, longitud 
12 degre 8’ W. 

thi group, now so well known, and which consist of three circular 
islands, wa first discov by the portuguese, and wa visit 
afterward by the dutch in 1643, and by the french in 1767. the three 
island togeth form a triangle, and are distant from each other about 
ten miles, there be fine open passag between. the land in all of 
them is veri high, especi in tristan d’acunha, properli so called. 
thi is the largest of the group, be fifteen mile in circumference, 
and so elev that it can be seen in clear weather at the distanc of 
eighti or nineti miles. A part of the land toward the north rise more 
than a thousand feet perpendicularli from the sea. A tableland at thi 
height extend back nearli to the centr of the island, and from thi 
tableland aris a lofti cone like that of teneriffe. the lower half of 
thi cone is cloth with tree of good size, but the upper region is 
barren rock, usual hidden among the clouds, and cover with snow 
dure the greater part of the year. there are no shoal or other 
danger about the island, the shore be remark bold and the water 
deep. On the northwestern coast is a bay, with a beach of black sand 
where a land with boat can be easili effected, provid there be a 
southerli wind. plenti of excel water may here be readili procured; 
also cod and other fish may be taken with hook and line. 

the next island in point of size, and the most westwardli of the group, 
is that call the inaccessible. it precis situat is 37 degre 17’ 
S. latitude, longitud 12 degre 24’ W. It is seven or eight mile in 
circumference, and on all side present a forbid and precipit 
aspect. it top is perfectli flat, and the whole region is sterile, 
noth grow upon it except a few stunt shrubs. 

nightingal island, the smallest and most southerly, is in latitud 37 
degre 26’ s., longitud 12 degre 12’ W. off it southern extrem 
is a high ledg of rocki islets; a few also of a similar appear are 
seen to the northeast. the ground is irregular and sterile, and a deep 
valley partial separ it. 

the shore of these island abound, in the proper season, with sea 
lions, sea elephants, the hair and fur seal, togeth with a great 
varieti of ocean birds. whale are also plenti in their vicinity. 
owe to the eas with which these variou anim were here formerli 
taken, the group ha been much visit sinc it discovery. the dutch 
and french frequent it at a veri earli period. In 1790, captain 
patten, of the ship industry, of philadelphia, made tristan d’acunha, 
where he remain seven month (from august, 1790, to april, 1791) for 
the purpos of collect sealskins. In thi time he gather no less 
than five thousand six hundred, and say that he would have had no 
difficulti in load a larg ship with oil in three weeks. upon hi 
arriv he found no quadrupeds, with the except of a few wild goats; 
the island now abound with all our most valuabl domest animals, 
which have been introduc by subsequ navigators. 

I believ it wa not long after captain patten’ visit that captain 
colquhoun, of the american brig betsey, touch at the largest of the 
island for the purpos of refreshment. He plant onions, potatoes, 
cabbages, and a great mani other vegetables, an abund of all which 
is now to be met with. 

In 1811, a captain haywood, in the nereus, visit tristan. He found 
there three americans, who were resid upon the island to prepar 
sealskin and oil. one of these men wa name jonathan lambert, and 
he call himself the sovereign of the country. He had clear and 
cultiv about sixti acr of land, and turn hi attent to 
rais the coffee-pl and sugar-cane, with which he had been 
furnish by the american minist at rio janeiro. thi settlement, 
however, wa final abandoned, and in 1817 the island were taken 
possess of by the british government, who sent a detach for that 
purpos from the cape of good hope. they did not, however, retain them 
long; but, upon the evacu of the countri as a british possession, 
two or three english famili took up their resid there 
independ of the government. On the twenty-fifth of march, 1824, the 
berwick, captain jeffrey, from london to van diemen’ land, arriv at 
the place, where they found an englishman of the name of glass, formerli 
a corpor in the british artillery. He claim to be suprem governor 
of the islands, and had under hi control twenty-on men and three 
women. He gave a veri favour account of the salubr of the 
climat and of the product of the soil. the popul occupi 
themselv chiefli in collect sealskin and sea eleph oil, 
with which they trade to the cape of good hope, glass own a 
small schooner. At the period of our arriv the governor wa still a 
resident, but hi littl commun had multiplied, there be 
fifty-six person upon tristan, besid a smaller settlement of seven on 
nightingal island. We had no difficulti in procur almost everi 
kind of refresh which we required--sheep, hogs, bullocks, rabbits, 
poultry, goats, fish in great variety, and veget were abundant. 
have come to anchor close in with the larg island, in eighteen 
fathoms, we took all we want on board veri conveniently. captain 
guy also purchas of glass five hundr sealskin and some ivory. We 
remain here a week, dure which the prevail wind were from the 
northward and westward, and the weather somewhat hazy. On the fifth of 
novemb we made sail to the southward and westward, with the intent 
of have a thorough search for a group of island call the auroras, 
respect whose exist a great divers of opinion ha existed. 

these island are said to have been discov as earli as 1762, by the 
command of the ship aurora. In 1790, captain manuel de oyarvido, in 
the ship princess, belong to the royal philippin company, sailed, as 
he asserts, directli among them. In 1794, the spanish corvett atrevida 
went with the determin of ascertain their precis situation, 
and, in a paper publish by the royal hydrograph societi of 
madrid in the year 1809, the follow languag is use respect 
thi expedition: “the corvett atrevida practised, in their immedi 
vicinity, from the twenty-first to the twenty-seventh of january, all 
the necessari observations, and measur by chronomet the differ 
of longitud between these island and the port of soledad in the 
manillas. the island are three, they are veri nearli in the same 
meridian; the centr one is rather low, and the other two may be seen 
at nine leagues’ distance.” the observ made on board the atrevida 
give the follow result as the precis situat of each island. 
the most northern is in latitud 52 degre 37’ 24” s., longitud 47 
degrees, 43’ 15” w.; the middl one in latitud 53 degre 2’ 40” s., 
longitud 47 degre 55’ 15” w.; and the most southern in latitud 53 
degre 15’ 22” s., longitud 47 degre 57’ 15” W. 

On the twenty-seventh of january, 1820, captain jame weddel, of the 
british navy, sail from staten land also in search of the auroras. He 
report that, have made the most dilig search and pass not onli 
immedi over the spot indic by the command of the atrevida, 
but in everi direct throughout the vicin of these spots, he 
could discov no indic of land. these conflict statement have 
induc other navig to look out for the islands; and, strang to 
say, while some have sail through everi inch of sea where they are 
suppos to lie without find them, there have been not a few who 
declar posit that they have seen them; and even been close in 
with their shores. It wa captain guy’ intent to make everi exert 
within hi power to settl the question so oddli in dispute. {*3} 

We kept on our course, between the south and west, with variabl 
weather, until the twentieth of the month, when we found ourselv on 
the debat ground, be in latitud 53 degre 15’ s., longitud 47 
degre 58’ w.--that is to say, veri nearli upon the spot indic as 
the situat of the most southern of the group. not perceiv ani sign 
of land, we continu to the westward of the parallel of fifty-thre 
degre south, as far as the meridian of fifti degre west. We then 
stood to the north as far as the parallel of fifty-two degre south, 
when we turn to the eastward, and kept our parallel by doubl 
altitudes, morn and evening, and meridian altitud of the planet 
and moon. have thu gone eastwardli to the meridian of the western 
coast of georgia, we kept that meridian until we were in the latitud 
from which we set out. We then took diagon cours throughout the 
entir extent of sea circumscribed, keep a lookout constantli at the 
masthead, and repeat our examin with the greatest care for a 
period of three weeks, dure which the weather wa remark pleasant 
and fair, with no haze whatsoever. Of cours we were thoroughli 
satisfi that, whatev island might have exist in thi vicin at 
ani former period, no vestig of them remain at the present day. sinc 
my return home I find that the same ground wa trace over, with equal 
care, in 1822, by captain johnson, of the american schooner henry, and 
by captain morrel in the american schooner wasp--in both case with the 
same result as in our own. 




chapter 16 

It had been captain guy’ origin intention, after satisfi himself 
about the auroras, to proceed through the strait of magellan, and 
up along the western coast of patagonia; but inform receiv at 
tristan d’acunha induc him to steer to the southward, in the hope of 
fall in with some small island said to lie about the parallel of 
60 degre s., longitud 41 degre 20’ W. In the event of hi 
not discov these lands, he designed, should the season prove 
favourable, to push on toward the pole. accordingly, on the twelfth of 
december, we made sail in that direction. On the eighteenth we found 
ourselv about the station indic by glass, and cruis for three 
day in that neighborhood without find ani trace of the island 
he had mentioned. On the twenty-first, the weather be unusu 
pleasant, we again made sail to the southward, with the resolut of 
penetr in that cours as far as possible. befor enter upon thi 
portion of my narrative, it may be as well, for the inform of those 
reader who have paid littl attent to the progress of discoveri in 
these regions, to give some brief account of the veri few attempt at 
reach the southern pole which have hitherto been made. 

that of captain cook wa the first of which we have ani distinct 
account. In 1772 he sail to the south in the resolution, accompani 
by lieuten furneaux in the adventure. In decemb he found himself as 
far as the fifty-eighth parallel of south latitude, and in longitud 26 
degre 57’ E. here he met with narrow field of ice, about eight or ten 
inch thick, and run northwest and southeast. thi ice wa in larg 
cakes, and usual it wa pack so close that the vessel had great 
difficulti in forc a passage. At thi period captain cook supposed, 
from the vast number of bird to be seen, and from other indications, 
that he wa in the near vicin of land. He kept on to the southward, 
the weather be exceedingli cold, until he reach the sixty-fourth 
parallel, in longitud 38 degre 14’ E. here he had mild weather, with 
gentl breezes, for five days, the thermomet be at thirty-six. In 
january, 1773, the vessel cross the antarct circle, but did not 
succeed in penetr much farther; for upon reach latitud 67 
degre 15’ they found all farther progress imped by an immens bodi 
of ice, extend all along the southern horizon as far as the eye could 
reach. thi ice wa of everi variety--and some larg floe of it, mile 
in extent, form a compact mass, rise eighteen or twenti feet abov 
the water. It be late in the season, and no hope entertain of 
round these obstructions, captain cook now reluctantli turn to the 
northward. 

In the novemb follow he renew hi search in the antarctic. In 
latitud 59 degre 40’ he met with a strong current set to the 
southward. In december, when the vessel were in latitud 67 degre 
31’, longitud 142 degre 54’ w., the cold wa excessive, with heavi 
gale and fog. here also bird were abundant; the albatross, the 
penguin, and the peterel especially. In latitud 70 degre 23’ some 
larg island of ice were encountered, and shortli afterward the cloud 
to the southward were observ to be of a snowi whiteness, indic 
the vicin of field ice. In latitud 71 degre 10’, longitud 106 
degre 54’ w., the navig were stopped, as before, by an immens 
frozen expanse, which fill the whole area of the southern horizon. the 
northern edg of thi expans wa rag and broken, so firmli wedg 
togeth as to be utterli impassible, and extend about a mile to the 
southward. behind it the frozen surfac wa compar smooth for 
some distance, until termin in the extrem background by gigant 
rang of ice mountains, the one tower abov the other. captain cook 
conclud that thi vast field reach the southern pole or wa 
join to a continent. mr. J. N. reynolds, whose great exert and 
persever have at length succeed in get set on foot a nation 
expedition, partli for the purpos of explor these regions, thu 
speak of the attempt of the resolution. “we are not surpris that 
captain cook wa unabl to go beyond 71 degre 10’, but we are 
astonish that he did attain that point on the meridian of 106 degre 
54’ west longitude. palmer’ land lie south of the shetland, latitud 
sixty-four degrees, and tend to the southward and westward farther than 
ani navig ha yet penetrated. cook wa stand for thi land when 
hi progress wa arrest by the ice; which, we apprehend, must alway 
be the case in that point, and so earli in the season as the sixth 
of january--and we should not be surpris if a portion of the ici 
mountain describ wa attach to the main bodi of palmer’ land, 
or to some other portion of land lie farther to the southward and 
westward.” 

In 1803, captain kreutzenstern and lisiauski were dispatch by 
alexand of russia for the purpos of circumnavig the globe. In 
endeavour to get south, they made no farther than 59 degre 58’, in 
longitud 70 degre 15’ W. they here met with strong current set 
eastwardly. whale were abundant, but they saw no ice. In regard to thi 
voyage, mr. reynold observ that, if kreutzenstern had arriv where 
he did earlier in the season, he must have encount ice--it wa march 
when he reach the latitud specified. the winds, prevailing, as they 
do, from the southward and westward, had carri the floes, aid by 
currents, into that ici region bound on the north by georgia, east 
by sandwich land and the south orkneys, and west by the south shetland 
islands. 

In 1822, captain jame weddell, of the british navy, with two veri small 
vessels, penetr farther to the south than ani previou navigator, 
and this, too, without encount extraordinari difficulties. He 
state that although he wa frequent hem in by ice befor reach 
the seventy-second parallel, yet, upon attain it, not a particl wa 
to be discovered, and that, upon arriv at the latitud of 74 degre 
15’, no fields, and onli three island of ice were visible. It is 
somewhat remark that, although vast flock of bird were seen, and 
other usual indic of land, and although, south of the shetlands, 
unknown coast were observ from the masthead tend southwardly, 
weddel discourag the idea of land exist in the polar region of 
the south. 

On the 11th of january, 1823, captain benjamin morrell, of the american 
schooner wasp, sail from kerguelen’ land with a view of penetr 
as far south as possible. On the first of februari he found himself in 
latitud 64 degre 52’ s., longitud 118 degre 27’ E. the follow 
passag is extract from hi journal of that date. “the wind soon 
freshen to an eleven-knot breeze, and we embrac thi opportun 
of make to the west; be howev convinc that the farther we 
went south beyond latitud sixty-four degrees, the less ice wa to be 
apprehended, we steer a littl to the southward, until we cross 
the antarct circle, and were in latitud 69 degre 15’ E. In thi 
latitud there wa no field ice, and veri few ice island in sight.” 

under the date of march fourteenth I find also thi entry. “the sea wa 
now entir free of field ice, and there were not more than a dozen ice 
island in sight. At the same time the temperatur of the air and water 
wa at least thirteen degre higher (more mild) than we had ever found 
it between the parallel of sixti and sixty-two south. We were now 
in latitud 70 degre 14’ s., and the temperatur of the air wa 
forty-seven, and that of the water forty-four. In thi situat I found 
the variat to be 14 degre 27’ easterly, per azimuth.... I 
have sever time pass within the antarct circle, on differ 
meridians, and have uniformli found the temperature, both of the air and 
the water, to becom more and more mild the farther I advanc beyond 
the sixty-fifth degre of south latitude, and that the variat 
decreas in the same proportion. while north of thi latitude, say 
between sixti and sixty-f south, we frequent had great difficulti 
in find a passag for the vessel between the immens and almost 
innumer ice islands, some of which were from one to two mile in 
circumference, and more than five hundr feet abov the surfac of the 
water.” 

be nearli destitut of fuel and water, and without proper 
instruments, it be also late in the season, captain morrel wa now 
oblig to put back, without attempt ani further progress to the 
westward, although an entir open, sea lay befor him. He express 
the opinion that, had not these overrul consider oblig him to 
retreat, he could have penetrated, if not to the pole itself, at least 
to the eighty-fifth parallel. I have given hi idea respect these 
matter somewhat at length, that the reader may have an opportun of 
see how far they were born out by my own subsequ experience. 

In 1831, captain briscoe, in the employ of the messieur enderby, 
whale-ship owner of london, sail in the brig live for the south 
seas, accompani by the cutter tula. On the twenty-eighth of february, 
be in latitud 66 degre 30’ s., longitud 47 degre 31’ e., he 
descri land, and “clearli discov through the snow the black 
peak of a rang of mountain run E. S. e.” He remain in thi 
neighbourhood dure the whole of the follow month, but wa unabl 
to approach the coast nearer than within ten leagues, owe to the 
boister state of the weather. find it imposs to make further 
discoveri dure thi season, he return northward to winter in van 
diemen’ land. 

In the begin of 1832 he again proceed southwardly, and on the 
fourth of februari land wa seen to the southeast in latitud 67 degre 15’ 
longitud 69 degre 29’ W. thi wa soon found to be an island near the 
headland of the countri he had first discovered. On the twenty-first of 
the month he succeed in land on the latter, and took possess of 
it in the name of william iv, call it adelaide’ island, in honour 
of the english queen. these particular be made known to the royal 
geograph societi of london, the conclus wa drawn by that bodi 
“that there is a continu tract of land extend from 47 degre 
30’ E. to 69 degre 29’ W. longitude, run the parallel of from 
sixty-six to sixty-seven degre south latitude.” In respect to thi 
conclus mr. reynold observes: “in the correct of it we by 
no mean concur; nor do the discoveri of brisco warrant ani such 
indifference. It wa within these limit that weddel proceed south on 
a meridian to the east of georgia, sandwich land, and the south orkney 
and shetland islands.” My own experi will be found to testifi most 
directli to the falsiti of the conclus arriv at by the society. 

these are the princip attempt which have been made at penetr to 
a high southern latitude, and it will now be seen that there remained, 
previou to the voyag of the jane, nearli three hundr degre of 
longitud in which the antarct circl had not been cross at all. 
Of cours a wide field lay befor us for discovery, and it wa with 
feel of most intens interest that I heard captain guy express hi 
resolut of push boldli to the southward. 




chapter 17 

We kept our cours southwardli for four day after give up the 
search for glass’ islands, without meet with ani ice at all. On the 
twenty-sixth, at noon, we were in latitud 63 degre 23’ s., longitud 
41 degre 25’ W. We now saw sever larg ice islands, and a floe of 
field ice, not, however, of ani great extent. the wind gener blew 
from the southeast, or the northeast, but were veri light. whenev we 
had a westerli wind, which wa seldom, it wa invari attend with a 
rain squall. everi day we had more or less snow. the thermometer, on the 
twenty-seventh stood at thirty-five. 

januari 1, 1828.--thi day we found ourselv complet hem in by 
the ice, and our prospect look cheerless indeed. A strong gale blew, 
dure the whole forenoon, from the northeast, and drove larg cake of 
the drift against the rudder and counter with such violenc that we all 
trembl for the consequences. toward evening, the gale still blow 
with fury, a larg field in front separated, and we were enabled, by 
carri a press of sail to forc a passag through the smaller flake 
into some open water beyond. As we approach thi space we took in sail 
by degrees, and have at length got clear, lay-to under a singl reef 
foresail. 

januari 2.--we had now toler pleasant weather. At noon we found 
ourselv in latitud 69 degre 10’ S, longitud 42 degre 20’ W, 
have cross the antarct circle. veri littl ice wa to be seen to 
the southward, although larg field of it lay behind us. thi day we 
rig some sound gear, use a larg iron pot capabl of hold 
twenti gallons, and a line of two hundr fathoms. We found the 
current set to the north, about a quarter of a mile per hour. the 
temperatur of the air wa now about thirty-three. here we found the 
variat to be 14 degre 28’ easterly, per azimuth. 

januari 5.--we had still held on to the southward without ani veri great 
impediments. On thi morning, however, be in latitud 73 degre 15’ 
e., longitud 42 degre 10’ W, we were again brought to a stand by an 
immens expans of firm ice. We saw, nevertheless, much open water to 
the southward, and felt no doubt of be abl to reach it eventually. 
stand to the eastward along the edg of the floe, we at length came 
to a passag of about a mile in width, through which we warp our way 
by sundown. the sea in which we now were wa thickli cover with ice 
islands, but had no field ice, and we push on boldli as before. the 
cold did not seem to increase, although we had snow veri frequently, 
and now and then hail squall of great violence. immens flock of 
the albatross flew over the schooner thi day, go from southeast to 
northwest. 

januari 7.--the sea still remain pretti well open, so that we had 
no difficulti in hold on our course. To the westward we saw some 
iceberg of incred size, and in the afternoon pass veri near one 
whose summit could not have been less than four hundr fathom from 
the surfac of the ocean. it girth wa probably, at the base, 
three-quart of a league, and sever stream of water were run 
from crevic in it sides. We remain in sight of thi island two 
days, and then onli lost it in a fog. 

januari 10.--earli thi morn we had the misfortun to lose a man 
overboard. He wa an american name peter vredenburgh, a nativ of new 
york, and wa one of the most valuabl hand on board the schooner. In 
go over the bow hi foot slipped, and he fell between two cake 
of ice, never rise again. At noon of thi day we were in latitud 78 
degre 30’, longitud 40 degre 15’ W. the cold wa now excessive, and 
we had hail squall continu from the northward and eastward. In 
thi direct also we saw sever more immens icebergs, and the whole 
horizon to the eastward appear to be block up with field ice, rise 
in tiers, one mass abov the other. some driftwood float by dure 
the evening, and a great quantiti of bird flew over, among which were 
nellies, peterels, albatrosses, and a larg bird of a brilliant blue 
plumage. the variat here, per azimuth, wa less than it had been 
previous to our pass the antarct circle. 

januari 12.--our passag to the south again look doubtful, as noth 
wa to be seen in the direct of the pole but one appar limitless 
floe, back by absolut mountain of rag ice, one precipic of which 
aros frowningli abov the other. We stood to the westward until the 
fourteenth, in the hope of find an entrance. 

januari 14.--thi morn we reach the western extrem of the field 
which had imped us, and, weather it, came to an open sea, without a 
particl of ice. upon sound with two hundr fathoms, we here found 
a current set southwardli at the rate of half a mile per hour. the 
temperatur of the air wa forty-seven, that of the water thirty-four. We 
now sail to the southward without meet ani interrupt of moment 
until the sixteenth, when, at noon, we were in latitud 81 degre 
21’, longitud 42 degre W. We here again sounded, and found a current 
set still southwardly, and at the rate of three quarter of a mile 
per hour. the variat per azimuth had diminished, and the temperatur 
of the air wa mild and pleasant, the thermomet be as high as 
fifty-one. At thi period not a particl of ice wa to be discovered. 
all hand on board now felt certain of attain the pole. 

januari 17.--thi day wa full of incident. innumer flight of bird 
flew over us from the southward, and sever were shot from the deck, 
one of them, a speci of pelican, prove to be excel eating. about 
midday a small floe of ice wa seen from the masthead off the larboard 
bow, and upon it there appear to be some larg animal. As the weather 
wa good and nearli calm, captain guy order out two of the boat to 
see what it was. dirk peter and myself accompani the mate in the 
larger boat. upon come up with the floe, we perceiv that it wa in 
the possess of a gigant creatur of the race of the arctic bear, 
but far exceed in size the largest of these animals. be well 
armed, we made no scrupl of attack it at once. sever shot were 
fire in quick succession, the most of which took effect, apparently, 
in the head and body. noth discouraged, however, the monster threw 
himself from the ice, and swam with open jaws, to the boat in which were 
peter and myself. owe to the confus which ensu among us at thi 
unexpect turn of the adventure, no person wa readi immedi with 
a second shot, and the bear had actual succeed in get half hi 
vast bulk across our gunwale, and seiz one of the men by the small 
of hi back, befor ani effici mean were taken to repel him. In thi 
extrem noth but the prompt and agil of peter save us from 
destruction. leap upon the back of the huge beast, he plung the 
blade of a knife behind the neck, reach the spinal marrow at a blow. 
the brute tumbl into the sea lifeless, and without a struggle, roll 
over peter as he fell. the latter soon recov himself, and a rope 
be thrown him, he secur the carcass befor enter the boat. We 
then return in triumph to the schooner, tow our trophi behind us. 
thi bear, upon admeasurement, prove to be full fifteen feet in hi 
greatest length. hi wool wa perfectli white, and veri coarse, curl 
tightly. the eye were of a blood red, and larger than those of the 
arctic bear, the snout also more rounded, rather resembl the snout 
of the bulldog. the meat wa tender, but excess rank and fishy, 
although the men devour it with avidity, and declar it excel 
eating. 

scarc had we got our prize alongside, when the man at the masthead 
gave the joy shout of “land on the starboard bow!” all hand were 
now upon the alert, and, a breez spring up veri opportun from the 
northward and eastward, we were soon close in with the coast. It 
prove to be a low rocki islet, of about a leagu in circumference, and 
altogeth destitut of vegetation, if we except a speci of prickli 
pear. In approach it from the northward, a singular ledg of rock is 
seen project into the sea, and bear a strong resembl to cord 
bale of cotton. around thi ledg to the westward is a small bay, at 
the bottom of which our boat effect a conveni landing. 

It did not take us long to explor everi portion of the island, but, 
with one exception, we found noth worthi of our observation. In the 
southern extremity, we pick up near the shore, half buri in a pile 
of loos stones, a piec of wood, which seem to have form the prow 
of a canoe. there had been evid some attempt at carv upon it, 
and captain guy fanci that he made out the figur of a tortoise, but 
the resembl did not strike me veri forcibly. besid thi prow, if 
such it were, we found no other token that ani live creatur had ever 
been here before. around the coast we discov occasion small floe 
of ice--but these were veri few. the exact situat of the islet (to 
which captain guy gave the name of bennet’ islet, in honour of hi 
partner in the ownership of the schooner) is 82 degre 50’ S. latitude, 
42 degre 20’ W. longitude. 

We had now advanc to the southward more than eight degre farther 
than ani previou navigators, and the sea still lay perfectli open 
befor us. We found, too, that the variat uniformli decreas as we 
proceeded, and, what wa still more surprising, that the temperatur 
of the air, and latterli of the water, becam milder. the weather might 
even be call pleasant, and we had a steadi but veri gentl breez 
alway from some northern point of the compass. the sky wa usual 
clear, with now and then a slight appear of thin vapour in the 
southern horizon--this, however, wa invari of brief duration. two 
difficulti alon present themselv to our view; we were get 
short of fuel, and symptom of scurvi had occur among sever of 
the crew. these consider began to impress upon captain guy the 
necess of returning, and he spoke of it frequently. for my own part, 
confid as I wa of soon arriv at land of some descript upon 
the cours we were pursuing, and have everi reason to believe, from 
present appearances, that we should not find it the steril soil met 
with in the higher arctic latitudes, I warmli press upon him the 
expedi of persevering, at least for a few day longer, in the 
direct we were now holding. So tempt an opportun of solv 
the great problem in regard to an antarct contin had never yet 
been afford to man, and I confess that I felt myself burst with 
indign at the timid and ill-tim suggest of our commander. 
I believe, indeed, that what I could not refrain from say to him on 
thi head had the effect of induc him to push on. while, therefore, 
I cannot but lament the most unfortun and bloodi event which 
immedi aros from my advice, I must still be allow to feel some 
degre of gratif at have been instrumental, howev remotely, 
in open to the eye of scienc one of the most intens excit 
secret which ha ever engross it attention. 




chapter 18 

januari 18.--thi morn {*4} we continu to the southward, with the 
same pleasant weather as before. the sea wa entir smooth, the air 
toler warm and from the northeast, the temperatur of the water 
fifty-three. We now again got our sounding-gear in order, and, with a 
hundr and fifti fathom of line, found the current set toward 
the pole at the rate of a mile an hour. thi constant tendenc to 
the southward, both in the wind and current, caus some degre of 
speculation, and even of alarm, in differ quarter of the schooner, 
and I saw distinctli that no littl impress had been made upon the 
mind of captain guy. He wa exceedingli sensit to ridicule, however, 
and I final succeed in laugh him out of hi apprehensions. the 
variat wa now veri trivial. In the cours of the day we saw sever 
larg whale of the right species, and innumer flight of the 
albatross pass over the vessel. We also pick up a bush, full of 
red berries, like those of the hawthorn, and the carcass of a 
singular-look land-animal. It wa three feet in length, and but six 
inch in height, with four veri short legs, the feet arm with long 
claw of a brilliant scarlet, and resembl coral in substance. the 
bodi wa cover with a straight silki hair, perfectli white. the tail 
wa peak like that of a rat, and about a foot and a half long. the 
head resembl a cat’s, with the except of the ears--thes were 
flop like the ear of a dog. the teeth were of the same brilliant 
scarlet as the claws. 

januari 19.--to-day, be in latitud 83 degre 20’, longitud 43 
degre 5’ W. (the sea be of an extraordinarili dark colour), we 
again saw land from the masthead, and, upon a closer scrutiny, found it 
to be one of a group of veri larg islands. the shore wa precipitous, 
and the interior seem to be well wooded, a circumst which 
occas us great joy. In about four hour from our first discov 
the land we came to anchor in ten fathoms, sandi bottom, a leagu from 
the coast, as a high surf, with strong rippl here and there, render 
a nearer approach of doubt expediency. the two largest boat were 
now order out, and a party, well arm (among whom were peter and 
myself), proceed to look for an open in the reef which appear to 
encircl the island. after search about for some time, we discov 
an inlet, which we were entering, when we saw four larg cano put off 
from the shore, fill with men who seem to be well armed. We wait 
for them to come up, and, as they move with great rapidity, they were 
soon within hail. captain guy now held up a white handkerchief on the 
blade of an oar, when the stranger made a full stop, and commenc 
a loud jabber all at once, intermingl with occasion shouts, in 
which we could distinguish the word anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! they 
continu thi for at least half an hour, dure which we had a good 
opportun of observ their appearance. 

In the four canoes, which might have been fifti feet long and five 
broad, there were a hundr and ten savag in all. they were about the 
ordinari statur of europeans, but of a more muscular and brawni frame. 
their complexion a jet black, with thick and long woolli hair. they were 
cloth in skin of an unknown black animal, shaggi and silky, and made 
to fit the bodi with some degre of skill, the hair be inside, 
except where turn out about the neck, wrists, and ankles. their arm 
consist princip of clubs, of a dark, and appar veri heavi 
wood. some spears, however, were observ among them, head with flint, 
and a few slings. the bottom of the cano were full of black stone 
about the size of a larg egg. 

when they had conclud their harangu (for it wa clear they intend 
their jabber for such), one of them who seem to be the chief stood 
up in the prow of hi canoe, and made sign for us to bring our boat 
alongsid of him. thi hint we pretend not to understand, think 
it the wiser plan to maintain, if possible, the interv between us, as 
their number more than quadrupl our own. find thi to be the case, 
the chief order the three other cano to hold back, while he advanc 
toward us with hi own. As soon as he came up with us he leap on board 
the largest of our boats, and seat himself by the side of captain 
guy, point at the same time to the schooner, and repeat the word 
anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! We now put back to the vessel, the four 
cano follow at a littl distance. 

upon get alongside, the chief evinc symptom of extrem surpris 
and delight, clap hi hands, slap hi thigh and breast, and 
laugh obstreperously. hi follow behind join in hi merriment, 
and for some minut the din wa so excess as to be absolut 
deafening. quiet be at length restored, captain guy order the boat 
to be hoist up, as a necessari precaution, and gave the chief (whose 
name we soon found to be too-wit) to understand that we could admit no 
more than twenti of hi men on deck at one time. with thi arrang 
he appear perfectli satisfied, and gave some direct to the canoes, 
when one of them approached, the rest remain about fifti yard off. 
twenti of the savag now got on board, and proceed to rambl over 
everi part of the deck, and scrambl about among the rigging, make 
themselv much at home, and examin everi articl with great 
inquisitiveness. 

It wa quit evid that they had never befor seen ani of the white 
race--from whose complexion, indeed, they appear to recoil. they 
believ the jane to be a live creature, and seem to be afraid of 
hurt it with the point of their spears, care turn them up. 
our crew were much amus with the conduct of too-wit in one instance. 
the cook wa split some wood near the galley, and, by accident, 
struck hi axe into the deck, make a gash of consider depth. 
the chief immedi ran up, and push the cook on one side rather 
roughly, commenc a half whine, half howl, strongli indic of 
sympathi in what he consid the suffer of the schooner, pat 
and smooth the gash with hi hand, and wash it from a bucket of 
seawat which stood by. thi wa a degre of ignor for which we 
were not prepared, and for my part I could not help think some of it 
affected. 

when the visitor had satisfied, as well as they could, their curios 
in regard to our upper works, they were admit below, when their 
amaz exceed all bounds. their astonish now appear to be far 
too deep for words, for they roam about in silence, broken onli by low 
ejaculations. the arm afford them much food for speculation, and they 
were suffer to handl and examin them at leisure. I do not believ 
that they had the least suspicion of their actual use, but rather took 
them for idols, see the care we had of them, and the attent with 
which we watch their movement while handl them. At the great gun 
their wonder wa redoubled. they approach them with everi mark of the 
profoundest rever and awe, but forbor to examin them minutely. 
there were two larg mirror in the cabin, and here wa the acm of 
their amazement. too-wit wa the first to approach them, and he had got 
in the middl of the cabin, with hi face to one and hi back to the 
other, befor he fairli perceiv them. upon rais hi eye and see 
hi reflect self in the glass, I thought the savag would go mad; 
but, upon turn short round to make a retreat, and behold himself a 
second time in the opposit direction, I wa afraid he would expir upon 
the spot. No persuas could prevail upon him to take anoth look; 
throw himself upon the floor, with hi face buri in hi hands, he 
remain thu until we were oblig to drag him upon deck. 

the whole of the savag were admit on board in thi manner, twenti 
at a time, too-wit be suffer to remain dure the entir period. 
We saw no disposit to thieveri among them, nor did we miss a singl 
articl after their departure. throughout the whole of their visit they 
evinc the most friendli manner. there were, however, some point in 
their demeanour which we found it imposs to understand; for example, 
we could not get them to approach sever veri harmless objects--such 
as the schooner’ sails, an egg, an open book, or a pan of flour. We 
endeavour to ascertain if they had among them ani articl which might 
be turn to account in the way of traffic, but found great difficulti 
in be comprehended. We made out, nevertheless, what greatli 
astonish us, that the island abound in the larg tortois of the 
gallipagos, one of which we saw in the cano of too-wit. We saw also 
some bich de mer in the hand of one of the savages, who wa greedili 
devour it in it natur state. these anomalies--for they were such 
when consid in regard to the latitude--induc captain guy to wish 
for a thorough investig of the country, in the hope of make a 
profit specul in hi discovery. for my own part, anxiou as I 
wa to know someth more of these islands, I wa still more earnestli 
bent on prosecut the voyag to the southward without delay. We had 
now fine weather, but there wa no tell how long it would last; and 
be alreadi in the eighty-fourth parallel, with an open sea befor us, 
a current set strongli to the southward, and the wind fair, I could 
not listen with ani patienc to a proposit of stop longer than 
wa absolut necessari for the health of the crew and the take on 
board a proper suppli of fuel and fresh provisions. I repres to the 
captain that we might easili make thi group on our return, and winter 
here in the event of be block up by the ice. He at length came into 
my view (for in some way, hardli known to myself, I had acquir much 
influenc over him), and it wa final resolv that, even in the event 
of our find bich de mer, we should onli stay here a week to recruit, 
and then push on to the southward while we might. accordingli we made 
everi necessari preparation, and, under the guidanc of too-wit, got the 
jane through the reef in safety, come to anchor about a mile from the 
shore, in an excel bay, complet landlocked, on the southeastern 
coast of the main island, and in ten fathom of water, black sandi 
bottom. At the head of thi bay there were three fine spring (we were 
told) of good water, and we saw abund of wood in the vicinity. the 
four cano follow us in, keeping, however, at a respect distance. 
too-wit himself remain on board, and, upon our drop anchor, 
invit us to accompani him on shore, and visit hi villag in the 
interior. To thi captain guy consented; and ten savag be left on 
board as hostages, a parti of us, twelv in all, got in readi to 
attend the chief. We took care to be well armed, yet without evinc 
ani distrust. the schooner had her gun run out, her boarding-net 
up, and everi other proper precaut wa taken to guard against 
surprise. direct were left with the chief mate to admit no person 
on board dure our absence, and, in the event of our not appear in 
twelv hours, to send the cutter, with a swivel, around the island in 
search of us. 

At everi step we took inland the convict forc itself upon us that 
we were in a countri differ essenti from ani hitherto visit 
by civil men. We saw noth with which we had been formerli 
conversant. the tree resembl no growth of either the torrid, the 
temperate, or the northern frigid zones, and were altogeth unlik 
those of the lower southern latitud we had alreadi traversed. the veri 
rock were novel in their mass, their color, and their stratification; 
and the stream themselves, utterli incred as it may appear, had so 
littl in common with those of other climates, that we were scrupul 
of tast them, and, indeed, had difficulti in bring ourselv to 
believ that their qualiti were pure those of nature. At a small 
brook which cross our path (the first we had reached) too-wit and hi 
attend halt to drink. On account of the singular charact of the 
water, we refus to tast it, suppos it to be polluted; and it wa 
not until some time afterward we came to understand that such wa the 
appear of the stream throughout the whole group. I am at a loss 
to give a distinct idea of the natur of thi liquid, and cannot do so 
without mani words. although it flow with rapid in all decliv 
where common water would do so, yet never, except when fall in 
a cascade, had it the customari appear of limpidity. It was, 
nevertheless, in point of fact, as perfectli limpid as ani limeston 
water in existence, the differ be onli in appearance. At first 
sight, and especi in case where littl decliv wa found, it bore 
resemblance, as regard consistency, to a thick infus of gum 
arab in common water. but thi wa onli the least remark of it 
extraordinari qualities. It wa not colourless, nor wa it of ani one 
uniform colour--pres to the eye, as it flowed, everi possibl 
shade of purple; like the hue of a changeabl silk. thi variat in 
shade wa produc in a manner which excit as profound astonish 
in the mind of our parti as the mirror had done in the case of too-wit. 
upon collect a basinful, and allow it to settl thoroughly, we 
perceiv that the whole mass of liquid wa made up of a number of 
distinct veins, each of a distinct hue; that these vein did not 
commingle; and that their cohes wa perfect in regard to their own 
particl among themselves, and imperfect in regard to neighbour 
veins. upon pass the blade of a knife athwart the veins, the water 
close over it immediately, as with us, and also, in withdraw it, 
all trace of the passag of the knife were instantli obliterated. if, 
however, the blade wa pass down accur between the two veins, 
a perfect separ wa effected, which the power of cohes did 
not immedi rectify. the phenomena of thi water form the first 
definit link in that vast chain of appar miracl with which I wa 
destin to be at length encircled. 




chapter 19 

We were nearli three hour in reach the village, it be more than 
nine mile in the interior, and the path lie through a rug country. 
As we pass along, the parti of too-wit (the whole hundr and 
ten savag of the canoes) wa momentarili strengthen by smaller 
detachments, of from two to six or seven, which join us, as if by 
accident, at differ turn of the road. there appear so much of 
system in thi that I could not help feel distrust, and I spoke 
to captain guy of my apprehensions. It wa now too late, however, 
to recede, and we conclud that our best secur lay in evinc a 
perfect confid in the good faith of too-wit. We accordingli went 
on, keep a wari eye upon the manoeuvr of the savages, and not 
permit them to divid our number by push in between. In thi 
way, pass through a precipit ravine, we at length reach what we 
were told wa the onli collect of habit upon the island. As we 
came in sight of them, the chief set up a shout, and frequent repeat 
the word klock-klock, which we suppos to be the name of the village, 
or perhap the gener name for villages. 

the dwell were of the most miser descript imaginable, and, 
unlik those of even the lowest of the savag race with which mankind 
are acquainted, were of no uniform plan. some of them (and these we 
found belong to the wampoo or yampoos, the great men of the land) 
consist of a tree cut down at about four feet from the root, with a 
larg black skin thrown over it, and hang in loos fold upon the 
ground. under thi the savag nestled. other were form by mean 
of rough limb of trees, with the wither foliag upon them, made to 
recline, at an angl of forty-f degrees, against a bank of clay, 
heap up, without regular form, to the height of five or six feet. 
others, again, were mere hole dug in the earth perpendicularly, and 
cover over with similar branches, these be remov when the tenant 
wa about to enter, and pull on again when he had entered. A few were 
built among the fork limb of tree as they stood, the upper limb 
be partial cut through, so as to bend over upon the lower, thu 
form thicker shelter from the weather. the greater number, however, 
consist of small shallow caverns, appar scratch in the face of 
a precipit ledg of dark stone, resembl fuller’ earth, with which 
three side of the villag were bounded. At the door of each of these 
primit cavern wa a small rock, which the tenant care place 
befor the entranc upon leav hi residence, for what purpos I could 
not ascertain, as the stone itself wa never of suffici size to close 
up more than a third of the opening. 

thi village, if it were worthi of the name, lay in a valley of some 
depth, and could onli be approach from the southward, the precipit 
ledg of which I have alreadi spoken cut off all access in other 
directions. through the middl of the valley ran a brawl stream of 
the same magical-look water which ha been described. We saw sever 
strang anim about the dwellings, all appear to be thoroughli 
domesticated. the largest of these creatur resembl our common hog in 
the structur of the bodi and snout; the tail, however, wa bushy, and 
the leg slender as those of the antelope. it motion wa exceedingli 
awkward and indecisive, and we never saw it attempt to run. We notic 
also sever anim veri similar in appearance, but of a greater length 
of body, and cover with a black wool. there were a great varieti of 
tame fowl run about, and these seem to constitut the chief food 
of the natives. To our astonish we saw black albatross among these 
bird in a state of entir domestication, go to sea period 
for food, but alway return to the villag as a home, and use the 
southern shore in the vicin as a place of incubation. there they were 
join by their friend the pelican as usual, but these latter never 
follow them to the dwell of the savages. among the other kind of 
tame fowl were ducks, differ veri littl from the canvass-back of 
our own country, black gannets, and a larg bird not unlik the buzzard 
in appearance, but not carnivorous. Of fish there seem to be a great 
abundance. We saw, dure our visit, a quantiti of dri salmon, 
rock cod, blue dolphins, mackerel, blackfish, skate, conger eels, 
elephantfish, mullets, soles, parrotfish, leather-jackets, gurnards, 
hake, flounders, paracutas, and innumer other varieties. We noticed, 
too, that most of them were similar to the fish about the group of lord 
auckland islands, in a latitud as low as fifty-on degre south. the 
gallipago tortois wa also veri plentiful. We saw but few wild animals, 
and none of a larg size, or of a speci with which we were familiar. 
one or two serpent of a formid aspect cross our path, but the 
nativ paid them littl attention, and we conclud that they were not 
venomous. 

As we approach the villag with too-wit and hi party, a vast crowd of 
the peopl rush out to meet us, with loud shouts, among which we could 
onli distinguish the everlast anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! We were 
much surpris at perceiv that, with one or two exceptions, these new 
comer were entir naked, and skin be use onli by the men of 
the canoes. all the weapon of the countri seem also to be in the 
possess of the latter, for there wa no appear of ani among the 
villagers. there were a great mani women and children, the former not 
altogeth want in what might be term person beauty. they were 
straight, tall, and well formed, with a grace and freedom of carriag 
not to be found in civil society. their lips, however, like those of 
the men, were thick and clumsy, so that, even when laughing, the teeth 
were never disclosed. their hair wa of a finer textur than that of the 
males. among these nake villag there might have been ten or twelv 
who were clothed, like the parti of too-wit, in dress of black skin, 
and arm with lanc and heavi clubs. these appear to have great 
influenc among the rest, and were alway address by the titl wampoo. 
these, too, were the tenant of the black skin palaces. that of too-wit 
wa situat in the centr of the village, and wa much larger and 
somewhat better construct than other of it kind. the tree which 
form it support wa cut off at a distanc of twelv feet or 
thereabout from the root, and there were sever branch left just 
below the cut, these serv to extend the covering, and in thi way 
prevent it flap about the trunk. the covering, too, which consist 
of four veri larg skin fasten togeth with wooden skewers, wa 
secur at the bottom with peg driven through it and into the ground. 
the floor wa strew with a quantiti of dri leav by way of carpet. 

To thi hut we were conduct with great solemnity, and as mani of the 
nativ crowd in after us as possible. too-wit seat himself on the 
leaves, and made sign that we should follow hi example. thi we did, 
and present found ourselv in a situat peculiarli uncomfortable, 
if not inde critical. We were on the ground, twelv in number, with 
the savages, as mani as forty, sit on their ham so close 
around us that, if ani disturb had arisen, we should have found it 
imposs to make use of our arms, or inde to have risen to our feet. 
the pressur wa not onli insid the tent, but outside, where probabl 
wa everi individu on the whole island, the crowd be prevent from 
trampl us to death onli by the incess exert and vocifer 
of too-wit. our chief secur lay, however, in the presenc of too-wit 
himself among us, and we resolv to stick by him closely, as the 
best chanc of extric ourselv from the dilemma, sacrif him 
immedi upon the first appear of hostil design. 

after some troubl a certain degre of quiet wa restored, when 
the chief address us in a speech of great length, and veri nearli 
resembl the one deliv in the canoes, with the except that the 
anamoo-moos! were now somewhat more strenuous insist upon than the 
lama-lamas! We listen in profound silenc until the conclus of thi 
harangue, when captain guy repli by assur the chief of hi etern 
friendship and goodwill, conclud what he had to say by a present of 
sever string of blue bead and a knife. At the former the monarch, 
much to our surprise, turn up hi nose with some express of 
contempt, but the knife gave him the most unlimit satisfaction, and he 
immedi order dinner. thi wa hand into the tent over the 
head of the attendants, and consist of the palpit entrail of a 
speciali of unknown animal, probabl one of the slim-leg hog which 
we had observ in our approach to the village. see us at a loss how 
to proceed, he began, by way of set us an example, to devour yard 
after yard of the entic food, until we could posit stand it no 
longer, and evinc such manifest symptom of rebellion of stomach as 
inspir hi majesti with a degre of astonish onli inferior to that 
brought about by the looking-glasses. We declined, however, partak of 
the delicaci befor us, and endeavour to make him understand that we 
had no appetit whatever, have just finish a hearti dejeuner. 

when the monarch had made an end of hi meal, we commenc a seri of 
cross-quest in everi ingeni manner we could devise, with a 
view of discov what were the chief product of the country, and 
whether ani of them might be turn to profit. At length he seem to 
have some idea of our meaning, and offer to accompani us to a part of 
coast where he assur us the bich de mer (point to a specimen of 
that animal) wa to be found in great abundance. We were glad of thi 
earli opportun of escap from the oppress of the crowd, 
and signifi our eager to proceed. We now left the tent, and, 
accompani by the whole popul of the village, follow the chief 
to the southeastern extrem of the island, nor far from the bay where 
our vessel lay at anchor. We wait here for about an hour, until the 
four cano were brought around by some of the savag to our station. 
the whole of our parti then get into one of them, we were paddl 
along the edg of the reef befor mentioned, and of anoth still 
farther out, where we saw a far greater quantiti of bich de mer than 
the oldest seamen among us had ever seen in those group of the lower 
latitud most celebr for thi articl of commerce. We stay near 
these reef onli long enough to satisfi ourselv that we could easili 
load a dozen vessel with the anim if necessary, when we were taken 
alongsid the schooner, and part with too-wit, after obtain from 
him a promis that he would bring us, in the cours of twenty-four 
hours, as mani of the canvass-back duck and gallipago tortois as hi 
cano would hold. In the whole of thi adventur we saw noth in the 
demeanour of the nativ calcul to creat suspicion, with the singl 
except of the systemat manner in which their parti wa strengthen 
dure our rout from the schooner to the village. 




chapter 20 

the chief wa as good as hi word, and we were soon plenti suppli 
with fresh provisions. We found the tortois as fine as we had ever 
seen, and the duck surpass our best speci of wild fowl, be 
exceedingli tender, juicy, and well-flavoured. besid these, the 
savag brought us, upon our make them comprehend our wishes, a vast 
quantiti of brown celeri and scurvi grass, with a canoe-load of fresh 
fish and some dried. the celeri wa a treat indeed, and the scurvi grass 
prove of incalcul benefit in restor those of our men who had 
shown symptom of disease. In a veri short time we had not a singl 
person on the sick-list. We had also plenti of other kind of fresh 
provisions, among which may be mention a speci of shellfish 
resembl the mussel in shape, but with the tast of an oyster. 
shrimps, too, and prawn were abundant, and albatross and other birds’ 
egg with dark shells. We took in, too, a plenti stock of the flesh 
of the hog which I have mention before. most of the men found it a 
palat food, but I thought it fishi and otherwis disagreeable. In 
return for these good thing we present the nativ with blue beads, 
brass trinkets, nails, knives, and piec of red cloth, they be fulli 
delight in the exchange. We establish a regular market on shore, 
just under the gun of the schooner, where our barter were carri 
on with everi appear of good faith, and a degre of order which 
their conduct at the villag of _klock-klock_ had not led us to expect 
from the savages. 

matter went on thu veri amic for sever days, dure which 
parti of the nativ were frequent on board the schooner, and 
parti of our men frequent on shore, make long excurs into the 
interior, and receiv no molest whatever. find the eas with 
which the vessel might be load with _bich de mer_, owe to the 
friendli disposit of the islanders, and the readi with which they 
would render us assist in collect it, captain guy resolv to 
enter into negoti with too-wit for the erect of suitabl hous 
in which to cure the article, and for the servic of himself and tribe 
in gather as much as possible, while he himself took advantag of the 
fine weather to prosecut hi voyag to the southward. upon mention 
thi project to the chief he seem veri will to enter into an 
agreement. A bargain wa accordingli struck, perfectli satisfactori to 
both parties, by which it wa arrang that, after make the necessari 
preparations, such as lay off the proper grounds, erect a portion 
of the buildings, and do some other work in which the whole of 
our crew would be required, the schooner should proceed on her route, 
leav three of her men on the island to superintend the fulfil of 
the project, and instruct the nativ in dri the _bich de mer_. In 
regard to terms, these were made to depend upon the exert of the 
savag in our absence. they were to receiv a stipul quantiti of 
blue beads, knives, red cloth, and so forth, for everi certain number of 
picul of the _bich de mer_ which should be readi on our return. 

A descript of the natur of thi import articl of commerce, and 
the method of prepar it, may prove of some interest to my readers, 
and I can find no more suitabl place than thi for introduc an 
account of it. the follow comprehens notic of the substanc is 
taken from a modern histori of a voyag to the south seas. 

“it is that _mollusca_ from the indian sea which is known to commerc 
by the french name _bouch de mer_ (a nice morsel from the sea). If I 
am not much mistaken, the celebr cuvier call it _gasteropeda 
pulmonifera_. It is abundantli gather in the coast of the pacif 
islands, and gather especi for the chines market, where it 
command a great price, perhap as much as their much-talked-of edibl 
birds’ nests, which are properli made up of the gelatin matter pick 
up by a speci of swallow from the bodi of these molluscae. they have 
no shell, no legs, nor ani promin part, except an _absorbing_ and 
an _excretory_, opposit organs; but, by their elast wings, like 
caterpillar or worms, they creep in shallow waters, in which, when low, 
they can be seen by a kind of swallow, the sharp bill of which, insert 
in the soft animal, draw a gummi and filament substance, which, by 
drying, can be wrought into the solid wall of their nest. henc the 
name of _gasteropeda pulmonifera_. 

“thi mollusca is oblong, and of differ sizes, from three to eighteen 
inch in length; and I have seen a few that were not less than two feet 
long. they were nearli round, a littl flattish on one side, which lie 
next to the bottom of the sea; and they are from one to eight inch 
thick. they crawl up into shallow water at particular season of the 
year, probabl for the purpos of gendering, as we often find them in 
pairs. It is when the sun ha the most power on the water, render it 
tepid, that they approach the shore; and they often go up into place so 
shallow that, on the tide’ receding, they are left dry, expos to 
the beat of the sun. but they do not bring forth their young in shallow 
water, as we never see ani of their progeny, and full-grown one are 
alway observ come in from deep water. they feed princip on that 
class of zoophyt which produc the coral. 

“the _bich de mer_ is gener taken in three or four feet of water; 
after which they are brought on shore, and split at one end with a 
knife, the incis be one inch or more, accord to the size of the 
mollusca. through thi open the entrail are forc out by pressure, 
and they are much like those of ani other small tenant of the deep. the 
articl is then washed, and afterward boil to a certain degree, which 
must not be too much or too little. they are then buri in the ground 
for four hours, then boil again for a short time, after which they are 
dried, either by the fire or the sun. those cure by the sun are worth 
the most; but where one picul (133 1/3 lbs.) can be cure that way, I 
can cure thirti picul by the fire. when onc properli cured, they can 
be kept in a dri place for two or three year without ani risk; but they 
should be examin onc in everi few months, say four time a year, to 
see if ani damp is like to affect them. 

“the chinese, as befor stated, consid _bich de mer_ a veri great 
luxury, believ that it wonder strengthen and nourish the 
system, and renew the exhaust system of the immoder voluptuary. 
the first qualiti command a high price in canton, be worth nineti 
dollar a picul; the second quality, seventy-f dollars; the third, 
fifti dollars; the fourth, thirti dollars; the fifth, twenti dollars; 
the sixth, twelv dollars; the seventh, eight dollars; and the eighth, 
four dollars; small cargoes, however, will often bring more in manilla, 
singapore, and batavia.” 

An agreement have been thu enter into, we proceed immedi to 
land everyth necessari for prepar the build and clear 
the ground. A larg flat space near the eastern shore of the bay wa 
selected, where there wa plenti of both wood and water, and within a 
conveni distanc of the princip reef on which the _bich de mer_ 
wa to be procured. We now all set to work in good earnest, and soon, to 
the great astonish of the savages, had fell a suffici number of 
tree for our purpose, get them quickli in order for the framework 
of the houses, which in two or three day were so far under way that 
we could safe trust the rest of the work to the three men whom we 
intend to leav behind. these were john carson, alfr harris, and 
___ peterson (all nativ of london, I believe), who volunt their 
servic in thi respect. 

By the last of the month we had everyth in readi for departure. 
We had agreed, however, to pay a formal visit of leave-tak to the 
village, and too-wit insist so pertinaci upon our keep the 
promis that we did not think it advis to run the risk of offend 
him by a final refusal. I believ that not one of us had at thi time 
the slightest suspicion of the good faith of the savages. they had 
uniformli behav with the greatest decorum, aid us with alacr in 
our work, offer us their commodities, frequent without price, and 
never, in ani instance, pilfer a singl article, although the 
high valu they set upon the good we had with us wa evid by the 
extravag demonstr of joy alway manifest upon our make them 
a present. the women especi were most oblig in everi respect, 
and, upon the whole, we should have been the most suspici of human 
be had we entertain a singl thought of perfidi on the part of a 
peopl who treat us so well. A veri short while suffic to prove that 
thi appar kind of disposit wa onli the result of a deepli 
laid plan for our destruction, and that the island for whom we 
entertain such inordin feel of esteem, were among the most 
barbarous, subtle, and bloodthirsti wretch that ever contamin the 
face of the globe. 

It wa on the first of februari that we went on shore for the purpos of 
visit the village. although, as said before, we entertain not the 
slightest suspicion, still no proper precaut wa neglected. six 
men were left in the schooner, with instruct to permit none of the 
savag to approach the vessel dure our absence, under ani pretenc 
whatever, and to remain constantli on deck. the boarding-net were 
up, the gun double-shot with grape and canister, and the swivel 
load with canist of musket-balls. she lay, with her anchor apeak, 
about a mile from the shore, and no cano could approach her in ani 
direct without be distinctli seen and expos to the full fire of 
our swivel immediately. 

the six men be left on board, our shore-parti consist of thirty-two 
person in all. We were arm to the teeth, have with us muskets, 
pistols, and cutlasses; besides, each had a long kind of seaman’ knife, 
somewhat resembl the bowi knife now so much use throughout our 
western and southern country. A hundr of the black skin warrior met 
us at the land for the purpos of accompani us on our way. We 
noticed, however, with some surprise, that they were now entir 
without arms; and, upon question too-wit in relat to thi 
circumstance, he mere answer that _matte non we pa pa si_--mean 
that there wa no need of arm where all were brothers. We took thi in 
good part, and proceeded. 

We had pass the spring and rivulet of which I befor spoke, and were 
now enter upon a narrow gorg lead through the chain of soapston 
hill among which the villag wa situated. thi gorg wa veri 
rocki and uneven, so much so that it wa with no littl difficulti we 
scrambl through it on our first visit to klock-klock. the whole length 
of the ravin might have been a mile and a half, or probabl two 
miles. It wound in everi possibl direct through the hill (have 
appar formed, at some remot period, the bed of a torrent), in no 
instanc proceed more than twenti yard without an abrupt turn. the 
side of thi dell would have averaged, I am sure, seventi or eighti 
feet in perpendicular altitud throughout the whole of their extent, and 
in some portion they aros to an astonish height, overshadow the 
pass so complet that but littl of the light of day could penetrate. 
the gener width wa about forti feet, and occasion it diminish 
so as not to allow the passag of more than five or six person abreast. 
In short, there could be no place in the world better adapt for the 
consumm of an ambuscade, and it wa no more than natur that we 
should look care to our arm as we enter upon it. when I now 
think of our egregi folly, the chief subject of astonish seem 
to be, that we should have ever ventured, under ani circumstances, so 
complet into the power of unknown savag as to permit them to march 
both befor and behind us in our progress through thi ravine. yet such 
wa the order we blindli took up, trust foolishli to the forc of 
our party, the unarm condit of too-wit and hi men, the certain 
efficaci of our firearm (whose effect wa yet a secret to the natives), 
and, more than all, to the long-sustain pretens of friendship kept 
up by these infam wretches. five or six of them went on before, as 
if to lead the way, ostentati busi themselv in remov the 
larger stone and rubbish from the path. next came our own party. We 
walk close together, take care onli to prevent separation. behind 
follow the main bodi of the savages, observ unusu order and 
decorum. 

dirk peters, a man name wilson allen, and myself were on the right of 
our companions, examining, as we went along, the singular stratif 
of the precipic which overhung us. A fissur in the soft rock attract 
our attention. It wa about wide enough for one person to enter without 
squeezing, and extend back into the hill some eighteen or twenti feet 
in a straight course, slope afterward to the left. the height of the 
opening, is far as we could see into it from the main gorge, wa perhap 
sixti or seventi feet. there were one or two stunt shrub grow from 
the crevices, bear a speci of filbert which I felt some curios 
to examine, and push in briskli for that purpose, gather five or 
six of the nut at a grasp, and then hastili retreating. As I turned, I 
found that peter and allen had follow me. I desir them to go back, 
as there wa not room for two person to pass, say they should have 
some of my nuts. they accordingli turned, and were scrambl back, 
allen be close to the mouth of the fissure, when I wa suddenli awar 
of a concuss resembl noth I had ever befor experienced, and 
which impress me with a vagu conception, if inde I then thought of 
anything, that the whole foundat of the solid globe were suddenli 
rent asunder, and that the day of univers dissolut wa at hand. 




chapter 21 

AS soon as I could collect my scatter senses, I found myself nearli 
suffocated, and grovel in utter dark among a quantiti of loos 
earth, which wa also fall upon me heavili in everi direction, 
threaten to buri me entirely. horribl alarm at thi idea, I 
struggl to gain my feet, and at last succeeded. I then remain 
motionless for some moments, endeavour to conceiv what had happen 
to me, and where I was. present I heard a deep groan just at my ear, 
and afterward the smother voic of peter call to me for aid in the 
name of god. I scrambl one or two pace forward, when I fell directli 
over the head and shoulder of my companion, who, I soon discovered, 
wa buri in a loos mass of earth as far as hi middle, and struggl 
desper to free himself from the pressure. I tore the dirt from 
around him with all the energi I could command, and at length succeed 
in get him out. 

As soon as we suffici recov from our fright and surpris to be 
capabl of convers rationally, we both came to the conclus 
that the wall of the fissur in which we had ventur had, by some 
convuls of nature, or probabl from their own weight, cave in 
overhead, and that we were consequ lost for ever, be thu 
entomb alive. for a long time we gave up supin to the most intens 
agoni and despair, such as cannot be adequ imagin by those 
who have never been in a similar position. I firmli believ that no 
incid ever occur in the cours of human event is more adapt to 
inspir the suprem of mental and bodili distress than a case like 
our own, of live inhumation. the black of dark which envelop 
the victim, the terrif oppress of lungs, the stifl fume from 
the damp earth, unit with the ghastli consider that we are beyond 
the remotest confin of hope, and that such is the allot portion of 
the dead, to carri into the human heart a degre of appal awe and 
horror not to be tolerated--nev to be conceived. 

At length peter propos that we should endeavour to ascertain 
precis the extent of our calamity, and grope about our prison; it 
be bare possible, he observed, that some open might yet be left 
us for escape. I caught eagerli at thi hope, and, arous myself to 
exertion, attempt to forc my way through the loos earth. hardli had 
I advanc a singl step befor a glimmer of light becam perceptible, 
enough to convinc me that, at all events, we should not immedi 
perish for want of air. We now took some degre of heart, and encourag 
each other to hope for the best. have scrambl over a bank of rubbish 
which imped our farther progress in the direct of the light, we 
found less difficulti in advanc and also experienc some relief from 
the excess oppress of lung which had torment us. present we 
were enabl to obtain a glimps of the object around, and discov 
that we were near the extrem of the straight portion of the fissure, 
where it made a turn to the left. A few struggl more, and we reach 
the bend, when to our inexpress joy, there appear a long seam or 
crack extend upward a vast distance, gener at an angl of about 
forty-f degrees, although sometim much more precipitous. We could 
not see through the whole extent of thi opening; but, as a good deal of 
light came down it, we had littl doubt of find at the top of it (if 
we could by ani mean reach the top) a clear passag into the open air. 

I now call to mind that three of us had enter the fissur from 
the main gorge, and that our companion, allen, wa still missing; we 
determin at onc to retrac our step and look for him. after a long 
search, and much danger from the farther cave in of the earth abov 
us, peter at length cri out to me that he had hold of our companion’ 
foot, and that hi whole bodi wa deepli buri beneath the rubbish 
beyond the possibl of extric him. I soon found that what he 
said wa too true, and that, of course, life had been long extinct. with 
sorrow hearts, therefore, we left the corps to it fate, and again 
made our way to the bend. 

the breadth of the seam wa bare suffici to admit us, and, after 
one or two ineffectu effort at get up, we began onc more to 
despair. I have befor said that the chain of hill through which 
ran the main gorg wa compos of a speci of soft rock resembl 
soapstone. the side of the cleft we were now attempt to ascend were 
of the same material, and so excess slippery, be wet, that we 
could get but littl foothold upon them even in their least precipit 
parts; in some places, where the ascent wa nearli perpendicular, the 
difficulti was, of course, much aggravated; and, indeed, for some time 
we thought insurmountable. We took courage, however, from despair, and 
what, by dint of cut step in the soft stone with our bowi knives, 
and swing at the risk of our lives, to small project point of 
a harder speci of slati rock which now and then protrud from the 
gener mass, we at length reach a natur platform, from which wa 
percept a patch of blue sky, at the extrem of a thickly-wood 
ravine. look back now, with somewhat more leisure, at the passag 
through which we had thu far proceeded, we clearli saw from the 
appear of it sides, that it wa of late formation, and we conclud 
that the concussion, whatev it was, which had so unexpectedli 
overwhelm us, had also, at the same moment, laid open thi path for 
escape. be quit exhaust with exertion, and indeed, so weak that we 
were scarc abl to stand or articulate, peter now propos that we 
should endeavour to bring our companion to the rescu by fire the 
pistol which still remain in our girdles--th musket as well as 
cutlass had been lost among the loos earth at the bottom of the 
chasm. subsequ event prove that, had we fired, we should have 
sore repent it, but luckili a half suspicion of foul play had by 
thi time arisen in my mind, and we forbor to let the savag know of 
our whereabouts. 

after have repos for about an hour, we push on slowli up the 
ravine, and had gone no great way befor we heard a success of 
tremend yells. At length we reach what might be call the surfac 
of the ground; for our path hitherto, sinc leav the platform, had 
lain beneath an archway of high rock and foliage, at a vast distanc 
overhead. with great caution we stole to a narrow opening, through which 
we had a clear sight of the surround country, when the whole dread 
secret of the concuss broke upon us in one moment and at one view. 

the spot from which we look wa not far from the summit of the highest 
peak in the rang of the soapston hills. the gorg in which our parti 
of thirty-two had enter ran within fifti feet to the left of us. but, 
for at least one hundr yards, the channel or bed of thi gorg wa 
entir fill up with the chaotic ruin of more than a million ton of 
earth and stone that had been artifici tumbl within it. the mean 
by which the vast mass had been precipit were not more simpl than 
evident, for sure trace of the murder work were yet remaining. In 
sever spot along the top of the eastern side of the gorg (we were 
now on the western) might be seen stake of wood driven into the earth. 
In these spot the earth had not given way, but throughout the whole 
extent of the face of the precipic from which the mass had fallen, 
it wa clear, from mark left in the soil resembl those made by the 
drill of the rock blaster, that stake similar to those we saw stand 
had been inserted, at not more than a yard apart, for the length of 
perhap three hundr feet, and rang at about ten feet back from the 
edg of the gulf. strong cord of grape vine were attach to the stake 
still remain on the hill, and it wa evid that such cord had also 
been attach to each of the other stakes. I have alreadi spoken of the 
singular stratif of these soapston hills; and the descript 
just given of the narrow and deep fissur through which we effect our 
escap from inhum will afford a further concept of it nature. 
thi wa such that almost everi natur convuls would be sure to 
split the soil into perpendicular layer or ridg run parallel with 
one another, and a veri moder exert of art would be suffici 
for effect the same purpose. Of thi stratif the savag had 
avail themselv to accomplish their treacher ends. there can be no 
doubt that, by the continu line of stakes, a partial ruptur of the 
soil had been brought about probabl to the depth of one or two feet, 
when by mean of a savag pull at the end of each of the cord (these 
cord be attach to the top of the stakes, and extend back from 
the edg of the cliff), a vast leverag power wa obtained, capabl of 
hurl the whole face of the hill, upon a given signal, into the bosom 
of the abyss below. the fate of our poor companion wa no longer a 
matter of uncertainty. We alon had escap from the tempest of that 
overwhelm destruction. We were the onli live white men upon the 
island. 




chapter 22 

our situation, as it now appeared, wa scarc less dread than 
when we had conceiv ourselv entomb forever. We saw befor us no 
prospect but that of be put to death by the savages, or of drag 
out a miser exist in captiv among them. We might, to be sure, 
conceal ourselv for a time from their observ among the fast 
of the hills, and, as a final resort, in the chasm from which we had 
just issued; but we must either perish in the long polar winter through 
cold and famine, or be ultim discov in our effort to obtain 
relief. 

the whole countri around us seem to be swarm with savages, crowd 
of whom, we now perceived, had come over from the island to the 
southward on flat rafts, doubtless with a view of lend their aid 
in the captur and plunder of the jane. the vessel still lay calmli at 
anchor in the bay, those on board be appar quit unconsci of 
ani danger await them. how we long at that moment to be with them! 
either to aid in effect their escape, or to perish with them in 
attempt a defence. We saw no chanc even of warn them of their 
danger without bring immedi destruct upon our own heads, with 
but a remot hope of benefit to them. A pistol fire might suffic to 
appris them that someth wrong had occurred; but the report could not 
possibl inform them that their onli prospect of safeti lay in get 
out of the harbour forthwith--it could not tell them that no principl 
of honour now bound them to remain, that their companion were no longer 
among the living. upon hear the discharg they could not be more 
thoroughli prepar to meet the foe, who were now get readi to 
attack, than they alreadi were, and alway had been. No good, therefore, 
and infinit harm, would result from our firing, and after matur 
deliberation, we forbore. 

our next thought wa to attempt to rush toward the vessel, to seiz one 
of the four cano which lay at the head of the bay, and endeavour to 
forc a passag on board. but the utter imposs of succeed in 
thi desper task soon becam evident. the country, as I said before, 
wa liter swarm with the natives, skulk among the bush and 
recess of the hills, so as not to be observ from the schooner. In 
our immedi vicin especially, and blockad the sole path by which 
we could hope to attain the shore at the proper point were station the 
whole parti of the black skin warriors, with too-wit at their head, and 
appar onli wait for some re-enforc to commenc hi onset 
upon the jane. the canoes, too, which lay at the head of the bay, were 
man with savages, unarmed, it is true, but who undoubtedli had arm 
within reach. We were forced, therefore, howev unwillingly, to remain 
in our place of concealment, mere spectat of the conflict which 
present ensued. 

In about half an hour we saw some sixti or seventi rafts, or flatboats, 
without riggers, fill with savages, and come round the southern 
bight of the harbor. they appear to have no arm except short clubs, 
and stone which lay in the bottom of the rafts. immedi afterward 
anoth detachment, still larger, appear in an opposit direction, and 
with similar weapons. the four canoes, too, were now quickli fill with 
natives, start up from the bush at the head of the bay, and put off 
swiftli to join the other parties. thus, in less time than I have taken 
to tell it, and as if by magic, the jane saw herself surround by an 
immens multitud of desperado evid bent upon captur her at 
all hazards. 

that they would succeed in so do could not be doubt for an instant. 
the six men left in the vessel, howev resolut they might engag 
in her defence, were altogeth unequ to the proper manag of the 
guns, or in ani manner to sustain a contest at such odds. I could 
hardli imagin that they would make resist at all, but in thi wa 
deceived; for present I saw them get spring upon the cable, and bring 
the vessel’ starboard broadsid to bear upon the canoes, which by thi 
time were within pistol range, the raft be nearli a quarter of a 
mile to windward. owe to some caus unknown, but most probabl to 
the agit of our poor friend at see themselv in so hopeless a 
situation, the discharg wa an entir failure. not a cano wa hit or 
a singl savag injured, the shot strike short and ricochet over 
their heads. the onli effect produc upon them wa astonish at 
the unexpect report and smoke, which wa so excess that for some 
moment I almost thought they would abandon their design entirely, and 
return to the shore. and thi they would most like have done had our 
men follow up their broadsid by a discharg of small arms, in which, 
as the cano were now so near at hand, they could not have fail in 
do some execution, sufficient, at least, to deter thi parti from a 
farther advance, until they could have given the raft also a broadside. 
but, in place of this, they left the cano parti to recov from their 
panic, and, by look about them, to see that no injuri had been 
sustained, while they flew to the larboard to get readi for the rafts. 

the discharg to larboard produc the most terribl effect. the star 
and double-head shot of the larg gun cut seven or eight of the raft 
complet asunder, and killed, perhaps, thirti or forti of the savag 
outright, while a hundr of them, at least, were thrown into the water, 
the most of them dread wounded. the remainder, frighten out of 
their senses, commenc at onc a precipit retreat, not even wait 
to pick up their maim companions, who were swim about in everi 
direction, scream and yell for aid. thi great success, however, 
came too late for the salvat of our devot people. the cano parti 
were alreadi on board the schooner to the number of more than a hundr 
and fifty, the most of them have succeed in scrambl up the chain 
and over the boarding-net even befor the match had been appli 
to the larboard guns. noth now could withstand their brute rage. 
our men were born down at once, overwhelmed, trodden under foot, and 
absolut torn to piec in an instant. 

see this, the savag on the raft got the better of their fears, 
and came up in shoal to the plunder. In five minut the jane wa a 
pitiabl scene inde of havoc and tumultu outrage. the deck were 
split open and rip up; the cordage, sails, and everyth movabl on 
deck demolish as if by magic, while, by dint of push at the stern, 
tow with the canoes, and haul at the sides, as they swam in 
thousand around the vessel, the wretch final forc her on shore 
(the cabl have been slipped), and deliv her over to the good 
offic of too-wit, who, dure the whole of the engagement, 
had maintained, like a skil general, hi post of secur and 
reconnaiss among the hills, but, now that the victori wa complet 
to hi satisfaction, condescend to scamper down with hi warrior of 
the black skin, and becom a partak in the spoils. 

too-wit’ descent left us at liberti to quit our hide place and 
reconnoitr the hill in the vicin of the chasm. At about fifti yard 
from the mouth of it we saw a small spring of water, at which we slake 
the burn thirst that now consum us. not far from the spring we 
discov sever of the filbert-bush which I mention before. upon 
tast the nut we found them palatable, and veri nearli resembl 
in flavour the common english filbert. We collect our hat full 
immediately, deposit them within the ravine, and return for more. 
while we were busili employ in gather these, a rustl in the 
bush alarm us, and we were upon the point of steal back to our 
covert, when a larg black bird of the bittern speci strugglingli and 
slowli aros abov the shrubs. I wa so much startl that I could do 
nothing, but peter had suffici presenc of mind to run up to it 
befor it could make it escape, and seiz it by the neck. it struggl 
and scream were tremendous, and we had thought of let it go, lest 
the nois should alarm some of the savag who might be still lurk in 
the neighbourhood. A stab with a bowi knife, however, at length brought 
it to the ground, and we drag it into the ravine, congratul 
ourselv that, at all events, we had thu obtain a suppli of food 
enough to last us for a week. 

We now went out again to look about us, and ventur a consider 
distanc down the southern decliv of the hill, but met with noth 
els which could serv us for food. We therefor collect a quantiti of 
dri wood and returned, see one or two larg parti of the nativ on 
their way to the village, laden with the plunder of the vessel, and who, 
we were apprehensive, might discov us in pass beneath the hill. 

our next care wa to render our place of conceal as secur as 
possible, and with thi object, we arrang some brushwood over the 
apertur which I have befor spoken of as the one through which we saw 
the patch of blue sky, on reach the platform from the interior of the 
chasm. We left onli a veri small open just wide enough to admit of 
our see the bay, without the risk of be discov from below. 
have done this, we congratul ourselv upon the secur of the 
position; for we were now complet exclud from observation, as long 
as we chose to remain within the ravin itself, and not ventur out upon 
the hill, We could perceiv no trace of the savag have ever been 
within thi hollow; but, indeed, when we came to reflect upon the 
probabl that the fissur through which we attain it had been onli 
just now creat by the fall of the cliff opposite, and that no other 
way of attain it could be perceived, we were not so much rejoic 
at the thought of be secur from molest as fear lest there 
should be absolut no mean left us for descent. We resolv to 
explor the summit of the hill thoroughly, when a good opportun 
should offer. In the meantim we watch the motion of the savag 
through our loophole. 

they had alreadi made a complet wreck of the vessel, and were now 
prepar to set her on fire. In a littl while we saw the smoke 
ascend in huge volum from her main hatchway, and, shortli 
afterward, a dens mass of flame burst up from the forecastle. the 
rigging, mast and what remain of the sail caught immediately, and 
the fire spread rapidli along the decks. still a great mani of the 
savag retain their station about her, hammer with larg stones, 
axes, and cannon ball at the bolt and other iron and copper work. On 
the beach, and in cano and rafts, there were not less, altogether, 
in the immedi vicin of the schooner, than ten thousand natives, 
besid the shoal of them who, laden with booty, were make their 
way inland and over to the neighbour islands. We now anticip a 
catastrophe, and were not disappointed. first of all there came a smart 
shock (which we felt as distinctli where we were as if we had been 
slightli galvanized), but unattend with ani visibl sign of an 
explosion. the savag were evid startled, and paus for an 
instant from their labour and yellings. they were upon the point of 
recommencing, when suddenli a mass of smoke puf up from the decks, 
resembl a black and heavi thundercloud--then, as if from it bowels, 
aros a tall stream of vivid fire to the height, apparently, of a 
quarter of a mile--then there came a sudden circular expans of the 
flame--then the whole atmospher wa magic crowded, in a singl 
instant, with a wild chao of wood, and metal, and human limbs--and, 
lastly, came the concuss in it fullest fury, which hurl us 
impetu from our feet, while the hill echo and re-echo the 
tumult, and a dens shower of the minutest fragment of the ruin 
tumbl headlong in everi direct around us. 

the havoc among the savag far exceed our utmost expectation, and 
they had now, indeed, reap the full and perfect fruit of their 
treachery. perhap a thousand perish by the explosion, while at least 
an equal number were desper mangled. the whole surfac of the bay 
wa liter strewn with the struggl and drown wretches, and 
on shore matter were even worse. they seem utterli appal by the 
sudden and complet of their discomfiture, and made no effort 
at assist one another. At length we observ a total chang in their 
demeanour. from absolut stupor, they appear to be, all at once, 
arous to the highest pitch of excitement, and rush wildli about, 
go to and from a certain point on the beach, with the strangest 
express of mingl horror, rage, and intens curios depict 
on their countenances, and shouting, at the top of their voices, 
“tekeli-li! tekeli-li!” 

present we saw a larg bodi go off into the hills, whenc they 
return in a short time, carri stake of wood. these they brought to 
the station where the crowd wa the thickest, which now separ so as 
to afford us a view of the object of all thi excitement. We perceiv 
someth white lie upon the ground, but could not immedi make 
out what it was. At length we saw that it wa the carcass of the strang 
anim with the scarlet teeth and claw which the schooner had pick 
up at sea on the eighteenth of january. captain guy had had the bodi 
preserv for the purpos of stuf the skin and take it to england. 
I rememb he had given some direct about it just befor our make 
the island, and it had been brought into the cabin and stow away in 
one of the lockers. It had now been thrown on shore by the explosion; 
but whi it had occas so much concern among the savag wa more 
than we could comprehend. although they crowd around the carcass at 
a littl distance, none of them seem will to approach it closely. 
by-and-bi the men with the stake drove them in a circl around it, and 
no sooner wa thi arrang completed, than the whole of the vast 
assemblag rush into the interior of the island, with loud scream of 
“tekeli-li! tekeli-li!” 




chapter 23 

dure the six or seven day immedi follow we remain in our 
hiding-plac upon the hill, go out onli occasionally, and then with 
the greatest precaution, for water and filberts. We had made a kind of 
penthous on the platform, furnish it with a bed of dri leaves, 
and place in it three larg flat stones, which serv us for both 
fireplac and table. We kindl a fire without difficulti by rub two 
piec of dri wood together, the one soft, the other hard. the bird we 
had taken in such good season prove excel eating, although somewhat 
tough. It wa not an ocean fowl, but a speci of bittern, with jet 
black and grizzli plumage, and diminut wing in proport to it 
bulk. We afterward saw three of the same kind in the vicin of the 
ravine, appar seek for the one we had captured; but, as they 
never alighted, we had no opportun of catch them. 

As long as thi fowl last we suffer noth from our situation, but 
it wa now entir consumed, and it becam absolut necessari that 
we should look out for provision. the filbert would not satisfi the 
crave of hunger, afflict us, too, with sever gripe of the 
bowels, and, if freeli indulg in, with violent headache. We had seen 
sever larg tortois near the seashor to the eastward of the hill, 
and perceiv they might be easili taken, if we could get at them 
without the observ of the natives. It wa resolved, therefore, to 
make an attempt at descending. 

We commenc by go down the southern declivity, which seem to offer 
the fewest difficulties, but had not proceed a hundr yard befor 
(a we had anticip from appear on the hilltop) our progress wa 
entir arrest by a branch of the gorg in which our companion had 
perished. We now pass along the edg of thi for about a quarter of a 
mile, when we were again stop by a precipic of immens depth, and, 
not be abl to make our way along the brink of it, we were forc to 
retrac our step by the main ravine. 

We now push over to the eastward, but with precis similar fortune. 
after an hour’ scramble, at the risk of break our necks, we 
discov that we had mere descend into a vast pit of black 
granite, with fine dust at the bottom, and whenc the onli egress wa by 
the rug path in which we had come down. toil again up thi path, 
we now tri the northern edg of the hill. here we were oblig to 
use the greatest possibl caution in our maneuvers, as the least 
indiscret would expos us to the full view of the savag in the 
village. We crawl along, therefore, on our hand and knees, and, 
occasionally, were even forc to throw ourselv at full length, 
drag our bodi along by mean of the shrubbery. In thi care 
manner we had proceed but a littl way, when we arriv at a chasm 
far deeper than ani we had yet seen, and lead directli into the main 
gorge. thu our fear were fulli confirmed, and we found ourselv cut 
off entir from access to the world below. thoroughli exhaust by 
our exertions, we made the best of our way back to the platform, and 
throw ourselv upon the bed of leaves, slept sweetli and soundli for 
some hours. 

for sever day after thi fruitless search we were occupi in 
explor everi part of the summit of the hill, in order to inform 
ourselv of it actual resources. We found that it would afford us no 
food, with the except of the unwholesom filberts, and a rank speci 
of scurvi grass, which grew in a littl patch of not more than four rod 
square, and would be soon exhausted. On the fifteenth of february, as 
near as I can remember, there wa not a blade of thi left, and the 
nut were grow scarce; our situation, therefore, could hardli be more 
lamentable. {*5} On the sixteenth we again went round the wall of our 
prison, in hope of find some avenu of escape; but to no purpose. 
We also descend the chasm in which we had been overwhelmed, with the 
faint expect of discovering, through thi channel, some open to 
the main ravine. here, too, we were disappointed, although we found and 
brought up with us a musket. 

On the seventeenth we set out with the determin of examin more 
thoroughli the chasm of black granit into which we had made our way in 
the first search. We rememb that one of the fissur in the side 
of thi pit had been but partial look into, and we were anxiou 
to explor it, although with no expect of discov here ani 
opening. 

We found no great difficulti in reach the bottom of the hollow as 
before, and were now suffici calm to survey it with some attention. 
It was, indeed, one of the most singular-look place imaginable, and 
we could scarc bring ourselv to believ it altogeth the work of 
nature. the pit, from it eastern to it western extremity, wa about 
five hundr yard in length, when all it wind were threaded; the 
distanc from east to west in a straight line not be more (I should 
suppose, have no mean of accur examination) than forti or fifti 
yards. upon first descend into the chasm, that is to say, for a 
hundr feet downward from the summit of the hill, the side of the 
abyss bore littl resembl to each other, and, apparently, had at 
no time been connected, the one surfac be of the soapstone, and the 
other of marl, granul with some metal matter. the averag breadth 
or interv between the two cliff wa probabl here sixti feet, but 
there seem to be no regular of formation. pass down, however, 
beyond the limit spoken of, the interv rapidli contracted, and the 
side began to run parallel, although, for some distanc farther, 
they were still dissimilar in their materi and form of surface. 
upon arriv within fifti feet of the bottom, a perfect regular 
commenced. the side were now entir uniform in substance, in colour, 
and in later direction, the materi be a veri black and shine 
granite, and the distanc between the two sides, at all point face 
each other, exactli twenti yards. the precis format of the chasm 
will be best understood by mean of a delin taken upon the spot; 
for I had luckili with me a pocketbook and pencil, which I preserv 
with great care through a long seri of subsequ adventure, and to 
which I am indebt for memoranda of mani subject which would otherwis 
have been crowd from my remembrance. 

thi figur [no figur in text] give the gener outlin of the 
chasm, without the minor caviti in the sides, of which there were 
several, each caviti have a correspond protuber opposite. the 
bottom of the gulf wa cover to the depth of three or four inch with 
a powder almost impalpable, beneath which we found a continu of the 
black granite. To the right, at the lower extremity, will be notic the 
appear of a small opening; thi is the fissur allud to above, and 
to examin which more minut than befor wa the object of our second 
visit. We now push into it with vigor, cut away a quantiti of 
brambl which imped us, and remov a vast heap of sharp flint 
somewhat resembl arrowhead in shape. We were encourag to 
persevere, however, by perceiv some littl light proceed from the 
farther end. We at length squeez our way for about thirti feet, and 
found that the apertur wa a low and regularli form arch, have a 
bottom of the same impalp powder as that in the main chasm. A strong 
light now broke upon us, and, turn a short bend, we found ourselv 
in anoth lofti chamber, similar to the one we had left in everi 
respect but longitudin form. it gener figur is here given. 

the total length of thi chasm, commenc at the open _a_ and 
proceed round the curv _b_ to the extrem _d_, is five hundr and 
fifti yards. At _c_ we discov a small apertur similar to the one 
through which we had issu from the other chasm, and thi wa choke up 
in the same manner with brambl and a quantiti of the white arrowhead 
flints. We forc our way through it, find it about forti feet long, 
and emerg into a third chasm. this, too, wa precis like the 
first, except in it longitudin shape, which wa thus. 

We found the entir length of the third chasm three hundr and 
twenti yards. At the point _a_ wa an open about six feet wide, and 
extend fifteen feet into the rock, where it termin in a bed of 
marl, there be no other chasm beyond, as we had expected. We were 
about leav thi fissure, into which veri littl light wa admitted, 
when peter call my attent to a rang of singular-look 
indentur in the surfac of the marl form the termin of the 
_cul-de-sac_. with a veri slight exert of the imagination, the left, 
or most northern of these indentur might have been taken for the 
intentional, although rude, represent of a human figur stand 
erect, with outstretch arm. the rest of them bore also some littl 
resembl to alphabet characters, and peter wa willing, at 
all events, to adopt the idl opinion that they were realli such. I 
convinc him of hi error, finally, by direct hi attent to the 
floor of the fissure, where, among the powder, we pick up, piec by 
piece, sever larg flake of the marl, which had evid been broken 
off by some convuls from the surfac where the indentur were found, 
and which had project point exactli fit the indentures; thu 
prove them to have been the work of nature. 

after satisfi ourselv that these singular cavern afford us no 
mean of escap from our prison, we made our way back, deject and 
dispirited, to the summit of the hill. noth worth mention occur 
dure the next twenty-four hours, except that, in examin the ground 
to the eastward of the third chasm, we found two triangular hole of 
great depth, and also with black granit sides. into these hole we 
did not think it worth while to attempt descending, as they had the 
appear of mere natur wells, without outlet. they were each about 
twenti yard in circumference, and their shape, as well as rel 
posit in regard to the third chasm, is shown in figur 5. {image} 




chapter 24 

ON the twentieth of the month, find it altogeth imposs to 
subsist ani longer upon the filberts, the use of which occas us the 
most excruci torment, we resolv to make a desper attempt at 
descend the southern decliv of the hill. the face of the 
precipic wa here of the softest speci of soapstone, although nearli 
perpendicular throughout it whole extent (a depth of a hundr and 
fifti feet at the least), and in mani place even overarching. after 
a long search we discov a narrow ledg about twenti feet below 
the brink of the gulf; upon thi peter contriv to leap, with what 
assist I could render him by mean of our pocket-handkerchief tie 
together. with somewhat more difficulti I also got down; and we then saw 
the possibl of descend the whole way by the process in which we 
had clamber up from the chasm when we had been buri by the fall of 
the hill--that is, by cut step in the face of the soapston with 
our knives. the extrem hazard of the attempt can scarc be conceived; 
but, as there wa no other resource, we determin to undertak it. 

upon the ledg where we stood there grew some filbert-bushes; and to one 
of these we made fast an end of our rope of handkerchiefs. the other end 
be tie round peters’ waist, I lower him down over the edg of the 
precipic until the handkerchief were stretch tight. He now proceed 
to dig a deep hole in the soapston (a far in as eight or ten inches), 
slope away the rock abov to the height of a foot, or thereabout, 
so as to allow of hi driving, with the butt of a pistol, a toler 
strong peg into the level surface. I then drew him up for about four 
feet, when he made a hole similar to the one below, drive in a peg as 
before, and have thu a resting-plac for both feet and hands. I now 
unfasten the handkerchief from the bush, throw him the end, which 
he tie to the peg in the uppermost hole, let himself down gentli 
to a station about three feet lower than he had yet been that is, to the 
full extent of the handkerchiefs. here he dug anoth hole, and drove 
anoth peg. He then drew himself up, so as to rest hi feet in the hole 
just cut, take hold with hi hand upon the peg in the one above. It 
wa now necessari to unti the handkerchief from the topmost peg, with 
the view of fasten them to the second; and here he found that an 
error had been commit in cut the hole at so great a distanc 
apart. however, after one or two unsuccess and danger attempt at 
reach the knot (have to hold on with hi left hand while he labor 
to undo the fasten with hi right), he at length cut the string, 
leav six inch of it affix to the peg. ty the handkerchief 
now to the second peg, he descend to a station below the third, take 
care not to go too far down. By these mean (mean which I should never 
have conceiv of myself, and for which we were indebt altogeth to 
peters’ ingenu and resolution) my companion final succeeded, with 
the occasion aid of project in the cliff, in reach the bottom 
without accident. 

It wa some time befor I could summon suffici resolut to follow 
him; but I did at length attempt it. peter had taken off hi shirt 
befor descending, and this, with my own, form the rope necessari 
for the adventure. after throw down the musket found in the chasm, I 
fasten thi rope to the bushes, and let myself down rapidly, striving, 
by the vigor of my movements, to banish the trepid which I could 
overcom in no other manner. thi answer suffici well for the 
first four or five steps; but present I found my imagin grow 
terribl excit by thought of the vast depth yet to be descended, and 
the precari natur of the peg and soapston hole which were my onli 
support. It wa in vain I endeavor to banish these reflections, and to 
keep my eye steadili bent upon the flat surfac of the cliff befor me. 
the more earnestli I struggl _not to think, _the more intens vivid 
becam my conceptions, and the more horribl distinct. At length arriv 
that crisi of fancy, so fear in all similar cases, the crisi in 
which we began to anticip the feel with which we _shall _fall--to 
pictur to ourselv the sickness, and dizziness, and the last struggle, 
and the half swoon, and the final bitter of the rush and headlong 
descent. and now I found these fanci creat their own realities, and 
all imagin horror crowd upon me in fact. I felt my knee strike 
violent together, while my finger were gradual but certainli 
relax their grasp. there wa a ring in my ears, and I said, “thi 
is my knell of death!” and now I wa consum with the irrepress 
desir of look below. I could not, I would not, confin my glanc to 
the cliff; and, with a wild, indefin emotion, half of horror, half 
of a reliev oppression, I threw my vision far down into the abyss. for 
one moment my finger clutch convuls upon their hold, while, with 
the movement, the faintest possibl idea of ultim escap wandered, 
like a shadow, through my mind--in the next my whole soul wa pervad 
with a long to fall; a desire, a yearning, a passion utterli 
uncontrollable. I let go at onc my grasp upon the peg, and, turn 
half round from the precipice, remain totter for an instant 
against it nake face. but now there came a spin of the brain; 
a shrill-sound and phantom voic scream within my ears; a dusky, 
fiendish, and filmi figur stood immedi beneath me; and, sighing, I 
sunk down with a burst heart, and plung within it arms. 

I had swooned, and peter had caught me as I fell. He had observ my 
proceed from hi station at the bottom of the cliff; and perceiv 
my immin danger, had endeavor to inspir me with courag by everi 
suggest he could devise; although my confus of mind had been so 
great as to prevent my hear what he said, or be consciou that he 
had even spoken to me at all. At length, see me totter, he hasten 
to ascend to my rescue, and arriv just in time for my preservation. 
had I fallen with my full weight, the rope of linen would inevit 
have snapped, and I should have been precipit into the abyss; as 
it was, he contriv to let me down gently, so as to remain suspend 
without danger until anim returned. thi wa in about fifteen 
minutes. On recovery, my trepid had entir vanished; I felt a new 
being, and, with some littl further aid from my companion, reach the 
bottom also in safety. 

We now found ourselv not far from the ravin which had prove the 
tomb of our friends, and to the southward of the spot where the hill had 
fallen. the place wa one of singular wildness, and it aspect brought 
to my mind the descript given by travel of those dreari region 
mark the site of degrad babylon. not to speak of the ruin of the 
disrupt cliff, which form a chaotic barrier in the vista to the 
northward, the surfac of the ground in everi other direct wa strewn 
with huge tumuli, appar the wreck of some gigant structur of 
art; although, in detail, no semblanc of art could be detected. 
scoria were abundant, and larg shapeless block of the black granite, 
intermingl with other of marl, {*6} and both granul with metal. 
Of veget there were no trace whatsoev throughout the whole of 
the desol area within sight. sever immens scorpion were seen, 
and variou reptil not elsewher to be found in the high latitudes. As 
food wa our most immedi object, we resolv to make our way to the 
seacoast, distant not more than half a mile, with a view of catch 
turtle, sever of which we had observ from our place of conceal 
on the hill. We had proceed some hundr yards, thread our rout 
cautious between the huge rock and tumuli, when, upon turn a 
corner, five savag sprung upon us from a small cavern, fell peter 
to the ground with a blow from a club. As he fell the whole parti rush 
upon him to secur their victim, leav me time to recov from my 
astonishment. I still had the musket, but the barrel had receiv so 
much injuri in be thrown from the precipic that I cast it asid 
as useless, prefer to trust my pistols, which had been care 
preserv in order. with these I advanc upon the assailants, fire 
one after the other in quick succession. two savag fell, and one, 
who wa in the act of thrust a spear into peters, sprung to hi feet 
without accomplish hi purpose. My companion be thu released, 
we had no further difficulty. He had hi pistol also, but prudent 
declin use them, confid in hi great person strength, which far 
exceed that of ani person I have ever known. seiz a club from one 
of the savag who had fallen, he dash out the brain of the three who 
remained, kill each instantan with a singl blow of the weapon, 
and leav us complet master of the field. 

So rapidli had these event passed, that we could scarc believ 
in their reality, and were stand over the bodi of the dead in a 
speci of stupid contemplation, when we were brought to recollect by 
the sound of shout in the distance. It wa clear that the savag had 
been alarm by the firing, and that we had littl chanc of avoid 
discovery. To regain the cliff, it would be necessari to proceed in the 
direct of the shouts, and even should we succeed in arriv at 
it base, we should never be abl to ascend it without be seen. our 
situat wa one of the greatest peril, and we were hesit in which 
path to commenc a flight, when one of the savag _whom _I had shot, 
and suppos dead, sprang briskli to hi feet, and attempt to make hi 
escape. We overtook _him, _however, befor he had advanc mani paces, 
and were about to put him to death, when peter suggest that we might 
deriv some benefit from forc him to accompani us in our attempt to 
escape. We therefor drag him with us, make him understand that 
we would shoot him if he offer resistance. In a few minut he wa 
perfectli submissive, and ran by our side as we push in among the 
rocks, make for the seashore. 

So far, the irregular of the ground we had been travers hid 
the sea, except at intervals, from our sight, and, when we first had it 
fairli in view, it wa perhap two hundr yard distant. As we emerg 
into the open beach we saw, to our great dismay, an immens crowd of the 
nativ pour from the village, and from all visibl quarter of 
the island, make toward us with gesticul of extrem fury, and 
howl like wild beasts. We were upon the point of turn upon our 
steps, and tri to secur a retreat among the fast of the 
rougher ground, when I discov the bow of two cano project from 
behind a larg rock which ran out into the water. toward these we 
now ran with all speed, and, reach them, found them unguarded, and 
without ani other freight than three of the larg gallipago turtl 
and the usual suppli of paddl for sixti rowers. We instantli took 
possess of one of them, and, forc our captiv on board, push out 
to sea with all the strength we could command. 

We had not made, however, more than fifti yard from the shore befor we 
becam suffici calm to perceiv the great oversight of which we had 
been guilti in leav the other cano in the power of the savages, 
who, by thi time, were not more than twice as far from the beach as 
ourselves, and were rapidli advanc to the pursuit. No time wa now to 
be lost. our hope was, at best, a forlorn one, but we had none other. It 
wa veri doubt whether, with the utmost exertion, we could get back 
in time to anticip them in take possess of the canoe; but 
yet there wa a chanc that we could. We might save ourselv if we 
succeeded, while not to make the attempt wa to resign ourselv to 
inevit butchery. 

the cano wa model with the bow and stern alike, and, in place of 
turn it around, we mere chang our posit in paddling. As soon 
as the savag perceiv thi they redoubl their yells, as well as 
their speed, and approach with inconceiv rapidity. We pulled, 
however, with all the energi of desperation, and arriv at the 
contest point befor more than one of the nativ had attain it. 
thi man paid dearli for hi superior agility, peter shoot him 
through the head with a pistol as he approach the shore. the foremost 
among the rest of hi parti were probabl some twenti or thirti pace 
distant as we seiz upon the canoe. We at first endeavor to pull her 
into the deep water, beyond the reach of the savages, but, find her 
too firmli aground, and there be no time to spare, peters, with one 
or two heavi stroke from the butt of the musket, succeed in dash 
out a larg portion of the bow and of one side. We then push off. 
two of the nativ by thi time had got hold of our boat, obstin 
refus to let go, until we were forc to despatch them with our 
knives. We were now clear off, and make great way out to sea. the main 
bodi of the savages, upon reach the broken canoe, set up the most 
tremend yell of rage and disappoint conceivable. In truth, from 
everyth I could see of these wretches, they appear to be the most 
wicked, hypocritical, vindictive, bloodthirsty, and altogeth fiendish 
race of men upon the face of the globe. It is clear we should have had 
no merci had we fallen into their hands. they made a mad attempt at 
follow us in the fractur canoe, but, find it useless, again 
vent their rage in a seri of hideou vociferations, and rush up 
into the hills. 

We were thu reliev from immedi danger, but our situat wa still 
suffici gloomy. We knew that four cano of the kind we had were 
at one time in the possess of the savages, and were not awar of the 
fact (afterward ascertain from our captive) that two of these had 
been blown to piec in the explos of the _jane guy. _we calculated, 
therefore, upon be yet pursued, as soon as our enemi could get 
round to the bay (distant about three miles) where the boat were 
usual laid up. fear this, we made everi exert to leav the 
island behind us, and went rapidli through the water, forc the 
prison to take a paddle. In about half an hour, when we had gain 
probabl five or six mile to the southward, a larg fleet of the 
flat-bottom cano or raft were seen to emerg from the bay evid 
with the design of pursuit. present they put back, despair to 
overtak us. 




chapter 25 

WE now found ourselv in the wide and desol antarct ocean, in a 
latitud exceed eighty-four degrees, in a frail canoe, and with no 
provis but the three turtles. the long polar winter, too, could not 
be consid as far distant, and it becam necessari that we should 
deliber well upon the cours to be pursued. there were six or seven 
island in sight belong to the same group, and distant from each 
other about five or six leagues; but upon neither of these had we ani 
intent to venture. In come from the northward in the _jane guy_ we 
had been gradual leav behind us the severest region of ice--this, 
howev littl it mayb in accord with the gener receiv 
notion respect the antarctic, wa a fact--experi would not 
permit us to deny. To attempt, therefore, get back would be 
folly--especi at so late a period of the season. onli one cours 
seem to be left open for hope. We resolv to steer boldli to the 
southward, where there wa at least a probabl of discov other 
lands, and more than a probabl of find a still milder climate. 

So far we had found the antarctic, like the arctic ocean, peculiarli 
free from violent storm or immoder rough water; but our cano was, 
at best, of frail structure, although large, and we set busili to 
work with a view of render her as safe as the limit mean in our 
possess would admit. the bodi of the boat wa of no better materi 
than bark--th bark of a tree unknown. the rib were of a tough osier, 
well adapt to the purpos for which it wa used. We had fifti feet 
room from stem to stern, from four to six in breadth, and in depth 
throughout four feet and a half-th boat thu differ vastli in shape 
from those of ani other inhabit of the southern ocean with whom 
civil nation are acquainted. We never did believ them the 
workmanship of the ignor island who own them; and some day 
after thi period discovered, by question our captive, that they were 
in fact made by the nativ of a group to the southwest of the countri 
where we found them, have fallen accident into the hand of our 
barbarians. what we could do for the secur of our boat wa veri 
littl indeed. sever wide rent were discov near both ends, and 
these we contriv to patch up with piec of woollen jacket. with the 
help of the superflu paddles, of which there were a great many, we 
erect a kind of framework about the bow, so as to break the forc of 
ani sea which might threaten to fill us in that quarter. We also set 
up two paddle-blad for masts, place them opposit each other, one 
by each gunwale, thu save the necess of a yard. To these mast we 
attach a sail made of our shirts-do thi with some difficulty, as 
here we could get no assist from our prison whatever, although he 
had been will enough to labor in all the other operations. the sight 
of the linen seem to affect him in a veri singular manner. He could 
not be prevail upon to touch it or go near it, shudder when we 
attempt to forc him, and shriek out, _“tekeli-li!”_ 

have complet our arrang in regard to the secur of the 
canoe, we now set sail to the south-southeast for the present, with the 
view of weather the most southerli of the group in sight. thi be 
done, we turn the bow full to the southward. the weather could by no 
mean be consid disagreeable. We had a prevail and veri gentl 
wind from the northward, a smooth sea, and continu daylight. No ice 
whatev wa to be seen; _nor did I ever see one particl of thi after 
leav the parallel of bennet’ islet. _indeed, the temperatur of the 
water wa here far too warm for it exist in ani quantity. have 
kill the largest of our tortoises, and obtain from him not onli food 
but a copiou suppli of water, we continu on our course, without ani 
incid of moment, for perhap seven or eight days, dure which period 
we must have proceed a vast distanc to the southward, as the wind 
blew constantli with us, and a veri strong current set continu in 
the direct we were pursuing. 

_march 1st_. {*7}-mani unusu phenomena now--ind that we were 
enter upon a region of novelti and wonder. A high rang of light 
gray vapor appear constantli in the southern horizon, flare up 
occasion in lofti streaks, now dart from east to west, now from 
west to east, and again present a level and uniform summit--in short, 
have all the wild variat of the aurora borealis. the averag 
height of thi vapor, as appar from our station, wa about 
twenty-f degrees. the temperatur of the sea seem to be increas 
momentarily, and there wa a veri percept alter in it color. 

_march 2d._-to-day by repeat question of our captive, we came 
to the knowledg of mani particular in regard to the island of the 
massacre, it inhabitants, and customs--but with these how can I now 
detain the reader? I may say, however, that we learn there were eight 
island in the group--that they were govern by a common king, name 
_tsalemon _or _psalemoun, _who resid in one of the smallest of the 
islands; that the black skin form the dress of the warrior came 
from an anim of huge size to be found onli in a valley near the court 
of the king--that the inhabit of the group fabric no other boat 
than the flat-bottom rafts; the four cano be all of the kind in 
their possession, and, these have been obtained, by mere accident, 
from some larg island in the southwest--that hi own name wa nu-nu--that 
he had no knowledg of bennet’ islet--and that the appel of the 
island he had left wa tsalal. the commenc of the word _tsalemon 
_and tsalal wa given with a prolong hiss sound, which we found 
it imposs to imitate, even after repeat endeavors, and which wa 
precis the same with the note of the black bittern we had eaten up on 
the summit of the hill. 

_march 3d._-the heat of the water wa now truli remarkable, and in color 
wa undergo a rapid change, be no longer transparent, but of a 
milki consist and hue. In our immedi vicin it wa usual 
smooth, never so rough as to endang the canoe--but we were frequent 
surpris at perceiving, to our right and left, at differ distances, 
sudden and extens agit of the surface; these, we at length 
noticed, were alway preced by wild flicker in the region of vapor 
to the southward. 

_march 4th._-to-day, with the view of widen our sail, the breez from 
the northward die away perceptibly, I took from my coat-pocket a white 
handkerchief. nu-nu wa seat at my elbow, and the linen accident 
flare in hi face, he becam violent affect with convulsions. 
these were succeed by drowsi and stupor, and low murmur of 
_“‘tekeli-li! tekeli-li!”_ 

_march _5th.-the wind had entir ceased, but it wa evid that 
we were still hurri on to the southward, under the influenc of a 
power current. and now,--indeed, it would seem reason that we 
should experi some alarm at the turn event were taking--but we 
felt none. the counten of peter indic noth of thi nature, 
although it wore at time an express I could not fathom. the polar 
winter appear to be come on--but come without it terrors. I felt 
a numb of bodi and mind--a dreami of sensat but thi wa all. 

_march 6th._-the gray vapor had now arisen mani more degre abov the 
horizon, and wa gradual lose it gray of tint. the heat of the 
water wa extreme, even unpleas to the touch, and it milki hue wa 
more evid than ever. today a violent agit of the water occur 
veri close to the canoe. It wa attended, as usual, with a wild flare 
up of the vapor at it summit, and a momentari divis at it base. A 
fine white powder, resembl ashes--but certainli not such--fel over the 
cano and over a larg surfac of the water, as the flicker die away 
among the vapor and the commot subsid in the sea. nu-nu now threw 
himself on hi face in the bottom of the boat, and no persuas could 
induc him to arise. 

_march 7th._-thi day we question nu-nu concern the motiv of 
hi countrymen in destroy our companions; but he appear to be too 
utterli overcom by terror to afford us ani ration reply. He still 
obstin lay in the bottom of the boat; and, upon reiter the 
question as to the motive, made use onli of idiot gesticulations, 
such as rais with hi forefing the upper lip, and display the 
teeth which lay beneath it. these were black. We had never befor seen 
the teeth of an inhabit of tsalal. 

_march 8th._-to-day there float by us one of the white anim whose 
appear upon the beach at tsalal had occas so wild a commot 
among the savages. I would have pick it up, but there came over me 
a sudden listlessness, and I forbore. the heat of the water still 
increased, and the hand could no longer be endur within it. peter 
spoke little, and I knew not what to think of hi apathy. nu-nu 
breathed, and no more. 

_march 9th._-the whole ashi materi fell now continu around us, 
and in vast quantities. the rang of vapor to the southward had arisen 
prodigi in the horizon, and began to assum more distinct 
of form. I can liken it to noth but a limitless cataract, roll 
silent into the sea from some immens and far-dist rampart in 
the heaven. the gigant curtain rang along the whole extent of the 
southern horizon. It emit no sound. 

_march 21st._-a sullen dark now hover abov us--but from out the 
milki depth of the ocean a lumin glare arose, and stole up along 
the bulwark of the boat. We were nearli overwhelm by the white ashi 
shower which settl upon us and upon the canoe, but melt into the 
water as it fell. the summit of the cataract wa utterli lost in the 
dim and the distance. yet we were evid approach it with a 
hideou velocity. At interv there were visibl in it wide, yawning, 
but momentari rents, and from out these rents, within which wa a chao 
of flit and indistinct images, there came rush and mighty, but 
soundless winds, tear up the enkindl ocean in their course. 

_march 22d._-the dark had materi increased, reliev onli by the 
glare of the water thrown back from the white curtain befor us. mani 
gigant and pallidli white bird flew continu now from beyond the 
veil, and their scream wa the etern _tekeli-li! _a they retreat 
from our vision. hereupon nu-nu stir in the bottom of the boat; but 
upon touch him we found hi spirit departed. and now we rush into 
the embrac of the cataract, where a chasm threw itself open to receiv 
us. but there aros in our pathway a shroud human figure, veri far 
larger in it proport than ani dweller among men. and the hue of the 
skin of the figur wa of the perfect white of the snow. 

note 

the circumst connect with the late sudden and distress death 
of mr. pym are alreadi well known to the public through the medium of 
the daili press. It is fear that the few remain chapter which were 
to have complet hi narrative, and which were retain by him, 
while the abov were in type, for the purpos of revision, have been 
irrecover lost through the accid by which he perish himself. 
this, however, may prove not to be the case, and the papers, if 
ultim found, will be given to the public. 

No mean have been left untri to remedi the deficiency. the gentleman 
whose name is mention in the preface, and who, from the statement 
there made, might be suppos abl to fill the vacuum, ha declin 
the task--this, for satisfactori reason connect with the gener 
inaccuraci of the detail afford him, and hi disbelief in the entir 
truth of the latter portion of the narration. peters, from whom 
some inform might be expected, is still alive, and a resid of 
illinois, but cannot be met with at present. He may hereaft be found, 
and will, no doubt, afford materi for a conclus of mr. pym’ 
account. 

the loss of two or three final chapter (for there were but two or 
three) is the more deepli to be regretted, as it can not be doubt they 
contain matter rel to the pole itself, or at least to region in 
it veri near proximity; and as, too, the statement of the author in 
relat to these region may shortli be verifi or contradict by 
mean of the government expedit now prepar for the southern 
ocean. 

On one point in the narr some remark may well be offered; and it 
would afford the writer of thi appendix much pleasur if what he may 
here observ should have a tendenc to throw credit, in ani degree, upon 
the veri singular page now published. We allud to the chasm found in 
the island of tsalal, and to the whole of the figur upon page 245-47 
{of the print edition--ed.}. 

(note: No figur were includ with thi text) 

mr. pym ha given the figur of the chasm without comment, and 
speak decidedli of the _indentur _found at the extrem of the 
most easterli of these chasm as have but a fanci resembl to 
alphabet characters, and, in short, as be posit _not such. 
_thi assert is made in a manner so simple, and sustain by a 
speci of demonstr so conclus (viz., the fit of the 
project of the fragment found among the dust into the indentur 
upon the wall), that we are forc to believ the writer in earnest; 
and no reason reader should suppos otherwise. but as the fact in 
relat to all the figur are most singular (especi when taken in 
connect with statement made in the bodi of the narrative), it may 
be as well to say a word or two concern them all--this, too, the more 
especi as the fact in question have, beyond doubt, escap the 
attent of mr. poe. 

figur 1, then, figur 2, figur 3, and figur 5, when conjoin with 
one anoth in the precis order which the chasm themselv presented, 
and when depriv of the small later branch or arch (which, it 
will be remembered, serv onli as a mean of commun between the 
main chambers, and were of total distinct character), constitut an 
ethiopian verbal root--th root “to be shady,’--wh all the 
inflect of shadow or darkness. 

In regard to the “left or most northwardly” of the indentur in figur 
4, it is more than probabl that the opinion of peter wa correct, 
and that the hieroglyph appear wa realli the work of art, 
and intend as the represent of a human form. the delin 
is befor the reader, and he may, or may not, perceiv the resembl 
suggested; but the rest of the indentur afford strong confirm 
of peters’ idea. the upper rang is evid the arab verbal root 
“to be white,” whenc all the inflect of brillianc and 
whiteness. the lower rang is not so immedi perspicuous. the 
charact are somewhat broken and disjointed; nevertheless, it can not 
be doubt that, in their perfect state, they form the full egyptian 
word, “the region of the south.” It should be observ that 
these interpret confirm the opinion of peter in regard to the 
“most northwardly” of the figures. the arm is outstretch toward the 
south. 

conclus such as these open a wide field for specul and excit 
conjecture. they should be regarded, perhaps, in connect with some 
of the most faintli detail incid of the narrative; although in no 
visibl manner is thi chain of connect complete. tekeli-li! wa the 
cri of the affright nativ of tsalal upon discov the carcas 
of the _white _anim pick up at sea. thi also wa the shudder 
exclam of tsalal upon discov the carcass of the _white 
_materi in possess of mr. pym. thi also wa the shriek of the 
swift-flying, _white, _and gigant bird which issu from the vapori 
_white _curtain of the south. noth _white _wa to be found at tsalal, 
and noth otherwis in the subsequ voyag to the region beyond. It 
is not imposs that “tsalal,” the appel of the island of the 
chasms, may be found, upon minut philolog scrutiny, to betray 
either some allianc with the chasm themselves, or some refer to 
the ethiopian charact so mysteri written in their windings. 

_“i have graven it within the hills, and my vengeanc upon the dust 
within the rock.”_ 


note 

{*1} whale vessel are usual fit with iron oil-tanks--whi the 
_grampus_ wa not I have never been abl to ascertain. 

{*2} the case of the brig _polly_, of boston, is one so much in point, 
and her fate, in mani respects, so remark similar to our own, that 
I cannot forbear allud to it here. thi vessel, of one hundr and 
thirti ton burden, sail from boston, with a cargo of lumber and 
provisions, for santa croix, on the twelfth of december, 1811, under the 
command of captain casneau. there were eight soul on board besid the 
captain--th mate, four seamen, and the cook, togeth with a mr. hunt, 
and a negro girl belong to him. On the fifteenth, have clear 
the shoal of georges, she sprung a leak in a gale of wind from the 
southeast, and wa final capsized; but, the mast go by the board, 
she afterward righted. they remain in thi situation, without fire, 
and with veri littl provision, for the period of one hundr and 
ninety-on day (from decemb the fifteenth to june the twentieth), 
when captain casneau and samuel badger, the onli survivors, were taken 
off the wreck by the fame, of hull, captain featherstone, bound home 
from rio janeiro. when pick up, they were in latitud 28 degre n., 
longitud 13 degre w., have drift abov two thousand miles! On the 
ninth of juli the fame fell in with the brig dromero, captain perkins, 
who land the two suffer in kennebeck. the narr from which we 
gather these detail end in the follow words: 

“it is natur to inquir how they could float such a vast distance, 
upon the most frequent part of the atlantic, and not be discov all 
thi time. they were pass by more than a dozen sail, one of which came 
so nigh them that they could distinctli see the peopl on deck and on 
the rig look at them; but, to the inexpress disappoint of 
the starv and freez men, they stifl the dictat of compassion, 
hoist sail, and cruelli abandon them to their fate.” 

{*3} among the vessel which at variou time have profess to meet 
with the aurora may be mention the ship san miguel, in 1769; the ship 
aurora, in 1774; the brig pearl, in 1779; and the ship dolores, in 1790. 
they all agre in give the mean latitud fifty-thre degre south. 

{*4} the term morn and evening, which I have made use of to avoid 
confus in my narrative, as far as possible, must not, of course, be 
taken in their ordinari sense. for a long time past we had had no night 
at all, the daylight be continual. the date throughout are accord 
to nautic time, and the bear must be understood as per compass. I 
would also remark, in thi place, that I cannot, in the first portion of 
what is here written, pretend to strict accuraci in respect to dates, or 
latitud and longitudes, have kept no regular journal until after 
the period of which thi first portion treats. In mani instanc I have 
reli altogeth upon memory. 

{*5} thi day wa render remark by our observ in the south 
sever huge wreath of the grayish vapour I have spoken of. 

{*6} the marl wa also black; indeed, we notic no light color 
substanc of ani kind upon the island. 

{*7}for obviou reason I cannot pretend to strict accuraci in 
these dates. they are given princip with a view to perspic of 
narrative, and as set down in my pencil memorandum. 




ligeia 

and the will therein lieth, which dieth not. who knoweth the mysteri 
of the will, with it vigor? for god is but a great will pervad all 
thing by natur of it intentness. man doth not yield himself to the 
angels, nor unto death utterly, save onli through the weak of hi 
feebl will.--joseph glanvill. 

I cannot, for my soul, rememb how, when, or even precis where, 
I first becam acquaint with the ladi ligeia. long year have sinc 
elapsed, and my memori is feebl through much suffering. or, perhaps, I 
cannot now bring these point to mind, because, in truth, the charact 
of my beloved, her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast of 
beauty, and the thrill and enthral eloqu of her low music 
language, made their way into my heart by pace so steadili and 
stealthili progress that they have been unnot and unknown. yet 
I believ that I met her first and most frequent in some large, old, 
decay citi near the rhine. Of her family--i have sure heard her 
speak. that it is of a remot ancient date cannot be doubted. ligeia! 
ligeia! in studi of a natur more than all els adapt to deaden 
impress of the outward world, it is by that sweet word alone--bi 
ligeia--that I bring befor mine eye in fanci the imag of her who is 
no more. and now, while I write, a recollect flash upon me that 
I have never known the patern name of her who wa my friend and my 
betrothed, and who becam the partner of my studies, and final the 
wife of my bosom. wa it a play charg on the part of my ligeia? or 
wa it a test of my strength of affection, that I should institut 
no inquiri upon thi point? or wa it rather a capric of my own--a 
wildli romant offer on the shrine of the most passion devotion? 
I but indistinctli recal the fact itself--what wonder that I have 
utterli forgotten the circumst which origin or attend it? 
and, indeed, if ever she, the wan and the misty-wing ashtophet of 
idolatr egypt, presided, as they tell, over marriag ill-omened, 
then most sure she presid over mine. 

there is one dear topic, however, on which my memori fail me not. It is 
the person of ligeia. In statur she wa tall, somewhat slender, and, in 
her latter days, even emaciated. I would in vain attempt to portray 
the majesty, the quiet ease, of her demeanor, or the incomprehens 
light and elast of her footfall. she came and depart as a 
shadow. I wa never made awar of her entranc into my close studi save 
by the dear music of her low sweet voice, as she place her marbl hand 
upon my shoulder. In beauti of face no maiden ever equal her. It wa 
the radianc of an opium-dream--an airi and spirit-lift vision 
more wildli divin than the phantasi which hover vision about the 
slumber soul of the daughter of delos. yet her featur were not of 
that regular mould which we have been fals taught to worship in the 
classic labor of the heathen. “there is no exquisit beauty,” say 
bacon, lord verulam, speak truli of all the form and genera of 
beauty, “without some strang in the proportion.” yet, although I saw 
that the featur of ligeia were not of a classic regularity--although 
I perceiv that her loveli wa inde “exquisite,” and felt that 
there wa much of “strangeness” pervad it, yet I have tri in vain 
to detect the irregular and to trace home my own percept of “the 
strange.” I examin the contour of the lofti and pale forehead--it 
wa faultless--how cold inde that word when appli to a majesti so 
divine!--th skin rival the purest ivory, the command extent and 
repose, the gentl promin of the region abov the temples; and 
then the raven-black, the glossy, the luxuri and naturally-curl 
tresses, set forth the full forc of the homer epithet, 
“hyacinthine!” I look at the delic outlin of the nose--and 
nowher but in the grace medallion of the hebrew had I beheld a 
similar perfection. there were the same luxuri smooth of surface, 
the same scarc percept tendenc to the aquiline, the same 
harmoni curv nostril speak the free spirit. I regard the 
sweet mouth. here wa inde the triumph of all thing heavenly--th 
magnific turn of the short upper lip--th soft, voluptu slumber 
of the under--th dimpl which sported, and the color which spoke--th 
teeth glanc back, with a brillianc almost startling, everi ray of 
the holi light which fell upon them in her seren and placid, yet most 
exultingli radiant of all smiles. I scrutin the format of the 
chin--and here, too, I found the gentl of breadth, the soft 
and the majesty, the full and the spirituality, of the greek--th 
contour which the god apollo reveal but in a dream, to cleomenes, the 
son of the athenian. and then I peer into the larg eye of ligeia. 

for eye we have no model in the remot antique. It might have been, 
too, that in these eye of my belov lay the secret to which lord 
verulam alludes. they were, I must believe, far larger than the ordinari 
eye of our own race. they were even fuller than the fullest of the 
gazel eye of the tribe of the valley of nourjahad. yet it wa onli 
at intervals--in moment of intens excitement--that thi peculiar 
becam more than slightli notic in ligeia. and at such moment wa 
her beauty--in my heat fanci thu it appear perhaps--th beauti of 
be either abov or apart from the earth--th beauti of the fabul 
houri of the turk. the hue of the orb wa the most brilliant of black, 
and, far over them, hung jetti lash of great length. the brows, 
slightli irregular in outline, had the same tint. the “strangeness,” 
however, which I found in the eyes, wa of a natur distinct from the 
formation, or the color, or the brillianc of the features, and must, 
after all, be refer to the expression. ah, word of no meaning! behind 
whose vast latitud of mere sound we intrench our ignor of so much 
of the spiritual. the express of the eye of ligeia! how for long 
hour have I ponder upon it! how have I, through the whole of a 
midsumm night, struggl to fathom it! what wa it--that someth 
more profound than the well of democritus--which lay far within the 
pupil of my beloved? what wa it? I wa possess with a passion to 
discover. those eyes! those large, those shining, those divin orbs! 
they becam to me twin star of leda, and I to them devoutest of 
astrologers. 

there is no point, among the mani incomprehens anomali of the 
scienc of mind, more thrillingli excit than the fact--never, I 
believe, notic in the schools--that, in our endeavor to recal to 
memori someth long forgotten, we often find ourselv upon the veri 
verg of remembrance, without be able, in the end, to remember. and 
thu how frequently, in my intens scrutini of ligeia’ eyes, have 
I felt approach the full knowledg of their expression--felt it 
approaching--yet not quit be mine--and so at length entir depart! 
and (strange, oh strangest mysteri of all!) I found, in the commonest 
object of the universe, a circl of analog to that expression. I 
mean to say that, subsequ to the period when ligeia’ beauti pass 
into my spirit, there dwell as in a shrine, I derived, from mani 
exist in the materi world, a sentiment such as I felt alway 
arous within me by her larg and lumin orbs. yet not the more 
could I defin that sentiment, or analyze, or even steadili view it. 
I recogn it, let me repeat, sometim in the survey of a 
rapidly-grow vine--in the contempl of a moth, a butterfly, a 
chrysalis, a stream of run water. I have felt it in the ocean; in 
the fall of a meteor. I have felt it in the glanc of unusu age 
people. and there are one or two star in heaven--(on especially, a 
star of the sixth magnitude, doubl and changeable, to be found near the 
larg star in lyra) in a telescop scrutini of which I have been made 
awar of the feeling. I have been fill with it by certain sound from 
string instruments, and not unfrequ by passag from books. among 
innumer other instances, I well rememb someth in a volum of 
joseph glanvill, which (perhap mere from it quaintness--who shall 
say?) never fail to inspir me with the sentiment;--“and the will 
therein lieth, which dieth not. who knoweth the mysteri of the will, 
with it vigor? for god is but a great will pervad all thing by 
natur of it intentness. man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto 
death utterly, save onli through the weak of hi feebl will.” 

length of years, and subsequ reflection, have enabl me to trace, 
indeed, some remot connect between thi passag in the english 
moralist and a portion of the charact of ligeia. An intens in 
thought, action, or speech, wa possibly, in her, a result, or at least 
an index, of that gigant volit which, dure our long intercourse, 
fail to give other and more immedi evid of it existence. 
Of all the women whom I have ever known, she, the outwardli calm, the 
ever-placid ligeia, wa the most violent a prey to the tumultu 
vultur of stern passion. and of such passion I could form no estimate, 
save by the miracul expans of those eye which at onc so 
delight and appal me--bi the almost magic melody, modulation, 
distinct and placid of her veri low voice--and by the fierc 
energi (render doubli effect by contrast with her manner of 
utterance) of the wild word which she habitu uttered. 

I have spoken of the learn of ligeia: it wa immense--such as I 
have never known in woman. In the classic tongu wa she deepli 
proficient, and as far as my own acquaint extend in regard to the 
modern dialect of europe, I have never known her at fault. inde upon 
ani theme of the most admired, becaus simpli the most abstrus of the 
boast erudit of the academy, have I ever found ligeia at fault? how 
singularly--how thrillingly, thi one point in the natur of my wife ha 
forc itself, at thi late period only, upon my attention! I said her 
knowledg wa such as I have never known in woman--but where breath 
the man who ha traversed, and successfully, all the wide area of 
moral, physical, and mathemat science? I saw not then what I now 
clearli perceive, that the acquisit of ligeia were gigantic, were 
astounding; yet I wa suffici awar of her infinit supremaci to 
resign myself, with a child-lik confidence, to her guidanc through the 
chaotic world of metaphys investig at which I wa most busili 
occupi dure the earlier year of our marriage. with how vast a 
triumph--with how vivid a delight--with how much of all that is 
ether in hope--did I feel, as she bent over me in studi but littl 
sought--but less known--that delici vista by slow degre expand 
befor me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, I might at 
length pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too divin preciou not to 
be forbidden! 

how poignant, then, must have been the grief with which, after some 
years, I beheld my well-ground expect take wing to themselv 
and fli away! without ligeia I wa but as a child grope benighted. 
her presence, her read alone, render vividli lumin the mani 
mysteri of the transcendent in which we were immersed. want 
the radiant lustr of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew duller 
than saturnian lead. and now those eye shone less and less frequent 
upon the page over which I pored. ligeia grew ill. the wild eye blaze 
with a too--too gloriou effulgence; the pale finger becam of the 
transpar waxen hue of the grave, and the blue vein upon the lofti 
forehead swell and sank impetu with the tide of the gentl 
emotion. I saw that she must die--and I struggl desper in spirit 
with the grim azrael. and the struggl of the passion wife were, to 
my astonishment, even more energet than my own. there had been much in 
her stern natur to impress me with the belief that, to her, death would 
have come without it terrors;--but not so. word are impot to convey 
ani just idea of the fierc of resist with which she wrestl 
with the shadow. I groan in anguish at the pitiabl spectacle. I would 
have soothed--i would have reasoned; but, in the intens of her wild 
desir for life,--for life--but for life--solac and reason were 
the uttermost folly. yet not until the last instance, amid the most 
convuls writh of her fierc spirit, wa shaken the extern 
placid of her demeanor. her voic grew more gentle--grew more 
low--yet I would not wish to dwell upon the wild mean of the quietli 
utter words. My brain reel as I hearken entranced, to a melodi 
more than mortal--to assumpt and aspir which mortal had 
never befor known. 

that she love me I should not have doubted; and I might have been 
easili awar that, in a bosom such as hers, love would have reign 
no ordinari passion. but in death only, wa I fulli impress with the 
strength of her affection. for long hours, detain my hand, would she 
pour out befor me the overflow of a heart whose more than passion 
devot amount to idolatry. how had I deserv to be so bless by 
such confessions?--how had I deserv to be so curs with the remov 
of my belov in the hour of her make them? but upon thi subject 
I cannot bear to dilate. let me say only, that in ligeia’ more than 
womanli abandon to a love, alas! all unmerited, all unworthili 
bestowed, I at length recogn the principl of her long with so 
wildli earnest a desir for the life which wa now flee so rapidli 
away. It is thi wild longing--it is thi eager vehem of desir 
for life--but for life--that I have no power to portray--no utter 
capabl of expressing. 

At high noon of the night in which she departed, beckon me, 
peremptorily, to her side, she bade me repeat certain vers compos by 
herself not mani day before. I obey her.--they were these: 

lo! ‘ti a gala night 
within the lonesom latter years! 
An angel throng, bewinged, bedight 
In veils, and drown in tears, 
sit in a theatre, to see 
A play of hope and fears, 
while the orchestra breath fit 
the music of the spheres. 

mimes, in the form of god on high, 
mutter and mumbl low, 
and hither and thither fly; 
mere puppet they, who come and go 
At bid of vast formless thing 
that shift the sceneri to and fro, 
flap from out their condor wing 
invis wo! 

that motley drama!--oh, be sure 
It shall not be forgot! 
with it phantom chase forev more, 
By a crowd that seiz it not, 
through a circl that ever returneth in 
To the self-sam spot, 
and much of mad and more of sin 
and horror the soul of the plot. 

but see, amid the mimic rout, 
A crawl shape intrude! 
A blood-r thing that writh from out 
the scenic solitude! 
It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pang 
the mime becom it food, 
and the seraph sob at vermin fang 
In human gore imbued. 

out--out are the lights--out all! 
and over each quiver form, 
the curtain, a funer pall, 
come down with the rush of a storm, 
and the angels, all pallid and wan, 
uprising, unveiling, affirm 
that the play is the tragedy, “man,” 
and it hero the conqueror worm. 

“O god!” half shriek ligeia, leap to her feet and extend 
her arm aloft with a spasmod movement, as I made an end of these 
lines--“o god! O divin father!--shal these thing be undeviatingli 
so?--shal thi conqueror be not onc conquered? are we not part and 
parcel in thee? who--who knoweth the mysteri of the will with it 
vigor? man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto death utterly, 
save onli through the weak of hi feebl will.” 

and now, as if exhaust with emotion, she suffer her white arm to 
fall, and return solemnli to her bed of death. and as she breath her 
last sighs, there came mingl with them a low murmur from her lips. I 
bent to them my ear and distinguished, again, the conclud word of 
the passag in glanvill--“man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto 
death utterly, save onli through the weak of hi feebl will.” 

she died;--and I, crush into the veri dust with sorrow, could no 
longer endur the lone desol of my dwell in the dim and 
decay citi by the rhine. I had no lack of what the world call 
wealth. ligeia had brought me far more, veri far more than ordinarili 
fall to the lot of mortals. after a few months, therefore, of weari and 
aimless wandering, I purchased, and put in some repair, an abbey, which 
I shall not name, in one of the wildest and least frequent portion of 
fair england. the gloomi and dreari grandeur of the building, the 
almost savag aspect of the domain, the mani melancholi and time-honor 
memori connect with both, had much in unison with the feel of 
utter abandon which had driven me into that remot and unsoci 
region of the country. yet although the extern abbey, with it verdant 
decay hang about it, suffer but littl alteration, I gave way, with 
a child-lik perversity, and perchanc with a faint hope of allevi 
my sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnific within.--for 
such follies, even in childhood, I had imbib a tast and now they came 
back to me as if in the dotag of grief. alas, I feel how much even 
of incipi mad might have been discov in the gorgeou and 
fantast draperies, in the solemn carv of egypt, in the wild 
cornic and furniture, in the bedlam pattern of the carpet of tuft 
gold! I had becom a bounden slave in the trammel of opium, and my 
labor and my order had taken a color from my dreams. but these 
absurd I must not paus to detail. let me speak onli of that one 
chamber, ever accursed, whither in a moment of mental alienation, I 
led from the altar as my bride--a the successor of the unforgotten 
ligeia--th fair-hair and blue-ey ladi rowena trevanion, of 
tremaine. 

there is no individu portion of the architectur and decor of 
that bridal chamber which is not now visibl befor me. where were the 
soul of the haughti famili of the bride, when, through thirst of gold, 
they permit to pass the threshold of an apart so bedecked, a 
maiden and a daughter so beloved? I have said that I minut rememb 
the detail of the chamber--yet I am sadli forget on topic of deep 
moment--and here there wa no system, no keeping, in the fantast 
display, to take hold upon the memory. the room lay in a high turret of 
the castel abbey, wa pentagon in shape, and of capaci 
size. occupi the whole southern face of the pentagon wa the sole 
window--an immens sheet of unbroken glass from venice--a singl pane, 
and tint of a leaden hue, so that the ray of either the sun or moon, 
pass through it, fell with a ghastli lustr on the object within. 
over the upper portion of thi huge window, extend the trellice-work 
of an age vine, which clamber up the massi wall of the turret. the 
ceiling, of gloomy-look oak, wa excess lofty, vaulted, and 
elabor fret with the wildest and most grotesqu specimen of a 
semi-gothic, semi-druid device. from out the most central recess of 
thi melancholi vaulting, depended, by a singl chain of gold with long 
links, a huge censer of the same metal, saracen in pattern, and with 
mani perfor so contriv that there writh in and out of them, 
as if endu with a serpent vitality, a continu success of 
parti-color fires. 

some few ottoman and golden candelabra, of eastern figure, were in 
variou station about--and there wa the couch, too--brid couch--of 
an indian model, and low, and sculptur of solid ebony, with a 
pall-lik canopi above. In each of the angl of the chamber stood on 
end a gigant sarcophagu of black granite, from the tomb of the king 
over against luxor, with their age lid full of immemori sculpture. 
but in the drape of the apart lay, alas! the chief phantasi of 
all. the lofti walls, gigant in height--even unproportion 
so--wer hung from summit to foot, in vast folds, with a heavi and 
massive-look tapestry--tapestri of a materi which wa found alik 
as a carpet on the floor, as a cover for the ottoman and the 
eboni bed, as a canopi for the bed, and as the gorgeou volut of the 
curtain which partial shade the window. the materi wa the richest 
cloth of gold. It wa spot all over, at irregular intervals, with 
arabesqu figures, about a foot in diameter, and wrought upon the cloth 
in pattern of the most jetti black. but these figur partook of the 
true charact of the arabesqu onli when regard from a singl point 
of view. By a contriv now common, and inde traceabl to a veri 
remot period of antiquity, they were made changeabl in aspect. To one 
enter the room, they bore the appear of simpl monstrosities; but 
upon a farther advance, thi appear gradual departed; and step by 
step, as the visitor move hi station in the chamber, he saw himself 
surround by an endless success of the ghastli form which belong to 
the superstit of the norman, or aris in the guilti slumber of the 
monk. the phantasmagor effect wa vastli heighten by the artifici 
introduct of a strong continu current of wind behind the 
draperies--giv a hideou and uneasi anim to the whole. 

In hall such as these--in a bridal chamber such as this--i passed, with 
the ladi of tremaine, the unhallow hour of the first month of our 
marriage--pass them with but littl disquietude. that my wife dread 
the fierc moodi of my temper--that she shun me and love me but 
little--i could not help perceiving; but it gave me rather pleasur than 
otherwise. I loath her with a hatr belong more to demon than 
to man. My memori flew back, (oh, with what intens of regret!) to 
ligeia, the beloved, the august, the beautiful, the entombed. I revel 
in recollect of her purity, of her wisdom, of her lofty, her 
ether nature, of her passionate, her idolatr love. now, then, did 
my spirit fulli and freeli burn with more than all the fire of her own. 
In the excit of my opium dream (for I wa habitu fetter in 
the shackl of the drug) I would call aloud upon her name, dure the 
silenc of the night, or among the shelter recess of the glen 
by day, as if, through the wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the 
consum ardor of my long for the departed, I could restor her to 
the pathway she had abandoned--ah, could it be forever?--upon the earth. 

about the commenc of the second month of the marriage, the ladi 
rowena wa attack with sudden illness, from which her recoveri wa 
slow. the fever which consum her render her night uneasy; and 
in her perturb state of half-slumber, she spoke of sounds, and of 
motions, in and about the chamber of the turret, which I conclud 
had no origin save in the distemp of her fancy, or perhap in the 
phantasmagor influenc of the chamber itself. she becam at length 
convalescent--fin well. yet but a brief period elapsed, ere a second 
more violent disord again threw her upon a bed of suffering; and from 
thi attack her frame, at all time feeble, never altogeth recovered. 
her ill were, after thi epoch, of alarm character, and of more 
alarm recurrence, defi alik the knowledg and the great exert 
of her physicians. with the increas of the chronic diseas which 
had thus, apparently, taken too sure hold upon her constitut to 
be erad by human means, I could not fail to observ a similar 
increas in the nervou irrit of her temperament, and in her 
excit by trivial caus of fear. she spoke again, and now more 
frequent and pertinaciously, of the sounds--of the slight sounds--and 
of the unusu motion among the tapestries, to which she had formerli 
alluded. 

one night, near the close in of september, she press thi 
distress subject with more than usual emphasi upon my attention. she 
had just awaken from an unquiet slumber, and I had been watching, 
with feel half of anxiety, half of vagu terror, the work of her 
emaci countenance. I sat by the side of her eboni bed, upon one of 
the ottoman of india. she partli arose, and spoke, in an earnest low 
whisper, of sound which she then heard, but which I could not hear--of 
motion which she then saw, but which I could not perceive. the wind wa 
rush hurriedli behind the tapestries, and I wish to show her 
(what, let me confess it, I could not all believe) that those almost 
inarticul breathings, and those veri gentl variat of the figur 
upon the wall, were but the natur effect of that customari rush of 
the wind. but a deadli pallor, overspread her face, had prove to me 
that my exert to reassur her would be fruitless. she appear to 
be fainting, and no attend were within call. I rememb where 
wa deposit a decant of light wine which had been order by her 
physicians, and hasten across the chamber to procur it. but, as 
I step beneath the light of the censer, two circumst of a 
startl natur attract my attention. I had felt that some palpabl 
although invis object had pass lightli by my person; and I saw 
that there lay upon the golden carpet, in the veri middl of the rich 
lustr thrown from the censer, a shadow--a faint, indefinit shadow of 
angel aspect--such as might be fanci for the shadow of a shade. 
but I wa wild with the excit of an immoder dose of opium, and 
heed these thing but little, nor spoke of them to rowena. have 
found the wine, I recross the chamber, and pour out a gobletful, 
which I held to the lip of the faint lady. she had now partial 
recovered, however, and took the vessel herself, while I sank upon an 
ottoman near me, with my eye fasten upon her person. It wa then that 
I becam distinctli awar of a gentl footfal upon the carpet, and 
near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as rowena wa in the act 
of rais the wine to her lips, I saw, or may have dream that I 
saw, fall within the goblet, as if from some invis spring in the 
atmospher of the room, three or four larg drop of a brilliant and 
rubi color fluid. If thi I saw--not so rowena. she swallow the wine 
unhesitatingly, and I forbor to speak to her of a circumst which 
must, after all, I considered, have been but the suggest of a vivid 
imagination, render morbidli activ by the terror of the lady, by the 
opium, and by the hour. 

yet I cannot conceal it from my own percept that, immedi 
subsequ to the fall of the ruby-drops, a rapid chang for the wors 
took place in the disord of my wife; so that, on the third subsequ 
night, the hand of her menial prepar her for the tomb, and on the 
fourth, I sat alone, with her shroud body, in that fantast chamber 
which had receiv her as my bride.--wild visions, opium-engendered, 
flitted, shadow-like, befor me. I gaze with unquiet eye upon the 
sarcophagi in the angl of the room, upon the vari figur of the 
drapery, and upon the writh of the parti-color fire in the censer 
overhead. My eye then fell, as I call to mind the circumst of 
a former night, to the spot beneath the glare of the censer where I had 
seen the faint trace of the shadow. It wa there, however, no longer; 
and breath with greater freedom, I turn my glanc to the pallid 
and rigid figur upon the bed. then rush upon me a thousand memori 
of ligeia--and then came back upon my heart, with the turbul violenc 
of a flood, the whole of that unutter wo with which I had regard 
her thu enshrouded. the night waned; and still, with a bosom full of 
bitter thought of the one onli and suprem beloved, I remain gaze 
upon the bodi of rowena. 

It might have been midnight, or perhap earlier, or later, for I had 
taken no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but veri distinct, 
startl me from my revery.--i felt that it came from the bed of 
ebony--th bed of death. I listen in an agoni of superstiti 
terror--but there wa no repetit of the sound. I strain my vision 
to detect ani motion in the corpse--but there wa not the slightest 
perceptible. yet I could not have been deceived. I had heard the noise, 
howev faint, and my soul wa awaken within me. I resolut and 
perseveringli kept my attent rivet upon the body. mani minut 
elaps befor ani circumst occur tend to throw light upon the 
mystery. At length it becam evid that a slight, a veri feeble, and 
bare notic ting of color had flush up within the cheeks, 
and along the sunken small vein of the eyelids. through a speci of 
unutter horror and awe, for which the languag of mortal ha no 
suffici energet expression, I felt my heart ceas to beat, my 
limb grow rigid where I sat. yet a sens of duti final oper to 
restor my self-possession. I could no longer doubt that we had been 
precipit in our preparations--that rowena still lived. It wa 
necessari that some immedi exert be made; yet the turret wa 
altogeth apart from the portion of the abbey tenant by the 
servants--ther were none within call--i had no mean of summon them 
to my aid without leav the room for mani minutes--and thi I could 
not ventur to do. I therefor struggl alon in my endeavor to call 
back the spirit ill hovering. In a short period it wa certain, however, 
that a relaps had taken place; the color disappear from both eyelid 
and cheek, leav a wan even more than that of marble; the lip 
becam doubli shrivel and pinch up in the ghastli express 
of death; a repuls clammi and cold overspread rapidli the 
surfac of the body; and all the usual rigor ill immedi 
supervened. I fell back with a shudder upon the couch from which I had 
been so startlingli aroused, and again gave myself up to passion 
wake vision of ligeia. 

An hour thu elaps when (could it be possible?) I wa a second 
time awar of some vagu sound issu from the region of the bed. I 
listened--in extrem of horror. the sound came again--it wa a sigh. 
rush to the corpse, I saw--distinctli saw--a tremor upon the lips. In 
a minut afterward they relaxed, disclos a bright line of the pearli 
teeth. amaz now struggl in my bosom with the profound awe which 
had hitherto reign there alone. I felt that my vision grew dim, that 
my reason wandered; and it wa onli by a violent effort that I at length 
succeed in nerv myself to the task which duti thu onc more had 
point out. there wa now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the 
cheek and throat; a percept warmth pervad the whole frame; there 
wa even a slight pulsat at the heart. the ladi lived; and with 
redoubl ardor I betook myself to the task of restoration. I chafe 
and bath the templ and the hands, and use everi exert which 
experience, and no littl medic reading, could suggest. but in vain. 
suddenly, the color fled, the pulsat ceased, the lip resum the 
express of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole 
bodi took upon itself the ici chilliness, the livid hue, the intens 
rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsom peculiar of 
that which ha been, for mani days, a tenant of the tomb. 

and again I sunk into vision of ligeia--and again, (what marvel that I 
shudder while I write,) again there reach my ear a low sob from the 
region of the eboni bed. but whi shall I minut detail the unspeak 
horror of that night? whi shall I paus to relat how, time after 
time, until near the period of the gray dawn, thi hideou drama of 
revivif wa repeated; how each terrif relaps wa onli into a 
sterner and appar more irredeem death; how each agoni wore the 
aspect of a struggl with some invis foe; and how each struggl wa 
succeed by I know not what of wild chang in the person appear 
of the corpse? let me hurri to a conclusion. 

the greater part of the fear night had worn away, and she who had 
been dead, onc again stirred--and now more vigor than hitherto, 
although arous from a dissolut more appal in it utter 
hopeless than any. I had long ceas to struggl or to move, and 
remain sit rigidli upon the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl of 
violent emotions, of which extrem awe wa perhap the least terrible, 
the least consuming. the corpse, I repeat, stirred, and now more 
vigor than before. the hue of life flush up with unwont energi 
into the countenance--th limb relaxed--and, save that the eyelid were 
yet press heavili together, and that the bandag and draperi of the 
grave still impart their charnel charact to the figure, I might 
have dream that rowena had inde shaken off, utterly, the fetter of 
death. but if thi idea wa not, even then, altogeth adopted, I could 
at least doubt no longer, when, aris from the bed, tottering, with 
feebl steps, with close eyes, and with the manner of one bewild in 
a dream, the thing that wa enshroud advanc boldli and palpabl into 
the middl of the apartment. 

I trembl not--i stir not--for a crowd of unutter fanci 
connect with the air, the stature, the demeanor of the figure, rush 
hurriedli through my brain, had paralyzed--had chill me into stone. I 
stir not--but gaze upon the apparition. there wa a mad disord 
in my thoughts--a tumult unappeasable. could it, indeed, be the 
live rowena who confront me? could it inde be rowena at all--th 
fair-haired, the blue-ey ladi rowena trevanion of tremaine? why, whi 
should I doubt it? the bandag lay heavili about the mouth--but then 
might it not be the mouth of the breath ladi of tremaine? and the 
cheeks--ther were the rose as in her noon of life--yes, these might 
inde be the fair cheek of the live ladi of tremaine. and the chin, 
with it dimples, as in health, might it not be hers?--but had she then 
grown taller sinc her malady? what inexpress mad seiz me with 
that thought? one bound, and I had reach her feet! shrink from my 
touch, she let fall from her head, unloosened, the ghastli cerement 
which had confin it, and there stream forth, into the rush 
atmospher of the chamber, huge mass of long and dishevel hair; it 
wa blacker than the raven wing of the midnight! and now slowli open 
the eye of the figur which stood befor me. “here then, at least,” 
I shriek aloud, “can I never--can I never be mistaken--thes are the 
full, and the black, and the wild eyes--of my lost love--of the lady--of 
the ladi ligeia.” 




morella 

itself, by itself, solely, one everlasting, and single. 

plato: sympos. 

with a feel of deep yet most singular affect I regard my friend 
morella. thrown by accid into her societi mani year ago, my soul 
from our first meeting, burn with fire it had never befor known; but 
the fire were not of eros, and bitter and torment to my spirit wa 
the gradual convict that I could in no manner defin their unusu 
mean or regul their vagu intensity. yet we met; and fate bound us 
togeth at the altar, and I never spoke of passion nor thought of 
love. she, however, shun society, and, attach herself to me alon 
render me happy. It is a happi to wonder; it is a happi to 
dream. 

morella’ erudit wa profound. As I hope to live, her talent were of 
no common order--h power of mind were gigantic. I felt this, and, in 
mani matters, becam her pupil. I soon, however, found that, perhap 
on account of her presburg education, she place befor me a number of 
those mystic write which are usual consid the mere dross of 
the earli german literature. these, for what reason I could not imagine, 
were her favourit and constant study--and that in process of time 
they becam my own, should be attribut to the simpl but effectu 
influenc of habit and example. 

In all this, if I err not, my reason had littl to do. My convictions, 
or I forget myself, were in no manner act upon by the ideal, nor wa 
ani tinctur of the mystic which I read to be discovered, unless I 
am greatli mistaken, either in my deed or in my thoughts. persuad 
of this, I abandon myself implicitli to the guidanc of my wife, and 
enter with an unflinch heart into the intricaci of her studies. 
and then--then, when pore over forbidden pages, I felt a forbidden 
spirit enkindl within me--would morella place her cold hand upon my 
own, and rake up from the ash of a dead philosophi some low, singular 
words, whose strang mean burn themselv in upon my memory. and 
then, hour after hour, would I linger by her side, and dwell upon the 
music of her voice, until at length it melodi wa taint with terror, 
and there fell a shadow upon my soul, and I grew pale, and shudder 
inwardli at those too unearthli tones. and thus, joy suddenli fade into 
horror, and the most beauti becam the most hideous, as hinnon becam 
ge-henna. 

It is unnecessari to state the exact charact of those disquisit 
which, grow out of the volum I have mentioned, formed, for so 
long a time, almost the sole convers of morella and myself. By 
the learn in what might be term theolog moral they will be 
readili conceived, and by the unlearn they would, at all events, 
be littl understood. the wild pantheism of fichte; the modifi 
paliggenedia of the pythagoreans; and, abov all, the doctrin of 
ident as urg by schelling, were gener the point of discuss 
present the most of beauti to the imagin morella. that ident 
which is term personal, mr. locke, I think, truli defin to consist 
in the sane of ration being. and sinc by person we understand an 
intellig essenc have reason, and sinc there is a conscious 
which alway accompani thinking, it is thi which make us all to 
be that which we call ourselves, therebi distinguish us from 
other be that think, and give us our person identity. but the 
principium indivduationis, the notion of that ident which at death 
is or is not lost for ever, wa to me, at all times, a consider of 
intens interest; not more from the perplex and excit natur of 
it consequences, than from the mark and agit manner in which 
morella mention them. 

but, indeed, the time had now arriv when the mysteri of my wife’ 
manner oppress me as a spell. I could no longer bear the touch of her 
wan fingers, nor the low tone of her music language, nor the lustr 
of her melancholi eyes. and she knew all this, but did not upbraid; she 
seem consciou of my weak or my folly, and, smiling, call it 
fate. she seem also consciou of a cause, to me unknown, for the 
gradual alien of my regard; but she gave me no hint or token of 
it nature. yet wa she woman, and pine away daily. In time the crimson 
spot settl steadili upon the cheek, and the blue vein upon the pale 
forehead becam prominent; and one instant my natur melt into pity, 
but in, next I met the glanc of her mean eyes, and then my soul 
sicken and becam giddi with the giddi of one who gaze downward 
into some dreari and unfathom abyss. 

shall I then say that I long with an earnest and consum desir for 
the moment of morella’ decease? I did; but the fragil spirit clung to 
it tenement of clay for mani days, for mani week and irksom months, 
until my tortur nerv obtain the masteri over my mind, and I grew 
furiou through delay, and, with the heart of a fiend, curs the day 
and the hour and the bitter moments, which seem to lengthen and 
lengthen as her gentl life declined, like shadow in the die of the 
day. 

but one autumn evening, when the wind lay still in heaven, morella 
call me to her bedside. there wa a dim mist over all the earth, and 
a warm glow upon the waters, and amid the rich octob leav of the 
forest, a rainbow from the firmament had sure fallen. 

“it is a day of days,” she said, as I approached; “a day of all day 
either to live or die. It is a fair day for the son of earth and 
life--ah, more fair for the daughter of heaven and death!” 

I kiss her forehead, and she continued: 

“I am dying, yet shall I live.” 

“morella!” 

“the day have never been when thou couldst love me--but her whom in 
life thou didst abhor, in death thou shalt adore.” 

“morella!” 

“I repeat I am dying. but within me is a pledg of that affection--ah, 
how little!--which thou didst feel for me, morella. and when my spirit 
depart shall the child live--thi child and mine, morella’s. but thi 
day shall be day of sorrow--that sorrow which is the most last of 
impressions, as the cypress is the most endur of trees. for the hour 
of thi happi are over and joy is not gather twice in a life, as 
the rose of paestum twice in a year. thou shalt no longer, then, play 
the teian with time, but, be ignor of the myrtl and the vine, 
thou shalt bear about with thee thi shroud on the earth, as do the 
moslemin at mecca.” 

“morella!” I cried, “morella! how knowest thou this?” but she turn 
away her face upon the pillow and a slight tremor come over her limbs, 
she thu died, and I heard her voic no more. 

yet, as she had foretold, her child, to which in die she had given 
birth, which breath not until the mother breath no more, her child, 
a daughter, lived. and she grew strang in statur and intellect, and 
wa the perfect resembl of her who had departed, and I love her 
with a love more fervent than I had believ it possibl to feel for ani 
denizen of earth. 

but, ere long the heaven of thi pure affect becam darkened, and 
gloom, and horror, and grief swept over it in clouds. I said the child 
grew strang in statur and intelligence. strange, indeed, wa her 
rapid increas in bodili size, but terrible, oh! terribl were the 
tumultu thought which crowd upon me while watch the develop 
of her mental being. could it be otherwise, when I daili discov 
in the concept of the child the adult power and faculti of the 
woman? when the lesson of experi fell from the lip of infancy? and 
when the wisdom or the passion of matur I found hourli gleam from 
it full and specul eye? when, I say, all thi becam evid to my 
appal senses, when I could no longer hide it from my soul, nor throw 
it off from those percept which trembl to receiv it, is it to be 
wonder at that suspicions, of a natur fear and exciting, crept in 
upon my spirit, or that my thought fell back aghast upon the wild tale 
and thrill theori of the entomb morella? I snatch from the 
scrutini of the world a be whom destini compel me to adore, and 
in the rigor seclus of my home, watch with an agon anxieti 
over all which concern the beloved. 

and as year roll away, and I gaze day after day upon her holy, and 
mild, and eloqu face, and pour over her matur form, day after 
day did I discov new point of resembl in the child to her mother, 
the melancholi and the dead. and hourli grew darker these shadow of 
similitude, and more full, and more definite, and more perplexing, and 
more hideous terribl in their aspect. for that her smile wa like her 
mother’ I could bear; but then I shudder at it too perfect identity, 
that her eye were like morella’ I could endure; but then they, too, 
often look down into the depth of my soul with morella’ own intens 
and bewild meaning. and in the contour of the high forehead, and 
in the ringlet of the silken hair, and in the wan finger which buri 
themselv therein, and in the sad music tone of her speech, and 
abov all--oh, abov all, in the phrase and express of the dead on 
the lip of the love and the living, I found food for consum thought 
and horror, for a worm that would not die. 

thu pass away two lustra of her life, and as yet my daughter 
remain nameless upon the earth. “mi child,” and “mi love,” were the 
design usual prompt by a father’ affection, and the rigid 
seclus of her day preclud all other intercourse. morella’ name 
die with her at her death. Of the mother I had never spoken to the 
daughter, it wa imposs to speak. indeed, dure the brief period of 
her existence, the latter had receiv no impress from the outward 
world, save such as might have been afford by the narrow limit of her 
privacy. but at length the ceremoni of baptism present to my mind, 
in it unnerv and agit condition, a present deliver from the 
terror of my destiny. and at the baptism font I hesit for a name. 
and mani titl of the wise and beautiful, of old and modern times, of 
my own and foreign lands, came throng to my lips, with many, mani 
fair titl of the gentle, and the happy, and the good. what prompt 
me then to disturb the memori of the buri dead? what demon urg me to 
breath that sound, which in it veri recollect wa wont to make ebb 
the purpl blood in torrent from the templ to the heart? what fiend 
spoke from the recess of my soul, when amid those dim aisles, and in 
the silenc of the night, I whisper within the ear of the holi man 
the syllables--morella? what more than fiend convuls the featur of 
my child, and overspread them with hue of death, as start at that 
scarc audibl sound, she turn her glassi eye from the earth to 
heaven, and fall prostrat on the black slab of our ancestr vault, 
responded--“i am here!” 

distinct, coldly, calmli distinct, fell those few simpl sound within 
my ear, and thenc like molten lead roll hissingli into my brain. 
years--year may pass away, but the memori of that epoch never. nor wa 
I inde ignor of the flower and the vine--but the hemlock and the 
cypress overshadow me night and day. and I kept no reckon of time 
or place, and the star of my fate fade from heaven, and therefor the 
earth grew dark, and it figur pass by me like flit shadows, 
and among them all I beheld only--morella. the wind of the firmament 
breath but one sound within my ears, and the rippl upon the sea 
murmur evermore--morella. but she died; and with my own hand I bore 
her to the tomb; and I laugh with a long and bitter laugh as I found 
no trace of the first in the channel where I laid the second.--morella. 




A tale OF the rag mountain 

dure the fall of the year 1827, while resid near charlottesville, 
virginia, I casual made the acquaint of mr. augustu bedloe. thi 
young gentleman wa remark in everi respect, and excit in me a 
profound interest and curiosity. I found it imposs to comprehend 
him either in hi moral or hi physic relations. Of hi famili I could 
obtain no satisfactori account. whenc he came, I never ascertained. 
even about hi age--although I call him a young gentleman--ther wa 
someth which perplex me in no littl degree. He certainli seem 
young--and he made a point of speak about hi youth--yet there were 
moment when I should have had littl troubl in imagin him a hundr 
year of age. but in no regard wa he more peculiar than in hi person 
appearance. He wa singularli tall and thin. He stoop much. hi limb 
were exceedingli long and emaciated. hi forehead wa broad and low. hi 
complexion wa absolut bloodless. hi mouth wa larg and flexible, 
and hi teeth were more wildli uneven, although sound, than I had ever 
befor seen teeth in a human head. the express of hi smile, 
however, wa by no mean unpleasing, as might be supposed; but it had 
no variat whatever. It wa one of profound melancholy--of a phaseless 
and unceas gloom. hi eye were abnorm large, and round like 
those of a cat. the pupils, too, upon ani access or diminut of 
light, underw contract or dilation, just such as is observ in 
the felin tribe. In moment of excit the orb grew bright to a 
degre almost inconceivable; seem to emit lumin rays, not of a 
reflect but of an intrins lustre, as doe a candl or the sun; yet 
their ordinari condit wa so total vapid, filmy, and dull as to 
convey the idea of the eye of a long-int corpse. 

these peculiar of person appear to caus him much annoyance, and 
he wa continu allud to them in a sort of half explanatory, 
half apologet strain, which, when I first heard it, impress me veri 
painfully. I soon, however, grew accustom to it, and my uneasi 
wore off. It seem to be hi design rather to insinu than directli 
to assert that, physically, he had not alway been what he was--that 
a long seri of neuralg attack had reduc him from a condit of 
more than usual person beauty, to that which I saw. for mani year 
past he had been attend by a physician, name templeton--an old 
gentleman, perhap seventi year of age--whom he had first encount 
at saratoga, and from whose attention, while there, he either received, 
or fanci that he received, great benefit. the result wa that bedloe, 
who wa wealthy, had made an arrang with dr. templeton, by 
which the latter, in consider of a liber annual allowance, had 
consent to devot hi time and medic experi exclus to the 
care of the invalid. 

doctor templeton had been a travel in hi younger days, and at pari 
had becom a convert, in great measure, to the doctrin of mesmer. It 
wa altogeth by mean of magnet remedi that he had succeed in 
allevi the acut pain of hi patient; and thi success had veri 
natur inspir the latter with a certain degre of confid in the 
opinion from which the remedi had been educed. the doctor, however, 
like all enthusiasts, had struggl hard to make a thorough convert of 
hi pupil, and final so far gain hi point as to induc the suffer 
to submit to numer experiments. By a frequent repetit of these, a 
result had arisen, which of late day ha becom so common as to attract 
littl or no attention, but which, at the period of which I write, had 
veri rare been known in america. I mean to say, that between doctor 
templeton and bedlo there had grown up, littl by little, a veri 
distinct and strongli mark rapport, or magnet relation. I am not 
prepar to assert, however, that thi rapport extend beyond the 
limit of the simpl sleep-produc power, but thi power itself had 
attain great intensity. At the first attempt to induc the magnet 
somnolency, the mesmerist entir failed. In the fifth or sixth he 
succeed veri partially, and after long continu effort. onli at the 
twelfth wa the triumph complete. after thi the will of the patient 
succumb rapidli to that of the physician, so that, when I first becam 
acquaint with the two, sleep wa brought about almost instantan 
by the mere volit of the operator, even when the invalid wa unawar 
of hi presence. It is onli now, in the year 1845, when similar miracl 
are wit daili by thousands, that I dare ventur to record thi 
appar imposs as a matter of seriou fact. 

the temperatur of bedlo was, in the highest degre sensitive, 
excitable, enthusiastic. hi imagin wa singularli vigor and 
creative; and no doubt it deriv addit forc from the habitu use 
of morphine, which he swallow in great quantity, and without which he 
would have found it imposs to exist. It wa hi practic to take 
a veri larg dose of it immedi after breakfast each morning--or, 
rather, immedi after a cup of strong coffee, for he ate noth in 
the forenoon--and then set forth alone, or attend onli by a dog, upon 
a long rambl among the chain of wild and dreari hill that lie westward 
and southward of charlottesville, and are there dignifi by the titl 
of the rag mountains. 

upon a dim, warm, misti day, toward the close of november, and dure 
the strang interregnum of the season which in america is term the 
indian summer, mr. bedlo depart as usual for the hills. the day 
passed, and still he did not return. 

about eight o’clock at night, have becom serious alarm at hi 
protract absence, we were about set out in search of him, when he 
unexpectedli made hi appearance, in health no wors than usual, and 
in rather more than ordinari spirits. the account which he gave of hi 
expedition, and of the event which had detain him, wa a singular one 
indeed. 

“you will remember,” said he, “that it wa about nine in the morn 
when I left charlottesville. I bent my step immedi to the 
mountains, and, about ten, enter a gorg which wa entir new to 
me. I follow the wind of thi pass with much interest. the sceneri 
which present itself on all sides, although scarc entitl to be 
call grand, had about it an indescrib and to me a delici aspect 
of dreari desolation. the solitud seem absolut virgin. I could not 
help believ that the green sod and the gray rock upon which I trod 
had been trodden never befor by the foot of a human being. So 
entir secluded, and in fact inaccessible, except through a seri 
of accidents, is the entranc of the ravine, that it is by no mean 
imposs that I wa inde the first adventurer--th veri first and 
sole adventur who had ever penetr it recesses. 

“the thick and peculiar mist, or smoke, which distinguish the indian 
summer, and which now hung heavili over all objects, served, no doubt, 
to deepen the vagu impress which these object created. So dens 
wa thi pleasant fog that I could at no time see more than a dozen 
yard of the path befor me. thi path wa excess sinuous, and 
as the sun could not be seen, I soon lost all idea of the direct 
in which I journeyed. In the meantim the morphin had it customari 
effect--that of endu all the extern world with an intens of 
interest. In the quiver of a leaf--in the hue of a blade of grass--in 
the shape of a trefoil--in the hum of a bee--in the gleam of a 
dew-drop--in the breath of the wind--in the faint odor that came 
from the forest--ther came a whole univers of suggestion--a gay and 
motley train of rhapsod and immethod thought. 

“busi in this, I walk on for sever hours, dure which the mist 
deepen around me to so great an extent that at length I wa reduc 
to an absolut grope of the way. and now an indescrib uneasi 
possess me--a speci of nervou hesit and tremor. I fear to 
tread, lest I should be precipit into some abyss. I remembered, too, 
strang stori told about these rag hills, and of the uncouth and 
fierc race of men who tenant their grove and caverns. A thousand 
vagu fanci oppress and disconcert me--fanc the more 
distress becaus vague. veri suddenli my attent wa arrest by 
the loud beat of a drum. 

“mi amaz was, of course, extreme. A drum in these hill wa a thing 
unknown. I could not have been more surpris at the sound of the trump 
of the archangel. but a new and still more astound sourc of interest 
and perplex arose. there came a wild rattl or jingl sound, as 
if of a bunch of larg keys, and upon the instant a dusky-visag and 
half-nak man rush past me with a shriek. He came so close to my 
person that I felt hi hot breath upon my face. He bore in one hand 
an instrument compos of an assemblag of steel rings, and shook them 
vigor as he ran. scarc had he disappear in the mist before, 
pant after him, with open mouth and glare eyes, there dart a huge 
beast. I could not be mistaken in it character. It wa a hyena. 

“the sight of thi monster rather reliev than heighten my 
terrors--for I now made sure that I dreamed, and endeavor to arous 
myself to wake consciousness. I step boldli and briskli forward. 
I rub my eyes. I call aloud. I pinch my limbs. A small spring of 
water present itself to my view, and here, stooping, I bath my hand 
and my head and neck. thi seem to dissip the equivoc sensat 
which had hitherto annoy me. I arose, as I thought, a new man, and 
proceed steadili and complac on my unknown way. 

“at length, quit overcom by exertion, and by a certain oppress 
close of the atmosphere, I seat myself beneath a tree. present 
there came a feebl gleam of sunshine, and the shadow of the leav of 
the tree fell faintli but definit upon the grass. At thi shadow 
I gaze wonderingli for mani minutes. it charact stupefi me with 
astonishment. I look upward. the tree wa a palm. 

“I now aros hurriedly, and in a state of fear agitation--for the 
fanci that I dream would serv me no longer. I saw--i felt that I had 
perfect command of my senses--and these sens now brought to my soul 
a world of novel and singular sensation. the heat becam all at onc 
intolerable. A strang odor load the breeze. A low, continu murmur, 
like that aris from a full, but gentli flow river, came to my 
ears, intermingl with the peculiar hum of multitudin human voices. 

“while I listen in an extrem of astonish which I need not 
attempt to describe, a strong and brief gust of wind bore off the 
incumb fog as if by the wand of an enchanter. 

“I found myself at the foot of a high mountain, and look down into a 
vast plain, through which wound a majest river. On the margin of thi 
river stood an eastern-look city, such as we read of in the arabian 
tales, but of a charact even more singular than ani there described. 
from my position, which wa far abov the level of the town, I could 
perceiv it everi nook and corner, as if delin on a map. the 
street seem innumerable, and cross each other irregularli in 
all directions, but were rather long wind alley than streets, and 
absolut swarm with inhabitants. the hous were wildli picturesque. 
On everi hand wa a wilder of balconies, of verandas, of minarets, 
of shrines, and fantast carv oriels. bazaar abounded; and 
in these were display rich ware in infinit varieti and 
profusion--silks, muslins, the most dazzl cutlery, the most 
magnific jewel and gems. besid these things, were seen, on all 
sides, banner and palanquins, litter with state dame close veiled, 
eleph gorgeous caparisoned, idol grotesqu hewn, drums, 
banners, and gongs, spears, silver and gild maces. and amid the 
crowd, and the clamor, and the gener intricaci and confusion--amid 
the million of black and yellow men, turban and robed, and of flow 
beard, there roam a countless multitud of holi fillet bulls, while 
vast legion of the filthi but sacr ape clambered, chatter and 
shrieking, about the cornic of the mosques, or clung to the minaret 
and oriels. from the swarm street to the bank of the river, there 
descend innumer flight of step lead to bath places, while 
the river itself seem to forc a passag with difficulti through the 
vast fleet of deeply-burthen ship that far and wide encount 
it surface. beyond the limit of the citi arose, in frequent majest 
groups, the palm and the cocoa, with other gigant and weird tree of 
vast age, and here and there might be seen a field of rice, the thatch 
hut of a peasant, a tank, a stray temple, a gypsi camp, or a solitari 
grace maiden take her way, with a pitcher upon her head, to the 
bank of the magnific river. 

“you will say now, of course, that I dreamed; but not so. what I 
saw--what I heard--what I felt--what I thought--had about it noth 
of the unmistak idiosyncrasi of the dream. all wa rigor 
self-consistent. At first, doubt that I wa realli awake, I enter 
into a seri of tests, which soon convinc me that I realli was. 
now, when one dreams, and, in the dream, suspect that he dreams, the 
suspicion never fail to confirm itself, and the sleeper is almost 
immedi aroused. thu novali err not in say that ‘we are near 
wake when we dream that we dream.’ had the vision occur to me as I 
describ it, without my suspect it as a dream, then a dream it might 
absolut have been, but, occur as it did, and suspect and test 
as it was, I am forc to class it among other phenomena.” 

“in thi I am not sure that you are wrong,” observ dr. templeton, “but 
proceed. you aros and descend into the city.” 

“I arose,” continu bedloe, regard the doctor with an air of 
profound astonish “I arose, as you say, and descend into the city. 
On my way I fell in with an immens populace, crowd through everi 
avenue, all in the same direction, and exhibit in everi action the 
wildest excitement. veri suddenly, and by some inconceiv impulse, I 
becam intens imbu with person interest in what wa go on. 
I seem to feel that I had an import part to play, without exactli 
understand what it was. against the crowd which environ me, 
however, I experienc a deep sentiment of animosity. I shrank from amid 
them, and, swiftly, by a circuit path, reach and enter the city. 
here all wa the wildest tumult and contention. A small parti of men, 
clad in garment half-indian, half-european, and offic by gentlemen 
in a uniform partli british, were engaged, at great odds, with the 
swarm rabbl of the alleys. I join the weaker party, arm myself 
with the weapon of a fallen officer, and fight I knew not whom with 
the nervou feroc of despair. We were soon overpow by numbers, 
and driven to seek refug in a speci of kiosk. here we barricad 
ourselves, and, for the present were secure. from a loop-hol near the 
summit of the kiosk, I perceiv a vast crowd, in furiou agitation, 
surround and assault a gay palac that overhung the river. 
presently, from an upper window of thi place, there descend an 
effeminate-look person, by mean of a string made of the turban of 
hi attendants. A boat wa at hand, in which he escap to the opposit 
bank of the river. 

“and now a new object took possess of my soul. I spoke a few hurri 
but energet word to my companions, and, have succeed in gain 
over a few of them to my purpos made a frantic salli from the kiosk. 
We rush amid the crowd that surround it. they retreated, at first, 
befor us. they rallied, fought madly, and retreat again. In the 
mean time we were born far from the kiosk, and becam bewild and 
entangl among the narrow street of tall, overhang houses, into 
the recess of which the sun had never been abl to shine. the rabbl 
press impetu upon us, harrass us with their spears, and 
overwhelm us with flight of arrows. these latter were veri 
remarkable, and resembl in some respect the writh crees of the 
malay. they were made to imit the bodi of a creep serpent, and 
were long and black, with a poison barb. one of them struck me upon 
the right temple. I reel and fell. An instantan and dread 
sick seiz me. I struggled--i gasped--i died. “you will hardli 
persist now,” said I smiling, “that the whole of your adventur wa not 
a dream. you are not prepar to maintain that you are dead?” 

when I said these words, I of cours expect some live salli from 
bedlo in reply, but, to my astonishment, he hesitated, trembled, becam 
fear pallid, and remain silent. I look toward templeton. He 
sat erect and rigid in hi chair--hi teeth chattered, and hi eye were 
start from their sockets. “proceed!” he at length said hoars to 
bedloe. 

“for mani minutes,” continu the latter, “mi sole sentiment--mi sole 
feeling--wa that of dark and nonentity, with the conscious of 
death. At length there seem to pass a violent and sudden shock through 
my soul, as if of electricity. with it came the sens of elast and 
of light. thi latter I felt--not saw. In an instant I seem to rise 
from the ground. but I had no bodily, no visible, audible, or palpabl 
presence. the crowd had departed. the tumult had ceased. the citi wa 
in compar repose. beneath me lay my corpse, with the arrow in my 
temple, the whole head greatli swollen and disfigured. but all these 
thing I felt--not saw. I took interest in nothing. even the corps 
seem a matter in which I had no concern. volit I had none, but 
appear to be impel into motion, and flit buoyantli out of the 
city, retrac the circuit path by which I had enter it. when I 
had attain that point of the ravin in the mountain at which I had 
encount the hyena, I again experienc a shock as of a galvan 
battery, the sens of weight, of volition, of substance, returned. I 
becam my origin self, and bent my step eagerli homeward--but the 
past had not lost the vivid of the real--and not now, even for an 
instant, can I compel my understand to regard it as a dream.” 

“nor wa it,” said templeton, with an air of deep solemnity, “yet it 
would be difficult to say how otherwis it should be termed. let us 
suppos only, that the soul of the man of to-day is upon the verg of 
some stupend psychal discoveries. let us content ourselv with thi 
supposition. for the rest I have some explan to make. here is a 
watercolor drawing, which I should have shown you before, but which 
an unaccount sentiment of horror ha hitherto prevent me from 
showing.” 

We look at the pictur which he presented. I saw noth in it of an 
extraordinari character, but it effect upon bedlo wa prodigious. He 
nearli faint as he gazed. and yet it wa but a miniatur portrait--a 
miracul accur one, to be sure--of hi own veri remark 
features. At least thi wa my thought as I regard it. 

“you will perceive,” said templeton, “the date of thi picture--it 
is here, scarc visible, in thi corner--1780. In thi year wa the 
portrait taken. It is the like of a dead friend--a mr. oldeb--to 
whom I becam much attach at calcutta, dure the administr of 
warren hastings. I wa then onli twenti year old. when I first saw you, 
mr. bedloe, at saratoga, it wa the miracul similar which exist 
between yourself and the paint which induc me to accost you, 
to seek your friendship, and to bring about those arrang which 
result in my becom your constant companion. In accomplish thi 
point, I wa urg partly, and perhap principally, by a regret 
memori of the deceased, but also, in part, by an uneasy, and not 
altogeth horrorless curios respect yourself. 

“in your detail of the vision which present itself to you amid the 
hills, you have described, with the minutest accuracy, the indian citi 
of benares, upon the holi river. the riots, the combat, the massacre, 
were the actual event of the insurrect of cheyt sing, which took 
place in 1780, when hast wa put in immin peril of hi life. the 
man escap by the string of turban wa cheyt sing himself. the parti 
in the kiosk were sepoy and british officers, head by hastings. Of 
thi parti I wa one, and did all I could to prevent the rash and fatal 
salli of the offic who fell, in the crowd alleys, by the poison 
arrow of a bengalee. that offic wa my dearest friend. It wa oldeb. 
you will perceiv by these manuscripts,” (here the speaker produc a 
note-book in which sever page appear to have been freshli written,) 
“that at the veri period in which you fanci these thing amid the 
hills, I wa engag in detail them upon paper here at home.” 

In about a week after thi conversation, the follow paragraph 
appear in a charlottesvil paper: 

“we have the pain duti of announc the death of mr. augustu bedlo, 
a gentleman whose amiabl manner and mani virtu have long endear 
him to the citizen of charlottesville. 

“mr. b., for some year past, ha been subject to neuralgia, which ha 
often threaten to termin fatally; but thi can be regard onli 
as the mediat caus of hi decease. the proxim caus wa one of 
especi singularity. In an excurs to the rag mountains, a few 
day since, a slight cold and fever were contracted, attend with 
great determin of blood to the head. To reliev this, dr. templeton 
resort to topic bleeding. leech were appli to the temples. In 
a fear brief period the patient died, when it appear that in the 
jar contain the leeches, had been introduced, by accident, one of 
the venom vermicular sangsu which are now and then found in the 
neighbor ponds. thi creatur fasten itself upon a small arteri in 
the right temple. it close resembl to the medicin leech caus 
the mistak to be overlook until too late. 

“n. B. the poison sangsu of charlottesvil may alway be 
distinguish from the medicin leech by it blackness, and especi 
by it writh or vermicular motions, which veri nearli resembl those 
of a snake.” 

I wa speak with the editor of the paper in question, upon the 
topic of thi remark accident, when it occur to me to ask how it 
happen that the name of the deceas had been given as bedlo. 

“I presume,” I said, “you have author for thi spelling, but I have 
alway suppos the name to be written with an e at the end.” 

“authority?--no,” he replied. “it is a mere typograph error. the 
name is bedlo with an e, all the world over, and I never knew it to be 
spelt otherwis in my life.” 

“then,” said I mutteringly, as I turn upon my heel, “then inde ha 
it come to pass that one truth is stranger than ani fiction--for bedloe, 
without the e, what is it but oldeb conversed! and thi man tell me 
that it is a typograph error.” 




the spectacl 

mani year ago, it wa the fashion to ridicul the idea of “love at 
first sight;” but those who think, not less than those who feel deeply, 
have alway advoc it existence. modern discoveries, indeed, in what 
may be term ethic magnet or magnetoesthetics, render it probabl 
that the most natural, and, consequently, the truest and most intens 
of the human affect are those which aris in the heart as if by 
electr sympathy--in a word, that the brightest and most endur 
of the psychal fetter are those which are rivet by a glance. the 
confess I am about to make will add anoth to the alreadi almost 
innumer instanc of the truth of the position. 

My stori requir that I should be somewhat minute. I am still a veri 
young man--not yet twenty-two year of age. My name, at present, is a 
veri usual and rather plebeian one--simpson. I say “at present;” for it 
is onli late that I have been so called--hav legisl 
adopt thi surnam within the last year in order to receiv a larg 
inherit left me by a distant male relative, adolphu simpson, 
esq. the bequest wa condit upon my take the name of the 
testator,--th family, not the christian name; my christian name is 
napoleon bonaparte--or, more properly, these are my first and middl 
appellations. 

I assum the name, simpson, with some reluctance, as in my true 
patronym, froissart, I felt a veri pardon pride--believ that 
I could trace a descent from the immort author of the “chronicles.” 
while on the subject of names, by the bye, I may mention a singular 
coincid of sound attend the name of some of my immedi 
predecessors. My father wa a monsieur froissart, of paris. hi wife--mi 
mother, whom he marri at fifteen--wa a mademoisel croissart, eldest 
daughter of croissart the banker, whose wife, again, be onli sixteen 
when married, wa the eldest daughter of one victor voissart. monsieur 
voissart, veri singularly, had marri a ladi of similar name--a 
mademoisel moissart. she, too, wa quit a child when married; and her 
mother, also, madam moissart, wa onli fourteen when led to the altar. 
these earli marriag are usual in france. here, however, are moissart, 
voissart, croissart, and froissart, all in the direct line of descent. 
My own name, though, as I say, becam simpson, by act of legislature, 
and with so much repugn on my part, that, at one period, I actual 
hesit about accept the legaci with the useless and annoy 
proviso attached. 

As to person endowments, I am by no mean deficient. On the contrary, 
I believ that I am well made, and possess what nine tenth of the world 
would call a handsom face. In height I am five feet eleven. My hair is 
black and curling. My nose is suffici good. My eye are larg and 
gray; and although, in fact they are weak a veri inconveni degree, 
still no defect in thi regard would be suspect from their appearance. 
the weak itself, however, ha alway much annoy me, and I have 
resort to everi remedy--short of wear glasses. be youth and 
good-looking, I natur dislik these, and have resolut refus to 
employ them. I know nothing, indeed, which so disfigur the counten 
of a young person, or so impress everi featur with an air of 
demureness, if not altogeth of sanctimoni and of age. An 
eyeglass, on the other hand, ha a savor of downright fopperi and 
affectation. I have hitherto manag as well as I could without either. 
but someth too much of these mere person details, which, after 
all, are of littl importance. I will content myself with saying, 
in addition, that my tempera is sanguine, rash, ardent, 
enthusiastic--and that all my life I have been a devot admir of the 
women. 

one night last winter I enter a box at the p---theatre, in compani 
with a friend, mr. talbot. It wa an opera night, and the bill 
present a veri rare attraction, so that the hous wa excess 
crowded. We were in time, however, to obtain the front seat which had 
been reserv for us, and into which, with some littl difficulty, we 
elbow our way. 

for two hour my companion, who wa a music fanatico, gave hi 
undivid attent to the stage; and, in the meantime, I amus myself 
by observ the audience, which consisted, in chief part, of the veri 
elit of the city. have satisfi myself upon thi point, I wa about 
turn my eye to the prima donna, when they were arrest and 
rivet by a figur in one of the privat box which had escap my 
observation. 

If I live a thousand years, I can never forget the intens emot 
with which I regard thi figure. It wa that of a female, the most 
exquisit I had ever beheld. the face wa so far turn toward the stage 
that, for some minutes, I could not obtain a view of it--but the form 
wa divine; no other word can suffici express it magnific 
proportion--and even the term “divine” seem ridicul feebl as I 
write it. 

the magic of a love form in woman--th necrom of femal 
gracefulness--wa alway a power which I had found it imposs to 
resist, but here wa grace personified, incarnate, the beau ideal of my 
wildest and most enthusiast visions. the figure, almost all of which 
the construct of the box permit to be seen, wa somewhat abov the 
medium height, and nearli approached, without posit reaching, the 
majestic. it perfect full and tournur were delicious. the head of 
which onli the back wa visible, rival in outlin that of the greek 
psyche, and wa rather display than conceal by an eleg cap of 
gaze aerienne, which put me in mind of the ventum textilem of apuleius. 
the right arm hung over the balustrad of the box, and thrill everi 
nerv of my frame with it exquisit symmetry. it upper portion wa 
draperi by one of the loos open sleev now in fashion. thi extend 
but littl below the elbow. beneath it wa worn an under one of some 
frail material, close-fitting, and termin by a cuff of rich lace, 
which fell grace over the top of the hand, reveal onli the 
delic fingers, upon one of which sparkl a diamond ring, which I 
at onc saw wa of extraordinari value. the admir round of the 
wrist wa well set off by a bracelet which encircl it, and which also 
wa ornament and clasp by a magnific aigrett of jewels--telling, 
in word that could not be mistaken, at onc of the wealth and 
fastidi tast of the wearer. 

I gaze at thi queenli apparit for at least half an hour, as if I 
had been suddenli convert to stone; and, dure thi period, I felt 
the full forc and truth of all that ha been said or sung concern 
“love at first sight.” My feel were total differ from ani which 
I had hitherto experienced, in the presenc of even the most celebr 
specimen of femal loveliness. An unaccountable, and what I am 
compel to consid a magnetic, sympathi of soul for soul, seem to 
rivet, not onli my vision, but my whole power of thought and feeling, 
upon the admir object befor me. I saw--i felt--i knew that I wa 
deeply, madly, irrevoc in love--and thi even befor see the face 
of the person beloved. So intense, indeed, wa the passion that consum 
me, that I realli believ it would have receiv littl if ani abat 
had the features, yet unseen, prove of mere ordinari character, so 
anomal is the natur of the onli true love--of the love at first 
sight--and so littl realli depend is it upon the extern condit 
which onli seem to creat and control it. 

while I wa thu wrap in admir of thi love vision, a sudden 
disturb among the audienc caus her to turn her head partial 
toward me, so that I beheld the entir profil of the face. it beauti 
even exceed my anticipations--and yet there wa someth about it 
which disappoint me without my be abl to tell exactli what it 
was. I said “disappointed,” but thi is not altogeth the word. My 
sentiment were at onc quiet and exalted. they partook less of 
transport and more of calm enthusiasm of enthusiast repose. thi state 
of feel arose, perhaps, from the madonna-lik and matronli air of 
the face; and yet I at onc understood that it could not have arisen 
entir from this. there wa someth else--som mysteri which I 
could not develope--som express about the counten which slightli 
disturb me while it greatli heighten my interest. In fact, I wa 
just in that condit of mind which prepar a young and suscept 
man for ani act of extravagance. had the ladi been alone, I should 
undoubtedli have enter her box and accost her at all hazards; but, 
fortunately, she wa attend by two companions--a gentleman, and a 
strikingli beauti woman, to all appear a few year younger than 
herself. 

I revolv in my mind a thousand scheme by which I might obtain, 
hereafter, an introduct to the elder lady, or, for the present, at 
all events, a more distinct view of her beauty. I would have remov 
my posit to one nearer her own, but the crowd state of the theatr 
render thi impossible; and the stern decre of fashion had, of late, 
imper prohibit the use of the opera-glass in a case such as 
this, even had I been so fortun as to have one with me--but I had 
not--and wa thu in despair. 

At length I bethought me of appli to my companion. 

“talbot,” I said, “you have an opera-glass. let me have it.” 

“an opera-glass!--no!--what do you suppos I would be do with an 
opera-glass?” here he turn impati toward the stage. 

“but, talbot,” I continued, pull him by the shoulder, “listen to me 
will you? Do you see the stage--box?--there!--no, the next.--did you 
ever behold as love a woman?” 

“she is veri beautiful, no doubt,” he said. 

“I wonder who she can be?” 

“why, in the name of all that is angelic, don’t you know who she is? 
‘not to know her argu yourself unknown.’ she is the celebr madam 
lalande--th beauti of the day par excellence, and the talk of the 
whole town. immens wealthi too--a widow, and a great match--ha just 
arriv from paris.” 

“do you know her?” 

“yes; I have the honor.” 

“will you introduc me?” 

“assuredly, with the greatest pleasure; when shall it be?” 

“to-morrow, at one, I will call upon you at b--’s.” 

“veri good; and now do hold your tongue, if you can.” 

In thi latter respect I wa forc to take talbot’ advice; for he 
remain obstin deaf to everi further question or suggestion, and 
occupi himself exclus for the rest of the even with what wa 
transact upon the stage. 

In the meantim I kept my eye rivet on madam lalande, and at length 
had the good fortun to obtain a full front view of her face. It wa 
exquisit lovely--this, of course, my heart had told me before, 
even had not talbot fulli satisfi me upon the point--but still the 
unintellig someth disturb me. I final conclud that my 
sens were impress by a certain air of gravity, sadness, or, still 
more properly, of weariness, which took someth from the youth 
and fresh of the countenance, onli to endow it with a seraph 
tender and majesty, and thus, of course, to my enthusiast and 
romant temperment, with an interest tenfold. 

while I thu feast my eyes, I perceived, at last, to my great 
trepidation, by an almost impercept start on the part of the lady, 
that she had becom suddenli awar of the intens of my gaze. still, 
I wa absolut fascinated, and could not withdraw it, even for an 
instant. she turn asid her face, and again I saw onli the chisel 
contour of the back portion of the head. after some minutes, as if urg 
by curios to see if I wa still looking, she gradual brought her 
face again around and again encount my burn gaze. her larg dark 
eye fell instantly, and a deep blush mantl her cheek. but what wa my 
astonish at perceiv that she not onli did not a second time 
avert her head, but that she actual took from her girdl a doubl 
eyeglass--elev it--adjust it--and then regard me through it, 
intent and deliberately, for the space of sever minutes. 

had a thunderbolt fallen at my feet I could not have been more 
thoroughli astounded--astound only--not offend or disgust in the 
slightest degree; although an action so bold in ani other woman would 
have been like to offend or disgust. but the whole thing wa done with 
so much quietude--so much nonchalance--so much repose--with so 
evid an air of the highest breeding, in short--that noth of 
mere effronteri wa perceptible, and my sole sentiment were those of 
admir and surprise. 

I observ that, upon her first elev of the glass, she had seem 
satisfi with a momentari inspect of my person, and wa withdraw 
the instrument, when, as if struck by a second thought, she resum 
it, and so continu to regard me with fix attent for the space of 
sever minutes--for five minutes, at the veri least, I am sure. 

thi action, so remark in an american theatre, attract veri 
gener observation, and gave rise to an indefinit movement, or buzz, 
among the audience, which for a moment fill me with confusion, but 
produc no visibl effect upon the counten of madam lalande. 

have satisfi her curiosity--if such it was--sh drop the glass, 
and quietli gave her attent again to the stage; her profil now be 
turn toward myself, as before. I continu to watch her unremittingly, 
although I wa fulli consciou of my rude in so doing. present I 
saw the head slowli and slightli chang it position; and soon I becam 
convinc that the lady, while pretend to look at the stage was, in 
fact, attent regard myself. It is needless to say what effect 
thi conduct, on the part of so fascin a woman, had upon my 
excit mind. 

have thu scrutin me for perhap a quarter of an hour, the fair 
object of my passion address the gentleman who attend her, and 
while she spoke, I saw distinctly, by the glanc of both, that the 
convers had refer to myself. 

upon it conclusion, madam laland again turn toward the stage, and, 
for a few minutes, seem absorb in the performance. At the expir 
of thi period, however, I wa thrown into an extrem of agit by 
see her unfold, for the second time, the eye-glass which hung at her 
side, fulli confront me as before, and, disregard the renew buzz 
of the audience, survey me, from head to foot, with the same miracul 
composur which had previous so delight and confound my soul. 

thi extraordinari behavior, by throw me into a perfect fever of 
excitement--into an absolut delirium of love--serv rather to embolden 
than to disconcert me. In the mad intens of my devotion, I forgot 
everyth but the presenc and the majest loveli of the vision 
which confront my gaze. watch my opportunity, when I thought the 
audienc were fulli engag with the opera, I at length caught the eye 
of madam lalande, and, upon the instant, made a slight but unmistak 
bow. 

she blush veri deeply--then avert her eyes--then slowli and 
cautious look around, appar to see if my rash action had been 
noticed--then lean over toward the gentleman who sat by her side. 

I now felt a burn sens of the improprieti I had committed, and 
expect noth less than instant exposure; while a vision of pistol 
upon the morrow float rapidli and uncomfort through my brain. 
I wa greatli and immedi relieved, however, when I saw the ladi 
mere hand the gentleman a play-bill, without speaking, but the reader 
may form some feebl concept of my astonishment--of my profound 
amazement--mi deliri bewilder of heart and soul--when, instantli 
afterward, have again glanc furtiv around, she allow her bright 
eye to set fulli and steadili upon my own, and then, with a faint 
smile, disclos a bright line of her pearli teeth, made two distinct, 
pointed, and unequivoc affirm inclin of the head. 

It is useless, of course, to dwell upon my joy--upon my transport--upon 
my illimit ecstasi of heart. If ever man wa mad with excess of 
happiness, it wa myself at that moment. I loved. thi wa my first 
love--so I felt it to be. It wa love supreme--indescribable. It wa 
“love at first sight;” and at first sight, too, it had been appreci 
and returned. 

yes, returned. how and whi should I doubt it for an instant. what other 
construct could I possibl put upon such conduct, on the part of a 
ladi so beautiful--so wealthy--evid so accomplished--of so high 
breeding--of so lofti a posit in society--in everi regard so entir 
respect as I felt assur wa madam lalande? yes, she love me--sh 
return the enthusiasm of my love, with an enthusiasm as blind--a 
uncompromising--a uncalculating--a abandoned--and as utterli unbound 
as my own! these delici fanci and reflections, however, were now 
interrupt by the fall of the drop-curtain. the audienc arose; and 
the usual tumult immedi supervened. quit talbot abruptly, I 
made everi effort to forc my way into closer proxim with madam 
lalande. have fail in this, on account of the crowd, I at length 
gave up the chase, and bent my step homeward; consol myself for 
my disappoint in not have been abl to touch even the hem of her 
robe, by the reflect that I should be introduc by talbot, in due 
form, upon the morrow. 

thi morrow at last came, that is to say, a day final dawn upon a 
long and weari night of impatience; and then the hour until “one” were 
snail-paced, dreary, and innumerable. but even stamboul, it is said, 
shall have an end, and there came an end to thi long delay. the clock 
struck. As the last echo ceased, I step into b--‘ and inquir for 
talbot. 

“out,” said the footman--talbot’ own. 

“out!” I replied, stagger back half a dozen paces--“let me tell 
you, my fine fellow, that thi thing is thoroughli imposs and 
impracticable; mr. talbot is not out. what do you mean?” 

“nothing, sir; onli mr. talbot is not in, that’ all. He rode over to 
s--, immedi after breakfast, and left word that he would not be in 
town again for a week.” 

I stood petrifi with horror and rage. I endeavor to reply, but my 
tongu refus it office. At length I turn on my heel, livid with 
wrath, and inwardli consign the whole tribe of the talbot to the 
innermost region of erebus. It wa evid that my consider friend, 
il fanatico, had quit forgotten hi appoint with myself--had 
forgotten it as soon as it wa made. At no time wa he a veri scrupul 
man of hi word. there wa no help for it; so smother my vexat as 
well as I could, I stroll moodili up the street, propound futil 
inquiri about madam laland to everi male acquaint I met. By 
report she wa known, I found, to all--to mani by sight--but she had 
been in town onli a few weeks, and there were veri few, therefore, who 
claim her person acquaintance. these few, be still compar 
strangers, could not, or would not, take the liberti of introduc me 
through the formal of a morn call. while I stood thu in despair, 
convers with a trio of friend upon the all absorb subject of my 
heart, it so happen that the subject itself pass by. 

“a I live, there she is!” cri one. 

“surprisingli beautiful!” exclaim a second. 

“an angel upon earth!” ejacul a third. 

I looked; and in an open carriag which approach us, pass slowli 
down the street, sat the enchant vision of the opera, accompani by 
the younger ladi who had occupi a portion of her box. 

“her companion also wear remark well,” said the one of my trio who 
had spoken first. 

“astonishingly,” said the second; “still quit a brilliant air, but art 
will do wonders. upon my word, she look better than she did at 
pari five year ago. A beauti woman still;--don’t you think so, 
froissart?--simpson, I mean.” 

“still!” said I, “and whi shouldn’t she be? but compar with her friend 
she is as a rush-light to the even star--a glow-worm to antares. 

“ha! ha! ha!--why, simpson, you have an astonish tact at make 
discoveries--origin ones, I mean.” and here we separated, while one 
of the trio began hum a gay vaudeville, of which I caught onli the 
lines-- 

ninon, ninon, ninon a bas-- 

A ba ninon De l’enclos! 

dure thi littl scene, however, one thing had serv greatli to 
consol me, although it fed the passion by which I wa consumed. As the 
carriag of madam laland roll by our group, I had observ that 
she recogn me; and more than this, she had bless me, by the 
most seraph of all imagin smiles, with no equivoc mark of the 
recognition. 

As for an introduction, I wa oblig to abandon all hope of it until 
such time as talbot should think proper to return from the country. In 
the meantim I perseveringli frequent everi reput place of public 
amusement; and, at length, at the theatre, where I first saw her, I had 
the suprem bliss of meet her, and of exchang glanc with her 
onc again. thi did not occur, however, until the laps of a fortnight. 
everi day, in the interim, I had inquir for talbot at hi hotel, and 
everi day had been thrown into a spasm of wrath by the everlast “not 
come home yet” of hi footman. 

upon the even in question, therefore, I wa in a condit littl 
short of madness. madam lalande, I had been told, wa a parisian--had 
late arriv from paris--might she not suddenli return?--return befor 
talbot came back--and might she not be thu lost to me forever? the 
thought wa too terribl to bear. sinc my futur happi wa at 
issue, I resolv to act with a manli decision. In a word, upon the 
break up of the play, I trace the ladi to her residence, note the 
address, and the next morn sent her a full and elabor letter, in 
which I pour out my whole heart. 

I spoke boldly, freely--in a word, I spoke with passion. I conceal 
nothing--noth even of my weakness. I allud to the romant 
circumst of our first meeting--even to the glanc which had pass 
between us. I went so far as to say that I felt assur of her love; 
while I offer thi assurance, and my own intens of devotion, as two 
excus for my otherwis unpardon conduct. As a third, I spoke of my 
fear that she might quit the citi befor I could have the opportun of 
a formal introduction. I conclud the most wildli enthusiast epistl 
ever penned, with a frank declar of my worldli circumstances--of my 
affluence--and with an offer of my heart and of my hand. 

In an agoni of expect I await the reply. after what seem the 
laps of a centuri it came. 

yes, actual came. romant as all thi may appear, I realli receiv 
a letter from madam lalande--th beautiful, the wealthy, the idol 
madam lalande. her eyes--h magnific eyes, had not beli her 
nobl heart. like a true frenchwoman as she wa she had obey the frank 
dictat of her reason--th gener impuls of her nature--despis 
the convent pruderi of the world. she had not scorn my 
proposals. she had not shelter herself in silence. she had not 
return my letter unopened. she had even sent me, in reply, one pen 
by her own exquisit fingers. It ran thus: 

“monsieur simpson vill pardonn me for not compos de buteful tong of 
hi contre so vell as might. It is onli de late dat I am arrive, and 
not yet ave do opportunit for to--l’etudier. 

“vid di apologi for the maniere, I vill now say dat, helas!--monsieur 
simpson ave guess but de too true. need I say de more? helas! am I not 
readi speak de too moshe? 

“eugeni laland.” 

thi noble--spirit note I kiss a million times, and committed, no 
doubt, on it account, a thousand other extravag that have now 
escap my memory. still talbot would not return. alas! could he have 
form even the vaguest idea of the suffer hi absenc had occas 
hi friend, would not hi sympath natur have flown immedi 
to my relief? still, however, he came not. I wrote. He replied. He wa 
detain by urgent business--but would shortli return. He beg me not 
to be impatient--to moder my transports--to read sooth books--to 
drink noth stronger than hock--and to bring the consol of 
philosophi to my aid. the fool! if he could not come himself, why, in 
the name of everi thing rational, could he not have enclos me a 
letter of presentation? I wrote him again, entreat him to forward one 
forthwith. My letter wa return by that footman, with the follow 
endors in pencil. the scoundrel had join hi master in the 
country: 

“left s---yesterday, for part unknown--did not say where--or when be 
back--so thought best to return letter, know your handwriting, and as 
how you is always, more or less, in a hurry. 

“your sincerely, 

“stubbs.” 

after this, it is needless to say, that I devot to the infern 
deiti both master and valet:--but there wa littl use in anger, and 
no consol at all in complaint. 

but I had yet a resourc left, in my constitut audacity. hitherto 
it had serv me well, and I now resolv to make it avail me to the 
end. besides, after the correspond which had pass between us, what 
act of mere inform could I commit, within bounds, that ought to 
be regard as indecor by madam lalande? sinc the affair of 
the letter, I had been in the habit of watch her house, and thu 
discov that, about twilight, it wa her custom to promenade, 
attend onli by a negro in livery, in a public squar overlook by 
her windows. here, amid the luxuri and shadow groves, in the 
gray gloom of a sweet midsumm evening, I observ my opportun and 
accost her. 

the better to deceiv the servant in attendance, I did thi with the 
assur air of an old and familiar acquaintance. with a presenc of mind 
truli parisian, she took the cue at once, and, to greet me, held out the 
most bewitchingli littl of hands. the valet at onc fell into the 
rear, and now, with heart full to overflowing, we discours long and 
unreservedli of our love. 

As madam laland spoke english even less fluentli than she wrote it, 
our convers wa necessarili in french. In thi sweet tongue, so 
adapt to passion, I gave loos to the impetu enthusiasm of my 
nature, and, with all the eloqu I could command, besought her to 
consent to an immedi marriage. 

At thi impati she smiled. she urg the old stori of decorum--that 
bug-bear which deter so mani from bliss until the opportun for 
bliss ha forev gone by. I had most imprud made it known among my 
friends, she observed, that I desir her acquaintance--thu that I did 
not possess it--thus, again, there wa no possibl of conceal the 
date of our first knowledg of each other. and then she adverted, with a 
blush, to the extrem recenc of thi date. To wed immedi would be 
improper--would be indecorous--would be outre. all thi she said with a 
charm air of naivet which enraptur while it griev and convinc 
me. she went even so far as to accus me, laughingly, of rashness--of 
imprudence. she bade me rememb that I realli even knew not who she 
was--what were her prospects, her connections, her stand in society. 
she beg me, but with a sigh, to reconsid my proposal, and term 
my love an infatuation--a will o’ the wisp--a fanci or fantasi of the 
moment--a baseless and unstabl creation rather of the imagin 
than of the heart. these thing she utter as the shadow of the sweet 
twilight gather darkli and more darkli around us--and then, with a 
gentl pressur of her fairy-lik hand, overthrew, in a singl sweet 
instant, all the argument fabric she had reared. 

I repli as best I could--a onli a true lover can. I spoke at length, 
and perseveringli of my devotion, of my passion--of her exceed 
beauty, and of my own enthusiast admiration. In conclusion, I dwelt, 
with a convinc energy, upon the peril that encompass the cours 
of love--that cours of true love that never did run smooth--and thu 
deduc the manifest danger of render that cours unnecessarili long. 

thi latter argument seem final to soften the rigor of her 
determination. she relented; but there wa yet an obstacle, she said, 
which she felt assur I had not properli considered. thi wa a 
delic point--for a woman to urge, especi so; in mention it, 
she saw that she must make a sacrific of her feelings; still, for me, 
everi sacrific should be made. she allud to the topic of age. wa I 
aware--wa I fulli awar of the discrep between us? that the age 
of the husband, should surpass by a few years--even by fifteen or 
twenty--th age of the wife, wa regard by the world as admissible, 
and, indeed, as even proper, but she had alway entertain the belief 
that the year of the wife should never exceed in number those of the 
husband. A discrep of thi unnatur kind gave rise, too frequently, 
alas! to a life of unhappiness. now she wa awar that my own age did 
not exceed two and twenty; and I, on the contrary, perhaps, wa not 
awar that the year of my eugeni extend veri consider beyond 
that sum. 

about all thi there wa a nobil of soul--a digniti of candor--which 
delighted--which enchant me--which etern rivet my chains. I 
could scarc restrain the excess transport which possess me. 

“mi sweetest eugenie,” I cried, “what is all thi about which you are 
discoursing? your year surpass in some measur my own. but what then? 
the custom of the world are so mani convent follies. To those who 
love as ourselves, in what respect differ a year from an hour? I am 
twenty-two, you say, granted: indeed, you may as well call me, at once, 
twenty-three. now you yourself, my dearest eugenie, can have 
number no more than--can have number no more than--no more 
than--than--than--than--” 

here I paus for an instant, in the expect that madam laland 
would interrupt me by suppli her true age. but a frenchwoman is 
seldom direct, and ha always, by way of answer to an embarrass 
query, some littl practic repli of her own. In the present instance, 
eugenie, who for a few moment past had seem to be search for 
someth in her bosom, at length let fall upon the grass a miniature, 
which I immedi pick up and present to her. 

“keep it!” she said, with one of her most ravish smiles. “keep it 
for my sake--for the sake of her whom it too flatteringli represents. 
besides, upon the back of the trinket you may discover, perhaps, the 
veri inform you seem to desire. It is now, to be sure, grow 
rather dark--but you can examin it at your leisur in the morning. In 
the meantime, you shall be my escort home to-night. My friend are 
about hold a littl music levee. I can promis you, too, some good 
singing. We french are not nearli so punctili as you americans, and I 
shall have no difficulti in smuggl you in, in the charact of an old 
acquaintance.” 

with this, she took my arm, and I attend her home. the mansion wa 
quit a fine one, and, I believe, furnish in good taste. Of thi 
latter point, however, I am scarc qualifi to judge; for it wa just 
dark as we arrived; and in american mansion of the better sort light 
seldom, dure the heat of summer, make their appear at this, the 
most pleasant period of the day. In about an hour after my arrival, 
to be sure, a singl shade solar lamp wa lit in the princip 
drawing-room; and thi apartment, I could thu see, wa arrang with 
unusu good tast and even splendor; but two other room of the suite, 
and in which the compani chiefli assembled, remained, dure the whole 
evening, in a veri agreeabl shadow. thi is a well-conceiv custom, 
give the parti at least a choic of light or shade, and one which our 
friend over the water could not do better than immedi adopt. 

the even thu spent wa unquestion the most delici of my life. 
madam laland had not overr the music abil of her friends; 
and the sing I here heard I had never heard excel in ani privat 
circl out of vienna. the instrument perform were mani and of 
superior talents. the vocalist were chiefli ladies, and no individu 
sang less than well. At length, upon a peremptori call for “madam 
lalande,” she aros at once, without affect or demur, from the 
chais longu upon which she had sat by my side, and, accompani by 
one or two gentlemen and her femal friend of the opera, repair to the 
piano in the main drawing-room. I would have escort her myself, but 
felt that, under the circumst of my introduct to the house, I 
had better remain unobserv where I was. I wa thu depriv of the 
pleasur of seeing, although not of hearing, her sing. 

the impress she produc upon the compani seem electr but the 
effect upon myself wa someth even more. I know not how adequ to 
describ it. It aros in part, no doubt, from the sentiment of love 
with which I wa imbued; but chiefli from my convict of the extrem 
sensibl of the singer. It is beyond the reach of art to endow either 
air or recit with more impass express than wa hers. her 
utter of the romanc in otello--th tone with which she gave the 
word “sul mio sasso,” in the capuletti--i ring in my memori yet. 
her lower tone were absolut miraculous. her voic embrac three 
complet octaves, extend from the contralto D to the D upper soprano, 
and, though suffici power to have fill the san carlos, 
executed, with the minutest precision, everi difficulti of vocal 
composition--ascend and descend scales, cadences, or fiorituri. In 
the final of the somnambula, she brought about a most remark effect 
at the words: 

ah! non guing uman pensiero 

Al contento ond ‘io son piena. 

here, in imit of malibran, she modifi the origin phrase of 
bellini, so as to let her voic descend to the tenor G, when, by a rapid 
transition, she struck the G abov the trebl stave, spring over an 
interv of two octaves. 

upon rise from the piano after these miracl of vocal execution, she 
resum her seat by my side; when I express to her, in term of the 
deepest enthusiasm, my delight at her performance. Of my surpris I 
said nothing, and yet wa I most unfeignedli surprised; for a certain 
feebleness, or rather a certain tremul indecis of voic in 
ordinari conversation, had prepar me to anticip that, in singing, 
she would not acquit herself with ani remark ability. 

our convers wa now long, earnest, uninterrupted, and total 
unreserved. she made me relat mani of the earlier passag of my life, 
and listen with breathless attent to everi word of the narrative. I 
conceal nothing--felt that I had a right to conceal nothing--from her 
confid affection. encourag by her candor upon the delic point of 
her age, I entered, with perfect frankness, not onli into a detail of 
my mani minor vices, but made full confess of those moral and even 
of those physic infirmities, the disclosur of which, in demand so 
much higher a degre of courage, is so much surer an evid of love. 
I touch upon my colleg indiscretions--upon my extravagances--upon my 
carousals--upon my debts--upon my flirtations. I even went so far as 
to speak of a slightli hectic cough with which, at one time, I had been 
troubled--of a chronic rheumatism--of a twing of hereditari gout--and, 
in conclusion, of the disagre and inconvenient, but hitherto 
care concealed, weak of my eyes. 

“upon thi latter point,” said madam lalande, laughingly, “you have 
been sure injudici in come to confession; for, without the 
confession, I take it for grant that no one would have accus you of 
the crime. By the by,” she continued, “have you ani recollection--” and 
here I fanci that a blush, even through the gloom of the apartment, 
becam distinctli visibl upon her cheek--“hav you ani recollection, 
mon cher ami of thi littl ocular assistant, which now depend from my 
neck?” 

As she spoke she twirl in her finger the ident doubl eye-glass 
which had so overwhelm me with confus at the opera. 

“full well--alas! do I rememb it,” I exclaimed, press passion 
the delic hand which offer the glass for my inspection. they 
form a complex and magnific toy, richli chase and filigreed, and 
gleam with jewels, which, even in the defici light, I could not 
help perceiv were of high value. 

“eh bien! mon ami” she resum with a certain empress of manner that 
rather surpris me--“eh bien! mon ami, you have earnestli besought of 
me a favor which you have been pleas to denomin priceless. you 
have demand of me my hand upon the morrow. should I yield to your 
entreaties--and, I may add, to the plead of my own bosom--would I 
not be entitl to demand of you a very--a veri littl boon in return?” 

“name it!” I exclaim with an energi that had nearli drawn upon us the 
observ of the company, and restrain by their presenc alon 
from throw myself impetu at her feet. “name it, my beloved, my 
eugenie, my own!--nam it!--but, alas! it is alreadi yield ere named.” 

“you shall conquer, then, mon ami,” said she, “for the sake of the 
eugeni whom you love, thi littl weak which you have at last 
confessed--thi weak more moral than physical--and which, let 
me assur you, is so unbecom the nobil of your real nature--so 
inconsist with the candor of your usual character--and which, if 
permit further control, will assuredli involv you, sooner or later, 
in some veri disagre scrape. you shall conquer, for my sake, thi 
affect which lead you, as you yourself acknowledge, to the tacit 
or impli denial of your infirm of vision. for, thi infirm 
you virtual deny, in refus to employ the customari mean for it 
relief. you will understand me to say, then, that I wish you to wear 
spectacles;--ah, hush!--you have alreadi consent to wear them, for my 
sake. you shall accept the littl toy which I now hold in my hand, 
and which, though admir as an aid to vision, is realli of no veri 
immens valu as a gem. you perceiv that, by a trifl modif 
thus--or thus--it can be adapt to the eye in the form of spectacles, 
or worn in the waistcoat pocket as an eye-glass. It is in the former 
mode, however, and habitually, that you have alreadi consent to wear 
it for my sake.” 

thi request--must I confess it?--confus me in no littl degree. but 
the condit with which it wa coupl render hesitation, of course, 
a matter altogeth out of the question. 

“it is done!” I cried, with all the enthusiasm that I could muster at 
the moment. “it is done--it is most cheer agreed. I sacrific 
everi feel for your sake. to-night I wear thi dear eye-glass, as an 
eye-glass, and upon my heart; but with the earliest dawn of that morn 
which give me the pleasur of call you wife, I will place it 
upon my--upon my nose,--and there wear it ever afterward, in the less 
romantic, and less fashionable, but certainli in the more serviceable, 
form which you desire.” 

our convers now turn upon the detail of our arrang for the 
morrow. talbot, I learn from my betrothed, had just arriv in town. 
I wa to see him at once, and procur a carriage. the soire would 
scarc break up befor two; and by thi hour the vehicl wa to be 
at the door, when, in the confus occas by the departur of the 
company, madam L. could easili enter it unobserved. We were then to 
call at the hous of a clergyman who would be in waiting; there be 
married, drop talbot, and proceed on a short tour to the east, leav 
the fashion world at home to make whatev comment upon the matter 
it thought best. 

have plan all this, I immedi took leave, and went in search of 
talbot, but, on the way, I could not refrain from step into a hotel, 
for the purpos of inspect the miniature; and thi I did by the 
power aid of the glasses. the counten wa a surpassingli 
beauti one! those larg lumin eyes!--that proud grecian 
nose!--thos dark luxuri curls!--“ah!” said I, exultingli to myself, 
“thi is inde the speak imag of my beloved!” I turn the reverse, 
and discov the words--“eugeni lalande--ag twenty-seven year and 
seven months.” 

I found talbot at home, and proceed at onc to acquaint him with 
my good fortune. He profess excess astonishment, of course, but 
congratul me most cordially, and proffer everi assist in hi 
power. In a word, we carri out our arrang to the letter, and, at 
two in the morning, just ten minut after the ceremony, I found myself 
in a close carriag with madam lalande--with mrs. simpson, I should 
say--and drive at a great rate out of town, in a direct northeast 
by north, half-north. 

It had been determin for us by talbot, that, as we were to be up all 
night, we should make our first stop at c--, a villag about twenti 
mile from the city, and there get an earli breakfast and some repose, 
befor proceed upon our route. At four precisely, therefore, the 
carriag drew up at the door of the princip inn. I hand my ador 
wife out, and order breakfast forthwith. In the meantim we were shown 
into a small parlor, and sat down. 

It wa now nearli if not altogeth daylight; and, as I gazed, 
enraptured, at the angel by my side, the singular idea came, all at 
once, into my head, that thi wa realli the veri first moment sinc my 
acquaint with the celebr loveli of madam lalande, that I 
had enjoy a near inspect of that loveli by daylight at all. 

“and now, mon ami,” said she, take my hand, and so interrupt thi 
train of reflection, “and now, mon cher ami, sinc we are indissolubl 
one--sinc I have yield to your passion entreaties, and perform 
my portion of our agreement--i presum you have not forgotten that you 
also have a littl favor to bestow--a littl promis which it is your 
intent to keep. ah! let me see! let me remember! yes; full easili do 
I call to mind the precis word of the dear promis you made to eugeni 
last night. listen! you spoke thus: ‘it is done!--it is most cheer 
agreed! I sacrific everi feel for your sake. to-night I wear thi 
dear eye-glass as an eye-glass, and upon my heart; but with the earliest 
dawn of that morn which give me the privileg of call you wife, I 
will place it upon my--upon my nose,--and there wear it ever afterward, 
in the less romantic, and less fashionable, but certainli in the more 
serviceable, form which you desire.’ these were the exact words, my 
belov husband, were they not?” 

“they were,” I said; “you have an excel memory; and assuredly, 
my beauti eugenie, there is no disposit on my part to evad the 
perform of the trivial promis they imply. see! behold! they are 
becoming--rather--ar they not?” and here, have arrang the glass 
in the ordinari form of spectacles, I appli them gingerli in their 
proper position; while madam simpson, adjust her cap, and fold 
her arms, sat bolt upright in her chair, in a somewhat stiff and prim, 
and indeed, in a somewhat undignifi position. 

“good graciou me!” I exclaimed, almost at the veri instant that the 
rim of the spectacl had settl upon my nose--“mi good graciou 
me!--why, what can be the matter with these glasses?” and take them 
quickli off, I wipe them care with a silk handkerchief, and 
adjust them again. 

but if, in the first instance, there had occur someth which 
occas me surprise, in the second, thi surpris becam 
elev into astonishment; and thi astonish wa profound--wa 
extreme--inde I may say it wa horrific. what, in the name of 
everyth hideous, did thi mean? could I believ my eyes?--could 
i?--that wa the question. wa that--wa that--wa that rouge? and were 
those--and were those--wer those wrinkles, upon the visag of eugeni 
lalande? and oh! jupiter, and everi one of the god and goddesses, 
littl and big! what--what--what--what had becom of her teeth? I dash 
the spectacl violent to the ground, and, leap to my feet, stood 
erect in the middl of the floor, confront mrs. simpson, with my arm 
set a-kimbo, and grin and foaming, but, at the same time, utterli 
speechless with terror and with rage. 

now I have alreadi said that madam eugeni lalande--that is to say, 
simpson--spok the english languag but veri littl better than she 
wrote it, and for thi reason she veri properli never attempt to speak 
it upon ordinari occasions. but rage will carri a ladi to ani 
extreme; and in the present care it carri mrs. simpson to the veri 
extraordinari extrem of attempt to hold a convers in a tongu 
that she did not altogeth understand. 

“vell, monsieur,” said she, after survey me, in great appar 
astonishment, for some moments--“vell, monsieur?--and vat den?--vat de 
matter now? Is it de danc of de saint ituss dat you ave? If not like 
me, vat for vy buy de pig in the poke?” 

“you wretch!” said I, catch my breath--“you--you--y villain old 
hag!” 

“ag?--ole?--m not so ver ole, after all! Me not one singl day more dan 
de eighty-doo.” 

“eighty-two!” I ejaculated, stagger to the wall--“eighty-two hundr 
thousand baboons! the miniatur said twenty-seven year and seven 
months!” 

“to be sure!--dat is so!--ver true! but den de portrait ha been take 
for dese fifty-f year. ven I go marri my segond usbande, monsieur 
lalande, at dat time I had de portrait take for my daughter by my first 
usbande, monsieur moissart!” 

“moissart!” said I. 

“yes, moissart,” said she, mimick my pronunciation, which, to speak 
the truth, wa none of the best,--“and vat den? vat you know about de 
moissart?” 

“nothing, you old fright!--i know noth about him at all; onli I had 
an ancestor of that name, onc upon a time.” 

“dat name! and vat you ave for say to dat name? ‘ti ver goot name; 
and so is voissart--dat is ver goot name too. My daughter, mademoisel 
moissart, she marri von monsieur voissart,--and de name is bot ver 
respecta name.” 

“moissart?” I exclaimed, “and voissart! why, what is it you mean?” 

“vat I mean?--i mean moissart and voissart; and for de matter of dat, I 
mean croissart and froisart, too, if I onli tink proper to mean it. 
My daughter’ daughter, mademoisel voissart, she marri von monsieur 
croissart, and den again, my daughter’ grand daughter, mademoisel 
croissart, she marri von monsieur froissart; and I suppos you say dat 
dat is not von ver respecta name.-” 

“froissart!” said I, begin to faint, “why, sure you don’t say 
moissart, and voissart, and croissart, and froissart?” 

“yes,” she replied, lean fulli back in her chair, and stretch 
out her lower limb at great length; “yes, moissart, and voissart, and 
croissart, and froissart. but monsieur froissart, he va von ver big vat 
you call fool--h va von ver great big donc like yourself--for he lef 
la bell franc for come to di stupid amerique--and ven he get here 
he went and ave von ver stupide, von ver, ver stupid sonn, so I hear, 
dough I not yet av ad de plaisir to meet vid him--neith me nor my 
companion, de madam stephani lalande. He is name de napoleon 
bonapart froissart, and I suppos you say dat dat, too, is not von ver 
respect name.” 

either the length or the natur of thi speech, had the effect of 
work up mrs. simpson into a veri extraordinari passion indeed; and 
as she made an end of it, with great labor, she lump up from her chair 
like somebodi bewitched, drop upon the floor an entir univers 
of bustl as she lumped. onc upon her feet, she gnash her gums, 
brandish her arms, roll up her sleeves, shook her fist in my face, 
and conclud the perform by tear the cap from her head, and with 
it an immens wig of the most valuabl and beauti black hair, 
the whole of which she dash upon the ground with a yell, and there 
trammpl and danc a fandango upon it, in an absolut ecstasi and 
agoni of rage. 

meantim I sank aghast into the chair which she had vacated. “moissart 
and voissart!” I repeated, thoughtfully, as she cut one of her 
pigeon-wings, and “croissart and froissart!” as she complet 
another--“moissart and voissart and croissart and napoleon bonapart 
froissart!--why, you ineff old serpent, that’ me--that’ me--d’y 
hear? that’ me”--her I scream at the top of my voice--“that’ 
me-e-e! I am napoleon bonapart froissart! and if I havn’t marri my 
great, great, grandmother, I wish I may be everlastingli confounded!” 

madam eugeni lalande, quasi simpson--formerli moissart--was, in sober 
fact, my great, great, grandmother. In her youth she had been beautiful, 
and even at eighty-two, retain the majest height, the sculptur 
contour of head, the fine eye and the grecian nose of her girlhood. By 
the aid of these, of pearl-powder, of rouge, of fals hair, fals teeth, 
and fals tournure, as well as of the most skil modist of paris, 
she contriv to hold a respect foot among the beauti en peu 
passe of the french metropolis. In thi respect, indeed, she might 
have been regard as littl less than the equal of the celebr ninon 
De l’enclos. 

she wa immens wealthy, and be left, for the second time, a widow 
without children, she bethought herself of my exist in america, 
and for the purpos of make me her heir, paid a visit to the unit 
states, in compani with a distant and exceedingli love rel of her 
second husband’s--a madam stephani lalande. 

At the opera, my great, great, grandmother’ attent wa arrest by 
my notice; and, upon survey me through her eye-glass, she wa struck 
with a certain famili resembl to herself. thu interested, and 
know that the heir she sought wa actual in the city, she made 
inquiri of her parti respect me. the gentleman who attend her 
knew my person, and told her who I was. the inform thu obtain 
induc her to renew her scrutiny; and thi scrutini it wa which so 
embolden me that I behav in the absurd manner alreadi detailed. 
she return my bow, however, under the impress that, by some odd 
accident, I had discov her identity. when, deceiv by my weak 
of vision, and the art of the toilet, in respect to the age and charm 
of the strang lady, I demand so enthusiast of talbot who 
she was, he conclud that I meant the younger beauty, as a matter 
of course, and so inform me, with perfect truth, that she wa “the 
celebr widow, madam lalande.” 

In the street, next morning, my great, great, grandmoth encount 
talbot, an old parisian acquaintance; and the conversation, veri 
natur turn upon myself. My defici of vision were then 
explained; for these were notorious, although I wa entir ignor 
of their notoriety, and my good old rel discovered, much to 
her chagrin, that she had been deceiv in suppos me awar of her 
identity, and that I had been mere make a fool of myself in make 
open love, in a theatre, to an old woman unknown. By way of punish me 
for thi imprudence, she concoct with talbot a plot. He purpos kept 
out of my way to avoid give me the introduction. My street inquiri 
about “the love widow, madam lalande,” were suppos to refer to 
the younger lady, of course, and thu the convers with the three 
gentlemen whom I encount shortli after leav talbot’ hotel will 
be easili explained, as also their allus to ninon De l’enclos. I had 
no opportun of see madam laland close dure daylight; and, 
at her music soiree, my silli weak in refus the aid of glass 
effectu prevent me from make a discoveri of her age. when 
“madam lalande” wa call upon to sing, the younger ladi wa intended; 
and it wa she who aros to obey the call; my great, great, grandmother, 
to further the deception, aris at the same moment and accompani 
her to the piano in the main drawing-room. had I decid upon escort 
her thither, it had been her design to suggest the proprieti of my 
remain where I was; but my own prudenti view render thi 
unnecessary. the song which I so much admired, and which so confirm 
my impress of the youth of my mistress, were execut by madam 
stephani lalande. the eyeglass wa present by way of ad a reproof 
to the hoax--a sting to the epigram of the deception. it present 
afford an opportun for the lectur upon affect with which 
I wa so especi edified. It is almost superflu to add that the 
glass of the instrument, as worn by the old lady, had been exchang 
by her for a pair better adapt to my years. they suit me, in fact, 
to a T. 

the clergyman, who mere pretend to tie the fatal knot, wa a boon 
companion of talbot’s, and no priest. He wa an excel “whip,” 
however; and have dof hi cassock to put on a great-coat, he drove 
the hack which convey the “happi couple” out of town. talbot took a 
seat at hi side. the two scoundrel were thu “in at the death,” 
and through a half-open window of the back parlor of the inn, amus 
themselv in grin at the denouement of the drama. I believ I shall 
be forc to call them both out. 

nevertheless, I am not the husband of my great, great, grandmother; and 
thi is a reflect which afford me infinit relief,--but I am the 
husband of madam lalande--of madam stephani lalande--with whom my 
good old relative, besid make me her sole heir when she dies--if 
she ever does--ha been at the troubl of concoct me a match. In 
conclusion: I am done forev with billet doux and am never to be met 
without spectacles. 




king pest. 

A tale contain an allegory. 

the god do bear and will allow in king 
the thing which they abhor in rascal routes. 

_buckhurst’ tragedi of ferrex and porrex._ 

about twelv o’clock, one night in the month of october, and dure the 
chivalr reign of the third edward, two seamen belong to the crew 
of the “free and easy,” a trade schooner pli between sluy and the 
thames, and then at anchor in that river, were much astonish to find 
themselv seat in the tap-room of an ale-hous in the parish of st. 
andrews, london--which ale-hous bore for sign the portraitur of a 
“jolli tar.” 

the room, although ill-contrived, smoke-blackened, low-pitched, and in 
everi other respect agre with the gener charact of such place 
at the period--was, nevertheless, in the opinion of the grotesqu group 
scatter here and there within it, suffici well adapt to it 
purpose. 

Of these group our two seamen formed, I think, the most interesting, if 
not the most conspicuous. 

the one who appear to be the elder, and whom hi companion address 
by the characterist appel of “legs,” wa at the same time much 
the taller of the two. He might have measur six feet and a half, and 
an habitu stoop in the shoulder seem to have been the necessari 
consequ of an altitud so enormous.--superflu in height were, 
however, more than account for by defici in other respects. 
He wa exceedingli thin; and might, as hi associ asserted, have 
answered, when drunk, for a pennant at the mast-head, or, when sober, 
have serv for a jib-boom. but these jests, and other of a similar 
nature, had evid produced, at no time, ani effect upon the 
cachinnatori muscl of the tar. with high cheek-bones, a larg 
hawk-nose, retreat chin, fallen under-jaw, and huge protrud white 
eyes, the express of hi countenance, although ting with a speci 
of dog indiffer to matter and thing in general, wa not the 
less utterli solemn and seriou beyond all attempt at imit or 
description. 

the younger seaman was, in all outward appearance, the convers of hi 
companion. hi statur could not have exceed four feet. A pair 
of stumpi bow-leg support hi squat, unwieldi figure, while hi 
unusu short and thick arms, with no ordinari fist at their 
extremities, swung off dangl from hi side like the fin of a 
sea-turtle. small eyes, of no particular color, twinkl far back in hi 
head. hi nose remain buri in the mass of flesh which envelop hi 
round, full, and purpl face; and hi thick upper-lip rest upon the 
still thicker one beneath with an air of complac self-satisfaction, 
much heighten by the owner’ habit of lick them at intervals. 
He evid regard hi tall shipmat with a feel half-wondrous, 
half-quizzical; and stare up occasion in hi face as the red 
set sun stare up at the crag of ben nevis. 

variou and eventful, however, had been the peregrin of the worthi 
coupl in and about the differ tap-hous of the neighbourhood dure 
the earlier hour of the night. fund even the most ample, are not 
alway everlasting: and it wa with empti pocket our friend had 
ventur upon the present hostelrie. 

At the precis period, then, when thi histori properli commences, legs, 
and hi fellow hugh tarpaulin, sat, each with both elbow rest upon 
the larg oaken tabl in the middl of the floor, and with a hand upon 
either cheek. they were eyeing, from behind a huge flagon of unpaid-for 
“humming-stuff,” the portent words, “no chalk,” which to their 
indign and astonish were score over the doorway by mean of 
that veri miner whose presenc they purport to deny. not that the 
gift of decyph written characters--a gift among the commonalti 
of that day consid littl less cabalist than the art of 
inditing--could, in strict justice, have been laid to the charg of 
either discipl of the sea; but there was, to say the truth, a certain 
twist in the format of the letters--an indescrib lee-lurch about 
the whole--which foreboded, in the opinion of both seamen, a long run 
of dirti weather; and determin them at once, in the allegor word 
of leg himself, to “pump ship, clew up all sail, and scud befor the 
wind.” 

have accordingli dispos of what remain of the ale, and loop up 
the point of their short doublets, they final made a bolt for the 
street. although tarpaulin roll twice into the fire-place, mistak 
it for the door, yet their escap wa at length happili effected--and 
half after twelv o’clock found our hero ripe for mischief, and 
run for life down a dark alley in the direct of st. andrew’ 
stair, hotli pursu by the landladi of the “jolli tar.” 

At the epoch of thi event tale, and periodically, for mani year 
befor and after, all england, but more especi the metropolis, 
resound with the fear cri of “plague!” the citi wa in a great 
measur depopulated--and in those horribl regions, in the vicin of 
the thames, where amid the dark, narrow, and filthi lane and alleys, 
the demon of diseas wa suppos to have had hi nativity, awe, terror, 
and superstit were alon to be found stalk abroad. 

By author of the king such district were place under ban, and all 
person forbidden, under pain of death, to intrud upon their dismal 
solitude. yet neither the mandat of the monarch, nor the huge barrier 
erect at the entranc of the streets, nor the prospect of that 
loathsom death which, with almost absolut certainty, overwhelm 
the wretch whom no peril could deter from the adventure, prevent the 
unfurnish and unten dwell from be stripped, by the hand 
of nightli rapine, of everi article, such as iron, brass, or lead-work, 
which could in ani manner be turn to a profit account. 

abov all, it wa usual found, upon the annual winter open of the 
barriers, that locks, bolts, and secret cellars, had prove but 
slender protect to those rich store of wine and liquor which, in 
consider of the risk and troubl of removal, mani of the numer 
dealer have shop in the neighbourhood had consent to trust, dure 
the period of exile, to so insuffici a security. 

but there were veri few of the terror-stricken peopl who attribut 
these do to the agenc of human hands. pest-spirits, plague-goblins, 
and fever-demons, were the popular imp of mischief; and tale so 
blood-chil were hourli told, that the whole mass of forbidden 
build was, at length, envelop in terror as in a shroud, and 
the plunder himself wa often scare away by the horror hi own 
depreci had created; leav the entir vast circuit of prohibit 
district to gloom, silence, pestilence, and death. 

It wa by one of the terrif barrier alreadi mentioned, and which 
indic the region beyond to be under the pest-ban, that, in 
scrambl down an alley, leg and the worthi hugh tarpaulin found their 
progress suddenli impeded. To return wa out of the question, and no 
time wa to be lost, as their pursuer were close upon their heels. with 
thorough-br seamen to clamber up the roughli fashion plank-work 
wa a trifle; and, madden with the twofold excit of exercis 
and liquor, they leap unhesitatingli down within the enclosure, and 
hold on their drunken cours with shout and yellings, were soon 
bewild in it noisom and intric recesses. 

had they not, indeed, been intox beyond moral sense, their reel 
footstep must have been palsi by the horror of their situation. the 
air wa cold and misty. the paving-stones, loosen from their beds, lay 
in wild disord amid the tall, rank grass, which sprang up around the 
feet and ankles. fallen hous choke up the streets. the most fetid and 
poison smell everywher prevailed;--and by the aid of that ghastli 
light which, even at midnight, never fail to eman from a vapori and 
pestilenti atmosphere, might be discern lie in the by-path and 
alleys, or rot in the windowless habitations, the carcass of mani 
a nocturn plunder arrest by the hand of the plagu in the veri 
perpetr of hi robbery. 

--but it lay not in the power of images, or sensations, or impedi 
such as these, to stay the cours of men who, natur brave, and at 
that time especially, brim of courag and of “humming-stuff!” would 
have reeled, as straight as their condit might have permitted, 
undauntedli into the veri jaw of death. onward--stil onward stalk 
the grim legs, make the desol solemn echo and re-echo with yell 
like the terrif war-whoop of the indian: and onward, still onward 
roll the dumpi tarpaulin, hang on to the doublet of hi more activ 
companion, and far surpass the latter’ most strenuou exert in 
the way of vocal music, by bull-roar in basso, from the profund 
of hi stentorian lungs. 

they had now evid reach the strong hold of the pestilence. their 
way at everi step or plung grew more noisom and more horrible--th 
path more narrow and more intricate. huge stone and beam fall 
moment from the decay roof abov them, gave evidence, by their 
sullen and heavi descent, of the vast height of the surround houses; 
and while actual exert becam necessari to forc a passag through 
frequent heap of rubbish, it wa by no mean seldom that the hand fell 
upon a skeleton or rest upon a more fleshli corpse. 

suddenly, as the seamen stumbl against the entranc of a tall and 
ghastly-look building, a yell more than usual shrill from the 
throat of the excit legs, wa repli to from within, in a rapid 
success of wild, laughter-like, and fiendish shrieks. noth daunt 
at sound which, of such a nature, at such a time, and in such a place, 
might have curdl the veri blood in heart less irrevoc on fire, 
the drunken coupl rush headlong against the door, burst it open, and 
stagger into the midst of thing with a volley of curses. 

the room within which they found themselv prove to be the shop of 
an undertaker; but an open trap-door, in a corner of the floor near the 
entrance, look down upon a long rang of wine-cellars, whose depth 
the occasion sound of burst bottl proclaim to be well store 
with their appropri contents. In the middl of the room stood a 
table--in the centr of which again aros a huge tub of what appear 
to be punch. bottl of variou wine and cordials, togeth with 
jugs, pitchers, and flagon of everi shape and quality, were scatter 
profus upon the board. around it, upon coffin-tressels, wa seat a 
compani of six. thi compani I will endeavor to delin one by one. 

front the entrance, and elev a littl abov hi companions, sat a 
personag who appear to be the presid of the table. hi statur wa 
gaunt and tall, and leg wa confound to behold in him a figur 
more emaci than himself. hi face wa as yellow as saffron--but 
no featur except one alone, wa suffici mark to merit a 
particular description. thi one consist in a forehead so unusu 
and hideous lofty, as to have the appear of a bonnet or crown 
of flesh superad upon the natur head. hi mouth wa pucker and 
dimpl into an express of ghastli affability, and hi eyes, as 
inde the eye of all at table, were glaze over with the fume 
of intoxication. thi gentleman wa cloth from head to foot in a 
richly-embroid black silk-velvet pall, wrap neglig around 
hi form after the fashion of a spanish cloak.--hi head wa stuck full 
of sabl hearse-plumes, which he nod to and fro with a jaunti and 
know air; and, in hi right hand, he held a huge human thigh-bone, 
with which he appear to have been just knock down some member of 
the compani for a song. 

opposit him, and with her back to the door, wa a ladi of no whit the 
less extraordinari character. although quit as tall as the person just 
described, she had no right to complain of hi unnatur emaciation. she 
wa evid in the last stage of a dropsy; and her figur resembl 
nearli that of the huge puncheon of octob beer which stood, with the 
head driven in, close by her side, in a corner of the chamber. her 
face wa exceedingli round, red, and full; and the same peculiarity, or 
rather want of peculiarity, attach itself to her countenance, which I 
befor mention in the case of the president--that is to say, onli one 
featur of her face wa suffici distinguish to need a separ 
characterization: inde the acut tarpaulin immedi observ that 
the same remark might have appli to each individu person of the 
party; everi one of whom seem to possess a monopoli of some particular 
portion of physiognomy. with the ladi in question thi portion prove 
to be the mouth. commenc at the right ear, it swept with a terrif 
chasm to the left--th short pendant which she wore in either auricl 
continu bob into the aperture. she made, however, everi exert 
to keep her mouth close and look dignified, in a dress consist of a 
newli starch and iron shroud come up close under her chin, with a 
crimpl ruffl of cambric muslin. 

At her right hand sat a diminut young ladi whom she appear to 
patronise. thi delic littl creature, in the trembl of her wast 
fingers, in the livid hue of her lips, and in the slight hectic spot 
which ting her otherwis leaden complexion, gave evid indic 
of a gallop consumption. An air of gave extrem haut ton, however, 
pervad her whole appearance; she wore in a grace and degag manner, 
a larg and beauti winding-sheet of the finest india lawn; her hair 
hung in ringlet over her neck; a soft smile play about her mouth; but 
her nose, extrem long, thin, sinuous, flexibl and pimpled, hung down 
far below her under lip, and in spite of the delic manner in which 
she now and then move it to one side or the other with her tongue, gave 
to her counten a somewhat equivoc expression. 

over against her, and upon the left of the dropsic lady, wa seat a 
littl puffy, wheezing, and gouti old man, whose cheek repos upon the 
shoulder of their owner, like two huge bladder of oporto wine. with 
hi arm folded, and with one bandag leg deposit upon the table, 
he seem to think himself entitl to some consideration. He evid 
pride himself much upon everi inch of hi person appearance, but took 
more especi delight in call attent to hi gaudy-color surtout. 
this, to say the truth, must have cost him no littl money, and wa made 
to fit him exceedingli well--b fashion from one of the curious 
embroid silken cover appertain to those gloriou escutcheon 
which, in england and elsewhere, are customarili hung up, in some 
conspicu place, upon the dwell of depart aristocracy. 

next to him, and at the right hand of the president, wa a gentleman 
in long white hose and cotton drawers. hi frame shook, in a ridicul 
manner, with a fit of what tarpaulin call “the horrors.” hi jaws, 
which had been newli shaved, were tightli tie up by a bandag of 
muslin; and hi arm be fasten in a similar way at the wrists, 
I prevent him from help himself too freeli to the liquor upon the 
table; a precaut render necessary, in the opinion of legs, by 
the peculiarli sottish and wine-bib cast of hi visage. A pair of 
prodigi ears, nevertheless, which it wa no doubt found imposs 
to confine, tower away into the atmospher of the apartment, and were 
occasion prick up in a spasm, at the sound of the draw of a 
cork. 

front him, sixthli and lastly, wa situat a singularli 
stiff-look personage, who, be afflict with paralysis, must, 
to speak seriously, have felt veri ill at eas in hi unaccommod 
habiliments. He wa habited, somewhat uniquely, in a new and handsom 
mahogani coffin. it top or head-piec press upon the skull of the 
wearer, and extend over it in the fashion of a hood, give to the 
entir face an air of indescrib interest. arm-hol had been cut in 
the sides, for the sake not more of eleg than of convenience; but 
the dress, nevertheless, prevent it proprietor from sit as erect 
as hi associates; and as he lay reclin against hi tressel, at an 
angl of forty-f degrees, a pair of huge goggl eye roll up their 
aw white toward the ceil in absolut amaz at their own 
enormity. 

befor each of the parti lay a portion of a skull, which wa use as 
a drink cup. overhead wa suspend a human skeleton, by mean of a 
rope tie round one of the leg and fasten to a ring in the ceiling. 
the other limb, confin by no such fetter, stuck off from the bodi at 
right angles, caus the whole loos and rattl frame to dangl and 
twirl about at the capric of everi occasion puff of wind which found 
it way into the apartment. In the cranium of thi hideou thing lay 
quantiti of ignit charcoal, which threw a fit but vivid light over 
the entir scene; while coffins, and other ware appertain to the 
shop of an undertaker, were pile high up around the room, and against 
the windows, prevent ani ray from escap into the street. 

At sight of thi extraordinari assembly, and of their still more 
extraordinari paraphernalia, our two seamen did not conduct themselv 
with that degre of decorum which might have been expected. legs, 
lean against the wall near which he happen to be standing, drop 
hi lower jaw still lower than usual, and spread open hi eye to their 
fullest extent: while hugh tarpaulin, stoop down so as to bring hi 
nose upon a level with the table, and spread out a palm upon either 
knee, burst into a long, loud, and obstreper roar of veri ill-tim 
and immoder laughter. 

without, however, take offenc at behaviour so excess rude, the 
tall presid smile veri gracious upon the intruders--nod to them 
in a dignifi manner with hi head of sabl plumes--and, arising, took 
each by an arm, and led him to a seat which some other of the compani 
had place in the meantim for hi accommodation. leg to all thi 
offer not the slightest resistance, but sat down as he wa directed; 
while the gallant hugh, remov hi coffin tressel from it station 
near the head of the table, to the vicin of the littl consumpt 
ladi in the wind sheet, plump down by her side in high glee, 
and pour out a skull of red wine, quaf it to their better 
acquaintance. but at thi presumpt the stiff gentleman in the coffin 
seem exceedingli nettled; and seriou consequ might have ensued, 
had not the president, rap upon the tabl with hi truncheon, 
divert the attent of all present to the follow speech: 

“it becom our duti upon the present happi occasion”-- 

“avast there!” interrupt legs, look veri serious, “avast there a 
bit, I say, and tell us who the devil ye all are, and what busi ye 
have here, rig off like the foul fiends, and swill the snug blue 
ruin stow away for the winter by my honest shipmate, will wimbl the 
undertaker!” 

At thi unpardon piec of ill-breeding, all the origin compani 
half start to their feet, and utter the same rapid success of 
wild fiendish shriek which had befor caught the attent of the 
seamen. the president, however, wa the first to recov hi composure, 
and at length, turn to leg with great dignity, recommenced: 

“most willingli will we gratifi ani reason curios on the part of 
guest so illustrious, unbidden though they be. know then that in these 
dominion I am monarch, and here rule with undivid empir under the 
titl of ‘king pest the first.’ 

“thi apartment, which you no doubt profan suppos to be the shop of 
will wimbl the undertaker--a man whom we know not, and whose plebeian 
appel ha never befor thi night thwart our royal ears--thi 
apartment, I say, is the dais-chamb of our palace, devot to the 
council of our kingdom, and to other sacr and lofti purposes. 

“the nobl ladi who sit opposit is queen pest, our seren consort. the 
other exalt personag whom you behold are all of our family, and 
wear the insignia of the blood royal under the respect titl of 
‘hi grace the arch duke pest-iferous’--‘hi grace the duke 
pest-ilential’--‘hi grace the duke tem-pest’--and ‘her seren high 
the arch duchess ana-pest.’ 

“a regards,” continu he, “your demand of the busi upon which we 
sit here in council, we might be pardon for repli that it concerns, 
and concern alone, our own privat and regal interest, and is in no 
manner import to ani other than ourself. but in consider of 
those right to which as guest and stranger you may feel yourselv 
entitled, we will furthermor explain that we are here thi night, 
prepar by deep research and accur investigation, to examine, 
analyze, and thoroughli determin the indefin spirit--th 
incomprehens qualiti and nature--of those inestim treasur of 
the palate, the wines, ales, and liqueur of thi goodli metropolis: by 
so do to advanc not more our own design than the true welfar of 
that unearthli sovereign whose reign is over us all, whose dominion are 
unlimited, and whose name is ‘death’.” 

“whose name is davi jones!” ejacul tarpaulin, help the ladi by 
hi side to a skull of liqueur, and pour out a second for himself. 

“profan varlet!” said the president, now turn hi attent to 
the worthi hugh, “profan and execr wretch!--w have said, that in 
consider of those right which, even in thi filthi person, we feel 
no inclin to violate, we have condescend to make repli to thi 
rude and unseason inquiries. We nevertheless, for your unhallow 
intrus upon our councils, believ it our duti to mulct thee and thi 
companion in each a gallon of black strap--hav imbib which to the 
prosper of our kingdom--at a singl draught--and upon your bend 
knees--y shall be forthwith free either to proceed upon your way, or 
remain and be admit to the privileg of our table, accord to your 
respect and individu pleasures.” 

“it would be a matter of utter impossibility,” repli legs, whom the 
assumpt and digniti of king pest the first had evid inspir 
some feel of respect, and who aros and steadi himself by the 
tabl as he spoke--“it would, pleas your majesty, be a matter of utter 
imposs to stow away in my hold even one-fourth part of the same 
liquor which your majesti ha just mentioned. To say noth of the 
stuff place on board in the forenoon by way of ballast, and not to 
mention the variou ale and liqueur ship thi even at differ 
sea-ports, I have, at present, a full cargo of ‘hum stuff’ taken in 
and duli paid for at the sign of the ‘jolli tar.’ you will, therefore, 
pleas your majesty, be so good as to take the will for the deed--for by 
no manner of mean either can I or will I swallow anoth drop--least 
of all a drop of that villain bilge-wat that answer to the hall of 
‘black strap.’” 

“belay that!” interrupt tarpaulin, astonish not more at the length 
of hi companion’ speech than at the natur of hi refusal--“belay that 
you tubber!--and I say, legs, none of your palaver! My hull is still 
light, although I confess you yourself seem to be a littl top-heavy; 
and as for the matter of your share of the cargo, whi rather than rais 
a squall I would find stowageroom for it myself, but”-- 

“thi proceeding,” interpos the president, “i by no mean in 
accord with the term of the mulct or sentence, which is in it 
natur median, and not to be alter or recalled. the condit we have 
impos must be fulfil to the letter, and that without a moment’ 
hesitation--in failur of which fulfil we decre that you do here be 
tie neck and heel together, and duli drown as rebel in yon hogshead 
of octob beer!” 

“A sentence!--a sentence!--a righteou and just sentence!--a gloriou 
decree!--a most worthi and upright, and holi condemnation!” shout the 
pest famili altogether. the king elev hi forehead into innumer 
wrinkles; the gouti littl old man puf like a pair of bellows; the 
ladi of the wind sheet wave her nose to and fro; the gentleman in 
the cotton drawer prick up hi ears; she of the shroud gasp like a 
die fish; and he of the coffin look stiff and roll up hi eyes. 

“ugh! ugh! ugh!” chuckl tarpaulin without heed the gener 
excitation, “ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--i wa 
saying,” said he, “I wa say when mr. king pest poke in hi 
marlin-spike, that as for the matter of two or three gallon more or 
less of black strap, it wa a trifl to a tight sea-boat like myself not 
overstowed--but when it come to drink the health of the devil (whom 
god assoilzie) and go down upon my marrow bone to hi ill-favor 
majesti there, whom I know, as well as I know myself to be a sinner, to 
be nobodi in the whole world, but tim hurlygurli the stage-player--why! 
it’ quit anoth guess sort of a thing, and utterli and altogeth 
past my comprehension.” 

He wa not allow to finish thi speech in tranquillity. At the name 
tim hurlygurli the whole assembl leap from their name seats. 

“treason!” shout hi majesti king pest the first. 

“treason!” said the littl man with the gout. 

“treason!” scream the arch duchess ana-pest. 

“treason!” mutter the gentleman with hi jaw tie up. 

“treason!” growl he of the coffin. 

“treason! treason!” shriek her majesti of the mouth; and, seiz by 
the hinder part of hi breech the unfortun tarpaulin, who had just 
commenc pour out for himself a skull of liqueur, she lift him 
high into the air, and let him fall without ceremoni into the huge open 
puncheon of hi belov ale. bob up and down, for a few seconds, 
like an appl in a bowl of toddy, he, at length, final disappear 
amid the whirlpool of foam which, in the alreadi effervesc liquor, 
hi struggl easili succeed in creating. 

not tamely, however, did the tall seaman behold the discomfitur of hi 
companion. jostl king pest through the open trap, the valiant leg 
slam the door down upon him with an oath, and strode toward the 
centr of the room. here tear down the skeleton which swung over the 
table, he laid it about him with so much energi and good will, that, as 
the last glimps of light die away within the apartment, he succeed 
in knock out the brain of the littl gentleman with the gout. 
rush then with all hi forc against the fatal hogshead full of 
octob ale and hugh tarpaulin, he roll it over and over in an 
instant. out burst a delug of liquor so fierce--so impetuous--so 
overwhelming--that the room wa flood from wall to wall--th load 
tabl wa overturned--th tressel were thrown upon their backs--th tub 
of punch into the fire-place--and the ladi into hysterics. pile of 
death-furnitur flounder about. jugs, pitchers, and carboy mingl 
promiscu in the melee, and wicker flagon encount desper 
with bottl of junk. the man with the horror wa drown upon the 
spot-th littl stiff gentleman float off in hi coffin--and the 
victori legs, seiz by the waist the fat ladi in the shroud, rush 
out with her into the street, and made a bee-lin for the “free and 
easy,” follow under easi sail by the redoubt hugh tarpaulin, who, 
have sneez three or four times, pant and puf after him with the 
arch duchess ana-pest. 




three sunday IN A week 

“you hard-headed, dunder-headed, obstinate, rusty, crusty, musty, 
fusty, old savage!” said I, in fancy, one afternoon, to my grand uncl 
rumgudgeon--shak my fist at him in imagination. 

onli in imagination. the fact is, some trivial discrep did exist, 
just then, between what I said and what I had not the courag to 
say--between what I did and what I had half a mind to do. 

the old porpoise, as I open the drawing-room door, wa sit with 
hi feet upon the mantel-piece, and a bumper of port in hi paw, make 
strenuou effort to accomplish the ditty. 

rempli ton verr vide! 

vide ton verr plein! 

“mi dear uncle,” said I, close the door gently, and approach 
him with the blandest of smiles, “you are alway so veri kind and 
considerate, and have evinc your benevol in so many--so veri mani 
ways--that--that I feel I have onli to suggest thi littl point to you 
onc more to make sure of your full acquiescence.” 

“hem!” said he, “good boy! go on!” 

“I am sure, my dearest uncl (you confound old rascal!), that you 
have no design really, seriously, to oppos my union with kate. thi is 
mere a joke of yours, I know--ha! ha! ha!--how veri pleasant you are 
at times.” 

“ha! ha! ha!” said he, “curs you! yes!” 

“to be sure--of course! I knew you were jesting. now, uncle, all that 
kate and myself wish at present, is that you would oblig us with your 
advic as--a regard the time--y know, uncle--in short, when will it 
be most conveni for yourself, that the wed shall--shal come off, 
you know?” 

“come off, you scoundrel!--what do you mean by that?--bett wait till 
it goe on.” 

“ha! ha! ha!--he! he! he!--hi! hi! hi!--ho! ho! ho!--hu! hu! hu!--that’ 
good!--oh that’ capital--such a wit! but all we want just now, you 
know, uncle, is that you would indic the time precisely.” 

“ah!--precisely?” 

“yes, uncle--that is, if it would be quit agreeabl to yourself.” 

“wouldn’t it answer, bobby, if I were to leav it at random--som time 
within a year or so, for example?--must I say precisely?” 

“if you please, uncle--precisely.” 

“well, then, bobby, my boy--you’r a fine fellow, aren’t you?--sinc you 
will have the exact time i’ll--whi i’ll oblig you for once:” 

“dear uncle!” 

“hush, sir!” (drown my voice)--“i’l oblig you for once. you shall 
have my consent--and the plum, we mus’n’t forget the plum--let me see! 
when shall it be? to-day’ sunday--isn’t it? well, then, you shall 
be marri precisely--precisely, now mind!--when three sunday come 
togeth in a week! Do you hear me, sir! what are you gape at? I say, 
you shall have kate and her plum when three sunday come togeth in a 
week--but not till then--you young scapegrace--not till then, if I 
die for it. you know me--i’m a man of my word--now be off!” here he 
swallow hi bumper of port, while I rush from the room in despair. 

A veri “fine old english gentleman,” wa my grand-uncl rumgudgeon, but 
unlik him of the song, he had hi weak points. He wa a little, pursy, 
pompous, passion semicircular somebody, with a red nose, a thick 
scull, (sic) a long purse, and a strong sens of hi own consequence. 
with the best heart in the world, he contrived, through a predomin 
whim of contradiction, to earn for himself, among those who onli knew 
him superficially, the charact of a curmudgeon. like mani excel 
people, he seem possess with a spirit of tantalization, which might 
easily, at a casual glance, have been mistaken for malevolence. To everi 
request, a posit “no!” wa hi immedi answer, but in the end--in 
the long, long end--ther were exceedingli few request which he 
refused. against all attack upon hi purs he made the most sturdi 
defence; but the amount extort from him, at last, wa gener in 
direct ratio with the length of the sieg and the stubborn of the 
resistance. In chariti no one gave more liber or with a wors grace. 

for the fine arts, and especi for the belles-lettres, he entertain 
a profound contempt. with thi he had been inspir by casimir perier, 
whose pert littl queri “A quoi un poet est il bon?” he wa in the 
habit of quoting, with a veri droll pronunciation, as the ne plu ultra 
of logic wit. thu my own inkl for the muse had excit hi entir 
displeasure. He assur me one day, when I ask him for a new copi of 
horace, that the translat of “poeta nascitur non fit” wa “a nasti 
poet for noth fit”--a remark which I took in high dudgeon. hi 
repugn to “the humanities” had, also, much increas of late, by 
an accident bia in favor of what he suppos to be natur science. 
somebodi had accost him in the street, mistak him for no less a 
personag than doctor dubbl L. dee, the lectur upon quack physics. 
thi set him off at a tangent; and just at the epoch of thi story--for 
stori it is get to be after all--mi grand-uncl rumgudgeon wa 
access and pacif onli upon point which happen to chime in with 
the capriol of the hobbi he wa riding. for the rest, he laugh with 
hi arm and legs, and hi polit were stubborn and easili understood. 
He thought, with horsley, that “the peopl have noth to do with the 
law but to obey them.” 

I had live with the old gentleman all my life. My parents, in dying, 
had bequeath me to him as a rich legacy. I believ the old villain 
love me as hi own child--nearli if not quit as well as he love 
kate--but it wa a dog’ exist that he led me, after all. from my 
first year until my fifth, he oblig me with veri regular floggings. 
from five to fifteen, he threaten me, hourly, with the hous of 
correction. from fifteen to twenty, not a day pass in which he did not 
promis to cut me off with a shilling. I wa a sad dog, it is true--but 
then it wa a part of my nature--a point of my faith. In kate, however, 
I had a firm friend, and I knew it. she wa a good girl, and told me 
veri sweetli that I might have her (plum and all) whenev I could 
badger my grand-uncl rumgudgeon, into the necessari consent. poor 
girl!--sh wa bare fifteen, and without thi consent, her littl 
amount in the fund wa not come-at- until five immeasur summer 
had “drag their slow length along.” what, then, to do? At fifteen, or 
even at twenty-on (for I had now pass my fifth olympiad) five year 
in prospect are veri much the same as five hundred. In vain we besieg 
the old gentleman with importunities. here wa a piec de resist (a 
messieur ude and carem would say) which suit hi pervers fanci to a 
T. It would have stif the indign of job himself, to see how much 
like an old mouser he behav to us two poor wretch littl mice. In 
hi heart he wish for noth more ardent than our union. He had 
made up hi mind to thi all along. In fact, he would have given ten 
thousand pound from hi own pocket (kate’ plum wa her own) if he 
could have invent ani thing like an excus for compli with our 
veri natur wishes. but then we had been so imprud as to broach 
the subject ourselves. not to oppos it under such circumstances, I 
sincer believe, wa not in hi power. 

I have said alreadi that he had hi weak points; but in speak of 
these, I must not be understood as refer to hi obstinacy: which wa 
one of hi strong points--“assur ce n’ etait pa sa foible.” when 
I mention hi weak I have allus to a bizarr old-womanish 
superstit which beset him. He wa great in dreams, portents, et id 
genu omn of rigmarole. He wa excess punctilious, too, upon small 
point of honor, and, after hi own fashion, wa a man of hi word, 
beyond doubt. thi was, in fact, one of hi hobbies. the spirit of hi 
vow he made no scrupl of set at naught, but the letter wa a bond 
inviolable. now it wa thi latter peculiar in hi disposition, 
of which kate’ ingenu enabl us one fine day, not long after our 
interview in the dining-room, to take a veri unexpect advantage, and, 
have thus, in the fashion of all modern bard and orators, exhaust 
in prolegomena, all the time at my command, and nearli all the room at 
my disposal, I will sum up in a few word what constitut the whole 
pith of the story. 

It happen then--so the fate order it--that among the naval 
acquaint of my betrothed, were two gentlemen who had just set foot 
upon the shore of england, after a year’ absence, each, in foreign 
travel. In compani with these gentlemen, my cousin and I, preconcertedli 
paid uncl rumgudgeon a visit on the afternoon of sunday, octob the 
tenth,--just three week after the memor decis which had so 
cruelli defeat our hopes. for about half an hour the convers ran 
upon ordinari topics, but at last, we contrived, quit naturally, to 
give it the follow turn: 

capt. pratt. “well I have been absent just one year.--just one year 
to-day, as I live--let me see! yes!--thi is octob the tenth. you 
remember, mr. rumgudgeon, I called, thi day year to bid you good-bye. 
and by the way, it doe seem someth like a coincidence, doe it 
not--that our friend, captain smitherton, here, ha been absent exactli 
a year also--a year to-day!” 

smitherton. “yes! just one year to a fraction. you will remember, mr. 
rumgudgeon, that I call with capt. pratol on thi veri day, last year, 
to pay my part respects.” 

uncle. “yes, yes, yes--i rememb it veri well--veri queer indeed! both 
of you gone just one year. A veri strang coincidence, indeed! just what 
doctor dubbl L. dee would denomin an extraordinari concurr of 
events. doctor dub-” 

kate. (interrupting.) “to be sure, papa, it is someth strange; but 
then captain pratt and captain smitherton didn’t go altogeth the same 
route, and that make a difference, you know.” 

uncle. “I don’t know ani such thing, you huzzy! how should I? I think it 
onli make the matter more remarkable, doctor dubbl L. dee--” 

kate. “why, papa, captain pratt went round cape horn, and captain 
smitherton doubl the cape of good hope.” 

uncle. “precisely!--th one went east and the other went west, you jade, 
and they both have gone quit round the world. By the by, doctor dubbl 
L. dee--” 

myself. (hurriedly.) “captain pratt, you must come and spend the even 
with us to-morrow--y and smitherton--y can tell us all about your 
voyage, and we’ll have a game of whist and--” 

pratt. “wist, my dear fellow--y forget. to-morrow will be sunday. some 
other evening--” 

kate. “oh, no, fie!--robert’ not quit so bad as that. to-day’ 
sunday.” 

pratt. “I beg both your pardons--but I can’t be so much mistaken. I know 
to-morrow’ sunday, because-” 

smitherton. (much surprised.) “what are you all think about? wasn’t 
yesterday, sunday, I should like to know?” 

all. “yesterday indeed! you are out!” 

uncle. “to-day’ sunday, I say--don’t I know?” 

pratt. “oh no!--to-morrow’ sunday.” 

smitherton. “you are all mad--everi one of you. I am as posit that 
yesterday wa sunday as I am that I sit upon thi chair.” 

kate. (jump up eagerly.) “I see it--i see it all. papa, thi is a 
judgment upon you, about--about you know what. let me alone, and i’ll 
explain it all in a minute. it’ a veri simpl thing, indeed. captain 
smitherton say that yesterday wa sunday: so it was; he is right. 
cousin bobby, and uncl and I say that to-day is sunday: so it is; we 
are right. captain pratt maintain that to-morrow will be sunday: so it 
will; he is right, too. the fact is, we are all right, and thu three 
sunday have come togeth in a week.” 

smitherton. (after a pause.) “bi the by, pratt, kate ha us completely. 
what fool we two are! mr. rumgudgeon, the matter stand thus: the 
earth, you know, is twenty-four thousand mile in circumference. 
now thi globe of the earth turn upon it own axis--revolves--spin 
round--thes twenty-four thousand mile of extent, go from west 
to east, in precis twenty-four hours. Do you understand mr. 
rumgudgeon?-” 

uncle. “to be sure--to be sure--doctor dub-” 

smitherton. (drown hi voice.) “well, sir; that is at the rate of one 
thousand mile per hour. now, suppos that I sail from thi posit a 
thousand mile east. Of cours I anticip the rise of the sun here 
at london by just one hour. I see the sun rise one hour befor you 
do. proceeding, in the same direction, yet anoth thousand miles, I 
anticip the rise by two hours--anoth thousand, and I anticip 
it by three hours, and so on, until I go entir round the globe, and 
back to thi spot, when, have gone twenty-four thousand mile east, 
I anticip the rise of the london sun by no less than twenty-four 
hours; that is to say, I am a day in advanc of your time. understand, 
eh?” 

uncle. “but doubl L. dee-” 

smitherton. (speak veri loud.) “captain pratt, on the contrary, when 
he had sail a thousand mile west of thi position, wa an hour, and 
when he had sail twenty-four thousand mile west, wa twenty-four 
hours, or one day, behind the time at london. thus, with me, yesterday 
wa sunday--thus, with you, to-day is sunday--and thus, with pratt, 
to-morrow will be sunday. and what is more, mr. rumgudgeon, it 
is posit clear that we are all right; for there can be no 
philosoph reason assign whi the idea of one of us should have 
prefer over that of the other.” 

uncle. “mi eyes!--well, kate--well, bobby!--thi is a judgment upon me, 
as you say. but I am a man of my word--mark that! you shall have her, 
boy, (plum and all), when you please. done up, by jove! three sunday 
all in a row! i’ll go, and take dubbl L. dee’ opinion upon that.” 





end of project gutenberg’ the work of edgar allan poe, by edgar allan poe 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook the work OF edgar allan poe *** 

***** thi file should be name 2149-0.txt or 2149-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/4/2149/ 

produc by david widger 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, “inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation.” 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the “right 
of replac or refund” describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you ‘as-is’ with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm’ 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation’ ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state’ laws. 

the foundation’ princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation’ web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. 
To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
