the project gutenberg ebook of ten day in a mad-house;, by nelli bli 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no restrict 
whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it under the term 
of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi ebook or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the unit states, you'll 
have to check the law of the countri where you are locat befor use 
thi ebook. 



title: ten day in a mad-house; 
or, nelli bly' experi on blackwell' island. feign 
insan in order to reveal asylum horrors. the tri 
ordeal of the new york world' girl correspondent. 

author: nelli bli 

releas date: juli 10, 2019 [ebook #59899] 

language: english 

charact set encoding: utf-8 

*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook ten day IN A mad-house; *** 




produc by richard tonsing, tim lindell, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive) 









ten day IN A mad-house; 

or, 

nelli bly’ experi on blackwell’ island. 


feign insan IN order TO reveal asylum horrors. 


_the tri ordeal OF the new york world’ girl correspondent._ 


_enter accord to act of congress, in the year 1887, by norman L. 
munro, in the offic of the librarian of congress, at washington, D. c._ 

[illustration] 

new york: 
norman L. munro, publisher, 
24 and 26 vandewat st. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




whi are 

the madam mora’ corset 


[illustration] 

=A marvel OF comfort and elegances= 

=tri them, and you will find= 

=why= they =need no break in=, but feel easi at once. 

=why= they are like by ladi of =full figure=. 

=why= they do =not break down over the hips=, and 

=why= the celebr =french curv band= prevent ani wrinkl or 
stretch at the sides. 

=why= dressmak delight in fit dress over them. 

=why= merchant say they give better satisfact than ani others. 

=why= they take pain to recommend them. 

their popular ha induc mani imitations, which are frauds, high 
at ani price. buy onli the genuine, stamp =madam mora’s=. sold by 
all lead dealer with thi 

guarantee: 
that if not perfectli satisfactori upon trial the money will be 
refunded. 

L. krau & co., manufacturers, birmingham, conn. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




introduction. 


sinc my experi in blackwell’ island insan asylum were publish 
in the _world_ I have receiv hundr of letter in regard to it. the 
edit contain my stori long sinc ran out, and I have been 
prevail upon to allow it to be publish in book-form, to satisfi the 
hundr who are yet ask for copies. 

I am happi to be abl to state as a result of my visit to the asylum and 
the exposur consequ thereon, that the citi of new york ha 
appropri $1,000,000 more per annum than ever befor for the care of 
the insane. So I have at least the satisfact of know that the poor 
unfortun will be the better care for becaus of my work. 

[illustration: nelli bly] 




ten day IN A mad-house. 




chapter I. 
A delic mission. 


prefac 
On the 22d of septemb I wa ask by the _world_ if I could have 
myself commit to one of the asylum for the insan in new york, with 
a view to write a plain and unvarnish narr of the treatment of 
the patient therein and the method of management, etc. did I think I 
had the courag to go through such an ordeal as the mission would 
demand? could I assum the characterist of insan to such a degre 
that I could pass the doctors, live for a week among the insan without 
the author there find out that I wa onli a “chiel amang ’em 
takin’ notes?” I said I believ I could. I had some faith in my own 
abil as an actress and thought I could assum insan long enough to 
accomplish ani mission intrust to me. could I pass a week in the 
insan ward at blackwell’ island? I said I could and I would. and I 
did. 

My instruct were simpli to go on with my work as soon as I felt that 
I wa ready. I wa to chronicl faith the experi I underwent, 
and when onc within the wall of the asylum to find out and describ 
it insid workings, which are alway so effectu hidden by 
white-cap nurses, as well as by bolt and bars, from the knowledg of 
the public. “we do not ask you to go there for the purpos of make 
sensat revelations. write up thing as you find them, good or bad; 
give prais or blame as you think best, and the truth all the time. but 
I am afraid of that chronic smile of yours,” said the editor. “I will 
smile no more,” I said, and I went away to execut my delic and, as I 
found out, difficult mission. 

If I did get into the asylum, which I hardli hope to do, I had no idea 
that my experi would contain aught els than a simpl tale of life 
in an asylum. that such an institut could be mismanaged, and that 
cruelti could exist ’neath it roof, I did not deem possible. I alway 
had a desir to know asylum life more thoroughly—a desir to be 
convinc that the most helpless of god’ creatures, the insane, were 
care for kindli and properly. the mani stori I had read of abus in 
such institut I had regard as wildli exagger or els romances, 
yet there wa a latent desir to know positively. 

I shudder to think how complet the insan were in the power of 
their keepers, and how one could weep and plead for release, and all of 
no avail, if the keeper were so minded. eagerli I accept the mission 
to learn the insid work of the blackwel island insan asylum. 

“how will you get me out,” I ask my editor, “after I onc get in?” 

“I do not know,” he replied, “but we will get you out if we have to tell 
who you are, and for what purpos you feign insanity—onli get in.” 

I had littl belief in my abil to deceiv the insan experts, and I 
think my editor had less. 

all the preliminari prepar for my ordeal were left to be plan 
by myself. onli one thing wa decid upon, namely, that I should pass 
under the pseudonym of nelli brown, the initi of which would agre 
with my own name and my linen, so that there would be no difficulti in 
keep track of my movement and assist me out of ani difficulti 
or danger I might get into. there were way of get into the insan 
ward, but I did not know them. I might adopt one of two courses. either 
I could feign insan at the hous of friends, and get myself commit 
on the decis of two compet physicians, or I could go to my goal by 
way of the polic courts. 

[illustration: nelli practic insan AT home.] 

On reflect I thought it wiser not to inflict myself upon my friend 
or to get ani good-natur doctor to assist me in my purpose. besides, 
to get to blackwell’ island my friend would have had to feign poverty, 
and, unfortun for the end I had in view, my acquaint with the 
struggl poor, except my own self, wa onli veri superficial. So I 
determin upon the plan which led me to the success accomplish 
of my mission. I succeed in get commit to the insan ward at 
blackwell’ island, where I spent ten day and night and had an 
experi which I shall never forget. I took upon myself to enact the 
part of a poor, unfortun crazi girl, and felt it my duti not to shirk 
ani of the disagre result that should follow. I becam one of the 
city’ insan ward for that length of time, experienc much, and saw 
and heard more of the treatment accord to thi helpless class of our 
population, and when I had seen and heard enough, my releas wa 
promptli secured. I left the insan ward with pleasur and 
regret—pleasur that I wa onc more abl to enjoy the free breath of 
heaven; regret that I could not have brought with me some of the 
unfortun women who live and suffer with me, and who, I am 
convinced, are just as sane as I wa and am now myself. 

but here let me say one thing: from the moment I enter the insan ward 
on the island, I made no attempt to keep up the assum _role_ of 
insanity. I talk and act just as I do in ordinari life. yet strang 
to say, the more sane I talk and act the crazier I wa thought to 
be by all except one physician, whose kind and gentl way I shall 
not soon forget. 




chapter ii. 
prepar for the ordeal. 


but to return to my work and my mission. after receiv my instruct 
I return to my boarding-house, and when even came I began to 
practic the _role_ in which I wa to make my _debut_ on the morrow. 
what a difficult task, I thought, to appear befor a crowd of peopl and 
convinc them that I wa insane. I had never been near insan person 
befor in my life, and had not the faintest idea of what their action 
were like. and then to be examin by a number of learn physician who 
make insan a specialty, and who daili come in contact with insan 
people! how could I hope to pass these doctor and convinc them that I 
wa crazy? I fear that they could not be deceived. I began to think my 
task a hopeless one; but it had to be done. So I flew to the mirror and 
examin my face. I rememb all I had read of the do of crazi 
people, how first of all they must have stare eyes, and so I open 
mine as wide as possibl and stare unblinkingli at my own reflection. I 
assur you the sight wa not reassuring, even to myself, especi in 
the dead of night. I tri to turn the ga up higher in hope that it 
would rais my courage. I succeed onli partially, but I consol 
myself with the thought that in a few night more I would not be there, 
but lock up in a cell with a lot of lunatics. 

the weather wa not cold; but, nevertheless, when I thought of what wa 
to come, winteri chill ran race up and down my back in veri mockeri of 
the perspir which wa slowli but sure take the curl out of my 
bangs. between times, practic befor the mirror and pictur my 
futur as a lunatic, I read snatch of improb and imposs ghost 
stories, so that when the dawn came to chase away the night, I felt that 
I wa in a fit mood for my mission, yet hungri enough to feel keenli 
that I want my breakfast. slowli and sadli I took my morn bath and 
quietli bade farewel to a few of the most preciou articl known to 
modern civilization. tenderli I put my tooth-brush aside, and, when 
take a final rub of the soap, I murmured, “it may be for days, and it 
may be—for longer.” then I don the old cloth I had select for 
the occasion. I wa in the mood to look at everyth through veri 
seriou glasses. it’ just as well to take a last “fond look,” I mused, 
for who could tell but that the strain of play crazy, and be shut 
up with a crowd of mad people, might turn my own brain, and I would 
never get back. but not onc did I think of shirk my mission. calmly, 
outwardli at least, I went out to my crazi business. 

I first thought it best to go to a boarding-house, and, after secur 
lodging, confidenti tell the landlady, or lord, whichev it might 
chanc to be, that I wa seek work, and, in a few day after, 
appar go insane. when I reconsid the idea, I fear it would 
take too long to mature. suddenli I thought how much easier it would be 
to go to a boarding-hom for work women. I knew, if onc I made a 
hous of women believ me crazy, that they would never rest until I 
wa out of their reach and in secur quarters. 

from a directori I select the temporari home for females, no. 84 
second avenue. As I walk down the avenue, I determin that, onc 
insid the home, I should do the best I could to get start on my 
journey to blackwell’ island and the insan asylum. 




chapter iii. 
IN the temporari home. 


I wa left to begin my career as nelli brown, the insan girl. As I 
walk down the avenu I tri to assum the look which maiden wear in 
pictur entitl “dreaming.” “far-away” express have a crazi air. I 
pass through the littl pave yard to the entranc of the home. I 
pull the bell, which sound loud enough for a church chime, and 
nervous await the open of the door to the home, which I intend 
should ere long cast me forth and out upon the chariti of the police. 
the door wa thrown back with a vengeance, and a short, yellow-hair 
girl of some thirteen summer stood befor me. 

“i the matron in?” I asked, faintly. 

“yes, she’ in; she’ busy. Go to the back parlor,” answer the girl, 
in a loud voice, without one chang in her peculiarli matur face. 

[illustration: AT the temporari home for women.] 

I follow these not overkind or polit instruct and found myself in 
a dark, uncomfort back-parlor. there I await the arriv of my 
hostess. I had been seat some twenti minut at the least, when a 
slender woman, clad in a plain, dark dress enter and, stop befor 
me, ejacul inquiringly, “well?” 

“are you the matron?” I asked. 

“no,” she replied, “the matron is sick; I am her assistant. what do you 
want?” 

“I want to stay here for a few days, if you can accommod me.” 

“well, I have no singl rooms, we are so crowded; but if you will occupi 
a room with anoth girl, I shall do that much for you.” 

“I shall be glad of that,” I answered. “how much do you charge?” I had 
brought onli about seventi cent along with me, know full well that 
the sooner my fund were exhaust the sooner I should be put out, and 
to be put out wa what I wa work for. 

“we charg thirti cent a night,” wa her repli to my question, and with 
that I paid her for one night’ lodging, and she left me on the plea of 
have someth els to look after. left to amus myself as best I 
could, I took a survey of my surroundings. 

they were not cheerful, to say the least. A wardrobe, desk, book-case, 
organ, and sever chair complet the furnish of the room, into 
which the daylight bare came. 

By the time I had becom familiar with my quarter a bell, which rival 
the door-bel in it loudness, began clang in the basement, and 
simultan women went troop down-stair from all part of the 
house. I imagined, from the obviou signs, that dinner wa served, but 
as no one had said anyth to me I made no effort to follow in the 
hungri train. yet I did wish that some one would invit me down. It 
alway produc such a lonely, homesick feel to know other are 
eating, and we haven’t a chance, even if we are not hungry. I wa glad 
when the assist matron came up and ask me if I did not want 
someth to eat. I repli that I did, and then I ask her what her 
name was. mrs. stanard, she said, and I immedi wrote it down in a 
notebook I had taken with me for the purpos of make memoranda, and in 
which I had written sever page of utter nonsens for inquisit 
scientists. 

thu equip I await developments. but my dinner—well, I follow 
mrs. stanard down the uncarpet stair into the basement, where a larg 
number of women were eating. she found room for me at a tabl with three 
other women. the short-hair slavey who had open the door now put in 
an appear as waiter. place her arm akimbo and stare me out of 
countenance, she said: 

“boil mutton, boil beef, beans, potatoes, coffe or tea?” 

“beef, potatoes, coffe and bread,” I responded. 

“bread goe in,” she explained, as she made her way to the kitchen, 
which wa in the rear. It wa not veri long befor she return with 
what I had order on a large, badli batter tray, which she bang 
down befor me. I began my simpl meal. It wa not veri enticing, so 
while make a feint of eat I watch the others. 

I have often moral on the repuls form chariti alway assumes! 
here wa a home for deserv women and yet what a mockeri the name was. 
the floor wa bare, and the littl wooden tabl were sublim ignor 
of such modern beautifi as varnish, polish and table-covers. It is 
useless to talk about the cheap of linen and it effect on 
civilization. yet these honest workers, the most deserv of women, are 
ask to call thi spot of bareness—home. 

when the meal wa finish each woman went to the desk in the corner, 
where mrs. stanard sat, and paid her bill. I wa given a much-used, and 
abused, red check, by the origin piec of human in shape of my 
waitress. My bill wa about thirti cents. 

after dinner I went up-stair and resum my former place in the back 
parlor. I wa quit cold and uncomfortable, and had fulli made up my 
mind that I could not endur that sort of busi long, so the sooner I 
assum my insan point the sooner I would be releas from enforc 
idleness. ah! that wa inde the longest day I had ever lived. I 
listlessli watch the women in the front parlor, where all sat except 
myself. 

one did noth but read and scratch her head and occasion call out 
mildly, “georgie,” without lift her eye from her book. “georgie” wa 
her over-friski boy, who had more nois in him than ani child I ever saw 
before. He did everyth that wa rude and unmannerly, I thought, and 
the mother never said a word unless she heard some one els yell at him. 
anoth woman alway kept go to sleep and wake herself up with her 
own snoring. I realli felt wickedli thank it wa onli herself she 
awakened. the major of the women sat there do nothing, but there 
were a few who made lace and knit unceasingly. the enorm door-bel 
seem to be go all the time, and so did the short-hair girl. the 
latter was, besides, one of those girl who sing all the time snatch 
of all the song and hymn that have been compos for the last fifti 
years. there is such a thing as martyrdom in these days. the ring of 
the bell brought more peopl who want shelter for the night. except 
one woman, who wa from the countri on a day’ shop expedition, they 
were work women, some of them with children. 

As it drew toward even mrs. stanard came to me and said: 

“what is wrong with you? have you some sorrow or trouble?” 

“no,” I said, almost stun at the suggestion. “why?” 

“oh, because,” she said, womanlike, “I can see it in your face. It tell 
the stori of a great trouble.” 

“yes, everyth is so sad,” I said, in a haphazard way, which I had 
intend to reflect my craziness. 

“but you must not allow that to worri you. We all have our troubles, but 
we get over them in good time. what kind of work are you tri to get?” 

“I do not know; it’ all so sad,” I replied. 

“would you like to be a nurs for children and wear a nice white cap and 
apron?” she asked. 

I put my handkerchief up to my face to hide a smile, and replied, in a 
muffl tone, “I never worked; I don’t know how.” 

“but you must learn,” she urged; “all these women here work.” 

“do they?” I said, in a low, thrill whisper. “why, they look horribl 
to me; just like crazi women. I am so afraid of them.” 

“they don’t look veri nice,” she answered, assentingly, “but they are 
good, honest work women. We do not keep crazi peopl here.” 

I again use my handkerchief to hide a smile, as I thought that befor 
morn she would at least think she had one crazi person among her 
flock. 

“they all look crazy,” I assert again, “and I am afraid of them. there 
are so mani crazi peopl about, and one can never tell what they will 
do. then there are so mani murder committed, and the polic never catch 
the murderers,” and I finish with a sob that would have broken up an 
audienc of _blase_ critics. she gave a sudden and convuls start, and 
I knew my first stroke had gone home. It wa amus to see what a 
remark short time it took her to get up from her chair and to 
whisper hurriedly: “i’ll come back to talk with you after awhile.” I 
knew she would not come back and she did not. 

when the supper-bel rang I went along with the other to the basement 
and partook of the even meal, which wa similar to dinner, except 
that there wa a smaller bill of fare and more people, the women who are 
employ outsid dure the day have returned. after the even meal 
we all adjourn to the parlors, where all sat, or stood, as there were 
not chair enough to go round. 

It wa a wretchedli lone evening, and the light which fell from the 
solitari ga jet in the parlor, and oil-lamp in the hall, help to 
envelop us in a duski hue and dye our spirit a navi blue, I felt it 
would not requir mani inund of thi atmospher to make me a fit 
subject for the place I wa strive to reach. 

[illustration: nellie’ first meal AT the home.] 

I watch two women, who seem of all the crowd to be the most 
sociable, and I select them as the one to work out my salvation, or, 
more properli speaking, my condemn and conviction. excus myself 
and say that I felt lonely, I ask if I might join their company. 
they gracious consented, so with my hat and glove on, which no one 
had ask me to lay aside, I sat down and listen to the rather 
wearisom conversation, in which I took no part, mere keep up my 
sad look, say “yes,” or “no,” or “I can’t say,” to their 
observations. sever time I told them I thought everybodi in the hous 
look crazy, but they were slow to catch on to my veri origin remark. 
one said her name wa mrs. king and that she wa a southern woman. then 
she said that I had a southern accent. she ask me bluntli if I did not 
realli come from the south. I said “yes.” the other woman got to talk 
about the boston boat and ask me if I knew at what time they left. 

for a moment I forgot my _role_ of assum insanity, and told her the 
correct hour of departure. she then ask me what work I wa go to 
do, or if I had ever done any. I repli that I thought it veri sad that 
there were so mani work peopl in the world. she said in repli that 
she had been unfortun and had come to new york, where she had work 
at correct proof on a medic dictionari for some time, but that her 
health had given way under the task, and that she wa now go to 
boston again. when the maid came to tell us to go to bed I remark that 
I wa afraid, and again ventur the assert that all the women in the 
hous seem to be crazy. the nurs insist on my go to bed. I ask 
if I could not sit on the stairs, but she said, decisively: “no; for 
everi one in the hous would think you were crazy.” final I allow 
them to take me to a room. 

here I must introduc a new personag by name into my narrative. It is 
the woman who had been a proofreader, and wa about to return to boston. 
she wa a mrs. caine, who wa as courag as she wa good-hearted. she 
came into my room, and sat and talk with me a long time, take down 
my hair with gentl ways. she tri to persuad me to undress and go to 
bed, but I stubbornli refus to do so. dure thi time a number of the 
inmat of the hous had gather around us. they express themselv 
in variou ways. “poor loon!” they said. “why, she’ crazi enough!” “I 
am afraid to stay with such a crazi be in the house.” “she will 
murder us all befor morning.” one woman wa for send for a policeman 
to take me away at once. they were all in a terribl and real state of 
fright. 

No one want to be respons for me, and the woman who wa to occupi 
the room with me declar that she would not stay with that “crazi 
woman” for all the money of the vanderbilts. It wa then that mrs. cain 
said she would stay with me. I told her I would like to have her do so. 
So she wa left with me. she didn’t undress, but lay down on the bed, 
watch of my movements. she tri to induc me to lie down, but I wa 
afraid to do this. I knew that if I onc gave way I should fall asleep 
and dream as pleasantli and peac as a child. I should, to use a 
slang expression, be liabl to “give myself dead away.” I had made up my 
mind to stay awak all night. So I insist on sit on the side of 
the bed and stare blankli at vacancy. My poor companion wa put into a 
wretch state of unhappiness. everi few moment she would rise up to 
look at me. she told me that my eye shone terribl brightli and then 
began to question me, ask me where I had lived, how long I had been 
in new york, what I had been doing, and mani thing besides. To all her 
question I had but one response—i told her that I had forgotten 
everything, that ever sinc my headach had come on I could not 
remember. 

poor soul! how cruelli I tortur her, and what a kind heart she had! 
but how I tortur all of them! one of them dream of me—a a 
nightmare. after I had been in the room an hour or so, I wa myself 
startl by hear a woman scream in the next room. I began to 
imagin that I wa realli in an insan asylum. 

mrs. cain woke up, look around, frightened, and listened. she then 
went out and into the next room, and I heard her ask anoth woman 
some questions. when she came back she told me that the woman had had a 
hideou nightmare. she had been dream of me. she had seen me, she 
said, rush at her with a knife in my hand, with the intent of 
kill her. In tri to escap me she had fortun been abl to 
scream, and so to awaken herself and scare off her nightmare. then mrs. 
cain got into bed again, consider agitated, but veri sleepy. 

I wa weary, too, but I had brace myself up to the work, and wa 
determin to keep awak all night so as to carri on my work of 
imperson to a success end in the morning. I heard midnight. I 
had yet six hour to wait for daylight. the time pass with 
excruci slowness. minut appear hours. the nois in the hous 
and on the avenu ceased. 

fear that sleep would coax me into it grasp, I commenc to review 
my life. how strang it all seems! one incident, if never so trifling, 
is but a link more to chain us to our unchang fate. I began at the 
beginning, and live again the stori of my life. old friend were 
recal with a pleasur thrill; old enmities, old heartaches, old 
joy were onc again present. the turned-down page of my life were 
turn up, and the past wa present. 

when it wa completed, I turn my thought brave to the future, 
wondering, first, what the next day would bring forth, then make plan 
for the carri out of my project. I wonder if I should be abl to 
pass over the river to the goal of my strang ambition, to becom 
eventu an inmat of the hall inhabit by my mental wreck 
sisters. and then, onc in, what would be my experience? and after? how 
to get out? bah! I said, they will get me out. 

that wa the greatest night of my existence. for a few hour I stood 
face to face with “self!” 

I look out toward the window and hail with joy the slight shimmer of 
dawn. the light grew strong and gray, but the silenc wa strikingli 
still. My companion slept. I had still an hour or two to pass over. 
fortun I found some employ for my mental activity. robert bruce 
in hi captiv had won confid in the future, and pass hi time 
as pleasantli as possibl under the circumstances, by watch the 
celebr spider build hi web. I had less nobl vermin to interest 
me. yet I believ I made some valuabl discoveri in natur history. I 
wa about drop off to sleep in spite of myself when I wa suddenli 
startl to wakefulness. I thought I heard someth crawl and fall down 
upon the counterpan with an almost inaud thud. 

I had the opportun of studi these interest anim veri 
thoroughly. they had evid come for breakfast, and were not a littl 
disappoint to find that their princip _plat_ wa not there. they 
scamper up and down the pillow, came together, seem to hold 
interest converse, and act in everi way as if they were puzzl by 
the absenc of an appet breakfast. after one consult of some 
length they final disappeared, seek victim elsewhere, and leav 
me to pass the long minut by give my attent to cockroaches, whose 
size and agil were someth of a surpris to me. 

My room companion had been sound asleep for a long time, but she now 
woke up, and express surpris at see me still awak and appar 
as live as a cricket. she wa as sympathet as ever. she came to me 
and took my hand and tri her best to consol me, and ask me if I 
did not want to go home. she kept me up-stair until nearli everybodi 
wa out of the house, and then took me down to the basement for coffe 
and a bun. after that, partaken in silence, I went back to my room, 
where I sat down, moping. mrs. cain grew more and more anxious. “what 
is to be done?” she kept exclaiming. “where are your friends?” “no,” I 
answered, “I have no friends, but I have some trunks. where are they? I 
want them.” the good woman tri to pacifi me, say that they would be 
found in good time. she believ that I wa insane. 

yet I forgiv her. It is onli after one is in troubl that one realiz 
how littl sympathi and kind there is in the world. the women in the 
home who were not afraid of me had want to have some amus at my 
expense, and so they had bother me with question and remark that had 
I been insan would have been cruel and inhumane. onli thi one woman 
among the crowd, pretti and delic mrs. caine, display true womanli 
feeling. she compel the other to ceas teas me and took the bed 
of the woman who refus to sleep near me. she protest against the 
suggest to leav me alon and to have me lock up for the night so 
that I could harm no one. she insist on remain with me in order to 
administ aid should I need it. she smooth my hair and bath my brow 
and talk as soothingli to me as a mother would do to an ail child. 
By everi mean she tri to have me go to bed and rest, and when it drew 
toward morn she got up and wrap a blanket around me for fear I 
might get cold; then she kiss me on the brow and whispered, 
compassionately: 

“poor child, poor child!” 

how much I admir that littl woman’ courag and kindness. how I 
long to reassur her and whisper that I wa not insane, and how I 
hope that, if ani poor girl should ever be so unfortun as to be what 
I wa pretend to be, she might meet with one who possess the same 
spirit of human kind possess by mrs. ruth caine. 




chapter iv. 
judg duffi and the police. 


but to return to my story. I kept up my _role_ until the assist 
matron, mrs. stanard, came in. she tri to persuad me to be calm. I 
began to see clearli that she want to get me out of the hous at all 
hazards, quietli if possible. thi I did not want. I refus to move, 
but kept up ever the refrain of my lost trunks. final some one 
suggest that an offic be sent for. after awhil mrs. stanard put on 
her bonnet and went out. then I knew that I wa make an advanc toward 
the home of the insane. soon she returned, bring with her two 
policemen—big, strong men—who enter the room rather unceremoniously, 
evid expect to meet with a person violent crazy. the name of 
one of them wa tom bockert. 

when they enter I pretend not to see them. “I want you to take her 
quietly,” said mrs. stanard. “if she don’t come along quietly,” 
respond one of the men, “I will drag her through the streets.” I still 
took no notic of them, but certainli wish to avoid rais a scandal 
outside. fortun mrs. cain came to my rescue. she told the offic 
about my outcri for my lost trunks, and togeth they made up a plan 
to get me to go along with them quietli by tell me they would go with 
me to look for my lost effects. they ask me if I would go. I said I 
wa afraid to go alone. mrs. stanard then said she would accompani me, 
and she arrang that the two policemen should follow us at a respect 
distance. she tie on my veil for me, and we left the hous by the 
basement and start across town, the two offic follow at some 
distanc behind. We walk along veri quietli and final came to the 
station-house, which the good woman assur me wa the express office, 
and that there we should certainli find my miss effects. I went 
insid with fear and trembling, for good reason. 

A few day previou to thi I had met captain mccullagh at a meet 
held in cooper union. At that time I had ask him for some inform 
which he had given me. If he were in, would he not recogn me? and 
then all would be lost so far as get to the island wa concerned. I 
pull my sailor hat as low down over my face as I possibl could, and 
prepar for the ordeal. sure enough there wa sturdi captain mccullagh 
stand near the desk. 

He watch me close as the offic at the desk convers in a low tone 
with mrs. stanard and the policeman who brought me. 

“are you nelli brown?” ask the officer. I said I suppos I was. 
“where do you come from?” he asked. I told him I did not know, and then 
mrs. stanard gave him a lot of inform about me—told him how 
strang I had act at her home; how I had not slept a wink all night, 
and that in her opinion I wa a poor unfortun who had been driven 
crazi by inhuman treatment. there wa some discuss between mrs. 
stanard and the two officers, and tom bockert wa told to take us down 
to the court in a car. 

[illustration: IN the hand OF the police.] 

“come along,” bockert said, “I will find your trunk for you.” We all 
went together, mrs. stanard, tom bockert, and myself. I said it wa veri 
kind of them to go with me, and I should not soon forget them. As we 
walk along I kept up my refrain about my trunks, interject 
occasion some remark about the dirti condit of the street and 
the curiou charact of the peopl we met on the way. “I don’t think I 
have ever seen such peopl before,” I said. “who are they?” I asked, and 
my companion look upon me with express of pity, evid 
believ I wa a foreigner, an immigr or someth of the sort. they 
told me that the peopl around me were work people. I remark onc 
more that I thought there were too mani work peopl in the world for 
the amount of work to be done, at which remark policeman P. T. bockert 
eye me closely, evid think that my mind wa gone for good. We 
pass sever other policemen, who gener ask my sturdi guardian 
what wa the matter with me. By thi time quit a number of rag 
children were follow us too, and they pass remark about me that 
were to me origin as well as amusing. 

“what’ she up for?” “say, kop, where did ye get her?” “where did yer 
pull ’er?” “she’ a daisy!” 

poor mrs. stanard wa more frighten than I was. the whole situat 
grew interesting, but I still had fear for my fate befor the judge. 

At last we came to a low building, and tom bockert kindli volunt 
the information: “here’ the express office. We shall soon find those 
trunk of yours.” 

the entranc to the build wa surround by a curiou crowd and I did 
not think my case wa bad enough to permit me pass them without some 
remark, so I ask if all those peopl had lost their trunks. 

“yes,” he said, “nearli all these peopl are look for trunks.” 

I said, “they all seem to be foreigners, too.” “yes,” said tom, “they 
are all foreign just landed. they have all lost their trunks, and it 
take most of our time to help find them for them.” 

We enter the courtroom. It wa the essex market polic courtroom. At 
last the question of my saniti or insan wa to be decided. judg 
duffi sat behind the high desk, wear a look which seem to indic 
that he wa deal out the milk of human kind by wholesale. I 
rather fear I would not get the fate I sought, becaus of the kind 
I saw on everi line of hi face, and it wa with rather a sink heart 
that I follow mrs. stanard as she answer the summon to go up to the 
desk, where tom bockert had just given an account of the affair. 

“come here,” said an officer. “what is your name?” 

“nelli brown,” I replied, with a littl accent. “I have lost my trunks, 
and would like if you could find them.” 

“when did you come to new york?” he asked. 

“I did not come to new york,” I repli (while I added, mentally, 
“becaus I have been here for some time.”) 

“but you are in new york now,” said the man. 

“no,” I said, look as incredul as I thought a crazi person could, 
“I did not come to new york.” 

“that girl is from the west,” he said, in a tone that made me tremble. 
“she ha a western accent.” 

some one els who had been listen to the brief dialogu here assert 
that he had live south and that my accent wa southern, while anoth 
offic wa posit it wa eastern. I felt much reliev when the first 
spokesman turn to the judg and said: 

“judge, here is a peculiar case of a young woman who doesn’t know who 
she is or where she came from. you had better attend to it at once.” 

I commenc to shake with more than the cold, and I look around at the 
strang crowd about me, compos of poorli dress men and women with 
stori print on their face of hard lives, abus and poverty. some 
were consult eagerli with friends, while other sat still with a look 
of utter hopelessness. everywher wa a sprinkl of well-dressed, 
well-f offic watch the scene passiv and almost indifferently. 
It wa onli an old stori with them. one more unfortun ad to a long 
list which had long sinc ceas to be of ani interest or concern to 
them. 

[illustration: nelli befor judg duffy.] 

“come here, girl, and lift your veil,” call out judg duffy, in tone 
which surpris me by a harsh which I did not think from the kindli 
face he possessed. 

“who are you speak to?” I inquired, in my stateliest manner. 

“come here, my dear, and lift your veil. you know the queen of england, 
if she were here, would have to lift her veil,” he said, veri kindly. 

“that is much better,” I replied. “I am not the queen of england, but 
i’ll lift my veil.” 

As I did so the littl judg look at me, and then, in a veri kind and 
gentl tone, he said: 

“mi dear child, what is wrong?” 

“noth is wrong except that I have lost my trunks, and thi man,” 
indic policeman bockert, “promis to bring me where they could be 
found.” 

“what do you know about thi child?” ask the judge, sternly, of mrs. 
stanard, who stood, pale and trembling, by my side. 

“I know noth of her except that she came to the home yesterday and 
ask to remain overnight.” 

“the home! what do you mean by the home?” ask judg duffy, quickly. 

“it is a temporari home kept for work women at no. 84 second avenue.” 

“what is your posit there?” 

“I am assist matron.” 

“well, tell us all you know of the case.” 

“when I wa go into the home yesterday I notic her come down the 
avenue. she wa all alone. I had just got into the hous when the bell 
rang and she came in. when I talk with her she want to know if she 
could stay all night, and I said she could. after awhil she said all 
the peopl in the hous look crazy, and she wa afraid of them. then 
she would not go to bed, but sat up all the night.” 

“had she ani money?” 

“yes,” I replied, answer for her, “I paid her for everything, and the 
eat wa the worst I ever tried.” 

there wa a gener smile at this, and some murmur of “she’ not so 
crazi on the food question.” 

“poor child,” said judg duffy, “she is well dressed, and a lady. her 
english is perfect, and I would stake everyth on her be a good 
girl. I am posit she is somebody’ darling.” 

At thi announc everybodi laughed, and I put my handkerchief over 
my face and endeavor to choke the laughter that threaten to spoil my 
plans, in despit of my resolutions. 

“I mean she is some woman’ darling,” hastili amend the judge. “I am 
sure some one is search for her. poor girl, I will be good to her, 
for she look like my sister, who is dead.” 

there wa a hush for a moment after thi announcement, and the offic 
glanc at me more kindly, while I silent bless the kind-heart 
judge, and hope that ani poor creatur who might be afflict as I 
pretend to be should have as kindli a man to deal with as judg duffy. 

“I wish the report were here,” he said at last. “they would be abl 
to find out someth about her.” 

I got veri much frighten at this, for if there is ani one who can 
ferret out a mysteri it is a reporter. I felt that I would rather face a 
mass of expert doctors, policemen, and detect than two bright 
specimen of my craft, so I said: 

“I don’t see whi all thi is need to help me find my trunks. these men 
are impudent, and I do not want to be stare at. I will go away. I don’t 
want to stay here.” 

So saying, I pull down my veil and secretli hope the report would 
be detain elsewher until I wa sent to the asylum. 

“I don’t know what to do with the poor child,” said the worri judge. 
“she must be taken care of.” 

“send her to the island,” suggest one of the officers. 

“oh, don’t!” said mrs. stanard, in evid alarm. “don’t! she is a ladi 
and it would kill her to be put on the island.” 

for onc I felt like shake that good woman. To think the island wa 
just the place I want to reach and here she wa tri to keep me from 
go there! It wa veri kind of her, but rather provok under the 
circumstances. 

“there ha been some foul work here,” said the judge. “I believ thi 
child ha been drug and brought to thi city. make out the paper and 
we will send her to bellevu for examination. probabl in a few day the 
effect of the drug will pass off and she will be abl to tell us a stori 
that will be startling. If the report would onli come!” 

I dread them, so I said someth about not wish to stay there ani 
longer to be gaze at. judg duffi then told policeman bockert to take 
me to the back office. after we were seat there judg duffi came in 
and ask me if my home wa in cuba. 

“yes,” I replied, with a smile. “how did you know?” 

“oh, I knew it, my dear. now, tell me where wa it? In what part of 
cuba?” 

“on the hacienda,” I replied. 

“ah,” said the judge, “on a farm. Do you rememb havana?” 

“si, senor,” I answered; “it is near home. how did you know?” 

“oh, I knew all about it. now, won’t you tell me the name of your home?” 
he asked, persuasively. 

“that’ what I forget,” I answered, sadly. “I have a headach all the 
time, and it make me forget things. I don’t want them to troubl me. 
everybodi is ask me questions, and it make my head worse,” and in 
truth it did. 

“well, no one shall troubl you ani more. sit down here and rest 
awhile,” and the genial judg left me alon with mrs. stanard. 

just then an offic came in with a reporter. I wa so frightened, and 
thought I would be recogn as a journalist, so I turn my head away 
and said, “I don’t want to see ani reporters; I will not see any; the 
judg said I wa not to be troubled.” 

“well, there is no insan in that,” said the man who had brought the 
reporter, and togeth they left the room. onc again I had a fit of 
fear. had I gone too far in not want to see a reporter, and wa my 
saniti detected? If I had given the impress that I wa sane, I wa 
determin to undo it, so I jump up and ran back and forward through 
the office, mrs. stanard cling terrifi to my arm. 

“I won’t stay here; I want my trunks! whi do they bother me with so mani 
people?” and thu I kept on until the ambul surgeon came in, 
accompani by the judge. 




chapter V. 
pronounc insane. 


“here is a poor girl who ha been drugged,” explain the judge. “she 
look like my sister, and ani one can see she is a good girl. I am 
interest in the child, and I would do as much for her as if she were 
my own. I want you to be kind to her,” he said to the ambul surgeon. 
then, turn to mrs. stanard, he ask her if she could not keep me for 
a few day until my case wa inquir into. fortunately, she said she 
could not, becaus all the women at the home were afraid of me, and 
would leav if I were kept there. I wa veri much afraid she would keep 
me if the pay wa assur her, and so I said someth about the bad 
cook and that I did not intend to go back to the home. then came the 
examination; the doctor look clever and I had not one hope of 
deceiv him, but I determin to keep up the farce. 

“put out your tongue,” he ordered, briskly. 

I gave an inward chuckl at the thought. 

“put out your tongu when I tell you,” he said. 

“I don’t want to,” I answered, truth enough. 

“you must. you are sick, and I am a doctor.” 

“I am not sick and never was. I onli want my trunks.” 

but I put out my tongue, which he look at in a sagaci manner. then 
he felt my puls and listen to the beat of my heart. I had not the 
least idea how the heart of an insan person beat, so I held my breath 
all the while he listened, until, when he quit, I had to give a gasp to 
regain it. then he tri the effect of the light on the pupil of my 
eyes. hold hi hand within a half inch of my face, he told me to look 
at it, then, jerk it hastili away, he would examin my eyes. I wa 
puzzl to know what insan wa like in the eye, so I thought the best 
thing under the circumst wa to stare. thi I did. I held my eye 
rivet unblinkingli upon hi hand, and when he remov it I exert all 
my strength to still keep my eye from blinking. 

[illustration: AN insan expert AT work.] 

“what drug have you been taking?” he then ask me. 

“drugs!” I repeated, wonderingly. “I do not know what drug are.” 

“the pupil of her eye have been enlarg ever sinc she came to the 
home. they have not chang once,” explain mrs. stanard. I wonder 
how she knew whether they had or not, but I kept quiet. 

“I believ she ha been use belladonna,” said the doctor, and for the 
first time I wa thank that I wa a littl near-sighted, which of 
cours answer for the enlarg of the pupils. I thought I might as 
well be truth when I could without injur my case, so I told him I 
wa near-sighted, that I wa not in the least ill, had never been sick, 
and that no one had a right to detain me when I want to find my 
trunks. I want to go home. He wrote a lot of thing in a long, slender 
book, and then said he wa go to take me home. the judg told him to 
take me and to be kind to me, and to tell the peopl at the hospit to 
be kind to me, and to do all they could for me. If we onli had more such 
men as judg duffy, the poor unfortun would not find life all 
darkness. 

I began to have more confid in my own abil now, sinc one judge, 
one doctor, and a mass of peopl had pronounc me insane, and I put on 
my veil quit gladli when I wa told that I wa to be taken in a 
carriage, and that afterward I could go home. “I am so glad to go with 
you,” I said, and I meant it. I wa veri glad indeed. onc more, guard 
by policeman brockert, I walk through the little, crowd courtroom. I 
felt quit proud of myself as I went out a side door into an alleyway, 
where the ambul wa waiting. near the close and bar gate wa a 
small offic occupi by sever men and larg books. We all went in 
there, and when they began to ask me question the doctor interpos and 
said he had all the papers, and that it wa useless to ask me anyth 
further, becaus I wa unabl to answer questions. thi wa a great 
relief to me, for my nerv were alreadi feel the strain. A 
rough-look man want to put me into the ambulance, but I refus hi 
aid so decidedli that the doctor and policeman told him to desist, and 
they perform that gallant offic themselves. I did not enter the 
ambul without protest. I made the remark that I had never seen a 
carriag of that make before, and that I did not want to ride in it, but 
after awhil I let them persuad me, as I had right along intend to 
do. 

I shall never forget that ride. after I wa put in flat on the yellow 
blanket, the doctor got in and sat near the door. the larg gate were 
swung open, and the curiou crowd which had collect sway back to 
make way for the ambul as it back out. how they tri to get a 
glimps at the suppos crazi girl! the doctor saw that I did not like 
the peopl gaze at me, and consider put down the curtains, after 
ask my wish in regard to it. still that did not keep the peopl 
away. the children race after us, yell all sort of slang 
expressions, and tri to get a peep under the curtains. It wa quit 
an interest drive, but I must say that it wa an excruciatingli rough 
one. I held on, onli there wa not much to hold on to, and the driver 
drove as if he fear some one would catch up with us. 




chapter vi. 
IN bellevu hospital. 


At last bellevu wa reached, the third station on my way to the island. 
I had pass through success the ordeal at the home and at essex 
market polic court, and now felt confid that I should not fail. the 
ambul stop with a sudden jerk and the doctor jump out. “how 
mani have you?” I heard some one inquire. “onli one, for the pavilion,” 
wa the reply. A rough-look man came forward, and catch hold of me 
attempt to drag me out as if I had the strength of an eleph and 
would resist. the doctor, see my look of disgust, order him to 
leav me alone, say that he would take charg of me himself. He then 
lift me care out and I walk with the grace of a queen past the 
crowd that had gather curiou to see the new unfortunate. togeth 
with the doctor I enter a small dark office, where there were sever 
men. the one behind the desk open a book and began on the long string 
of question which had been ask me so often. 

I refus to answer, and the doctor told him it wa not necessari to 
troubl me further, as he had all the paper made out, and I wa too 
insan to be abl to tell anyth that would be of consequence. I felt 
reliev that it wa so easi here, as, though still undaunted, I had 
begun to feel faint for want of food. the order wa then given to take 
me to the insan pavilion, and a muscular man came forward and caught me 
so tightli by the arm that a pain ran clear through me. It made me 
angry, and for a moment I forgot my _role_ as I turn to him and said: 

“how dare you touch me?” At thi he loosen hi hold somewhat, and I 
shook him off with more strength than I thought I possessed. 

“I will go with no one but thi man,” I said, point to the 
ambulance-surgeon. “the judg said that he wa to take care of me, and I 
will go with no one else.” 

At thi the surgeon said that he would take me, and so we went arm in 
arm, follow the man who had at first been so rough with me. We pass 
through the well-cared-for ground and final reach the insan ward. 
A white-cap nurs wa there to receiv me. 

“thi young girl is to wait here for the boat,” said the surgeon, and 
then he start to leav me. I beg him not to go, or to take me with 
him, but he said he want to get hi dinner first, and that I should 
wait there for him. when I insist on accompani him he claim that 
he had to assist at an amputation, and it would not look well for me to 
be present. It wa evid that he believ he wa deal with an 
insan person. just then the most horribl insan cri came from a yard 
in the rear. with all my braveri I felt a chill at the prospect of be 
shut up with a fellow-creatur who wa realli insane. the doctor 
evid notic my nervousness, for he said to the attendant: 

“what a nois the carpent make.” 

turn to me he offer me explan to the effect that new build 
were be erected, and that the nois came from some of the workmen 
engag upon it. I told him I did not want to stay there without him, 
and to pacifi me he promis soon to return. He left me and I found 
myself at last an occup of an insan asylum. 

I stood at the door and contempl the scene befor me. the long, 
uncarpet hall wa scrub to that peculiar white seen onli in 
public institutions. In the rear of the hall were larg iron door 
fasten by a padlock. sever stiff-look bench and a number of 
willow chair were the onli articl of furniture. On either side of the 
hall were door lead into what I suppos and what prove to be 
bedrooms. near the entranc door, on the right-hand side, wa a small 
sitting-room for the nurses, and opposit it wa a room where dinner wa 
dish out. A nurs in a black dress, white cap and apron and arm with 
a bunch of key had charg of the hall. I soon learn her name, miss 
ball. 

An old irishwoman wa maid-of-all-work. I heard her call mary, and I 
am glad to know that there is such a good-heart woman in that place. I 
experienc onli kind and the utmost consider from her. there 
were onli three patients, as they are called. I made the fourth. I 
thought I might as well begin work at once, for I still expect that 
the veri first doctor might declar me sane and send me out again into 
the wide, wide world. So I went down to the rear of the room and 
introduc myself to one of the women, and ask her all about herself. 
her name, she said, wa miss ann neville, and she had been sick from 
overwork. she had been work as a chambermaid, and when her health 
gave way she wa sent to some sisters’ home to be treated. her nephew, 
who wa a waiter, wa out of work, and, be unabl to pay her expens 
at the home, had had her transfer to bellevue. 

“i there anyth wrong with you mental as well?” I ask her. 

“no,” she said. “the doctor have been ask me mani curiou question 
and confus me as much as possible, but I have noth wrong with my 
brain.” 

“do you know that onli insan peopl are sent to thi pavilion?” I 
asked. 

“yes, I know; but I am unabl to do anything. the doctor refus to 
listen to me, and it is useless to say anyth to the nurses.” 

satisfi from variou reason that miss nevil wa as sane as I wa 
myself, I transfer my attent to one of the other patients. I 
found her in need of medic aid and quit silli mentally, although I 
have seen mani women in the lower walk of life, whose saniti wa never 
questioned, who were not ani brighter. 

the third patient, mrs. fox, would not say much. she wa veri quiet, and 
after tell me that her case wa hopeless refus to talk. I began now 
to feel surer of my position, and I determin that no doctor should 
convinc me that I wa sane so long as I had the hope of accomplish 
my mission. A small, fair-complexion nurs arrived, and, after put 
on her cap, told miss ball to go to dinner. the new nurse, miss scott by 
name, came to me and said, rudely: 

“take off your hat.” 

“I shall not take off my hat,” I answered. “I am wait for the boat, 
and I shall not remov it.” 

“well, you are not go on ani boat. you might as well know it now as 
later. you are in an asylum for the insane.” 

although fulli awar of that fact, her unvarnish word gave me a 
shock. “I did not want to come here; I am not sick or insane, and I will 
not stay,” I said. 

“it will be a long time befor you get out if you don’t do as you are 
told,” answer miss scott. “you might as well take off your hat, or I 
shall use force, and if I am not abl to do it, I have but to touch a 
bell and I shall get assistance. will you take it off?” 

“no, I will not. I am cold, and I want my hat on, and you can’t make me 
take it off.” 

“I shall give you a few more minutes, and if you don’t take it off then 
I shall use force, and I warn you it will not be veri gentle.” 

“if you take my hat off I shall take your cap off; so now.” 

miss scott wa call to the door then, and as I fear that an 
exhibit of temper might show too much saniti I took off my hat and 
glove and wa sit quietli look into space when she returned. I 
wa hungry, and wa quit pleas to see mari make prepar for 
dinner. the prepar were simple. she mere pull a straight bench 
up along the side of a bare tabl and order the patient to gather 
’round the feast; then she brought out a small tin plate on which wa a 
piec of boil meat and a potato. It could not have been colder had it 
been cook the week before, and it had no chanc to make acquaint 
with salt or pepper. I would not go up to the table, so mari came to 
where I sat in a corner, and, while hand out the tin plate, asked: 

“have ye ani penni about ye, dearie?” 

“what?” I said, in my surprise. 

“have ye ani pennies, dearie, that ye could give me. they’ll take them 
all from ye ani way, dearie, so I might as well have them.” 

I understood it fulli now, but I had no intent of fee mari so 
earli in the game, fear it would have an influenc on her treatment 
of me, so I said I had lost my purse, which wa quit true. but though I 
did not give mari ani money, she wa none the less kind to me. when I 
object to the tin plate in which she had brought my food she fetch a 
china one for me, and when I found it imposs to eat the food she 
present she gave me a glass of milk and a soda cracker. 

all the window in the hall were open and the cold air began to tell on 
my southern blood. It grew so cold inde as to be almost unbearable, 
and I complain of it to miss scott and miss ball. but they answer 
curtli that as I wa in a chariti place I could not expect much else. 
all the other women were suffer from the cold, and the nurs 
themselv had to wear heavi garment to keep themselv warm. I ask 
if I could go to bed. they said “no!” At last miss scott got an old gray 
shawl, and shake some of the moth out of it, told me to put it on. 

“it’ rather a bad-look shawl,” I said. 

“well, some peopl would get along better if they were not so proud,” 
said miss scott. “peopl on chariti should not expect anyth and 
should not complain.” 

So I put the moth-eaten shawl, with all it musti smell, around me, and 
sat down on a wicker chair, wonder what would come next, whether I 
should freez to death or survive. My nose wa veri cold, so I cover 
up my head and wa in a half doze, when the shawl wa suddenli jerk 
from my face and a strang man and miss scott stood befor me. the man 
prove to be a doctor, and hi first greet were: 

“i’v seen that face before.” 

“then you know me?” I asked, with a great show of eager that I did 
not feel. 

“I think I do. where did you come from?” 

“from home.” 

“where is home?” 

“don’t you know? cuba.” 

[illustration: posit demented.] 

He then sat down besid me, felt my pulse, and examin my tongue, and 
at last said: 

“tell miss scott all about yourself.” 

“no, I will not. I will not talk with women.” 

“what do you do in new york?” 

“nothing.” 

“can you work?” 

“no, senor.” 

“tell me, are you a woman of the town?” 

“I do not understand you,” I replied, heartili disgust with him. 

“I mean have you allow the men to provid for you and keep you?” 

I felt like slap him in the face, but I had to maintain my 
composure, so I simpli said: 

“I do not know what you are talk about. I alway live at home.” 

after mani more questions, fulli as useless and senseless, he left me 
and began to talk with the nurse. “posit demented,” he said. “I 
consid it a hopeless case. she need to be put where some one will 
take care of her.” 

and so I pass my second medic expert. 

after this, I began to have a smaller regard for the abil of doctor 
than I ever had before, and a greater one for myself. I felt sure now 
that no doctor could tell whether peopl were insan or not, so long as 
the case wa not violent. 

later in the afternoon a boy and a woman came. the woman sat down on a 
bench, while the boy went in and talk with miss scott. In a short time 
he came out, and, just nod good-by to the woman, who wa hi 
mother, went away. she did not look insane, but as she wa german I 
could not learn her story. her name, however, wa mrs. louis schanz. 
she seem quit lost, but when the nurs put her at some sew she 
did her work well and quickly. At three in the afternoon all the 
patient were given a gruel broth, and at five a cup of tea and a piec 
of bread. I wa favored; for when they saw that it wa imposs for me 
to eat the bread or drink the stuff honor by the name of tea, they 
gave me a cup of milk and a cracker, the same as I had had at noon. 

just as the ga wa be light anoth patient wa added. she wa a 
young girl, twenty-f year old. she told me that she had just gotten 
up from a sick bed. her appear confirm her story. she look like 
one who had had a sever attack of fever. “I am now suffer from 
nervou debility,” she said, “and my friend have sent me here to be 
treat for it.” I did not tell her where she was, and she seem quit 
satisfied. At 6.15 miss ball said that she want to go away, and so we 
would all have to go to bed. then each of us—w now number six—wer 
assign a room and told to undress. I did so, and wa given a short, 
cotton-flannel gown to wear dure the night. then she took everi 
particl of the cloth I had worn dure the day, and, make it up in 
a bundle, label it “brown,” and took it away. the iron-bar window 
wa locked, and miss ball, after give me an extra blanket, which, she 
said, wa a favor rare granted, went out and left me alone. the bed 
wa not a comfort one. It wa so hard, indeed, that I could not make 
a dent in it; and the pillow wa stuf with straw. under the sheet wa 
an oilcloth spread. As the night grew colder I tri to warm that 
oilcloth. I kept on trying, but when morn dawn and it wa still as 
cold as when I went to bed, and had reduc me, too, to the temperatur 
of an iceberg, I gave it up as an imposs task. 

I had hope to get some rest on thi my first night in an insan asylum. 
but I wa doom to disappointment. when the night nurs came in they 
were curiou to see me and to find out what I wa like. No sooner had 
they left than I heard some one at the door inquir for nelli brown, 
and I began to tremble, fear alway that my saniti would be 
discovered. By listen to the convers I found it wa a report 
in search of me, and I heard him ask for my cloth so that he might 
examin it. I listen quit anxious to the talk about me, and wa 
reliev to learn that I wa consid hopelessli insane. that wa 
encouraging. after the report left I heard new arrivals, and I learn 
that a doctor wa there and intend to see me. for what purpos I knew 
not, and I imagin all sort of horribl things, such as examin 
and the rest of it, and when they got to my room I wa shake with more 
than fear. 

“nelli brown, here is the doctor; he wish to speak with you,” said 
the nurse. If that’ all he want I thought I could endur it. I 
remov the blanket which I had put over my head in my sudden fright and 
look up. the sight wa reassuring. 

He wa a handsom young man. He had the air and address of a gentleman. 
some peopl have sinc censur thi action; but I feel sure, even if it 
wa a littl indiscreet, that the young doctor onli meant kind to 
me. He came forward, seat himself on the side of my bed, and put hi 
arm soothingli around my shoulders. It wa a terribl task to play 
insan befor thi young man, and onli a girl can sympath with me in 
my position. 

“how do you feel to-night, nellie?” he asked, easily. 

“oh, I feel all right.” 

“but you are sick, you know,” he said. 

“oh, am i?” I replied, and I turn my head on the pillow and smiled. 

“when did you leav cuba, nellie?” 

“oh, you know my home?” I asked. 

“yes, veri well. don’t you rememb me? I rememb you.” 

“do you?” and I mental said I should not forget him. He wa 
accompani by a friend who never ventur a remark, but stood stare 
at me as I lay in bed. after a great mani questions, to which I answer 
truthfully, he left me. then came other troubles. all night long the 
nurs read one to the other aloud, and I know that the other patients, 
as well as myself, were unabl to sleep. everi half-hour or hour they 
would walk heavili down the halls, their boot-heel resound like the 
march of a privat of dragoons, and take a look at everi patient. Of 
cours thi help to keep us awake. then, as it came toward morning, 
they began to beat egg for breakfast, and the sound made me realiz how 
horribl hungri I was. occasion yell and cri came from the male 
department, and that did not aid in make the night pass more 
cheerfully. then the ambulance-gong, as it brought in more unfortunates, 
sound as a knell to life and liberty. thu I pass my first night as 
an insan girl at bellevue. 




chapter vii. 
the goal IN sight. 


At 6 o’clock on sunday morning, sept. 25, the nurs pull the cover 
from my bed. “come, it’ time for you to get out of bed,” they said, and 
open the window and let in the cold breeze. My cloth wa then 
return to me. after dress I wa shown to a washstand, where all the 
other patient were tri to rid their face of all trace of sleep. At 
7 o’clock we were given some horribl mess, which mari told us wa 
chicken broth. the cold, from which we had suffer enough the day 
previous, wa bitter, and when I complain to the nurs she said it wa 
one of the rule of the institut not to turn the heat on until 
october, and so we would have to endur it, as the steam-pip had not 
even been put in order. the night nurs then, arm themselv with 
scissors, began to play manicur on the patients. they cut my nail to 
the quick, as they did those of sever of the other patients. shortli 
after thi a handsom young doctor made hi appear and I wa 
conduct into the sitting-room. 

“who are you?” he asked. 

“nelli moreno,” I replied. 

“then whi did you give the name of brown?” he asked. “what is wrong with 
you?” 

“nothing. I did not want to come here, but they brought me. I want to go 
away. won’t you let me out?” 

“if I take you out will you stay with me? won’t you run away from me 
when you get on the street?” 

“I can’t promis that I will not,” I answered, with a smile and a sigh, 
for he wa handsome. 

He ask me mani other questions. did I ever see face on the wall? did 
I ever hear voic around? I answer him to the best of my ability. 

“do you ever hear voic at night?” he asked. 

“yes, there is so much talk I cannot sleep.” 

“I thought so,” he said to himself. then turn to me, he asked: “what 
do these voic say?” 

“well, I do not listen to them always. but sometimes, veri often, they 
talk about nelli brown, and then on other subject that do not interest 
me half so much,” I answered, truthfully. 

“that will do,” he said to miss scott, who wa just on the outside. 

“can I go away?” I asked. 

“yes,” he said, with a satisfi laugh, “we’ll soon send you away.” 

“it is so veri cold here, I want to go out,” I said. 

“that’ true,” he said to miss scott. “the cold is almost unbear in 
here, and you will have some case of pneumonia if you are not careful.” 

with thi I wa led away and anoth patient wa taken in. I sat right 
outsid the door and wait to hear how he would test the saniti of the 
other patients. with littl variat the examin wa exactli the 
same as mine. all the patient were ask if they saw face on the wall, 
heard voices, and what they said. I might also add each patient deni 
ani such peculiar freak of sight and hearing. At 10 o’clock we were 
given a cup of unsalt beef tea; at noon a bit of cold meat and a 
potatoe, at 3 o’clock a cup of oatmeal gruel and at 5.30 a cup of tea 
and a slice of unbutt bread. We were all cold and hungry. after the 
physician left we were given shawl and told to walk up and down the 
hall in order to get warm. dure the day the pavilion wa visit by a 
number of peopl who were curiou to see the crazi girl from cuba. I 
kept my head covered, on the plea of be cold, for fear some of the 
report would recogn me. some of the visitor were appar in 
search of a miss girl, for I wa made to take down the shawl 
repeatedly, and after they look at me they would say, “I don’t know 
her,” or “she is not the one,” for which I wa secretli thankful. warden 
o’rourk visit me, and tri hi art on an examination. then he 
brought some well-dress women and some gentlemen at differ time to 
have a glanc at the mysteri nelli brown. 

the report were the most troublesome. such a number of them! and they 
were all so bright and clever that I wa terribl frighten lest they 
should see that I wa sane. they were veri kind and nice to me, and veri 
gentl in all their questionings. My late visitor the night previou 
came to the window while some report were interview me in the 
sitting-room, and told the nurs to allow them to see me, as they would 
be of assist in find some clew as to my identity. 

In the afternoon dr. field came and examin me. He ask me onli a few 
questions, and one that had no bear on such a case. the chief 
question wa of my home and friends, and if I had ani lover or had ever 
been married. then he made me stretch out my arm and move my fingers, 
which I did without the least hesitation, yet I heard him say my case 
wa hopeless. the other patient were ask the same questions. 

As the doctor wa about to leav the pavilion miss tilli mayard 
discov that she wa in an insan ward. she went to dr. field and 
ask him whi she had been sent there. 

“have you just found out you are in an insan asylum?” ask the doctor. 

“yes; my friend said they were send me to a convalesc ward to be 
treat for nervou debility, from which I am suffer sinc my 
illness. I want to get out of thi place immediately.” 

“well, you won’t get out in a hurry,” he said, with a quick laugh. 

“if you know anyth at all,” she responded, “you should be abl to 
tell that I am perfectli sane. whi don’t you test me?” 

“we know all we want to on that score,” said the doctor, and he left the 
poor girl condemn to an insan asylum, probabl for life, without 
give her one feebl chanc to prove her sanity. 

sunday night wa but a repetit of saturday. all night long we were 
kept awak by the talk of the nurs and their heavi walk through the 
uncarpet halls. On monday morn we were told that we should be taken 
away at 1.30. the nurs question me unceasingli about my home, and 
all seem to have an idea that I had a lover who had cast me forth on 
the world and wreck my brain. the morn brought mani reporters. how 
untir they are in their effort to get someth new. miss scott 
refus to allow me to be seen, however, and for thi I wa thankful. 
had they been given free access to me, I should probabl not have been a 
mysteri long, for mani of them knew me by sight. warden o’rourk came 
for a final visit and had a short convers with me. He wrote hi 
name in my notebook, say to the nurs that I would forget all about 
it in an hour. I smile and thought I wasn’t sure of that. other peopl 
call to see me, but none knew me or could give ani inform about 
me. 

noon came. I grew nervou as the time approach to leav for the 
island. I dread everi new arrival, fear that my secret would be 
discov at the last moment. then I wa given a shawl and my hat and 
gloves. I could hardli put them on, my nerv were so unstrung. At last 
the attend arrived, and I bade good-by to mari as I slip “a few 
pennies” into her hand. “god bless you,” she said; “I shall pray for 
you. cheer up, dearie. you are young, and will get over this.” I told 
her I hope so, and then I said good-by to miss scott in spanish. the 
rough-look attend twist hi arm around mine, and half-led, 
half-drag me to an ambulance. A crowd of the student had assembled, 
and they watch us curiously. I put the shawl over my face, and sank 
thank into the wagon. miss neville, miss mayard, mrs. fox, and mrs. 
schanz were all put in after me, one at a time. A man got in with us, 
the door were locked, and we were driven out of the gate in great 
style on toward the insan asylum and victory! the patient made no move 
to escape. the odor of the male attendant’ breath wa enough to make 
one’ head swim. 

when we reach the wharf such a mob of peopl crowd around the wagon 
that the polic were call to put them away, so that we could reach the 
boat. I wa the last of the procession. I wa escort down the plank, 
the fresh breez blow the attendants’ whiski breath into my face 
until I staggered. I wa taken into a dirti cabin, where I found my 
companion seat on a narrow bench. the small window were closed, and, 
with the smell of the filthi room, the air wa stifling. At one end of 
the cabin wa a small bunk in such a condit that I had to hold my 
nose when I went near it. A sick girl wa put on it. An old woman, with 
an enorm bonnet and a dirti basket fill with chunk of bread and 
bit of scrap meat, complet our company. the door wa guard by two 
femal attendants. one wa clad in a dress made of bed-tick and the 
other wa dress with some attempt at style. they were coarse, massiv 
women, and expector tobacco juic about on the floor in a manner 
more skill than charming. one of these fear creatur seem to 
have much faith in the power of the glanc on insan people, for, when 
ani one of us would move or go to look out of the high window she would 
say “sit down,” and would lower her brow and glare in a way that wa 
simpli terrifying. while guard the door they talk with some men on 
the outside. they discuss the number of patient and then their own 
affair in a manner neither edifi nor refined. 

[illustration: ON board the island boat.] 

the boat stop and the old woman and the sick girl were taken off. the 
rest of us were told to sit still. At the next stop my companion were 
taken off, one at a time. I wa last, and it seem to requir a man and 
a woman to lead me up the plank to reach the shore. An ambul wa 
stand there, and in it were the four other patients. 

“what is thi place?” I ask of the man, who had hi finger sunk into 
the flesh of my arm. 

“blackwell’ island, an insan place, where you’ll never get out of.” 

with thi I wa shove into the ambulance, the springboard wa put up, 
an offic and a mail-carri jump on behind, and I wa swiftli driven 
to the insan asylum on blackwell’ island. 




chapter viii. 
insid the mad-house. 


As the wagon wa rapidli driven through the beauti lawn up to the 
asylum my feel of satisfact at have attain the object of my 
work were greatli dampen by the look of distress on the face of my 
companions. poor women, they had no hope of a speedi delivery. they 
were be driven to a prison, through no fault of their own, in all 
probabl for life. In comparison, how much easier it would be to walk 
to the gallow than to thi tomb of live horrors! On the wagon sped, 
and I, as well as my comrades, gave a despair farewel glanc at 
freedom as we came in sight of the long stone buildings. We pass one 
low building, and the stench wa so horribl that I wa compel to 
hold my breath, and I mental decid that it wa the kitchen. I 
afterward found I wa correct in my surmise, and smile at the signboard 
at the end of the walk: “visitor are not allow on thi road.” I don’t 
think the sign would be necessari if they onc tri the road, 
especi on a warm day. 

the wagon stopped, and the nurs and offic in charg told us to get 
out. the nurs added: “thank god! they came quietly.” We obey order 
to go ahead up a flight of narrow, stone steps, which had evid been 
built for the accommod of peopl who climb stair three at a time. 
I wonder if my companion knew where we were, so I said to miss tilli 
mayard: 

“where are we?” 

“at the blackwell’ island lunat asylum,” she answered, sadly. 

“are you crazy?” I asked. 

“no,” she replied; “but as we have been sent here we will have to be 
quiet until we find some mean of escape. they will be few, though, if 
all the doctors, as dr. field, refus to listen to me or give me a 
chanc to prove my sanity.” We were usher into a narrow vestibule, and 
the door wa lock behind us. 

In spite of the knowledg of my saniti and the assur that I would be 
releas in a few days, my heart gave a sharp twinge. pronounc insan 
by four expert doctor and shut up behind the unmerci bolt and bar 
of a mad-house! not to be confin alone, but to be a companion, day and 
night, of senseless, chatter lunatics; to sleep with them, to eat 
with them, to be consid one of them, wa an uncomfort position. 
timidli we follow the nurs up the long uncarpet hall to a room 
fill by so-cal crazi women. We were told to sit down, and some of 
the patient kindli made room for us. they look at us curiously, and 
one came up to me and asked: 

“who sent you here?” 

“the doctors,” I answered. 

“what for?” she persisted. 

“well, they say I am insane,” I admitted. 

“insane!” she repeated, incredulously. “it cannot be seen in your face.” 

thi woman wa too clever, I concluded, and wa glad to answer the 
roughli given order to follow the nurs to see the doctor. thi nurse, 
miss grupe, by the way, had a nice german face, and if I had not 
detect certain hard line about the mouth I might have expected, as 
did my companions, to receiv but kind from her. she left us in a 
small waiting-room at the end of the hall, and left us alon while she 
went into a small offic open into the sit or receiving-room. 

“I like to go down in the wagon,” she said to the invis parti on the 
inside. “it help to break up the day.” He answer her that the open 
air improv her looks, and she again appear befor us all smile and 
simpers. 

[illustration: the insan asylum.] 

“come here, tilli mayard,” she said. miss mayard obeyed, and, though I 
could not see into the office, I could hear her gentli but firmli 
plead her case. all her remark were as ration as ani I ever heard, 
and I thought no good physician could help but be impress with her 
story. she told of her recent illness, that she wa suffer from 
nervou debility. she beg that they tri all their test for insanity, 
if they had any, and give her justice. poor girl, how my heart ach for 
her! I determin then and there that I would tri by everi mean to make 
my mission of benefit to my suffer sisters; that I would show how 
they are commit without ampl trial. without one word of sympathi or 
encourag she wa brought back to where we sat. 

mrs. louis schanz wa taken into the presenc of dr. kinier, the 
medic man. 

“your name?” he asked, loudly. she answer in german, say she did 
not speak english nor could she understand it. however, when he said 
mrs. louis schanz, she said “yah, yah.” then he tri other questions, 
and when he found she could not understand one word of english, he said 
to miss grupe: 

“you are german; speak to her for me.” 

miss grupe prove to be one of those peopl who are asham of their 
nationality, and she refused, say she could understand but few word 
of her mother tongue. 

“you know you speak german. ask thi woman what her husband does,” and 
they both laugh as if they were enjoy a joke. 

“I can’t speak but a few words,” she protested, but at last she manag 
to ascertain the occup of mr. schanz. 

“now, what wa the use of lie to me?” ask the doctor, with a laugh 
which dispel the rudeness. 

“I can’t speak ani more,” she said, and she did not. 

thu wa mrs. louis schanz consign to the asylum without a chanc of 
make herself understood. can such careless be excused, I wonder, 
when it is so easi to get an interpreter? If the confin wa but for 
a few day one might question the necessity. but here wa a woman taken 
without her own consent from a free world to an asylum and there given 
no chanc to prove her sanity. confin most probabl for life behind 
asylum bars, without even be told in her languag the whi and 
wherefore. compar thi with a criminal, who is given everi chanc to 
prove hi innocence. who would not rather be a murder and take the 
chanc for life than be declar insane, without hope of escape? mrs. 
schanz beg in german to know where she was, and plead for liberty. 
her voic broken by sobs, she wa led unheard out to us. 

[illustration: the front hallway.] 

mrs. fox wa then put through thi weak, trifl examin and 
brought from the office, convicted. miss anni nevil took her turn, 
and I wa again left to the last. I had by thi time determin to act 
as I do when free, except that I would refus to tell who I wa or where 
my home was. 




chapter ix. 
AN expert(?) AT work. 


“nelli brown, the doctor want you,” said miss grupe. I went in and wa 
told to sit down opposit dr. kinier at the desk. 

“what is your name?” he asked, without look up. 

“nelli brown,” I replied, easily. 

“where is your home?” write what I had said down in a larg book. 

“in cuba.” 

“oh!” he ejaculated, with sudden understanding—then, address the 
nurse: 

“did you see anyth in the paper about her?” 

“yes,” she replied, “I saw a long account of thi girl in the _sun_ on 
sunday.” then the doctor said: 

“keep her here until I go to the offic and see the notic again.” 

He left us, and I wa reliev of my hat and shawl. On hi return, he 
said he had been unabl to find the paper, but he relat the stori of 
my _debut_, as he had read it, to the nurse. 

“what’ the color of her eyes?” 

miss grupe looked, and answer “gray,” although everybodi had alway 
said my eye were brown or hazel. 

“what’ your age?” he asked; and as I answered, “nineteen last may,” he 
turn to the nurse, and said, “when do you get your next pass?” thi I 
ascertain wa a leav of absence, or “a day off.” 

“next saturday,” she said, with a laugh. 

“you will go to town?” and they both laugh as she answer in the 
affirmative, and he said: 

“measur her.” I wa stood under a measure, and it wa brought down 
tightli on my head. 

“what is it?” ask the doctor. 

“now you know I can’t tell,” she said. 

“yes, you can; go ahead. what height?” 

“I don’t know; there are some figur there, but I can’t tell.” 

“yes, you can. now look and tell me.” 

“I can’t; do it yourself,” and they laugh again as the doctor left hi 
place at the desk and came forward to see for himself. 

“five feet five inches; don’t you see?” he said, take her hand and 
touch the figures. 

By her voic I knew she did not understand yet, but that wa no concern 
of mine, as the doctor seem to find a pleasur in aid her. then I 
wa put on the scales, and she work around until she got them to 
balance. 

“how much?” ask the doctor, have resum hi posit at the desk. 

“I don’t know. you will have to see for yourself,” she replied, call 
him by hi christian name, which I have forgotten. He turn and also 
address her by her baptism name, he said: 

“you are get too fresh!” and they both laughed. I then told the 
weight—112 pounds—to the nurse, and she in turn told the doctor. 

“what time are you go to supper?” he asked, and she told him. He gave 
the nurs more attent than he did me, and ask her six question to 
everi one of me. then he wrote my fate in the book befor him. I said, 
“I am not sick and I do not want to stay here. No one ha a right to 
shut me up in thi manner.” He took no notic of my remarks, and have 
complet hi writings, as well as hi talk with the nurs for the 
moment, he said that would do, and with my companions, I went back to 
the sitting-room. 

“you play the piano?” they asked. 

“oh, yes; ever sinc I wa a child,” I replied. 

then they insist that I should play, and they seat me on a wooden 
chair befor an old-fashion square. I struck a few notes, and the 
untun respons sent a grind chill through me. 

“how horrible,” I exclaimed, turn to a nurse, miss mccarten, who 
stood at my side. “I never touch a piano as much out of tune.” 

“it’ a piti of you,” she said, spitefully; “we’ll have to get one made 
to order for you.” 

I began to play the variat of “home sweet home.” the talk ceas 
and everi patient sat silent, while my cold finger move slowli and 
stiffli over the keyboard. I finish in an aimless fashion and refus 
all request to play more. not see an avail place to sit, I still 
occupi the chair in the front of the piano while I “size up” my 
surroundings. 

It wa a long, bare room, with bare yellow bench encircl it. these 
benches, which were perfectli straight, and just as uncomfortable, would 
hold five people, although in almost everi instanc six were crowd on 
them. bar windows, built about five feet from the floor, face the 
two doubl door which led into the hall. the bare white wall were 
somewhat reliev by three lithographs, one of fritz emmet and the 
other of negro minstrels. In the center of the room wa a larg tabl 
cover with a white bed-spread, and around it sat the nurses. 
everyth wa spotlessli clean and I thought what good worker the 
nurs must be to keep such order. In a few day after how I laugh at 
my own stupid to think the nurs would work. when they found I would 
not play ani more, miss mccarten came up to me saying, roughly: 

“get away from here,” and close the piano with a bang. 

“brown, come here,” wa the next order I got from a rough, red-fac 
woman at the table. “what have you on?” 

“mi clothing,” I replied. 

she lift my dress and skirt and wrote down one pair shoes, one pair 
stockings, one cloth dress, one straw sailor hat, and so on. 




chapter X. 
MY first supper. 


thi examin over, we heard some one yell, “go out into the hall.” 
one of the patient kindli explain that thi wa an invit to 
supper. We late comer tri to keep together, so we enter the hall 
and stood at the door where all the women had crowded. how we shiver 
as we stood there! the window were open and the draught went whizz 
through the hall. the patient look blue with cold, and the minut 
stretch into a quarter of an hour. At last one of the nurs went 
forward and unlock a door, through which we all crowd to a land 
of the stairway. here again came a long halt directli befor an open 
window. 

“how veri imprud for the attend to keep these thinli clad women 
stand here in the cold,” said miss neville. 

I look at the poor crazi captiv shivering, and added, emphatically, 
“it’ horribl brutal.” while they stood there I thought I would not 
relish supper that night. they look so lost and hopeless. some were 
chatter nonsens to invis persons, other were laugh or cri 
aimlessly, and one old, gray-hair woman wa nudg me, and, with 
wink and sage nod of the head and piti uplift of the eye 
and hands, wa assur me that I must not mind the poor creatures, as 
they were all mad. “stop at the heater,” wa then ordered, “and get in 
line, two by two.” “mary, get a companion.” “how mani time must I tell 
you to keep in line?” “stand still,” and, as the order were issued, a 
shove and a push were administered, and often a slap on the ears. after 
thi third and final halt, we were march into a long, narrow 
dining-room, where a rush wa made for the table. 

the tabl reach the length of the room and wa uncov and 
uninviting. long bench without back were put for the patient to sit 
on, and over these they had to crawl in order to face the table. place 
close togeth all along the tabl were larg dressing-bowl fill with 
a pinkish-look stuff which the patient call tea. By each bowl wa 
laid a piec of bread, cut thick and buttered. A small saucer contain 
five prune accompani the bread. one fat woman made a rush, and 
jerk up sever saucer from those around her empti their content 
into her own saucer. then while hold to her own bowl she lift up 
anoth and drain it content at one gulp. thi she did to a second 
bowl in shorter time than it take to tell it. indeed, I wa so amus 
at her success grab that when I look at my own share the woman 
opposite, without so much as by your leave, grab my bread and left me 
without any. 

anoth patient, see this, kindli offer me hers, but I declin 
with thank and turn to the nurs and ask for more. As she flung a 
thick piec down on the tabl she made some remark about the fact that 
if I forgot where my home wa I had not forgotten how to eat. I tri 
the bread, but the butter wa so horribl that one could not eat it. A 
blue-ey german girl on the opposit side of the tabl told me I could 
have bread unbutt if I wished, and that veri few were abl to eat 
the butter. I turn my attent to the prune and found that veri few 
of them would be sufficient. A patient near ask me to give them to 
her. I did so. My bowl of tea wa all that wa left. I tasted, and one 
tast wa enough. It had no sugar, and it tast as if it had been made 
in copper. It wa as weak as water. thi wa also transfer to a 
hungrier patient, in spite of the protest of miss neville. 

“you must forc the food down,” she said, “els you will be sick, and 
who know but what, with these surroundings, you may go crazy. To have a 
good brain the stomach must be care for.” 

“it is imposs for me to eat that stuff,” I replied, and, despit all 
her urging, I ate noth that night. 

It did not requir much time for the patient to consum all that wa 
eatabl on the table, and then we got our order to form in line in the 
hall. when thi wa done the door befor us were unlock and we were 
order to proceed back to the sitting-room. mani of the patient 
crowd near us, and I wa again urg to play, both by them and by the 
nurses. To pleas the patient I promis to play and miss tilli mayard 
wa to sing. the first thing she ask me to play wa “rock-a-by baby,” 
and I did so. she sang it beautifully. 




chapter xi. 
IN the bath. 


A few more song and we were told to go with miss grupe. We were taken 
into a cold, wet bathroom, and I wa order to undress. did I protest? 
well, I never grew so earnest in my life as when I tri to beg off. 
they said if I did not they would use forc and that it would not be 
veri gentle. At thi I notic one of the craziest women in the ward 
stand by the fill bathtub with a large, discolor rag in her 
hands. she wa chatter away to herself and chuckl in a manner 
which seem to me fiendish. I knew now what wa to be done with me. I 
shivered. they began to undress me, and one by one they pull off my 
clothes. At last everyth wa gone except one garment. “I will not 
remov it,” I said vehemently, but they took it off. I gave one glanc 
at the group of patient gather at the door watch the scene, and I 
jump into the bathtub with more energi than grace. 

[illustration: the reception-room.] 

the water wa ice-cold, and I again began to protest. how useless it all 
was! I begged, at least, that the patient be made to go away, but wa 
order to shut up. the crazi woman began to scrub me. I can find no 
other word that will express it but scrubbing. from a small tin pan she 
took some soft soap and rub it all over me, even all over my face and 
my pretti hair. I wa at last past see or speaking, although I had 
beg that my hair be left untouched. rub, rub, rub, went the old 
woman, chatter to herself. My teeth chatter and my limb were 
goose-flesh and blue with cold. suddenli I got, one after the other, 
three bucket of water over my head—ice-cold water, too—into my eyes, my 
ears, my nose and my mouth. I think I experienc some of the sensat 
of a drown person as they drag me, gasping, shiver and quaking, 
from the tub. for onc I did look insane. I caught a glanc of the 
indescrib look on the face of my companions, who had wit my 
fate and knew their wa sure following. unabl to control myself at 
the absurd pictur I presented, I burst into roar of laughter. they put 
me, drip wet, into a short canton flannel slip, label across the 
extrem end in larg black letters, “lunat asylum, B. i., H. 6.” the 
letter meant blackwell’ island, hall 6. 

By thi time miss mayard had been undressed, and, much as I hate my 
recent bath, I would have taken anoth if by it I could have save her 
the experience. imagin plung that sick girl into a cold bath when it 
made me, who ha never been ill, shake as if with ague. I heard her 
explain to miss grupe that her head wa still sore from her illness. her 
hair wa short and had mostli come out, and she ask that the crazi 
woman be made to rub more gently, but miss grupe said: 

“there isn’t much fear of hurt you. shut up, or you’ll get it worse.” 
miss mayard did shut up, and that wa my last look at her for the night. 

I wa hurri into a room where there were six beds, and had been put 
into bed when some one came along and jerk me out again, saying: 

“nelli brown ha to be put in a room alon to-night, for I suppos 
she’ noisy.” 

I wa taken to room 28 and left to tri and make an impress on the 
bed. It wa an imposs task. the bed had been made high in the center 
and slope on either side. At the first touch my head flood the 
pillow with water, and my wet slip transfer some of it damp to 
the sheet. when miss grupe came in I ask if I could not have a 
night-gown. 

“we have no such thing in thi institution,” she said. 

“I do not like to sleep without,” I replied. 

“well, I don’t care about that,” she said. “you are in a public 
institut now, and you can’t expect to get anything. thi is charity, 
and you should be thank for what you get.” 

“but the citi pay to keep these place up,” I urged, “and pay peopl 
to be kind to the unfortun brought here.” 

“well, you don’t need to expect ani kind here, for you won’t get 
it,” she said, and she went out and close the door. 

[illustration: her bedroom.] 

A sheet and an oilcloth were under me, and a sheet and black wool 
blanket above. I never felt anyth so annoy as that wool blanket as 
I tri to keep it around my shoulder to stop the chill from get 
underneath. when I pull it up I left my feet bare, and when I pull 
it down my shoulder were exposed. there wa absolut noth in the 
room but the bed and myself. As the door had been lock I imagin I 
should be left alon for the night, but I heard the sound of the heavi 
tread of two women down the hall. they stop at everi door, unlock 
it, and in a few moment I could hear them relock it. thi they did 
without the least attempt at quiet down the whole length of the 
opposit side of the hall and up to my room. here they paused. the key 
wa insert in the lock and turned. I watch those about to enter. In 
they came, dress in brown and white stripe dresses, fasten by brass 
buttons, large, white aprons, a heavi green cord about the waist, from 
which dangl a bunch of larg keys, and small, white cap on their 
heads. be dress as were the attend of the day, I knew they were 
nurses. the first one carri a lantern, and she flash it light into 
my face while she said to her assistant: 

“thi is nelli brown.” look at her, I asked: 

“who are you?” 

“the night nurse, my dear,” she replied, and, wish that I would sleep 
well, she went out and lock the door after her. sever time dure 
the night they came into my room, and even had I been abl to sleep, the 
unlock of the heavi door, their loud talking, and heavi tread, would 
have awaken me. 

I could not sleep, so I lay in bed pictur to myself the horror in 
case a fire should break out in the asylum. everi door is lock 
separ and the window are heavili barred, so that escap is 
impossible. In the one build alon there are, I think dr. ingram told 
me, some three hundr women. they are locked, one to ten to a room. It 
is imposs to get out unless these door are unlocked. A fire is not 
improbable, but one of the most like occurrences. should the build 
burn, the jailer or nurs would never think of releas their crazi 
patients. thi I can prove to you later when I come to tell of their 
cruel treatment of the poor thing intrust to their care. As I say, in 
case of fire, not a dozen women could escape. all would be left to roast 
to death. even if the nurs were kind, which they are not, it would 
requir more presenc of mind than women of their class possess to risk 
the flame and their own live while they unlock the hundr door for 
the insan prisoners. unless there is a chang there will some day be a 
tale of horror never equaled. 

In thi connect is an amus incid which happen just previou 
to my release. I wa talk with dr. ingram about mani things, and at 
last told him what I thought would be the result of a fire. 

“the nurs are expect to open the doors,” he said. 

“but you know posit that they would not wait to do that,” I said, 
“and these women would burn to death.” 

He sat silent, unabl to contradict my assertion. 

“whi don’t you have it changed?” I asked. 

“what can I do?” he replied. “I offer suggest until my brain is 
tired, but what good doe it do? what would you do?” he asked, turn 
to me, the proclaim insan girl. 

“well, I should insist on them have lock put in, as I have seen in 
some places, that by turn a crank at the end of the hall you can lock 
or unlock everi door on the one side. then there would be some chanc of 
escape. now, everi door be lock separately, there is absolut 
none.” 

dr. ingram turn to me with an anxiou look on hi kind face as he 
asked, slowly: 

“nelli brown, what institut have you been an inmat of befor you 
came here?” 

“none. I never wa confin in ani institution, except boarding-school, 
in my life.” 

“where then did you see the lock you have described?” 

I had seen them in the new western penitentiari at pittsburg, pa., but I 
did not dare say so. I mere answered: 

“oh, I have seen them in a place I wa in—i mean as a visitor.” 

“there is onli one place I know of where they have those locks,” he 
said, sadly, “and that is at sing sing.” 

the infer is conclusive. I laugh veri heartili over the impli 
accusation, and tri to assur him that I had never, up to date, been 
an inmat of sing sing or even ever visit it. 

just as the morn began to dawn I went to sleep. It did not seem mani 
moment until I wa rude awaken and told to get up, the window be 
open and the cloth pull off me. My hair wa still wet and I had 
pain all through me, as if I had the rheumatism. some cloth wa 
flung on the floor and I wa told to put it on. I ask for my own, but 
wa told to take what I got and keep quiet by the appar head nurse, 
miss grady. I look at it. one underskirt made of coars dark cotton 
good and a cheap white calico dress with a black spot in it. I tie the 
string of the skirt around me and put on the littl dress. It wa made, 
as are all those worn by the patients, into a straight tight waist sew 
on to a straight skirt. As I button the waist I notic the underskirt 
wa about six inch longer than the upper, and for a moment I sat down 
on the bed and laugh at my own appearance. No woman ever long for a 
mirror more than I did at that moment. 

I saw the other patient hurri past in the hall, so I decid not to 
lose anyth that might be go on. We number forty-f patient in 
hall 6, and were sent to the bathroom, where there were two coars 
towels. I watch crazi patient who had the most danger erupt 
all over their face dri on the towel and then saw women with clean 
skin turn to use them. I went to the bathtub and wash my face at the 
run faucet and my underskirt did duti for a towel. 

befor I had complet my ablut a bench wa brought into the 
bathroom. miss grupe and miss mccarten came in with comb in their 
hands. We were told to sit down on the bench, and the hair of forty-f 
women wa comb with one patient, two nurses, and six combs. As I saw 
some of the sore head comb I thought thi wa anoth dose I had not 
bargain for. miss tilli mayard had her own comb, but it wa taken 
from her by miss grady. oh, that combing! I never realiz befor what 
the express “i’ll give you a combing” meant, but I knew then. My 
hair, all mat and wet from the night previous, wa pull and jerked, 
and, after expostul to no avail, I set my teeth and endur the 
pain. they refus to give me my hairpins, and my hair wa arrang in 
one plait and tie with a red cotton rag. My curli bang refus to stay 
back, so that at least wa left of my former glory. 

after thi we went to the sitting-room and I look for my companions. 
At first I look vainly, unabl to distinguish them from the other 
patients, but after awhil I recogn miss mayard by her short hair. 

“how did you sleep after your cold bath?” 

“I almost froze, and then the nois kept me awake. it’ dreadful! My 
nerv were so unstrung befor I came here, and I fear I shall not be 
abl to stand the strain.” 

I did the best I could to cheer her. I ask that we be given addit 
clothing, at least as much as custom say women shall wear, but they 
told me to shut up; that we had as much as they intend to give us. 

We were compel to get up at 5.30 o’clock, and at 7.15 we were told to 
collect in the hall, where the experi of waiting, as on the even 
previous, wa repeated. when we got into the dining-room at last we 
found a bowl of cold tea, a slice of butter bread and a saucer of 
oatmeal, with molass on it, for each patient. I wa hungry, but the 
food would not down. I ask for unbutt bread and wa given it. I 
cannot tell you of anyth which is the same dirty, black color. It wa 
hard, and in place noth more than dri dough. I found a spider in 
my slice, so I did not eat it. I tri the oatmeal and molasses, but it 
wa wretched, and so I endeavored, but without much show of success, to 
choke down the tea. 

after we were back to the sitting-room a number of women were order to 
make the beds, and some of the patient were put to scrub and other 
given differ duti which cover all the work in the hall. It is not 
the attend who keep the institut so nice for the poor patients, 
as I had alway thought, but the patients, who do it all themselves—even 
to clean the nurses’ bedroom and care for their clothing. 

about 9.30 the new patients, of which I wa one, were told to go out to 
see the doctor. I wa taken in and my lung and my heart were examin 
by the flirti young doctor who wa the first to see us the day we 
entered. the one who made out the report, if I mistak not, wa the 
assist superintendent, ingram. A few question and I wa allow to 
return to the sitting-room. 

I came in and saw miss gradi with my notebook and long lead pencil, 
bought just for the occasion. 

“I want my book and pencil,” I said, quit truthfully. “it help me 
rememb things.” 

I wa veri anxiou to get it to make note in and wa disappoint when 
she said: 

“you can’t have it, so shut up.” 

some day after I ask dr. ingram if I could have it, and he promis 
to consid the matter. when I again refer to it, he said that miss 
gradi said I onli brought a book there; that I had no pencil. I wa 
provoked, and insist that I had, whereupon I wa advis to fight 
against the imagin of my brain. 

after the housework wa complet by the patients, and as the day wa 
fine, but cold, we were told to go out in the hall and get on shawl and 
hat for a walk. poor patients! how eager they were for a breath of air; 
how eager for a slight releas from their prison. they went swiftli into 
the hall and there wa a skirmish for hats. such hats! 

[illustration: AN insan hall.] 




chapter xii. 
promenad with lunatics. 


I shall never forget my first walk. when all the patient had don the 
white straw hats, such as bather wear at coney island, I could not but 
laugh at their comic appearances. I could not distinguish one woman 
from another. I lost miss neville, and had to take my hat off and search 
for her. when we met we put our hat on and laugh at one another. two 
by two we form in line, and guard by the attend we went out a 
back way on to the walks. 

We had not gone mani pace when I saw, proceed from everi walk, long 
line of women guard by nurses. how mani there were! everi way I 
look I could see them in the queer dresses, comic straw hat and 
shawls, march slowli around. I eagerli watch the pass line and 
a thrill of horror crept over me at the sight. vacant eye and 
meaningless faces, and their tongu utter meaningless nonsense. one 
crowd pass and I noted, by nose as well as eyes, that they were 
fear dirty. 

“who are they?” I ask of a patient near me. 

“they are consid the most violent on the island,” she replied. “they 
are from the lodge, the first build with the high steps.” some were 
yelling, some were cursing, other were sing or pray or preaching, 
as the fanci struck them, and they made up the most miser collect 
of human I had ever seen. As the din of their pass fade in the 
distanc there came anoth sight I can never forget: 

A long cabl rope fasten to wide leather belts, and these belt lock 
around the waist of fifty-two women. At the end of the rope wa a heavi 
iron cart, and in it two women—on nurs a sore foot, anoth 
scream at some nurse, saying: “you beat me and I shall not forget it. 
you want to kill me,” and then she would sob and cry. the women “on the 
rope,” as the patient call it, were each busi on their individu 
freaks. some were yell all the while. one who had blue eye saw me 
look at her, and she turn as far as she could, talk and smiling, 
with that terrible, horrifi look of absolut insan stamp on her. 
the doctor might safe judg on her case. the horror of that sight to 
one who had never been near an insan person before, wa someth 
unspeakable. 

“god help them!” breath miss neville, “it is so dread I cannot 
look.” 

On they passed, but for their place to be fill by more. can you 
imagin the sight? accord to one of the physician there are 1600 
insan women on blackwell’ island. 

mad! what can be half so horrible? My heart thrill with piti when I 
look on old, gray-hair women talk aimlessli to space. one woman 
had on a straight-jacket, and two women had to drag her along. crippled, 
blind, old, young, homely, and pretty; one senseless mass of humanity. 
No fate could be worse. 

I look at the pretti lawns, which I had onc thought wa such a 
comfort to the poor creatur confin on the island, and laugh at my 
own notions. what enjoy is it to them? they are not allow on the 
grass—it is onli to look at. I saw some patient eagerli and caressingli 
lift a nut or a color leaf that had fallen on the path. but they were 
not permit to keep them. the nurs would alway compel them to throw 
their littl bit of god’ comfort away. 

[illustration: quiet inmat out for A walk.] 

As I pass a low pavilion, where a crowd of helpless lunat were 
confined, I read a motto on the wall, “while I live I hope.” the 
absurd of it struck me forcibly. I would have like to put abov the 
gate that open to the asylum, “he who enter here leaveth hope behind.” 

dure the walk I wa annoy a great deal by nurs who had heard my 
romant stori call to those in charg of us to ask which one I was. 
I wa point out repeatedly. 

It wa not long until the dinner hour arrived, and I wa so hungri that 
I felt I could eat anything. the same old stori of stand for a half 
and three-quart of an hour in the hall wa repeat befor we got 
down to our dinners. the bowl in which we had had our tea were now 
fill with soup, and on a plate wa one cold boil potato and a chunk 
of beef, which, on investigation, prove to be slightli spoiled. there 
were no knive or forks, and the patient look fairli savag as they 
took the tough beef in their finger and pull in opposit to their 
teeth. those toothless or with poor teeth could not eat it. one 
tablespoon wa given for the soup, and a piec of bread wa the final 
entree. butter is never allow at dinner nor coffe or tea. miss mayard 
could not eat, and I saw mani of the sick one turn away in disgust. I 
wa get veri weak from the want of food and tri to eat a slice of 
bread. after the first few bite hunger assert itself, and I wa abl 
to eat all but the crust of the one slice. 

superintend dent went through the sitting-room, give an occasion 
“how do you do?” “how are you to-day?” here and there among the 
patients. hi voic wa as cold as the hall, and the patient made no 
movement to tell him of their sufferings. I ask some of them to tell 
how they were suffer from the cold and insuffici of clothing, but 
they repli that the nurs would beat them if they told. 

I wa never so tire as I grew sit on those benches. sever of the 
patient would sit on one foot or sideway to make a change, but they 
were alway reprov and told to sit up straight. If they talk they 
were scold and told to shut up; if they want to walk around in order 
to take the stiff out of them, they were told to sit down and be 
still. what, except torture, would produc insan quicker than thi 
treatment? here is a class of women sent to be cured. I would like the 
expert physician who are condemn me for my action, which ha proven 
their ability, to take a perfectli sane and healthi woman, shut her up 
and make her sit from 6 A. M. until 8 P. M. on straight-back benches, do 
not allow her to talk or move dure these hours, give her no read 
and let her know noth of the world or it doings, give her bad food 
and harsh treatment, and see how long it will take to make her insane. 
two month would make her a mental and physic wreck. 

I have describ my first day in the asylum, and as my other nine were 
exactli the same in the gener run of thing it would be tiresom to 
tell about each. In give thi stori I expect to be contradict by 
mani who are exposed. I mere tell in common words, without 
exaggeration, of my life in a mad-hous for ten days. the eat wa one 
of the most horribl things. except the first two day after I 
enter the asylum, there wa no salt for the food. the hungri and even 
famish women made an attempt to eat the horribl messes. mustard and 
vinegar were put on meat and in soup to give it a taste, but it onli 
help to make it worse. even that wa all consum after two days, and 
the patient had to tri to choke down fresh fish, just boil in water, 
without salt, pepper or butter; mutton, beef and potato without the 
faintest seasoning. the most insan refus to swallow the food and were 
threaten with punishment. In our short walk we pass the kitchen 
where food wa prepar for the nurs and doctors. there we got 
glimps of melon and grape and all kind of fruits, beauti white 
bread and nice meats, and the hungri feel would be increas tenfold. 
I spoke to some of the physicians, but it had no effect, and when I wa 
taken away the food wa yet unsalted. 

My heart ach to see the sick patient grow sicker over the table. I 
saw miss tilli mayard so suddenli overcom at a bite that she had to 
rush from the dining-room and then got a scold for do so. when the 
patient complain of the food they were told to shut up; that they 
would not have as good if they were at home, and that it wa too good 
for chariti patients. 

A german girl, louise—i have forgotten her last name—did not eat for 
sever day and at last one morn she wa missing. from the 
convers of the nurs I found she wa suffer from a high fever. 
poor thing! she told me she unceasingli pray for death. I watch the 
nurs make a patient carri such food as the well one were refus up 
to louise’ room. think of that stuff for a fever patient! Of course, 
she refus it. then I saw a nurse, miss mccarten, go to test her 
temperature, and she return with the report of it be some 150 
degrees. I smile at the report, and miss grupe, see it, ask me how 
high my temperatur had ever run. I refus to answer. miss gradi then 
decid to tri her ability. she return with the report of 99 degrees. 

miss tilli mayard suffer more than ani of us from the cold, and yet 
she tri to follow my advic to be cheer and tri to keep up for a 
short time. superintend dent brought in a man to see me. He felt my 
puls and my head and examin my tongue. I told them how cold it was, 
and assur them that I did not need medic aid, but that miss mayard 
did, and they should transfer their attent to her. they did not 
answer me, and I wa pleas to see miss mayard leav her place and come 
forward to them. she spoke to the doctor and told them she wa ill, but 
they paid no attent to her. the nurs came and drag her back to 
the bench, and after the doctor left they said, “after awhile, when you 
see that the doctor will not notic you, you will quit run up to 
them.” befor the doctor left me I heard one say—i cannot give it in 
hi exact words—that my puls and eye were not that of an insan girl, 
but superintend dent assur him that in case such as mine such 
test failed. after watch me for awhil he said my face wa the 
brightest he had ever seen for a lunatic. the nurs had on heavi 
undergar and coats, but they refus to give us shawls. 

nearli all night long I listen to a woman cri about the cold and beg 
for god to let her die. anoth one yell “murder!” at frequent 
interv and “police!” at other until my flesh felt creepy. 

the second morning, after we had begun our endless “set” for the day, 
two of the nurses, assist by some patients, brought the woman in who 
had beg the night previou for god to take her home. I wa not 
surpris at her prayer. she appear easili seventi year old, and she 
wa blind. although the hall were freezing-cold, that old woman had no 
more cloth on than the rest of us, which I have described. when she 
wa brought into the sitting-room and place on the hard bench, she 
cried: 

“oh, what are you do with me? I am cold, so cold. whi can’t I stay in 
bed or have a shawl?” and then she would get up and endeavor to feel her 
way to leav the room. sometim the attend would jerk her back to 
the bench, and again they would let her walk and heartlessli laugh when 
she bump against the tabl or the edg of the benches. At one time she 
said the heavi shoe which chariti provid hurt her feet, and she took 
them off. the nurs made two patient put them on her again, and when 
she did it sever times, and fought against have them on, I count 
seven peopl at her at onc tri to put the shoe on her. the old 
woman then tri to lie down on the bench, but they pull her up again. 
It sound so piti to hear her cry: 

“oh, give me a pillow and pull the cover over me, I am so cold.” 

At thi I saw miss grupe sit down on her and run her cold hand over the 
old woman’ face and down insid the neck of her dress. At the old 
woman’ cri she laugh savagely, as did the other nurses, and 
repeat her cruel action. that day the old woman wa carri away to 
anoth ward. 




chapter xiii. 
choke and beat patients. 


miss tilli mayard suffer greatli from cold. one morn she sat on 
the bench next to me and wa livid with the cold. her limb shook and 
her teeth chattered. I spoke to the three attend who sat with coat 
on at the tabl in the center of the floor. 

“it is cruel to lock peopl up and then freez them,” I said. they 
repli she had on as much as ani of the rest, and she would get no 
more. just then miss mayard took a fit and everi patient look 
frightened. miss nevil caught her in her arm and held her, although 
the nurs roughli said: 

“let her fall on the floor and it will teach her a lesson.” miss nevil 
told them what she thought of their actions, and then I got order to 
make my appear in the office. 

just as I reach there superintend dent came to the door and I told 
him how we were suffer from the cold, and of miss mayard’ condition. 
doubtless, I spoke incoherently, for I told of the state of the food, 
the treatment of the nurs and their refus to give more clothing, the 
condit of miss mayard, and the nurs tell us, becaus the asylum 
wa a public institution, we could not expect even kindness. assur 
him that I need no medic aid, I told him to go to miss mayard. He 
did so. from miss nevil and other patient I learn what transpired. 
miss mayard wa still in the fit, and he caught her roughli between the 
eyebrow or thereabouts, and pinch until her face wa crimson from the 
rush of blood to the head, and her sens returned. all day afterward 
she suffer from terribl headache, and from that on she grew worse. 

insane? yes, insane; and as I watch the insan slowli creep over the 
mind that had appear to be all right I secretli curs the doctors, 
the nurs and all public institutions. some one may say that she wa 
insan at some time previou to her consign to the asylum. then if 
she were, wa thi the proper place to send a woman just convalescing, 
to be given cold baths, depriv of suffici cloth and fed with 
horribl food? 

On thi morn I had a long convers with dr. ingram, the assist 
superintend of the asylum. I found that he wa kind to the helpless 
be in hi charge. I began my old complaint of the cold, and he 
call miss gradi to the offic and order more cloth given the 
patients. miss gradi said if I made a practic of tell it would be a 
seriou thing for me, she warn me in time. 

mani visitor look for miss girl came to see me. miss gradi 
yell in the door from the hall one day: 

“nelli brown, you’r wanted.” 

I went to the sitting-room at the end of the hall, and there sat a 
gentleman who had known me intim for years. I saw by the sudden 
blanch of hi face and hi inabl to speak that the sight of me 
wa wholli unexpect and had shock him terribly. In an instant I 
determined, if he betray me as nelli bly, to say I had never seen him 
before. however, I had one card to play and I risk it. with miss gradi 
within touch distanc I whisper hurriedli to him, in languag more 
express than elegant: 

“don’t give me away.” 

I knew by the express of hi eye that he understood, so I said to 
miss grady: 

“I do not know thi man.” 

“do you know her?” ask miss grady. 

“no; thi is not the young ladi I came in search of,” he replied, in a 
strain voice. 

“if you do not know her you cannot stay here,” she said, and she took 
him to the door. all at onc a fear struck me that he would think I had 
been sent there through some mistak and would tell my friend and make 
an effort to have me released. So I wait until miss gradi had the door 
unlocked. I knew that she would have to lock it befor she could leave, 
and the time requir to do so would give me opportun to speak, so I 
called: 

“one moment, senor.” He return to me and I ask aloud: 

“do you speak spanish, senor?” and then whispered, “it’ all right. i’m 
after an item. keep still.” “no,” he said, with a peculiar emphasis, 
which I knew meant that he would keep my secret. 

peopl in the world can never imagin the length of day to those in 
asylums. they seem never ending, and we welcom ani event that might 
give us someth to think about as well as talk of. there is noth to 
read, and the onli bit of talk that never wear out is conjur up 
delic food that they will get as soon as they get out. anxious the 
hour wa watch for when the boat arriv to see if there were ani new 
unfortun to be ad to our ranks. when they came and were usher 
into the sitting-room the patient would express sympathi to one anoth 
for them and were anxiou to show them littl mark of attention. hall 6 
wa the receiv hall so that wa how we saw all newcomers. 

soon after my advent a girl call urena little-pag wa brought in. she 
was, as she had been born, silly, and her tender spot was, as with mani 
sensibl women, her age. she claim eighteen, and would grow veri angri 
if told to the contrary. the nurs were not long in find thi out, 
and then they teas her. 

“urena,” said miss grady, “the doctor say that you are thirty-thre 
instead of eighteen,” and the other nurs laughed. they kept up thi 
until the simpl creatur began to yell and cry, say she want to go 
home and that everybodi treat her badly. after they had gotten all the 
amus out of her they want and she wa crying, they began to scold 
and tell her to keep quiet. she grew more hyster everi moment until 
they pounc upon her and slap her face and knock her head in a 
live fashion. thi made the poor creatur cri the more, and so they 
choke her. yes, actual choke her. then they drag her out to the 
closet, and I heard her terrifi cri hush into smother ones. after 
sever hours’ absenc she return to the sitting-room, and I plainli 
saw the mark of their finger on her throat for the entir day. 

thi punish seem to awaken their desir to administ more. they 
return to the sitting-room and caught hold of an old gray-hair woman 
whom I have heard address both as mrs. gradi and mrs. o’keefe. she wa 
insane, and she talk almost continu to herself and to those near 
her. she never spoke veri loud, and at the time I speak of wa sit 
harmlessli chatter to herself. they grab her, and my heart ach 
as she cried: 

“for god sake, ladies, don’t let them beat me.” 

“shut up, you hussy!” said miss gradi as she caught the woman by her 
gray hair and drag her shriek and plead from the room. she wa 
also taken to the closet, and her cri grew lower and lower, and then 
ceased. 

the nurs return to the room and miss gradi remark that she had 
“settl the old fool for awhile.” I told some of the physician of the 
occurrence, but they did not pay ani attent to it. 

one of the charact in hall 6 wa matilda, a littl old german woman, 
who, I believe, went insan over the loss of money. she wa small, and 
had a pretti pink complexion. she wa not much trouble, except at times. 
she would take spells, when she would talk into the steam-heat or get 
up on a chair and talk out of the windows. In these convers she 
rail at the lawyer who had taken her property. the nurs seem to 
find a great deal of amus in teas the harmless old soul. one day 
I sat besid miss gradi and miss grupe, and heard them tell her 
perfectli vile thing to call miss mccarten. after tell her to say 
these thing they would send her to the other nurse, but matilda prove 
that she, even in her state, had more sens than they. 

“I cannot tell you. It is private,” wa all she would say. I saw miss 
grady, on a pretens of whisper to her, spit in her ear. matilda 
quietli wipe her ear and said nothing. 




chapter xiv. 
some unfortun stories. 


By thi time I had made the acquaint of the greater number of the 
forty-f women in hall 6. let me introduc a few. louise, the pretti 
german girl whom I have spoken of formerli as be sick with fever, had 
the delus that the spirit of her dead parent were with her. “I have 
gotten mani beat from miss gradi and her assistants,” she said, “and 
I am unabl to eat the horribl food they give us. I ought not to be 
compel to freez for want of proper clothing. oh! I pray nightli that 
I may be taken to my papa and mamma. one night, when I wa confin at 
bellevue, dr. field came; I wa in bed, and weari of the examination. At 
last I said: ‘I am tire of this. I will talk no more.’ ‘won’t you?’ he 
said, angrily. ‘i’ll see if I can’t make you.’ with thi he laid hi 
crutch on the side of the bed, and, get up on it, he pinch me veri 
sever in the ribs. I jump up straight in bed, and said: ‘what do 
you mean by this?’ ‘I want to teach you to obey when I speak to you,’ he 
replied. If I could onli die and go to papa!” when I left she wa 
confin to bed with a fever, and mayb by thi time she ha her wish. 

there is a frenchwoman confin in hall 6, or wa dure my stay, whom I 
firmli believ to be perfectli sane. I watch her and talk with her 
everi day, except the last three, and I wa unabl to find ani 
delus or mania in her. her name is josephin despreau, if that is 
spell correctly, and her husband and all her friend are in france. 
josephin feel her posit keenly. her lip tremble, and she break 
down cri when she talk of her helpless condition. “how did you get 
here?” I asked. 

“one morn as I wa tri to get breakfast I grew deathli sick, and 
two offic were call in by the woman of the house, and I wa taken 
to the station-house. I wa unabl to understand their proceedings, and 
they paid littl attent to my story. do in thi countri were new 
to me, and befor I realiz it I wa lodg as an insan woman in thi 
asylum. when I first came I cri that I wa here without hope of 
release, and for cri miss gradi and her assist choke me until 
they hurt my throat, for it ha been sore ever since.” 

A pretti young hebrew woman spoke so littl english I could not get her 
stori except as told by the nurses. they said her name is sarah 
fishbaum, and that her husband put her in the asylum becaus she had a 
fond for other men than himself. grant that sarah wa insane, and 
about men, let me tell you how the nurs tri to cure(?) her. they 
would call her up and say: 

“sarah, wouldn’t you like to have a nice young man?” 

“oh, yes; a young man is all right,” sarah would repli in her few 
english words. 

“well, sarah, wouldn’t you like us to speak a good word to some of the 
doctor for you? wouldn’t you like to have one of the doctors?” 

and then they would ask her which doctor she preferred, and advis her 
to make advanc to him when he visit the hall, and so on. 

I had been watch and talk with a fair-complexion woman for 
sever days, and I wa at a loss to see whi she had been sent there, 
she wa so sane. 

“whi did you come here?” I ask her one day, after we had indulg in a 
long conversation. 

“I wa sick,” she replied. 

“are you sick mentally?” I urged. 

“oh, no; what gave you such an idea? I had been overwork myself, and 
I broke down. have some famili trouble, and be penniless and 
nowher to go, I appli to the commission to be sent to the 
poorhous until I would be abl to go to work.” 

“but they do not send poor peopl here unless they are insane,” I said. 
“don’t you know there are onli insan women, or those suppos to be so, 
sent here?” 

“I knew after I got here that the major of these women were insane, 
but then I believ them when they told me thi wa the place they sent 
all the poor who appli for aid as I had done.” 

“how have you been treated?” I asked. “well, so far I have escap a 
beating, although I have been sicken at the sight of mani and the 
recit of more. when I wa brought here they went to give me a bath, 
and the veri diseas for which I need doctor and from which I wa 
suffer made it necessari that I should not bathe. but they put me in, 
and my suffer were increas greatli for week thereafter.” 

A mrs. mccartney, whose husband is a tailor, seem perfectli ration 
and ha not one fancy. mari hugh and mrs. louis schanz show no 
obviou trace of insanity. 

one day two newcom were ad to our list. the one wa an idiot, 
carri glass, and the other wa a nice-look german girl—quit young, 
she seemed, and when she came in all the patient spoke of her nice 
appear and appar sanity. her name wa margaret. she told me she 
had been a cook, and wa extrem neat. one day, after she had scrub 
the kitchen floor, the chambermaid came down and deliber soil 
it. her temper wa arous and she began to quarrel with them; an 
offic wa call and she wa taken to an asylum. 

“how can they say I am insane, mere becaus I allow my temper to run 
away with me?” she complained. “other peopl are not shut up for crazi 
when they get angry. I suppos the onli thing to do is to keep quiet and 
so avoid the beat which I see other get. No one can say one word 
about me. I do everyth I am told, and all the work they give me. I am 
obedi in everi respect, and I do everyth to prove to them that I 
am sane.” 

one day an insan woman wa brought in. she wa noisy, and miss gradi 
gave her a beat and black her eye. when the doctor notic it and 
ask if it wa done befor she came there the nurs said it was. 

while I wa in hall 6 I never heard the nurs address the patient 
except to scold or yell at them, unless it wa to teas them. they spent 
much of their time gossip about the physician and about the other 
nurs in a manner that wa not elevating. miss gradi nearli alway 
interspers her convers with profan language, and gener began 
her sentenc by call on the name of the lord. the name she call 
the patient were of the lowest and most profan type. one even she 
quarrel with anoth nurs while we were at supper about the bread, 
and when the nurs had gone out she call her bad name and made ugli 
remark about her. 

In the even a woman, whom I suppos to be head cook for the 
doctors, use to come up and bring raisins, grapes, apples, and cracker 
to the nurses. imagin the feel of the hungri patient as they sat 
and watch the nurs eat what wa to them a dream of luxury. 

one afternoon, dr. dent wa talk to a patient, mrs. turney, about 
some troubl she had had with a nurs or matron. A short time after we 
were taken down to supper and thi woman who had beaten mrs. turney, and 
of whom dr. dent spoke, wa sit at the door of our dining-room. 
suddenli mrs. turney pick up her bowl of tea, and, rush out of the 
door flung it at the woman who had beat her. there wa some loud 
scream and mrs. turney wa return to her place. the next day she 
wa transfer to the “rope gang,” which is suppos to be compos of 
the most danger and most suicid women on the island. 

At first I could not sleep and did not want to so long as I could hear 
anyth new. the night nurs may have complain of the fact. At ani 
rate one night they came in and tri to make me take a dose of some 
mixtur out of a glass “to make me sleep,” they said. I told them I 
would do noth of the sort and they left me, I hoped, for the night. 
My hope were vain, for in a few minut they return with a doctor, 
the same that receiv us on our arrival. He insist that I take it, 
but I wa determin not to lose my wit even for a few hours. when he 
saw I wa not to be coax he grew rather rough, and said he had wast 
too much time with me already. that if I did not take it he would put it 
into my arm with a needle. It occur to me that if he put it into my 
arm I could not get rid of it, but if I swallow it there wa one hope, 
so I said I would take it. I smelt it and it smelt like laudanum, and it 
wa a horribl dose. No sooner had they left the room and lock me in 
than I tri to see how far down my throat my finger would go, and the 
chloral wa allow to tri it effect elsewhere. 

I want to say that the night nurse, burns, in hall 6, seem veri kind 
and patient to the poor, afflict people. the other nurs made sever 
attempt to talk to me about lovers, and ask me if I would not like to 
have one. they did not find me veri commun on the—to them—popular 
subject. 

onc a week the patient are given a bath, and that is the onli time 
they see soap. A patient hand me a piec of soap one day about the 
size of a thimble. I consid it a great compliment in her want to 
be kind, but I thought she would appreci the cheap soap more than I, 
so I thank her but refus to take it. On bath day the tub is 
fill with water, and the patient are washed, one after the other, 
without a chang of water. thi is done until the water is realli thick, 
and then it is allow to run out and the tub is refil without be 
washed. the same towel are use on all the women, those with erupt 
as well as those without. the healthi patient fight for a chang of 
water, but they are compel to submit to the dictat of the lazy, 
tyrann nurses. the dress are seldom chang often than onc a 
month. If the patient ha a visitor, I have seen the nurs hurri her 
out and chang her dress befor the visitor come in. thi keep up the 
appear of care and good management. 

the patient who are not abl to take care of themselv get into 
beastli conditions, and the nurs never look after them, but order some 
of the patient to do so. 

for five day we were compel to sit in the room all day. I never put 
in such a long time. everi patient wa stiff and sore and tired. We 
would get in littl group on bench and tortur our stomach by 
conjur up thought of what we would eat first when we got out. If I 
had not known how hungri they were and the piti side of it, the 
convers would have been veri amusing. As it wa it onli made me 
sad. when the subject of eating, which seem to be the favorit one, 
wa worn out, they use to give their opinion of the institut and 
it management. the condemn of the nurs and the eatabl wa 
unanimous. 

As the day pass miss tilli mayard’ condit grew worse. she wa 
continu cold and unabl to eat of the food provided. day after day 
she sang in order to tri to maintain her memory, but at last the nurs 
made her stop it. I talk with her daily, and I griev to find her 
grow wors so rapidly. At last she got a delusion. she thought that I 
wa tri to pass myself off for her, and that all the peopl who 
call to see nelli brown were friend in search of her, but that I, by 
some means, wa tri to deceiv them into the belief that I wa the 
girl. I tri to reason with her, but found it impossible, so I kept 
away from her as much as possible, lest my presenc should make her 
wors and feed the fancy. 

one of the patients, mrs. cotter, a pretty, delic woman, one day 
thought she saw her husband come up the walk. she left the line in 
which she wa march and ran to meet him. for thi act she wa sent to 
the retreat. she afterward said: 

“the remembr of that is enough to make me mad. for cri the nurs 
beat me with a broom-handl and jump on me, injur me internally, so 
that I shall never get over it. then they tie my hand and feet, and, 
throw a sheet over my head, twist it tightli around my throat, so I 
could not scream, and thu put me in a bathtub fill with cold water. 
they held me under until I gave up everi hope and becam senseless. At 
other time they took hold of my ear and beat my head on the floor and 
against the wall. then they pull my hair out by the roots, so that it 
will never grow in again.” 

mrs. cotter here show me proof of her story, the dent in the back of 
her head and the bare spot where the hair had been taken out by the 
handful. I give her stori as plainli as possible: “mi treatment wa not 
as bad as I have seen other get in there, but it ha ruin my health, 
and even if I do get out of here I will be a wreck. when my husband 
heard of the treatment given me he threaten to expos the place if I 
wa not removed, so I wa brought here. I am well mental now. all that 
old fear ha left me, and the doctor ha promis to allow my husband to 
take me home.” 

I made the acquaint of bridget mcguinness, who seem to be sane at 
the present time. she said she wa sent to retreat 4, and put on the 
“rope gang.” “the beat I got there were someth dreadful. I wa 
pull around by the hair, held under the water until I strangled, and I 
wa choke and kicked. the nurs would alway keep a quiet patient 
station at the window to tell them when ani of the doctor were 
approaching. It wa hopeless to complain to the doctors, for they alway 
said it wa the imagin of our diseas brains, and besid we would 
get anoth beat for telling. they would hold patient under the 
water and threaten to leav them to die there if they did not promis 
not to tell the doctors. We would all promise, becaus we knew the 
doctor would not help us, and we would do anyth to escap the 
punishment. after break a window I wa transfer to the lodge, the 
worst place on the island. It is dread dirti in there, and the 
stench is awful. In the summer the fli swarm the place. the food is 
wors than we get in other ward and we are given onli tin plates. 
instead of the bar be on the outside, as in thi ward, they are on 
the inside. there are mani quiet patient there who have been there for 
years, but the nurs keep them to do the work. among other beat I 
got there, the nurs jump on me onc and broke two of my ribs. 

“while I wa there a pretti young girl wa brought in. she had been 
sick, and she fought against be put in that dirti place. one night 
the nurs took her and, after beat her, they held her nake in a 
cold bath, then they threw her on her bed. when morn came the girl 
wa dead. the doctor said she die of convulsions, and that wa all 
that wa done about it. 

“they inject so much morphin and chloral that the patient are made 
crazy. I have seen the patient wild for water from the effect of the 
drugs, and the nurs would refus it to them. I have heard women beg 
for a whole night for one drop and it wa not given them. I myself cri 
for water until my mouth wa so parch and dri that I could not speak.” 

I saw the same thing myself in hall 7. the patient would beg for a 
drink befor retiring, but the nurses—miss hart and the others—refus 
to unlock the bathroom that they might quench their thirst. 




chapter xv. 
incid OF asylum life. 


there is littl in the ward to help one pass the time. all the asylum 
cloth is made by the patients, but sew doe not employ one’ mind. 
after sever months’ confin the thought of the busi world grow 
faint, and all the poor prison can do is to sit and ponder over their 
hopeless fate. In the upper hall a good view is obtain of the pass 
boat and new york. often I tri to pictur to myself as I look out 
between the bar to the light faintli glimmer in the city, what my 
feel would be if I had no one to obtain my release. 

I have watch patient stand and gaze longingli toward the citi they in 
all likelihood will never enter again. It mean liberti and life; it 
seem so near, and yet heaven is not further from hell. 

Do the women pine for home? except the most violent cases, they are 
consciou that they are confin in an asylum. An onli desir that never 
die is the one for release, for home. 

one poor girl use to tell me everi morning, “I dream of my mother 
last night. I think she may come to-day and take me home.” that one 
thought, that longing, is alway present, yet she ha been confin some 
four years. 

what a mysteri thing mad is. I have watch patient whose lip 
are forev seal in a perpetu silence. they live, breathe, eat; the 
human form is there, but that something, which the bodi can live 
without, but which cannot exist without the body, wa missing. I have 
wonder if behind those seal lip there were dream we ken not of, or 
if all wa blank? 

still, as sad are those case when the patient are alway convers 
with invis parties, I have seen them wholli unconsci of their 
surround and engross with an invis being. yet, strang to say, 
that ani command issu to them is alway obeyed, in about the same 
manner as a dog obey hi master. one of the most piti delus of 
ani of the patient wa that of a blue-ey irish girl, who believ she 
wa forev damn becaus of one act in her life. her horribl cry, 
morn and night, “I am damn for all eternity!” would strike horror 
to my soul. her agoni seem like a glimps of the inferno. 

after be transfer to hall 7 I wa lock in a room everi night 
with six crazi women. two of them seem never to sleep, but spent the 
night in raving. one would get out of her bed and creep around the room 
search for some one she want to kill. I could not help but think 
how easi it would be for her to attack ani of the other patient 
confin with her. It did not make the night more comfortable. 

one middle-ag woman, who use to sit alway in the corner of the room, 
wa veri strang affected. she had a piec of newspaper, and from it 
she continu read the most wonder thing I ever heard. I often sat 
close by her and listened. histori and romanc fell equal well from 
her lips. 

I saw but one letter given a patient while I wa there. It awaken a 
big interest. everi patient seem thirsti for a word from the world, 
and they crowd around the one who had been so fortun and ask 
hundr of questions. 

visitor make but littl interest and a great deal of mirth. miss matti 
morgan, in hall 7, play for the entertain of some visitor one 
day. they were close about her until one whisper that she wa a 
patient. “crazy!” they whispered, audibly, as they fell back and left 
her alone. she wa amus as well as indign over the episode. miss 
mattie, assist by sever girl she ha trained, make the even 
pass veri pleasantli in hall 7. they sing and dance. often the doctor 
come up and danc with the patients. 

one day when we went down to dinner we heard a weak littl cri in the 
basement. everi one seem to notic it, and it wa not long until we 
knew there wa a babi down there. yes, a baby. think of it—a little, 
innoc babe born in such a chamber of horrors! I can imagin noth 
more terrible. 

A visitor who came one day brought in her arm her babe. A mother who 
had been separ from her five littl children ask permiss to 
hold it. when the visitor want to leave, the woman’ grief wa 
uncontrollable, as she beg to keep the babe which she imagin wa 
her own. It excit more patient than I had ever seen excit befor at 
one time. 

the onli amusement, if so it may be called, given the patient outside, 
is a ride onc a week, if the weather permits, on the “merry-go-round.” 
It is a change, and so they accept it with some show of pleasure. 

A scrub-brush factory, a mat factory, and the laundri are where the mild 
patient work. they get no recompens for it, but they get hungri over 
it. 




chapter xvi. 
the last good-bye. 


the day paulin moser wa brought to the asylum we heard the most 
horribl screams, and an irish girl, onli partli dressed, came 
stagger like a drunken person up the hall, yelling, “hurrah! three 
cheers! I have kill the divil! lucifer, lucifer, lucifer,” and so on, 
over and over again. then she would pull a hand of hair out, while 
she exultingli cried, “how I deceiv the divils. they alway said god 
made hell, but he didn’t.” paulin help the girl to make the place 
hideou by sing the most horribl songs. after the irish girl had 
been there an hour or so, dr. dent came in, and as he walk down the 
hall, miss grupe whisper to the dement girl, “here is the devil 
coming, go for him.” surpris that she would give a mad woman such 
instructions, I fulli expect to see the frenzi creatur rush at the 
doctor. luckili she did not, but commenc to repeat her refrain of “oh, 
lucifer.” after the doctor left, miss grupe again tri to excit the 
woman by say the pictur minstrel on the wall wa the devil, and the 
poor creatur began to scream, “you divil, i’ll give it to you,” so that 
two nurs had to sit on her to keep her down. the attend seem to 
find amus and pleasur in excit the violent patient to do their 
worst. 

I alway made a point of tell the doctor I wa sane and ask to be 
released, but the more I endeavor to assur them of my saniti the more 
they doubt it. 

“what are you doctor here for?” I ask one, whose name I cannot 
recall. 

“to take care of the patient and test their sanity,” he replied. 

“veri well,” I said. “there are sixteen doctor on thi island, and, 
except two, I have never seen them pay ani attent to the patients. 
how can a doctor judg a woman’ saniti by mere bid her good 
morn and refus to hear her plea for release? even the sick one 
know it is useless to say anything, for the answer will be that it is 
their imagination.” “tri everi test on me,” I have urg others, “and 
tell me am I sane or insane? tri my pulse, my heart, my eyes; ask me to 
stretch out my arm, to work my fingers, as dr. field did at bellevue, 
and then tell me if I am sane.” they would not heed me, for they thought 
I raved. 

again I said to one, “you have no right to keep sane peopl here. I am 
sane, have alway been so and I must insist on a thorough examin or 
be released. sever of the women here are also sane. whi can’t they be 
free?” 

“they are insane,” wa the reply, “and suffer from delusions.” 

after a long talk with dr. ingram, he said, “I will transfer you to a 
quieter ward.” An hour later miss gradi call me into the hall, and, 
after call me all the vile and profan name a woman could ever 
remember, she told me that it wa a lucki thing for my “hide” that I wa 
transferred, or els she would pay me for rememb so well to tell 
dr. ingram everything. “you d—n hussy, you forget all about yourself, 
but you never forget anyth to tell the doctor.” after call miss 
neville, whom dr. ingram also kindli transferred, miss gradi took us to 
the hall above, no. 7. 

[illustration: insan hall no. 7.] 

In hall 7 there are mrs. kroener, miss fitzpatrick, miss finney, and 
miss hart. I did not see as cruel treatment as down-stairs, but I heard 
them make ugli remark and threats, twist the finger and slap the face 
of the unruli patients. the night nurse, conway I believ her name is, 
is veri cross. In hall 7, if ani of the patient possess ani modesty, 
they soon lost it. everi one wa compel to undress in the hall befor 
their own door, and to fold their cloth and leav them there until 
morning. I ask to undress in my room, but miss conway told me if she 
ever caught me at such a trick she would give me caus not to want to 
repeat it. 

the first doctor I saw here—dr. caldwell—chuck me under the chin, and 
as I wa tire refus to tell where my home was, I would onli speak to 
him in spanish. 

hall 7 look rather nice to a casual visitor. It is hung with cheap 
pictur and ha a piano, which is presid over by miss matti morgan, 
who formerli wa in a music store in thi city. she ha been in the 
asylum for three years. miss matti ha been train sever of the 
patient to sing, with some show of success. the artist of the hall is 
under, pronounc wanda, a polish girl. she is a gift pianist when she 
choos to display her ability. the most difficult music she read at a 
glance, and her touch and express are perfect. 

On sunday the quieter patients, whose name have been hand in by the 
attend dure the week, are allow to go to church. A small 
cathol chapel is on the island, and other servic are also held. 

A “commissioner” came one day, and made the round with dr. dent. In the 
basement they found half the nurs gone to dinner, leav the other 
half in charg of us, as wa alway done. immedi order were given 
to bring the nurs back to their duti until after the patient had 
finish eating. some of the patient want to speak about their have 
no salt, but were prevented. 

the insan asylum on blackwell’ island is a human rat-trap. It is easi 
to get in, but onc there it is imposs to get out. I had intend to 
have myself commit to the violent wards, the lodg and retreat, but 
when I got the testimoni of two sane women and could give it, I decid 
not to risk my health—and hair—so I did not get violent. 

I had, toward the last, been shut off from all visitors, and so when the 
lawyer, peter A. hendricks, came and told me that friend of mine were 
will to take charg of me if I would rather be with them than in the 
asylum, I wa onli too glad to give my consent. I ask him to send me 
someth to eat immedi on hi arriv in the city, and then I 
wait anxious for my release. 

It came sooner than I had hoped. I wa out “in line” take a walk, and 
had just gotten interest in a poor woman who had faint away while 
the nurs were tri to compel her to walk. “good-bye; I am go 
home,” I call to paulin moser, as she went past with a woman on 
either side of her. sadli I said farewel to all I knew as I pass them 
on my way to freedom and life, while they were left behind to a fate 
wors than death. “_adios_,” I murmur to the mexican woman. I kiss 
my finger to her, and so I left my companion of hall 7. 

I had look forward so eagerli to leav the horribl place, yet when 
my releas came and I knew that god’ sunlight wa to be free for me 
again, there wa a certain pain in leaving. for ten day I had been one 
of them. foolishli enough, it seem intens selfish to leav them to 
their sufferings. I felt a quixot desir to help them by sympathi and 
presence. but onli for a moment. the bar were down and freedom wa 
sweeter to me than ever. 

soon I wa cross the river and near new york. onc again I wa a 
free girl after ten day in the mad-hous on blackwell’ island. 




chapter xvii. 
the grand juri investigation. 


soon after I had bidden farewel to the blackwell’ island insan 
asylum, I wa summon to appear befor the grand jury. I answer the 
summon with pleasure, becaus I long to help those of god’ most 
unfortun children whom I had left prison behind me. If I could not 
bring them that boon of all boons, liberty, I hope at least to 
influenc other to make life more bearabl for them. I found the juror 
to be gentlemen, and that I need not trembl befor their twenty-thre 
august presences. 

I swore to the truth of my story, and then I relat all—from my start 
at the temporari home until my release. assist district-attorney 
vernon M. davi conduct the examination. the juror then request 
that I should accompani them on a visit to the island. I wa glad to 
consent. 

No one wa expect to know of the contempl trip to the island, yet 
we had not been there veri long befor one of the commission of 
chariti and dr. macdonald, of ward’ island, were with us. one of the 
juror told me that in convers with a man about the asylum, he 
heard that they were notifi of our come an hour befor we reach 
the island. thi must have been done while the grand juri were examin 
the insan pavilion at bellevue. 

the trip to the island wa vastli differ to my first. thi time we 
went on a clean new boat, while the one I had travel in, they said, 
wa laid up for repairs. 

some of the nurs were examin by the jury, and made contradictori 
statement to one another, as well as to my story. they confess that 
the jury’ contempl visit had been talk over between them and the 
doctor. dr. dent confess that he had no mean by which to tell 
posit if the bath wa cold and of the number of women put into the 
same water. He knew the food wa not what it should be, but said it wa 
due to the lack of funds. 

If nurs were cruel to their patients, had he ani posit mean of 
ascertain it? no, he had not. He said all the doctor were not 
competent, which wa also due to the lack of mean to secur good 
medic men. In convers with me, he said: 

“I am glad you did thi now, and had I known your purpose, I would have 
aid you. We have no mean of learn the way thing are go except 
to do as you did. sinc your stori wa publish I found a nurs at the 
retreat who had watch set for our approach, just as you had stated. 
she wa dismissed.” 

miss ann nevil wa brought down, and I went into the hall to meet 
her, know that the sight of so mani strang gentlemen would excit 
her, even if she be sane. It wa as I feared. the attend had told 
her she wa go to be examin by a crowd of men, and she wa shake 
with fear. although I had left her onli two week before, yet she look 
as if she had suffer a sever illness, in that time, so chang wa 
her appearance. I ask her if she had taken ani medicine, and she 
answer in the affirmative. I then told her that all I want her to do 
wa tell the juri all we had done sinc I wa brought with her to the 
asylum, so they would be convinc that I wa sane. she onli knew me as 
miss nelli brown, and wa wholli ignor of my story. 

she wa not sworn, but her stori must have convinc all hearer of the 
truth of my statements. 

“when miss brown and I were brought here the nurs were cruel and the 
food wa too bad to eat. We did not have enough clothing, and miss brown 
ask for more all the time. I thought she wa veri kind, for when a 
doctor promis her some cloth she said she would give it to me. 
strang to say, ever sinc miss brown ha been taken away everyth is 
different. the nurs are veri kind and we are given plenti to wear. the 
doctor come to see us often and the food is greatli improved.” 

did we need more evidence? 

the juror then visit the kitchen. It wa veri clean, and two barrel 
of salt stood conspicu open near the door! the bread on exhibit 
wa beauti white and wholli unlik what wa given us to eat. 

We found the hall in the finest order. the bed were improved, and in 
hall 7 the bucket in which we were compel to wash had been replac 
by bright new basins. 

the institut wa on exhibition, and no fault could be found. 

but the women I had spoken of, where were they? not one wa to be found 
where I had left them. If my assert were not true in regard to these 
patients, whi should the latter be changed, so to make me unabl to find 
them? miss nevil complain befor the juri of be chang sever 
times. when we visit the hall later she wa return to her old place. 

mari hughes, of whom I had spoken as appear sane, wa not to be 
found. some rel had taken her away. where, they knew not. the fair 
woman I spoke of, who had been sent here becaus she wa poor, they said 
had been transfer to anoth island. they deni all knowledg of the 
mexican woman, and said there never had been such a patient. mrs. cotter 
had been discharged, and bridget mcguin and rebecca farron had been 
transfer to other quarters. the german girl, margaret, wa not to be 
found, and louis had been sent elsewher from hall 6. the frenchwoman, 
josephine, a great, healthi woman, they said wa die of paralysis, and 
we could not see her. If I wa wrong in my judgment of these patients’ 
sanity, whi wa all thi done? I saw tilli mayard, and she had chang 
so much for the wors that I shudder when I look at her. 

I hardli expect the grand juri to sustain me, after they saw 
everyth differ from what it had been while I wa there. yet they 
did, and their report to the court advis all the chang made that I 
had proposed. 

I have one consol for my work—on the strength of my stori the 
committe of appropri provid $1,000,000 more than wa ever befor 
given, for the benefit of the insane. 


[the end.] 

[illustration] 




miscellan sketches. 


BY nelli bly. 


tri TO BE A servant. 

_mi strang experi AT two employ agencies_. 


none but the initi know what a great question the servant question 
is and how mani perplex side it has. the mistress and servants, of 
course, fill the lead _roles_. then, in the lesser, but still 
import parts, come the agencies, which despit the mani voic 
clamor against them, declar themselv public benefactors. even the 
“funni man” manag to fill a great deal of space with the subject. It 
is a seriou question, sinc it affect all one hold dear in life—one’ 
dinner, one’ bed, and one’ linen. I had heard so mani complaint from 
long-suff mistresses, worked-out servants, agencies, and lawyers, 
that I determin to investig the subject to my own satisfaction. 
there wa onli one way to do it. that wa to person a servant and 
appli for a situation. I knew that there might be such a thing as 
“references” required, and, as I had never test my abil in thi 
line, I did not know how to furnish them. still, it would not do to 
allow a littl thing like a “reference” to stop me in my work, and I 
would not ask ani friend to commit herself to further my efforts. mani 
girl must at one time be without references, I thought, and thi 
encourag me to make the risk. 

On monday afternoon a letter came to the _world_ offic from a lawyer, 
complain of an agenc where, he claimed, a client of hi had paid for 
a servant, and the agent then refus to produc a girl. thi shop I 
decid to make my first essay. dress to look the charact I want 
to represent, I walk up fourth avenu until I found no. 69, the place 
I wanted. It wa a low frame build which retain all the impress 
of old age. the room on the first floor wa fill with a conglomer 
of articl which gave it the appear of a second-hand store. By a 
side door, lean against the wall, wa a larg sign which told the 
pass public that that wa the entranc to the “germania servants’ 
agency.” On a straight, blue board, fasten lengthwis to a 
second-stori window, was, in large, encourag white letters, the 
omin word “servants.” 

I enter the side door, and as there wa noth befor me but the 
dirty, uncarpet hall and a narrow, rickety-look staircase, I went 
on to my fate. I pass two close door on the first landing, and on 
the third I saw the word “office.” I did not knock, but turn the knob 
of the door, and, as it stuck top and bottom, I press my shoulder 
against it. It gave way, so did I, and I enter on my career as a 
servant with a tumble. It wa a small room, with a low ceiling, a dusti 
ingrain carpet and cheapli paper walls. A heavi rail and a high 
desk and counter which divid the room gave it the appear of a 
polic court. around the wall were hung color advertis of 
steamship line and maps. abov the mantel, which wa decor with two 
plaster-pari busts, wa a squar sheet of white paper. I view the 
larg black letter on thi paper with a quak heart. “refer 
investigated!!” with two exclam points. now, if it had onli been 
put quietli and mildly, or even with one exclam point, but 
two—dreadful. It wa a death-warr to the idea I had of write my own 
refer if ani were demanded. 

[illustration: IN the intellig office.] 

A young woman who wa stand with a downcast head by the window turn 
to look at the abrupt newcomer. A man who had appar been convers 
with her came hastili forward to the desk. He wa a middle-s man, 
with a sharp, gray eye, a bald head, and a black frock-coat button up 
tightly, show to disadvantag hi round shoulders. 

“well?” he said to me, in a question manner, as he glanc quickli 
over my “get up.” 

“are you the man who get place for girls?” I asked, as if there were 
but one such man. 

“yes, i’m the man. Do you want a place?” he asked, with a decidedli 
german twang. 

“yes, I want a place,” I replied. 

“what did you work at last?” 

“oh, I wa a chambermaid. can you get me a position, do you think?” 

“yes, I can do that,” he replied. “you’r a nice-look girl and I can 
soon get you a place. just the other day I got a girl a place for $20 a 
month, just becaus she wa nice-looking. mani gentlemen, and ladi 
also, will pay more when girl are nice-looking. where did you work 
last?” 

“I work in atlant city,” I replied, with a mental cri for 
forgiveness. 

“have you no citi reference?” 

“no, none whatever; but I want a job in thi city, that’ whi I came 
here.” 

“well, I can get you a position, never fear, onli some peopl are mighti 
particular about references.” 

“have you no place you can send me to now?” I said, determin to get at 
my busi as soon as possible. 

“you have to pay to get your name enter on the book first,” he said, 
open a larg ledger as he asked, “what is your name?” 

“how much do you charge?” I asked, in order to give me time to decid on 
a name. 

“I charg you one dollar for the use of the bureau for a month, and if I 
get you a big salari you will have to pay more.” 

“how much more?” 

“that depend entir on your salary,” he answered, non-committal. 
“your name?” 

“now, if I give you a dollar you will assur me a situation?” 

“certainly; that’ what i’m here for.” 

“and you guarante me work in thi city?” I urged. 

“oh, certainly, certainly; that’ what thi agenc is for. i’ll get you 
a place, sure enough.” 

“all right, i’ll give you a dollar, which is a great deal for a girl out 
of work. My name is salli lees.” 

“what shall I put you down for?” he asked. 

[illustration: out OF work.] 

“oh, anything,” I replied, with a generos that surpris myself. 

“then I shall put it chambermaid, waitress, nurs or seamstress.” So my 
name, or the one assumed, wa enter in the ledger, and as I paid my 
dollar I ventur the inform that if he gave me a situat 
directli I should be pleas to give him more money. He warm up at 
thi and told me he should advertis me in the morning. 

“then you have no one in want of help now?” 

“we have plenti of people, but not just now. they all come in the 
morning. thi is too late in the day. where are you boarding?” 

At thi moment a woman clad in a blue dress, with a small, black shawl 
wrap around her, enter from a room in the rear. she also look me 
over sharply, as if I wa an articl for sale, as the man told her in 
german all that he knew about me. 

“you can stay here,” she said, in broken, badli broken english, after 
she had learn that I wa friendless in the city. “where is your 
baggage?” 

“I left my baggag where I paid for my lodg to-night,” I answered. 
they tri to induc me to stop at their house. onli $2.50 a week, with 
board, or 20 cent a night for a bed. they urg that it wa immateri 
to them, onli I had a better chanc to secur work if I wa alway 
there; it wa onli for my own good they suggest it. I had one glanc 
of the adjoin bedroom, and that sight made me firm in my 
determin to sleep elsewhere. 

As the even drew on I felt they would have no more applic for 
servant that afternoon, and after ask the hour that I should return 
in the morning, I request a receipt for my money. “you don’t need to 
be so particular,” he said, crossly, but I told him I was, and insist 
until he wa forc to comply. It wa not much of a receipt. He wrote on 
the blank side of the agency’ advertis card: 

“salli lee ha paid $1. good for one month use of bureau. 
69 4th ave.” 

On the follow morning, about 10:30, I made my appear at the 
agency. some eight or ten girl were in the room and the man who had 
pocket my fee on the previou afternoon still adorn the throne back 
of the desk. No one said good-morning, or anyth els for that matter, 
so I quietli slid onto a chair near the door. the girl were all 
comfort dressed, and look as if they had enjoy hearti 
breakfasts. all sat silent, with a dreami express on their faces, 
except two who stood by the window watch the pass throng and 
convers in whisper with one another. I want to be with or near 
them, so that I might hear what wa said. after wait for some time I 
decid to awak the man to the fact that I want work, not a rest. 

“have you no place to send me thi morning?” 

“no; but I advertis you in the paper,” and he hand me the _tribune_ 
of octob 25 and point out the follow notice: 

“nurse, &c.—bi excellent, veri neat english girl as nurs and 
seamstress, chambermaid and waitress, or parlor maid. call at 69 4th 
ave.; no card answered.” 

I choke down a laugh as I read myself advertis in thi manner, and 
wonder what my _role_ would be the next time. I began to hope some one 
would soon call for the excel girl, but when an age gentleman 
enter I wish just as fervent that he wa not after me. I wa 
enjoy my posit too much, and I fear I could not restrain my 
graviti if ani one began to question me. poor old gentleman! He look 
around helplessly, as if he wa at a loss to know what to do. the agent 
did not leav him long in doubt. “you want a girl, sir?” 

“yes; my wife read an advertis in the _tribune_ thi morning, and 
she sent me here to see the girl.” 

“yes, yes, excel girl, sir, come right back here,” open the gate 
and give the gentleman a chair behind the high counter. “you come 
here, salli lees,” indic a chair besid the visitor for me. I sat 
down with an inward chuckl and the agent lean over the back of a 
chair. the visitor eye me nervously, and after clear hi throat 
sever time and make vain attempt at a beginning, he said: 

“you are the girl who want work?” and after I answer in the 
affirmative, he said: “of cours you know how to do all these things—you 
know what is requir of a girl?” 

“oh, yes, I know,” I answer confidently. 

“yes—well, how much do you want a month?” 

“oh, anything,” I answered, look to the agent for aid. He understood 
the look, for he began hurriedly: 

“fourteen dollar a month, sir. she is an excel girl, good, neat, 
quick and of an amiabl disposition.” 

I wa astonish at hi knowledg of my good qualities, but I maintain 
a lofti silence. 

“yes, yes,” the visitor said, musingly. “mi wife onli pay ten dollar a 
month, and then if the girl is all right she is will to pay more, you 
know. I realli couldn’t, you know——” 

“we have no ten-dollar-girl here, sir,” said the agent with dignity; 
“you can’t get an honest, neat, and respect girl for that amount.” 

“h’m, yes; well, thi girl ha good references, I suppose?” 

“oh, yes; I know all about her,” said the agent, briskli and 
confidently. “she is an excel girl, and I can give you the best 
person reference—th best of references.” 

here I was, unknown to the agent. So far as he knew, I might be a 
confid woman, a thief, or everyth wicked, and yet the agent wa 
vow that he had good person references. 

“well, I live in bloomfield, N. j., and there are onli four in the 
family. Of cours you are a good washer and ironer?” he said, turn to 
me. befor I had time to assur him of my wonder skill in that line 
the agent interposed: “thi is not the girl you want. no, sir, thi girl 
won’t do gener housework. thi is the girl you are after,” bring up 
another. “she doe gener housework,” and he went on with a long list 
of her virtues, which were similar to those he had profess to find in 
me. the visitor got veri nervou and began to insist that he could not 
take a girl unless hi wife saw her first. then the agent, when he found 
it imposs to make him take a girl, tri to induc the gentleman to 
join the bureau. “it will onli cost you $2 for the use of the bureau for 
a month,” he urged, but the visitor began to get more nervou and to 
make hi way to the door. I thought he wa frighten becaus it wa an 
agency, and it amus me to hear how earnestli he plead that realli he 
dare not employ a girl without hi wife’ consent. 

after the escap of the visitor we all resum our former posit and 
wait for anoth visitor. It came in the shape of a red-hair irish 
girl. 

“well, you are back again?” wa the greet given her. 

“yes. that woman wa horrible. she and her husband fought all the time, 
and the cook carri tale to the mistress. sure and I wouldn’t live at 
such a place. A splendid laundress, with a good ‘karacter,’ don’t need 
to stay in such places, I told them. the ladi of the hous made me wash 
everi other day; then she want me to be dress like a lady, sure, and 
wear a cap while I wa at work. sure and it’ no good laundress who can 
be dress up while at work, so I left her.” 

the storm had scarc pass when anoth girl with fieri lock 
entered. she had a good face and a bright one, and I watch her 
closely. 

“so you are back, too. you are troublesome,” said the agent. her eye 
flash as she replied: 

“oh, i’m troublesome, am I? well, you can take a poor girl’ money, 
anyway, and then you tell her she’ troublesome. It wasn’t troublesom 
when you took my money; and where is the position? I have walk all 
over the city, wear out my shoe and spend my money in car-fare. 
now, is thi how you treat poor girls?” 

“I did not mean anyth by say you were troublesome. that wa onli 
my fun,” the agent tri to explain; and after awhil the girl quiet 
down. 

anoth girl came and wa told that as she had not made her appear 
the day previou she could not expect to obtain a situation. He refus 
to send her word if there wa ani chance. then a messeng boy call 
and said that mrs. vanderpool, of no. 36 west thirty-ninth street, 
want the girl advertis in the morn paper. irish girl no. 1 wa 
sent, and she returned, after sever hours’ absence, to say that mrs. 
vanderpool said, when she learn where the girl came from, that she 
knew all about agenc and their schemes, and she did not propos to 
have a girl from them. the girl button mrs. vanderpool’ shoes, and 
return to the agenc to take her post of waiting. 

I succeed at last in draw one of the girls, winifr friel, into 
conversation. she said she had been wait for sever days, and that 
she had no chanc of a place yet. the agenc had a place out of town to 
which they tri to forc girl who declar they would not leav the 
city. quit strang they never offer the place to girl who said they 
would work anywhere. winifr friel want it, but they would not allow 
her to go, yet they tri to insist on me accept it. 

“well, now, if you won’t take that I would like to see you get a place 
thi winter,” he said, angrily, when he found that I would not go out of 
the city. 

“why, you promis that you would find me a situat in the city.” 

“that’ no difference; if you won’t take what I offer you can do 
without,” he said, indifferently. 

“then give me my money,” I said. 

“no, you can’t have your money. that goe into the bureau.” I urg and 
insisted, to no avail, and so I left the agency, to return no more. 

My second day I decid to appli to anoth agency, so I went to mrs. L. 
seely’s, no. 68 twenty-second street. I paid my dollar fee and wa taken 
to the third stori and put in a small room which wa pack as close 
with women as sardin in a box. after edg my way in I wa unabl to 
move, so pack were we. A woman came up, and, call me “that tall 
girl,” told me roughli as I wa new it wa useless for me to wait there. 
some of the girl said mrs. seeli wa alway cross to them, and that I 
should not mind it. how horribl stifl those room were! there were 
fifty-two in the room with me, and the two other room I could look into 
were equal crowded, while group stood on the stair and in the 
hallway. It wa a novel insight I got of life. some girl laughed, some 
were sad, some slept, some ate, and other read, while all sat from 
morn till night wait a chanc to earn a living. they are long 
wait too. one girl had been there two months, other for day and 
weeks. It wa good to see the glad look when call out to see a lady, 
and sad to see them return say that they did not suit becaus they 
wore bangs, or their hair in the wrong style, or that they look 
bilious, or that they were too tall, too short, too heavy, or too 
slender. one poor woman could not obtain a place becaus she wore 
mourning, and so the object ran. 

I got no chanc the entir day, and I decid that I could not endur a 
second day in that human pack for two situations, so frame some sort 
of excus I left the place, and gave up tri to be a servant. 




nelli bli as a white slave. 

_her experi IN the role OF A new york shop-girl make paper boxes._ 


veri earli the other morn I start out, not with the 
pleasure-seekers, but with those who toil the day long that they may 
live. everybodi wa rushing—girl of all age and appear and 
hurri men—and I went along, as one of the throng. I had often 
wonder at the tale of poor pay and cruel treatment that work girl 
tell. there wa one way of get at the truth, and I determin to tri 
it. It wa becom myself a paper box factori girl. accordingly, I 
start out in search of work without experience, reference, or aught to 
aid me. 

It wa a tiresom search, to say the least. had my live depend on 
it, it would have been discouraging, almost maddening. I went to a great 
number of factori in and around bleecker and grand street and sixth 
avenue, where the worker number up into the hundreds. “do you know how 
to do the work?” wa the question ask by everi one. when I repli 
that I did not, they gave me no further attention. 

“I am will to work for noth until I learn,” I urged. 

“work for nothing! why, if you paid us for come we wouldn’t have you 
in our way,” said one. 

“we don’t run an establish to teach women trades,” said another, in 
answer to my plea for work. 

“well, as they are not born with the knowledge, how do they ever learn?” 
I asked. 

[illustration: the past table.] 

“the girl alway have some friend who want to learn. If she wish to 
lose time and money by teach her, we don’t object, for we get the 
work the beginn doe for nothing.” 

By no persuas could I obtain an entre into the larger factories, so 
I conclud at last to tri a smaller one at no. 196 elm street. quit 
unlik the unkind, brusqu men I had met at other factories, the man 
here wa veri polite. He said: “if you have never done the work, I don’t 
think you will like it. It is dirti work and a girl ha to spend year 
at it befor she can make much money. our beginn are girl about 
sixteen year old, and they do not get paid for two week after they 
come here.” 

“what can they make afterward?” 

“we sometim start them at week work—$1.50 a week. when they becom 
compet they go on piecework—that is, they are paid by the hundred.” 

“how much do they earn then?” 

“A good worker will earn from $5 to $9 a week.” 

“have you mani girl here?” 

“we have about sixti in the build and a number who take the work 
home. I have onli been in thi busi for a few months, but if you 
think you would like to tri it, I shall speak to my partner. He ha had 
some of hi girl for eleven years. sit down until I find him.” 

He left the office, and I soon heard him talk outsid about me, and 
rather urg that I be given a chance. He soon returned, and with him a 
small man who spoke with a german accent. He stood by me without 
speaking, so I repeat my request. “well, give your name to the 
gentleman at the desk, and come down on monday morning, and we will see 
what we can do for you.” 

and so it wa that I start out earli in the morning. I had put on a 
calico dress to work in and to suit my chosen trade. In a nice littl 
bundle, cover with brown paper with a grease-spot on the center of it, 
wa my lunch. I had an idea that everi working-girl carri a lunch, and 
I wa tri to give out the impress that I wa quit use to thi 
thing. indeed, I consid the lunch a tell stroke of thought 
in my new _role_, and eye with some pride, in which wa mix a littl 
dismay, the grease-spot, which wa gradual grow in size. 

earli as it wa I found all the girl there and at work. I went through 
a small wagon-yard, the onli entranc to the office. after make my 
excus to the gentleman at the desk, he call to a pretti littl girl, 
who had her apron full of pasteboard, and said: 

“take thi ladi up to norah.” 

“i she to work on box or cornucopias?” ask the girl. 

“tell norah to put her on boxes.” 

follow my littl guide, I climb the narrowest, darkest, and most 
perpendicular stair it ha ever been my misfortun to see. On and on we 
went, through small rooms, fill with work girls, to the top 
floor—fourth or fifth story, I have forgotten which. ani way, I wa 
breathless when I got there. 

“norah, here is a ladi you are to put on boxes,” call out my pretti 
littl guide. 

all the girl that surround the long tabl turn from their work and 
look at me curiously. the auburn-hair girl address as norah rais 
her eye from the box she wa making, and replied: 

“see if the hatchway is down, and show her where to put her clothes.” 

then the forewoman order one of the girl to “get the ladi a stool,” 
and sat down befor a long table, on which wa pile a lot of pasteboard 
squares, label in the center. norah spread some long slip of paper on 
the table; then take up a scrub-brush, she dip it into a bucket of 
past and then rub it over the paper. next she took one of the 
squar of pasteboard and, run her thumb deftli along, turn up the 
edges. thi done, she took one of the slip of paper and put it quickli 
and neatli over the corner, bind them togeth and hold them in 
place. she quickli cut the paper off at the edg with her thumb-nail and 
swung the thing around and did the next corner. thi I soon found made a 
box lid. It look and wa veri easy, and in a few moment I wa abl to 
make one. 

I did not find the work difficult to learn, but rather disagreeable. the 
room wa not ventilated, and the past and glue were veri offensive. the 
pile of box made convers imposs with all the girl except a 
beginner, therese, who sat by my side. she wa veri timid at first, but 
after I question her kindli she grew more communicative. 

“I live on eldrig street with my parents. My father is a musician, but 
he will not go on the street to play. He veri seldom get an 
engagement. My mother is sick nearli all the time. I have a sister who 
work at passementerie. she can earn from $3 to $5 a week. I have 
anoth sister who ha been spool silk in twenty-third street for 
five year now. she make $6 a week. when she come home at night her 
face and hand and hair are all color from the silk she work on 
dure the day. It make her sick, and she is alway take medicine.” 

“have you work before?” 

“oh, yes; I use to work at passementeri on spring street. I work 
from 7 until 6 o’clock, piecework, and made about $3.50 a week. I left 
becaus the boss were not kind, and we onli had three littl oil lamp 
to see to work by. the room were veri dark, but they never allow us 
to burn the gas. ladi use to come here and take the work home to do. 
they did it cheap, for the pleasur of do it, so we did not get as 
much pay as we would otherwise.” 

“what did you do after you left there?” I asked. 

“I went to work in a fring factori on canal street. A woman had the 
place and she wa veri unkind to all the girls. she did not speak 
english. I work an entir week, from 8 to 6, with onli a half-hour for 
dinner, and at the end of the week she onli paid me 35 cents. you know a 
girl cannot live on 35 cent a week, so I left.” 

“how do you like the box factory?” 

“well, the boss seem veri kind. they alway say good-morn to me, a 
thing never done in ani other place I ever worked, but it is a good deal 
for a poor girl to give two weeks’ work for nothing. I have been here 
almost two weeks, and I have done a great deal of work. it’ all clear 
gain to the bosses. they say they often dismiss a girl after her first 
two week on the plea that she doe not suit. after thi I am to get 
$1.50 a week.” 

when the whistl of the surround factori blew at 12 o’clock the 
forewoman told us we could quit work and eat our lunch. I wa not quit 
so proud of my clever in simul a work girl when one of them 
said: 

“do you want to send out for your lunch?” 

“no; I brought it with me,” I replied. 

“oh!” she exclaimed, with a know inflect and amus smile. 

“i there anyth wrong?” I asked, answer her smile. 

[illustration: finish up.] 

“oh, no,” quickly; “onli the girl alway make fun of ani one who 
carri a basket now. No working-girl will carri a lunch or basket. It 
is out of style becaus it mark the girl at onc as a worker. I would 
like to carri a basket, but I don’t dare, becaus they would make so 
much fun of me.” 

the girl sent out for lunch and I ask of them the prices. for five 
cent they get a good pint of coffee, with sugar and milk if desired. 
two cent will buy three slice of butter bread. three cents, a 
sandwich. mani time a number of the girl will put all their money 
togeth and buy quit a littl feast. A bowl of soup for five cent 
will give four girl a taste. By club togeth they are abl to buy 
warm lunch. 

At one o’clock we were all at work again. I have complet sixty-four 
lids, and the suppli be consum wa put at “mold in.” thi is 
fit the bottom into the side of the box and past it there. It is 
rather difficult at first to make all the edg come close and neatli 
together, but after a littl experi it can be done easily. 

On my second day I wa put at a tabl with some new girl and I tri to 
get them to talk. I wa surpris to find that they are veri timid about 
tell their names, where they live or how. I endeavor by everi mean 
a woman knows, to get an invit to visit their homes, but did not 
succeed. 

“how much can girl earn here?” I ask the forewoman. 

“I do not know,” she said; “they never tell each other, and the boss 
keep their time.” 

“have you work here long?” I asked. 

“yes; I have been here eight years, and in that time I have taught my 
three sisters.” 

“i the work profitable?” 

“well, it is steady; but a girl must have mani years’ experi befor 
she can work fast enough to earn much.” 

the girl all seem happy. dure the day they would make the littl 
build resound with their singing. A song would be begun on the second 
floor, probably, and each floor would take it up in succession, until 
all were singing. they were nearli alway kind to one another. their 
littl quarrel did not last long, nor were they veri fierce. they were 
all extrem kind to me, and did all they could to make my work easi 
and pleasant. I felt quit proud when abl to make an entir box. 

there were two girl at one tabl on piecework who had been in a great 
mani box factori and had had a vari experience. 

“girl do not get paid half enough at ani work. box factori are no 
wors than other places. I do not know anyth a girl can do where by 
hard work she can earn more than $6 a week. A girl cannot dress and pay 
her board on that.” 

“where do such girl live?” I asked. 

“there are boarding-hous on bleecker and houston, and around such 
places, where girl can get a room and meal for $3.50 a week. the room 
may be onli for two, in one bed, or it may have a dozen, accord to 
size. they have no conveni or comforts, and gener undesir 
men board at the same place.” 

“whi don’t they live at these home that are run to accommod work 
women?” 

“oh, those home are frauds. A girl cannot obtain ani more home 
comforts, and then the restrict are more than they will endure. A 
girl who work all day must have some recreation, and she never find it 
in homes.” 

“have you work in box factori long?” 

“for eleven years, and I can’t say that it ha ever given me a living. 
On an averag I make $5 a week. I pay out $3.50 for board, and my wash 
bill at the least is 75 cents. can ani one expect a woman to dress on 
what remains?” 

“what do you get paid for boxes?” 

“I get 50 cent a hundr for one-pound candi boxes, and 40 cent a 
hundr for half-pound boxes.” 

“what work do you do on a box for that pay?” 

“everything. I get the pasteboard cut in squar the same as you did. I 
first ‘set up’ the lids, then I ‘mold in’ the bottoms. thi form a box. 
next I do the ‘trimming,’ which is put the gilt edg around the box 
lid. ‘cover striping’ (cover the edg of the lid) is next, and then 
come the ‘top label,’ which finish the lid entire. then I paper the 
box, do the ‘bottom labeling;’ and then put in two or four lace (lace 
paper) on the insid as ordered. thu you see one box pass through my 
hand eight time befor it is finished. I have to work veri hard and 
without ceas to be abl to make two hundr box a day, which earn 
me $1. It is not enough pay. you see I handl two hundr box sixteen 
hundr time for $1. cheap labor, isn’t it?” 

one veri bright girl, maggie, who sat opposit me, told a stori that 
made my heart ache. 

“thi is my second week here,” she said, “and, of course, I won’t 
receiv ani pay until next week, when I expect to receiv $1.50 for six 
days’ work. My father wa a driver befor he got sick. I don’t know what 
is wrong, but the doctor say he will die. befor I left thi morn he 
said my father will die soon. I could hardli work becaus of it. I am 
the oldest child, and I have a brother and two sister younger. I am 
sixteen, and my brother is twelve. He get $2 a week for be 
office-boy at a cigar-box factory.” 

“do you have much rent to pay?” 

“we have two room in a hous on houston street. they are small and have 
low ceilings, and there are a great mani chinamen in the same house. We 
pay for these room $14 per month. We do not have much to eat, but then 
father doesn’t mind it becaus he can’t eat. We could not live if 
father’ lodg did not pay our rent.” 

“did you ever work before?” 

“yes, I onc work in a carpet factori at yonkers. I onli had to work 
there one week until I learned, and afterward I made at piecework a 
dollar a day. when my father got so ill my mother want me at home, but 
now when we see I can earn so littl they wish I had remain there.” 

“whi do you not tri someth else?” I asked. 

“I want to, but could find nothing. father sent me to school until I 
wa fourteen, and so I thought I would learn to be a telegraph operator. 
I went to a place in twenty-third street, where it is taught, but the 
man said he would not give me a lesson unless I paid fifti dollar in 
advance. I could not do that.” 

I then spoke of the cooper institute, which I thought everi new yorker 
knew wa for the benefit of just such cases. I wa greatli astonish to 
learn that such a thing as the cooper institut wa wholli unknown to 
all the worker around me. 

“if my father knew that there wa a free school he would send me,” said 
one. 

“I would go in the evenings,” said another, “if I had known there wa 
such a place.” 

again, when some of them were complain of unjust wages, and some of 
place where they had been unabl to collect the amount due them after 
working, I spoke of the mission of the knight of labor, and the newli 
organ societi for women. they were all surpris to hear that there 
were ani mean to aid women in have justice. I moral somewhat on 
the use of ani such societi unless they enter the heart of these 
factories. 

one girl who work on the floor below me said they were not allow to 
tell what they earned. however, she had been work here five years, 
and she did not averag more than $5 a week. the factori in itself wa a 
total unfit place for women. the room were small and there wa no 
ventilation. In case of fire there wa practic no escape. 

the work wa tiresome, and after I had learn all I could from the 
rather retic girl I wa anxiou to leave. I notic some rather 
peculiar thing on my trip to and from the factory. I notic that men 
were much quicker to offer their place to the working-girl on the car 
than they were to offer them to well-dress women. anoth thing quit 
as noticeable, I had more men tri to get up a flirtat with me while I 
wa a box-factori girl than I ever had before. the girl were nice in 
their manner and as polit as one rear at home. they never forgot to 
thank one anoth for the slightest service, and there wa quit a 
littl air of “good form” in mani of their actions. I have seen mani 
wors girl in much higher posit than the white slave of new york. 


the end. 

[illustration] 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 


what IS sapolio? 

It is a solid handsom cake of scour soap, which ha no equal for all 
clean purpos except the laundry. To use it is to valu it. 

what will sapolio do? why, it will clean paint, make oil-cloth bright, 
and give the floors, tables, and shelv a new appearance. 

It will take the greas off the dish and off the pot and pans. 

you can scour the knive and fork with it, and make the tin thing 
shine brightly. the wash-basin, the bathtub, even the greasi kitchen 
sink, will be as clean as a new pin if you use =sapolio=. one cake will 
prove all we say. Be a clever littl housekeep and tri it. 

bewar OF imitations. 

* * * * * 


abandon physic! 

50 cent by mail. 
sold by druggists. 

all our health food circular free. 

[illustration: health food co’s. gluten suppositori cure constip 
and piles.] 

dr. A. W. thompson, northampton, mass., says: “I have test the gluten 
suppositories, and consid them valuable, as inde I expect from the 
excel of their theory.” 

dr. wm. todd helmuth declar the gluten suppositori to be “the best 
remedi for constip which I have ever prescribed.” 

As sancho panza said of sleep, so say I of your gluten suppositories: 
“god bless the man who invent them!”—e. L. ripley, burlington, vt. 

“I prescrib the gluten suppositori almost daili in my practice, and 
am often astonish at the perman result obtained.”—j. montfort 
schley, M. d., professor physic diagnosi woman’ medic college, new 
york city. 

health food co., 76 4th avenue, N. Y. 

* * * * * 


neuralgine, the great pain cure. 

one applic of neuralgin remov in mani case the most 
excruci pain—th worst case rare need more than two or three. 

=sufferers= should at onc send for thi invalu =remedy=. 

price 50 cts. per bottle. 

for sale by all druggists, or will be sent by mail to ani address, 
postag paid. 

neuralgin company, 

26 vandewat street, new york. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




transcriber’ note 


1. silent correct typograph error and variat in spelling. 
2. retain anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spell as 
printed. 
3. enclos ital font in _underscores_. 
4. enclos bold font in =equals=. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of ten day in a mad-house;, by nelli bli 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook ten day IN A mad-house; *** 

***** thi file should be name 59899-0.txt or 59899-0.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/9/59899/ 

produc by richard tonsing, tim lindell, and the onlin 
distribut proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (thi 
file wa produc from imag gener made avail 
by the internet archive) 


updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit will 
be renamed. 

creat the work from print edit not protect by u.s. copyright 
law mean that no one own a unit state copyright in these works, 
so the foundat (and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit 
state without permiss and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the gener term of use part 
of thi license, appli to copi and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a regist trademark, 
and may not be use if you charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv 
specif permission. If you do not charg anyth for copi of thi 
ebook, compli with the rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook 
for nearli ani purpos such as creation of deriv works, reports, 
perform and research. they may be modifi and print and given 
away--y may do practic anyth in the unit state with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribut is subject to the 
trademark license, especi commerci redistribution. 

start: full licens 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full 
project gutenberg-tm licens avail with thi file or onlin at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project 
gutenberg-tm electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or 
destroy all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your 
possession. If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound 
by the term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi 
agreement and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm 
electron works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect 
of project gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu 
work in the collect are in the public domain in the unit 
states. If an individu work is unprotect by copyright law in the 
unit state and you are locat in the unit states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or creat deriv work base on the work as long as 
all refer to project gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot 
free access to electron work by freeli share project gutenberg-tm 
work in complianc with the term of thi agreement for keep the 
project gutenberg-tm name associ with the work. you can easili 
compli with the term of thi agreement by keep thi work in the 
same format with it attach full project gutenberg-tm licens when 
you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are 
in a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, 
check the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi 
agreement befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribut or creat deriv work base on thi work or ani 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no 
represent concern the copyright statu of ani work in ani 
countri outsid the unit states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other 
immedi access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear 
promin whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher in the unit state and 
most other part of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or re-us it 
under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ with thi 
ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not locat in the 
unit states, you'll have to check the law of the countri where you 
are locat befor use thi ebook. 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is 
deriv from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (doe not 
contain a notic indic that it is post with permiss of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copi and distribut to anyon in 
the unit state without pay ani fee or charges. If you are 
redistribut or provid access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associ with or appear on the work, you must compli 
either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permiss for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani 
addit term impos by the copyright holder. addit term 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work 
post with the permiss of the copyright holder found at the 
begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ 
ani word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access 
to or distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici 
version post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens 
to the user, provid a copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean 
of obtain a copi upon request, of the work in it origin "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. ani altern format must includ the 
full project gutenberg-tm licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work 
provid that 

* you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he ha 
agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment must be paid 
within 60 day follow each date on which you prepar (or are 
legal requir to prepare) your period tax returns. royalti 
payment should be clearli mark as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the address specifi in 
section 4, "inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundation." 

* you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or destroy all 
copi of the work possess in a physic medium and discontinu 
all use of and all access to other copi of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
ani money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day of 
receipt of the work. 

* you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work or group of work on differ term than 
are set forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write 
from both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
work not protect by u.s. copyright law in creat the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur 
or corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other 
intellectu properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or 
other medium, a comput virus, or comput code that damag or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph 1.f.3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you 
with the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in 
lieu of a refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person 
or entiti provid it to you may choos to give you a second 
opportun to receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If 
the second copi is also defective, you may demand a refund in write 
without further opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is', with NO 
other warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not 
limit TO warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of 
damages. If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement 
violat the law of the state applic to thi agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaim or 
limit permit by the applic state law. the invalid or 
unenforc of ani provis of thi agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in 
accord with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the 
production, promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm 
electron works, harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, 
includ legal fees, that aris directli or indirectli from ani of 
the follow which you do or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi 
or ani project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addit or delet to ani project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani 
defect you cause. 

section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of 
comput includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It 
exist becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat 
from peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need are critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur 
generations. To learn more about the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat and how your effort and donat can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundat inform page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. inform about the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. contribut to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: PO box 750175, fairbanks, AK 99775, but it 
volunt and employe are scatter throughout numer 
locations. it busi offic is locat at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact link and up to 
date contact inform can be found at the foundation' web site and 
offici page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for addit contact information: 

dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To send 
donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/don 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ checks, onlin payment and credit card donations. To 
donate, pleas visit: www.gutenberg.org/don 

section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron works. 

professor michael S. hart wa the origin of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a librari of electron work that could be 
freeli share with anyone. for forti years, he produc and 
distribut project gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of 
volunt support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not 
necessarili keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper 
edition. 

most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 

