the project gutenberg ebook of the collect work of ambros bierce, vol. 
ii: In the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilians, by ambros bierc 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the collect work of ambros bierce, vol. ii: In the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilian 

author: ambros bierc 

releas date: august 30, 2004 [ebook #13334] 
[last updated: januari 26, 2014] 

language: english 


*** start OF thi project gutenberg ebook ambros bierce, vol. II *** 




produc by jonathan ingram, carol david and PG distribut proofread 




the collect 
work OF 
ambros bierc 

volum II 


IN the midst OF life 

tale OF soldier and civilian 



origin publish 1909 


prefac 
TO the first edit 


deni exist by the chief publish hous of the country, thi 
book owe itself to mr. e.l.g. steele, merchant, of thi city. In 
attest mr. steele' faith in hi judgment and hi friend, it will 
serv it author' main and best ambition. 

a.b. 

san francisco, sept. 4, 1891. 




content 


A horseman IN the ski 15 
AN occurr AT owl creek bridg 27 
chickamauga 46 
A son OF the god 58 
one OF the miss 71 
kill AT resaca 93 
the affair AT coulter' notch 105 
the coup DE grâce 122 
parker adderson, philosoph 133 
AN affair OF outpost 146 
the stori OF A conscienc 165 
one kind OF offic 178 
one officer, one man 197 
georg thurston 209 
the mocking-bird 218 

civilian 

the man out OF the nose 233 
AN adventur AT brownvil 247 
the famou gilson bequest 266 
the applic 281 
A watcher BY the dead 290 
the man and the snake 311 
A holi terror 324 
the suitabl surround 350 
the board window 364 
A ladi from red hors 373 
the eye OF the panther 385 





soldier 




A horseman IN the ski 

I 

one sunni afternoon in the autumn of the year 1861 a soldier lay in a 
clump of laurel by the side of a road in western virginia. He lay at 
full length upon hi stomach, hi feet rest upon the toes, hi head 
upon the left forearm. hi extend right hand loos grasp hi 
rifle. but for the somewhat method disposit of hi limb and a 
slight rhythmic movement of the cartridge-box at the back of hi belt he 
might have been thought to be dead. He wa asleep at hi post of duty. 
but if detect he would be dead shortli afterward, death be the just 
and legal penalti of hi crime. 

the clump of laurel in which the crimin lay wa in the angl of a road 
which after ascend southward a steep accliv to that point turn 
sharpli to the west, run along the summit for perhap one hundr 
yards. there it turn southward again and went zigzag downward 
through the forest. At the salient of that second angl wa a larg flat 
rock, jut out northward, overlook the deep valley from which the 
road ascended. the rock cap a high cliff; a stone drop from it 
outer edg would have fallen sheer downward one thousand feet to the 
top of the pines. the angl where the soldier lay wa on anoth spur 
of the same cliff. had he been awak he would have command a view, not 
onli of the short arm of the road and the jut rock, but of the 
entir profil of the cliff below it. It might well have made him giddi 
to look. 

the countri wa wood everywher except at the bottom of the valley to 
the northward, where there wa a small natur meadow, through which 
flow a stream scarc visibl from the valley' rim. thi open ground 
look hardli larger than an ordinari door-yard, but wa realli sever 
acr in extent. it green wa more vivid than that of the inclos 
forest. away beyond it rose a line of giant cliff similar to those upon 
which we are suppos to stand in our survey of the savag scene, and 
through which the road had somehow made it climb to the summit. the 
configur of the valley, indeed, wa such that from thi point of 
observ it seem entir shut in, and one could but have wonder 
how the road which found a way out of it had found a way into it, and 
whenc came and whither went the water of the stream that part the 
meadow more than a thousand feet below. 

No countri is so wild and difficult but men will make it a theatr of 
war; conceal in the forest at the bottom of that militari rat-trap, in 
which half a hundr men in possess of the exit might have starv 
an armi to submission, lay five regiment of feder infantry. they had 
march all the previou day and night and were resting. At nightfal 
they would take to the road again, climb to the place where their 
unfaith sentinel now slept, and descend the other slope of the 
ridg fall upon a camp of the enemi at about midnight. their hope wa to 
surpris it, for the road led to the rear of it. In case of failure, 
their posit would be peril in the extreme; and fail they sure 
would should accid or vigil appris the enemi of the movement. 

II 

the sleep sentinel in the clump of laurel wa a young virginian name 
carter druse. He wa the son of wealthi parents, an onli child, and had 
known such eas and cultiv and high live as wealth and tast were 
abl to command in the mountain countri of western virginia. hi home 
wa but a few mile from where he now lay. one morn he had risen from 
the breakfast-t and said, quietli but gravely: "father, a union 
regiment ha arriv at grafton. I am go to join it." 

the father lift hi leonin head, look at the son a moment in 
silence, and replied: "well, go, sir, and whatev may occur do what you 
conceiv to be your duty. virginia, to which you are a traitor, must get 
on without you. should we both live to the end of the war, we will speak 
further of the matter. your mother, as the physician ha inform you, 
is in a most critic condition; at the best she cannot be with us 
longer than a few weeks, but that time is precious. It would be better 
not to disturb her." 

So carter druse, bow rever to hi father, who return the 
salut with a state courtesi that mask a break heart, left the 
home of hi childhood to go soldiering. By conscienc and courage, by 
deed of devot and daring, he soon commend himself to hi fellow 
and hi officers; and it wa to these qualiti and to some knowledg of 
the countri that he owe hi select for hi present peril duti at 
the extrem outpost. nevertheless, fatigu had been stronger than 
resolut and he had fallen asleep. what good or bad angel came in a 
dream to rous him from hi state of crime, who shall say? without a 
movement, without a sound, in the profound silenc and the languor of 
the late afternoon, some invis messeng of fate touch with 
unseal finger the eye of hi consciousness--whisp into the ear 
of hi spirit the mysteri awaken word which no human lip ever 
have spoken, no human memori ever ha recalled. He quietli rais hi 
forehead from hi arm and look between the mask stem of the 
laurels, instinct close hi right hand about the stock of hi 
rifle. 

hi first feel wa a keen artist delight. On a coloss pedestal, 
the cliff,--motionless at the extrem edg of the cap rock and 
sharpli outlin against the sky,--wa an equestrian statu of 
impress dignity. the figur of the man sat the figur of the horse, 
straight and soldierly, but with the repos of a grecian god carv in 
the marbl which limit the suggest of activity. the gray costum 
harmon with it aërial background; the metal of accoutr and 
caparison wa soften and subdu by the shadow; the animal' skin had 
no point of high light. A carbin strikingli foreshorten lay across 
the pommel of the saddle, kept in place by the right hand grasp it at 
the "grip"; the left hand, hold the bridl rein, wa invisible. In 
silhouett against the sky the profil of the hors wa cut with the 
sharp of a cameo; it look across the height of air to the 
confront cliff beyond. the face of the rider, turn slightli away, 
show onli an outlin of templ and beard; he wa look downward to 
the bottom of the valley. magnifi by it lift against the sky and by 
the soldier' testifi sens of the formid of a near enemi the 
group appear of heroic, almost colossal, size. 

for an instant druse had a strange, half-defin feel that he had 
slept to the end of the war and wa look upon a nobl work of art 
rear upon that emin to commemor the deed of an heroic past of 
which he had been an inglori part. the feel wa dispel by a 
slight movement of the group: the horse, without move it feet, had 
drawn it bodi slightli backward from the verge; the man remain 
immobil as before. broad awak and keenli aliv to the signific of 
the situation, druse now brought the butt of hi rifl against hi cheek 
by cautious push the barrel forward through the bushes, cock the 
piece, and glanc through the sight cover a vital spot of the 
horseman' breast. A touch upon the trigger and all would have been well 
with carter druse. At that instant the horseman turn hi head and 
look in the direct of hi conceal foeman--seem to look into hi 
veri face, into hi eyes, into hi brave, compassion heart. 

Is it then so terribl to kill an enemi in war--an enemi who ha 
surpris a secret vital to the safeti of one' self and comrades--an 
enemi more formid for hi knowledg than all hi armi for it 
numbers? carter druse grew pale; he shook in everi limb, turn faint, 
and saw the statuesqu group befor him as black figures, rising, 
falling, move unsteadili in arc of circl in a fieri sky. hi hand 
fell away from hi weapon, hi head slowli drop until hi face rest 
on the leav in which he lay. thi courag gentleman and hardi 
soldier wa near swoon from intens of emotion. 

It wa not for long; in anoth moment hi face wa rais from earth, 
hi hand resum their place on the rifle, hi forefing sought the 
trigger; mind, heart, and eye were clear, conscienc and reason sound. 
He could not hope to captur that enemy; to alarm him would but send him 
dash to hi camp with hi fatal news. the duti of the soldier wa 
plain: the man must be shot dead from ambush--without warning, without a 
moment' spiritu preparation, with never so much as an unspoken 
prayer, he must be sent to hi account. but no--ther is a hope; he may 
have discov nothing--perhap he is but admir the sublim of the 
landscape. If permitted, he may turn and ride carelessli away in the 
direct whenc he came. sure it will be possibl to judg at the 
instant of hi withdraw whether he knows. It may well be that hi 
fixiti of attention--drus turn hi head and look through the deep 
of air downward, as from the surfac to the bottom of a transluc sea. 
He saw creep across the green meadow a sinuou line of figur of men 
and horses--som foolish command wa permit the soldier of hi 
escort to water their beast in the open, in plain view from a dozen 
summits! 

druse withdrew hi eye from the valley and fix them again upon the 
group of man and hors in the sky, and again it wa through the sight 
of hi rifle. but thi time hi aim wa at the horse. In hi memory, as 
if they were a divin mandate, rang the word of hi father at their 
parting: "whatev may occur, do what you conceiv to be your duty." He 
wa calm now. hi teeth were firmli but not rigidli closed; hi nerv 
were as tranquil as a sleep babe's--not a tremor affect ani muscl 
of hi body; hi breathing, until suspend in the act of take aim, 
wa regular and slow. duti had conquered; the spirit had said to the 
body: "peace, be still." He fired. 

iii 

An offic of the feder force, who in a spirit of adventur or in 
quest of knowledg had left the hidden _bivouac_ in the valley, and with 
aimless feet had made hi way to the lower edg of a small open space 
near the foot of the cliff, wa consid what he had to gain by 
push hi explor further. At a distanc of a quarter-mil befor 
him, but appar at a stone' throw, rose from it fring of pine 
the gigant face of rock, tower to so great a height abov him that 
it made him giddi to look up to where it edg cut a sharp, rug line 
against the sky. It present a clean, vertic profil against a 
background of blue sky to a point half the way down, and of distant 
hills, hardli less blue, thenc to the top of the tree at it base. 
lift hi eye to the dizzi altitud of it summit the offic saw an 
astonish sight--a man on horseback ride down into the valley 
through the air! 

straight upright sat the rider, in militari fashion, with a firm seat in 
the saddle, a strong clutch upon the rein to hold hi charger from too 
impetu a plunge. from hi bare head hi long hair stream upward, 
wave like a plume. hi hand were conceal in the cloud of the 
horse' lift mane. the animal' bodi wa as level as if everi 
hoof-strok encount the resist earth. it motion were those of a 
wild gallop, but even as the offic look they ceased, with all the 
leg thrown sharpli forward as in the act of alight from a leap. but 
thi wa a flight! 

fill with amaz and terror by thi apparit of a horseman in the 
sky--half believ himself the chosen scribe of some new apocalypse, 
the offic wa overcom by the intens of hi emotions; hi leg 
fail him and he fell. almost at the same instant he heard a crash 
sound in the trees--a sound that die without an echo--and all wa 
still. 

the offic rose to hi feet, trembling. the familiar sensat of an 
abrad shin recal hi daze faculties. pull himself togeth he 
ran rapidli obliqu away from the cliff to a point distant from it 
foot; thereabout he expect to find hi man; and thereabout he 
natur failed. In the fleet instant of hi vision hi imagin 
had been so wrought upon by the appar grace and eas and intent of 
the marvel perform that it did not occur to him that the line of 
march of aërial cavalri is directli downward, and that he could find the 
object of hi search at the veri foot of the cliff. A half-hour later 
he return to camp. 

thi offic wa a wise man; he knew better than to tell an incred 
truth. He said noth of what he had seen. but when the command ask 
him if in hi scout he had learn anyth of advantag to the 
expedit he answered: 

"yes, sir; there is no road lead down into thi valley from the 
southward." 

the commander, know better, smiled. 

IV 

after fire hi shot, privat carter druse reload hi rifl and 
resum hi watch. ten minut had hardli pass when a feder sergeant 
crept cautious to him on hand and knees. druse neither turn hi 
head nor look at him, but lay without motion or sign of recognition. 

"did you fire?" the sergeant whispered. 

"yes." 

"at what?" 

"A horse. It wa stand on yonder rock--pretti far out. you see it is 
no longer there. It went over the cliff." 

the man' face wa white, but he show no other sign of emotion. have 
answered, he turn away hi eye and said no more. the sergeant did not 
understand. 

"see here, druse," he said, after a moment' silence, "it' no use 
make a mystery. I order you to report. wa there anybodi on the 
horse?" 

"yes." 

"well?" 

"mi father." 

the sergeant rose to hi feet and walk away. "good god!" he said. 




AN occurr AT owl creek bridg 

I 

A man stood upon a railroad bridg in northern alabama, look down 
into the swift water twenti feet below. the man' hand were behind hi 
back, the wrist bound with a cord. A rope close encircl hi neck. 
It wa attach to a stout cross-timb abov hi head and the slack 
fell to the level of hi knees. some loos board laid upon the sleeper 
support the metal of the railway suppli a foot for him and hi 
executioners--two privat soldier of the feder army, direct by a 
sergeant who in civil life may have been a deputi sheriff. At a short 
remov upon the same temporari platform wa an offic in the uniform of 
hi rank, armed. He wa a captain. A sentinel at each end of the bridg 
stood with hi rifl in the posit known as "support," that is to say, 
vertic in front of the left shoulder, the hammer rest on the 
forearm thrown straight across the chest--a formal and unnatur 
position, enforc an erect carriag of the body. It did not appear to 
be the duti of these two men to know what wa occur at the centr of 
the bridge; they mere blockad the two end of the foot plank that 
travers it. 

beyond one of the sentinel nobodi wa in sight; the railroad ran 
straight away into a forest for a hundr yards, then, curving, wa lost 
to view. doubtless there wa an outpost farther along. the other bank of 
the stream wa open ground--a gentl accliv top with a stockad of 
vertic tree trunks, loop-hol for rifles, with a singl embrasur 
through which protrud the muzzl of a brass cannon command the 
bridge. mid-way of the slope between bridg and fort were the 
spectators--a singl compani of infantri in line, at "parad rest," the 
butt of the rifl on the ground, the barrel inclin slightli 
backward against the right shoulder, the hand cross upon the stock. A 
lieuten stood at the right of the line, the point of hi sword upon 
the ground, hi left hand rest upon hi right. except the group of 
four at the centr of the bridge, not a man moved. the compani face the 
bridge, stare stonily, motionless. the sentinels, face the bank of 
the stream, might have been statu to adorn the bridge. the captain 
stood with fold arms, silent, observ the work of hi subordinates, 
but make no sign. death is a dignitari who when he come announc is 
to be receiv with formal manifest of respect, even by those most 
familiar with him. In the code of militari etiquett silenc and fixiti 
are form of deference. 

the man who wa engag in be hang wa appar about thirty-f 
year of age. He wa a civilian, if one might judg from hi habit, 
which wa that of a planter. hi featur were good--a straight nose, 
firm mouth, broad forehead, from which hi long, dark hair wa comb 
straight back, fall behind hi ear to the collar of hi well-fit 
frock-coat. He wore a mustach and point beard, but no whiskers; hi 
eye were larg and dark gray, and had a kindli express which one 
would hardli have expect in one whose neck wa in the hemp. evid 
thi wa no vulgar assassin. the liber militari code make provis 
for hang mani kind of persons, and gentlemen are not excluded. 

the prepar be complete, the two privat soldier step asid 
and each drew away the plank upon which he had been standing. the 
sergeant turn to the captain, salut and place himself immedi 
behind that officer, who in turn move apart one pace. these movement 
left the condemn man and the sergeant stand on the two end of the 
same plank, which span three of the cross-ti of the bridge. the end 
upon which the civilian stood almost, but not quite, reach a fourth. 
thi plank had been held in place by the weight of the captain; it wa 
now held by that of the sergeant. At a signal from the former the latter 
would step aside, the plank would tilt and the condemn man go down 
between two ties. the arrang commend itself to hi judgment as 
simpl and effective. hi face had not been cover nor hi eye 
bandaged. He look a moment at hi "unsteadfast footing," then let hi 
gaze wander to the swirl water of the stream race madli beneath hi 
feet. A piec of danc driftwood caught hi attent and hi eye 
follow it down the current. how slowli it appear to move! what a 
sluggish stream! 

He close hi eye in order to fix hi last thought upon hi wife and 
children. the water, touch to gold by the earli sun, the brood 
mist under the bank at some distanc down the stream, the fort, the 
soldiers, the piec of drift--al had distract him. and now he becam 
consciou of a new disturbance. strike through the thought of hi dear 
one wa a sound which he could neither ignor nor understand, a sharp, 
distinct, metal percuss like the stroke of a blacksmith' hammer 
upon the anvil; it had the same ring quality. He wonder what it 
was, and whether immeasur distant or near by--it seem both. it 
recurr wa regular, but as slow as the toll of a death knell. He 
await each stroke with impati and--h knew not why--apprehension. 
the interv of silenc grew progress longer; the delay becam 
maddening. with their greater infrequ the sound increas in 
strength and sharpness. they hurt hi ear like the thrust of a knife; he 
fear he would shriek. what he heard wa the tick of hi watch. 

He unclos hi eye and saw again the water below him. "if I could free 
my hands," he thought, "I might throw off the noos and spring into the 
stream. By dive I could evad the bullet and, swim vigorously, 
reach the bank, take to the wood and get away home. My home, thank god, 
is as yet outsid their lines; my wife and littl one are still beyond 
the invader' farthest advance." 

As these thoughts, which have here to be set down in words, were flash 
into the doom man' brain rather than evolv from it the captain 
nod to the sergeant. the sergeant step aside. 

II 

peyton farquhar wa a well-to-do planter, of an old and highli respect 
alabama family. be a slave owner and like other slave owner a 
politician he wa natur an origin secessionist and ardent 
devot to the southern cause. circumst of an imperi nature, 
which it is unnecessari to relat here, had prevent him from take 
servic with the gallant armi that had fought the disastr campaign 
end with the fall of corinth, and he chafe under the inglori 
restraint, long for the releas of hi energies, the larger life of 
the soldier, the opportun for distinction. that opportunity, he felt, 
would come, as it come to all in war time. meanwhil he did what he 
could. No servic wa too humbl for him to perform in aid of the south, 
no adventur too peril for him to undertak if consist with the 
charact of a civilian who wa at heart a soldier, and who in good 
faith and without too much qualif assent to at least a part of 
the frankli villain dictum that all is fair in love and war. 

one even while farquhar and hi wife were sit on a rustic bench 
near the entranc to hi grounds, a gray-clad soldier rode up to the 
gate and ask for a drink of water. mrs. farquhar wa onli too happi to 
serv him with her own white hands. while she wa fetch the water her 
husband approach the dusti horseman and inquir eagerli for news from 
the front. 

"the yank are repair the railroads," said the man, "and are get 
readi for anoth advance. they have reach the owl creek bridge, put 
it in order and built a stockad on the north bank. the command ha 
issu an order, which is post everywhere, declar that ani civilian 
caught interf with the railroad, it bridges, tunnel or train 
will be summarili hanged. I saw the order." 

"how far is it to the owl creek bridge?" farquhar asked. 

"about thirti miles." 

"i there no forc on thi side the creek?" 

"onli a picket post half a mile out, on the railroad, and a singl 
sentinel at thi end of the bridge." 

"suppos a man--a civilian and student of hanging--should elud the 
picket post and perhap get the better of the sentinel," said farquhar, 
smiling, "what could he accomplish?" 

the soldier reflected. "I wa there a month ago," he replied. "I 
observ that the flood of last winter had lodg a great quantiti of 
driftwood against the wooden pier at thi end of the bridge. It is now 
dri and would burn like tow." 

the ladi had now brought the water, which the soldier drank. He thank 
her ceremoniously, bow to her husband and rode away. An hour later, 
after nightfall, he repass the plantation, go northward in the 
direct from which he had come. He wa a feder scout. 

iii 

As peyton farquhar fell straight downward through the bridg he lost 
conscious and wa as one alreadi dead. from thi state he wa 
awakened--ag later, it seem to him--bi the pain of a sharp pressur 
upon hi throat, follow by a sens of suffocation. keen, poignant 
agoni seem to shoot from hi neck downward through everi fibr of 
hi bodi and limbs. these pain appear to flash along well-defin 
line of ramif and to beat with an inconceiv rapid 
periodicity. they seem like stream of pulsat fire heat him to 
an intoler temperature. As to hi head, he wa consciou of noth 
but a feel of fulness--of congestion. these sensat were 
unaccompani by thought. the intellectu part of hi natur wa 
alreadi effaced; he had power onli to feel, and feel wa torment. He 
wa consciou of motion. encompass in a lumin cloud, of which he 
wa now mere the fieri heart, without materi substance, he swung 
through unthink arc of oscillation, like a vast pendulum. then all 
at once, with terribl suddenness, the light about him shot upward with 
the nois of a loud plash; a fright roar wa in hi ears, and all 
wa cold and dark. the power of thought wa restored; he knew that the 
rope had broken and he had fallen into the stream. there wa no 
addit strangulation; the noos about hi neck wa alreadi 
suffoc him and kept the water from hi lungs. To die of hang at 
the bottom of a river!--th idea seem to him ludicrous. He open hi 
eye in the dark and saw abov him a gleam of light, but how 
distant, how inaccessible! He wa still sinking, for the light becam 
fainter and fainter until it wa a mere glimmer. then it began to grow 
and brighten, and he knew that he wa rise toward the surface--knew it 
with reluctance, for he wa now veri comfortable. "to be hang and 
drowned," he thought, "that is not so bad; but I do not wish to be shot. 
no; I will not be shot; that is not fair." 

He wa not consciou of an effort, but a sharp pain in hi wrist 
appris him that he wa tri to free hi hands. He gave the struggl 
hi attention, as an idler might observ the feat of a juggler, without 
interest in the outcome. what splendid effort!--what magnificent, what 
superhuman strength! ah, that wa a fine endeavor! bravo! the cord fell 
away; hi arm part and float upward, the hand dimli seen on each 
side in the grow light. He watch them with a new interest as first 
one and then the other pounc upon the noos at hi neck. they tore it 
away and thrust it fierc aside, it undul resembl those of a 
water-snake. "put it back, put it back!" He thought he shout these 
word to hi hands, for the undo of the noos had been succeed by 
the direst pang that he had yet experienced. hi neck ach horribly; 
hi brain wa on fire; hi heart, which had been flutter faintly, 
gave a great leap, tri to forc itself out at hi mouth. hi whole 
bodi wa rack and wrench with an insupport anguish! but hi 
disobedi hand gave no heed to the command. they beat the water 
vigor with quick, downward strokes, forc him to the surface. He 
felt hi head emerge; hi eye were blind by the sunlight; hi chest 
expand convulsively, and with a suprem and crown agoni hi lung 
engulf a great draught of air, which instantli he expel in a 
shriek! 

He wa now in full possess of hi physic senses. they were, indeed, 
preternatur keen and alert. someth in the aw disturb of 
hi organ system had so exalt and refin them that they made record 
of thing never befor perceived. He felt the rippl upon hi face and 
heard their separ sound as they struck. He look at the forest on 
the bank of the stream, saw the individu trees, the leav and the 
vein of each leaf--saw the veri insect upon them: the locusts, the 
brilliant-bodi flies, the gray spider stretch their web from twig 
to twig. He note the prismat color in all the dewdrop upon a 
million blade of grass. the hum of the gnat that danc abov the 
eddi of the stream, the beat of the dragon-flies' wings, the 
stroke of the water-spiders' legs, like oar which had lift their 
boat--al these made audibl music. A fish slid along beneath hi eye 
and he heard the rush of it bodi part the water. 

He had come to the surfac face down the stream; in a moment the 
visibl world seem to wheel slowli round, himself the pivot point, 
and he saw the bridge, the fort, the soldier upon the bridge, the 
captain, the sergeant, the two privates, hi executioners. they were in 
silhouett against the blue sky. they shout and gesticulated, point 
at him. the captain had drawn hi pistol, but did not fire; the other 
were unarmed. their movement were grotesqu and horrible, their form 
gigantic. 

suddenli he heard a sharp report and someth struck the water smartli 
within a few inch of hi head, spatter hi face with spray. He 
heard a second report, and saw one of the sentinel with hi rifl at 
hi shoulder, a light cloud of blue smoke rise from the muzzle. the 
man in the water saw the eye of the man on the bridg gaze into hi 
own through the sight of the rifle. He observ that it wa a gray eye 
and rememb have read that gray eye were keenest, and that all 
famou markmen had them. nevertheless, thi one had missed. 

A counter-swirl had caught farquhar and turn him half round; he wa 
again look into the forest on the bank opposit the fort. the sound 
of a clear, high voic in a monoton singsong now rang out behind him 
and came across the water with a distinct that pierc and subdu 
all other sounds, even the beat of the rippl in hi ears. although 
no soldier, he had frequent camp enough to know the dread 
signific of that deliberate, drawling, aspir chant; the 
lieuten on shore wa take a part in the morning' work. how coldli 
and pitilessly--with what an even, calm intonation, presaging, and 
enforc tranquil in the men--with what accur measur 
interv fell those cruel words: 

"attention, company!... shoulder arms!... ready!... aim!... fire!" 

farquhar dived--div as deepli as he could. the water roar in hi 
ear like the voic of niagara, yet he heard the dull thunder of the 
volley and, rise again toward the surface, met shine bit of metal, 
singularli flattened, oscil slowli downward. some of them touch 
him on the face and hands, then fell away, continu their descent. one 
lodg between hi collar and neck; it wa uncomfort warm and he 
snatch it out. 

As he rose to the surface, gasp for breath, he saw that he had been a 
long time under water; he wa percept farther down stream--near to 
safety. the soldier had almost finish reloading; the metal ramrod 
flash all at onc in the sunshin as they were drawn from the barrels, 
turn in the air, and thrust into their sockets. the two sentinel 
fire again, independ and ineffectually. 

the hunt man saw all thi over hi shoulder; he wa now swim 
vigor with the current. hi brain wa as energet as hi arm and 
legs; he thought with the rapid of lightning. 

"the officer," he reasoned, "will not make that martinet' error a 
second time. It is as easi to dodg a volley as a singl shot. He ha 
probabl alreadi given the command to fire at will. god help me, I 
cannot dodg them all!" 

An appal plash within two yard of him wa follow by a loud, 
rush sound, _diminuendo_, which seem to travel back through the air 
to the fort and die in an explos which stir the veri river to it 
deeps! A rise sheet of water curv over him, fell down upon him, 
blind him, strangl him! the cannon had taken a hand in the game. As 
he shook hi head free from the commot of the smitten water he heard 
the deflect shot hum through the air ahead, and in an instant it 
wa crack and smash the branch in the forest beyond. 

"they will not do that again," he thought; "the next time they will use 
a charg of grape. I must keep my eye upon the gun; the smoke will 
appris me--th report arriv too late; it lag behind the missile. 
that is a good gun." 

suddenli he felt himself whirl round and round--spin like a top. 
the water, the banks, the forests, the now distant bridge, fort and men 
--all were commingl and blurred. object were repres by their 
color only; circular horizont streak of color--that wa all he saw. 
He had been caught in a vortex and wa be whirl on with a veloc 
of advanc and gyrat that made him giddi and sick. In a few moment 
he wa flung upon the gravel at the foot of the left bank of the stream 
--the southern bank--and behind a project point which conceal him 
from hi enemies. the sudden arrest of hi motion, the abras of one 
of hi hand on the gravel, restor him, and he wept with delight. He 
dug hi finger into the sand, threw it over himself in hand and 
audibl bless it. It look like diamonds, rubies, emeralds; he could 
think of noth beauti which it did not resemble. the tree upon the 
bank were giant garden plants; he note a definit order in their 
arrangement, inhal the fragranc of their blooms. A strange, roseat 
light shone through the space among their trunk and the wind made in 
their branch the music of æolian harps. He had no wish to perfect hi 
escape--wa content to remain in that enchant spot until retaken. 

A whiz and rattl of grapeshot among the branch high abov hi head 
rous him from hi dream. the baffl cannon had fire him a random 
farewell. He sprang to hi feet, rush up the slope bank, and plung 
into the forest. 

all that day he traveled, lay hi cours by the round sun. the 
forest seem interminable; nowher did he discov a break in it, not 
even a woodman' road. He had not known that he live in so wild a 
region. there wa someth uncanni in the revelation. 

By nightfal he wa fatigued, footsore, famishing. the thought of hi 
wife and children urg him on. At last he found a road which led him in 
what he knew to be the right direction. It wa as wide and straight as a 
citi street, yet it seem untraveled. No field border it, no 
dwell anywhere. not so much as the bark of a dog suggest human 
habitation. the black bodi of the tree form a straight wall on both 
sides, termin on the horizon in a point, like a diagram in a lesson 
in perspective. over-head, as he look up through thi rift in the 
wood, shone great golden star look unfamiliar and group in strang 
constellations. He wa sure they were arrang in some order which had a 
secret and malign significance. the wood on either side wa full of 
singular noises, among which--once, twice, and again--h distinctli 
heard whisper in an unknown tongue. 

hi neck wa in pain and lift hi hand to it he found it horribl 
swollen. He knew that it had a circl of black where the rope had 
bruis it. hi eye felt congested; he could no longer close them. hi 
tongu wa swollen with thirst; he reliev it fever by thrust it 
forward from between hi teeth into the cold air. how softli the turf 
had carpet the untravel avenue--h could no longer feel the roadway 
beneath hi feet! 

doubtless, despit hi suffering, he had fallen asleep while walking, 
for now he see anoth scene--perhap he ha mere recov from a 
delirium. He stand at the gate of hi own home. all is as he left it, 
and all bright and beauti in the morn sunshine. He must have 
travel the entir night. As he push open the gate and pass up the 
wide white walk, he see a flutter of femal garments; hi wife, look 
fresh and cool and sweet, step down from the veranda to meet him. At 
the bottom of the step she stand waiting, with a smile of ineff 
joy, an attitud of matchless grace and dignity. ah, how beauti she 
is! He spring forward with extend arms. As he is about to clasp her 
he feel a stun blow upon the back of the neck; a blind white 
light blaze all about him with a sound like the shock of a cannon--then 
all is dark and silence! 

peyton farquhar wa dead; hi body, with a broken neck, swung gentli 
from side to side beneath the timber of the owl creek bridge. 




chickamauga 

one sunni autumn afternoon a child stray away from it rude home in a 
small field and enter a forest unobserved. It wa happi in a new sens 
of freedom from control, happi in the opportun of explor and 
adventure; for thi child' spirit, in bodi of it ancestors, had for 
thousand of year been train to memor feat of discoveri and 
conquest--victori in battl whose critic moment were centuries, 
whose victors' camp were citi of hewn stone. from the cradl of it 
race it had conquer it way through two contin and pass a great 
sea had penetr a third, there to be born to war and dominion as a 
heritage. 

the child wa a boy age about six years, the son of a poor planter. In 
hi younger manhood the father had been a soldier, had fought against 
nake savag and follow the flag of hi countri into the capit of a 
civil race to the far south. In the peac life of a planter the 
warrior-fir survived; onc kindled, it is never extinguished. the man 
love militari book and pictur and the boy had understood enough to 
make himself a wooden sword, though even the eye of hi father would 
hardli have known it for what it was. thi weapon he now bore bravely, 
as becam the son of an heroic race, and paus now and again in the 
sunni space of the forest assumed, with some exaggeration, the postur 
of aggress and defens that he had been taught by the engraver' art. 
made reckless by the eas with which he overcam invis foe 
attempt to stay hi advance, he commit the common enough militari 
error of push the pursuit to a danger extreme, until he found 
himself upon the margin of a wide but shallow brook, whose rapid water 
bar hi direct advanc against the fli foe that had cross with 
illog ease. but the intrepid victor wa not to be baffled; the 
spirit of the race which had pass the great sea burn unconquer 
in that small breast and would not be denied. find a place where some 
bowlder in the bed of the stream lay but a step or a leap apart, he 
made hi way across and fell again upon the rear-guard of hi imaginari 
foe, put all to the sword. 

now that the battl had been won, prudenc requir that he withdraw to 
hi base of operations. alas; like mani a mightier conqueror, and like 
one, the mightiest, he could not 

curb the lust for war, 
nor learn that tempt fate will leav the loftiest star. 

advanc from the bank of the creek he suddenli found himself 
confront with a new and more formid enemy: in the path that he wa 
following, sat, bolt upright, with ear erect and paw suspend befor 
it, a rabbit! with a startl cri the child turn and fled, he knew not 
in what direction, call with inarticul cri for hi mother, 
weeping, stumbling, hi tender skin cruelli torn by brambles, hi littl 
heart beat hard with terror--breathless, blind with tears--lost in 
the forest! then, for more than an hour, he wander with er feet 
through the tangl undergrowth, till at last, overcom by fatigue, he 
lay down in a narrow space between two rocks, within a few yard of the 
stream and still grasp hi toy sword, no longer a weapon but a 
companion, sob himself to sleep. the wood bird sang merrili abov 
hi head; the squirrels, whisk their braveri of tail, ran bark 
from tree to tree, unconsci of the piti of it, and somewher far away 
wa a strange, muffl thunder, as if the partridg were drum in 
celebr of nature' victori over the son of her immemori 
enslavers. and back at the littl plantation, where white men and black 
were hastili search the field and hedg in alarm, a mother' heart 
wa break for her miss child. 

hour passed, and then the littl sleeper rose to hi feet. the chill of 
the even wa in hi limbs, the fear of the gloom in hi heart. but he 
had rested, and he no longer wept. with some blind instinct which 
impel to action he struggl through the undergrowth about him and 
came to a more open ground--on hi right the brook, to the left a 
gentl accliv stud with infrequ trees; over all, the gather 
gloom of twilight. A thin, ghostli mist rose along the water. It 
frighten and repel him; instead of recrossing, in the direct 
whenc he had come, he turn hi back upon it, and went forward toward 
the dark inclos wood. suddenli he saw befor him a strang move 
object which he took to be some larg animal--a dog, a pig--h could not 
name it; perhap it wa a bear. He had seen pictur of bears, but knew 
of noth to their discredit and had vagu wish to meet one. but 
someth in form or movement of thi object--someth in the 
awkward of it approach--told him that it wa not a bear, and 
curios wa stay by fear. He stood still and as it came slowli on 
gain courag everi moment, for he saw that at least it had not the 
long, menac ear of the rabbit. possibl hi impression mind wa 
half consciou of someth familiar in it shambling, awkward gait. 
befor it had approach near enough to resolv hi doubt he saw that 
it wa follow by anoth and another. To right and to left were mani 
more; the whole open space about him wa aliv with them--al move 
toward the brook. 

they were men. they crept upon their hand and knees. they use their 
hand only, drag their legs. they use their knee only, their arm 
hang idl at their sides. they strove to rise to their feet, but fell 
prone in the attempt. they did noth naturally, and noth alike, 
save onli to advanc foot by foot in the same direction. singly, in 
pair and in littl groups, they came on through the gloom, some halt 
now and again while other crept slowli past them, then resum their 
movement. they came by dozen and by hundreds; as far on either hand as 
one could see in the deepen gloom they extend and the black wood 
behind them appear to be inexhaustible. the veri ground seem in 
motion toward the creek. occasion one who had paus did not again 
go on, but lay motionless. He wa dead. some, pausing, made strang 
gestur with their hands, erect their arm and lower them again, 
clasp their heads; spread their palm upward, as men are sometim 
seen to do in public prayer. 

not all of thi did the child note; it is what would have been note by 
an elder observer; he saw littl but that these were men, yet crept like 
babes. be men, they were not terrible, though unfamiliarli clad. He 
move among them freely, go from one to anoth and peer into 
their face with childish curiosity. all their face were singularli 
white and mani were streak and gout with red. someth in this-- 
someth too, perhaps, in their grotesqu attitud and movements-- 
remind him of the paint clown whom he had seen last summer in the 
circus, and he laugh as he watch them. but on and ever on they 
crept, these maim and bleed men, as heedless as he of the dramat 
contrast between hi laughter and their own ghastli gravity. To him it 
wa a merri spectacle. He had seen hi father' negro creep upon their 
hand and knee for hi amusement--had ridden them so, "make believe" 
they were hi horses. He now approach one of these crawl figur 
from behind and with an agil movement mount it astride. the man sank 
upon hi breast, recovered, flung the small boy fierc to the ground 
as an unbroken colt might have done, then turn upon him a face that 
lack a lower jaw--from the upper teeth to the throat wa a great red 
gap fring with hang shred of flesh and splinter of bone. the 
unnatur promin of nose, the absenc of chin, the fierc eyes, gave 
thi man the appear of a great bird of prey crimson in throat and 
breast by the blood of it quarry. the man rose to hi knees, the child 
to hi feet. the man shook hi fist at the child; the child, terrifi 
at last, ran to a tree near by, got upon the farther side of it and took 
a more seriou view of the situation. and so the clumsi multitud 
drag itself slowli and pain along in hideou pantomime--mov 
forward down the slope like a swarm of great black beetles, with never a 
sound of going--in silenc profound, absolute. 

instead of darkening, the haunt landscap began to brighten. through 
the belt of tree beyond the brook shone a strang red light, the trunk 
and branch of the tree make a black lacework against it. It struck 
the creep figur and gave them monstrou shadows, which caricatur 
their movement on the lit grass. It fell upon their faces, touch 
their white with a ruddi tinge, accentu the stain with which 
so mani of them were freak and maculated. It sparkl on button and 
bit of metal in their clothing. instinct the child turn toward 
the grow splendor and move down the slope with hi horribl 
companions; in a few moment had pass the foremost of the throng--not 
much of a feat, consid hi advantages. He place himself in the 
lead, hi wooden sword still in hand, and solemnli direct the march, 
conform hi pace to their and occasion turn as if to see that 
hi forc did not straggle. sure such a leader never befor had such 
a following. 

scatter about upon the ground now slowli narrow by the encroach 
of thi aw march to water, were certain articl to which, in the 
leader' mind, were coupl no signific associations: an occasion 
blanket, tightli roll lengthwise, doubl and the end bound togeth 
with a string; a heavi knapsack here, and there a broken rifle--such 
things, in short, as are found in the rear of retreat troops, the 
"spoor" of men fli from their hunters. everywher near the creek, 
which here had a margin of lowland, the earth wa trodden into mud by 
the feet of men and horses. An observ of better experi in the use 
of hi eye would have notic that these footprint point in both 
directions; the ground had been twice pass over--in advanc and in 
retreat. A few hour before, these desperate, stricken men, with their 
more fortun and now distant comrades, had penetr the forest in 
thousands. their success battalions, break into swarm and 
re-form in lines, had pass the child on everi side--had almost 
trodden on him as he slept. the rustl and murmur of their march had not 
awaken him. almost within a stone' throw of where he lay they had 
fought a battle; but all unheard by him were the roar of the musketry, 
the shock of the cannon, "the thunder of the captain and the shouting." 
He had slept through it all, grasp hi littl wooden sword with 
perhap a tighter clutch in unconsci sympathi with hi martial 
environment, but as heedless of the grandeur of the struggl as the dead 
who had die to make the glory. 

the fire beyond the belt of wood on the farther side of the creek, 
reflect to earth from the canopi of it own smoke, wa now suffus 
the whole landscape. It transform the sinuou line of mist to the 
vapor of gold. the water gleam with dash of red, and red, too, were 
mani of the stone protrud abov the surface. but that wa blood; the 
less desper wound had stain them in crossing. On them, too, the 
child now cross with eager steps; he wa go to the fire. As he 
stood upon the farther bank he turn about to look at the companion of 
hi march. the advanc wa arriv at the creek. the stronger had 
alreadi drawn themselv to the brink and plung their face into the 
flood. three or four who lay without motion appear to have no heads. 
At thi the child' eye expand with wonder; even hi hospit 
understand could not accept a phenomenon impli such vital as 
that. after slake their thirst these men had not had the strength to 
back away from the water, nor to keep their head abov it. they were 
drowned. In rear of these, the open space of the forest show the 
leader as mani formless figur of hi grim command as at first; but not 
nearli so mani were in motion. He wave hi cap for their encourag 
and smilingli point with hi weapon in the direct of the guid 
light--a pillar of fire to thi strang exodus. 

confid of the fidel of hi forces, he now enter the belt of 
woods, pass through it easili in the red illumination, climb a 
fence, ran across a field, turn now and again to coquet with hi 
respons shadow, and so approach the blaze ruin of a dwelling. 
desol everywhere! In all the wide glare not a live thing wa 
visible. He care noth for that; the spectacl pleased, and he danc 
with glee in imit of the waver flames. He ran about, collect 
fuel, but everi object that he found wa too heavi for him to cast in 
from the distanc to which the heat limit hi approach. In despair he 
flung in hi sword--a surrend to the superior forc of nature. hi 
militari career wa at an end. 

shift hi position, hi eye fell upon some outbuild which had an 
oddli familiar appearance, as if he had dream of them. He stood 
consid them with wonder, when suddenli the entir plantation, with 
it inclos forest, seem to turn as if upon a pivot. hi littl 
world swung half around; the point of the compass were reversed. He 
recogn the blaze build as hi own home! 

for a moment he stood stupefi by the power of the revelation, then ran 
with stumbl feet, make a half-circuit of the ruin. there, 
conspicu in the light of the conflagration, lay the dead bodi of a 
woman--th white face turn upward, the hand thrown out and clutch 
full of grass, the cloth deranged, the long dark hair in tangl and 
full of clot blood. the greater part of the forehead wa torn away, 
and from the jag hole the brain protruded, overflow the temple, a 
frothi mass of gray, crown with cluster of crimson bubbles--th work 
of a shell. 

the child move hi littl hands, make wild, uncertain gestures. He 
utter a seri of inarticul and indescrib cries--someth 
between the chatter of an ape and the gobbl of a turkey--a 
startling, soulless, unholi sound, the languag of a devil. the child 
wa a deaf mute. 

then he stood motionless, with quiver lips, look down upon the 
wreck. 




A son OF the god 

A studi IN the present tens 

A breezi day and a sunni landscape. An open countri to right and left 
and forward; behind, a wood. In the edg of thi wood, face the open 
but not ventur into it, long line of troops, halted. the wood is 
aliv with them, and full of confus noises--th occasion rattl of 
wheel as a batteri of artilleri goe into posit to cover the 
advance; the hum and murmur of the soldier talking; a sound of 
innumer feet in the dri leav that strew the interspac among the 
trees; hoars command of officers. detach group of horsemen are well 
in front--not altogeth exposed--mani of them intent regard the 
crest of a hill a mile away in the direct of the interrupt advance. 
for thi power army, move in battl order through a forest, ha met 
with a formid obstacle--th open country. the crest of that gentl 
hill a mile away ha a sinist look; it says, beware! along it run a 
stone wall extend to left and right a great distance. behind the wall 
is a hedge; behind the hedg are seen the top of tree in rather 
straggl order. among the trees--what? It is necessari to know. 

yesterday, and for mani day and night previously, we were fight 
somewhere; alway there wa cannonading, with occasion keen rattl 
of musketry, mingl with cheers, our own or the enemy's, we seldom 
knew, attest some temporari advantage. thi morn at daybreak the 
enemi wa gone. We have move forward across hi earthworks, across 
which we have so often vainli attempt to move before, through the 
debri of hi abandon camps, among the grave of hi fallen, into the 
wood beyond. 

how curious we had regard everything! how odd it all had seemed! 
noth had appear quit familiar; the most commonplac objects--an 
old saddle, a splinter wheel, a forgotten canteen--everyth had 
relat someth of the mysteri person of those strang men who 
had been kill us. the soldier never becom wholli familiar with the 
concept of hi foe as men like himself; he cannot divest himself of 
the feel that they are anoth order of beings, differ 
conditioned, in an environ not altogeth of the earth. the smallest 
vestig of them rivet hi attent and engag hi interest. He think 
of them as inaccessible; and, catch an unexpect glimps of them, 
they appear farther away, and therefor larger, than they realli are-- 
like object in a fog. He is somewhat in awe of them. 

from the edg of the wood lead up the accliv are the track of 
hors and wheels--th wheel of cannon. the yellow grass is beaten down 
by the feet of infantry. clearli they have pass thi way in thousands; 
they have not withdrawn by the countri roads. thi is significant--it is 
the differ between retir and retreating. 

that group of horsemen is our commander, hi staff and escort. He is 
face the distant crest, hold hi field-glass against hi eye with 
both hands, hi elbow needlessli elevated. It is a fashion; it seem to 
dignifi the act; we are all addict to it. suddenli he lower the glass 
and say a few word to those about him. two or three aid detach 
themselv from the group and canter away into the woods, along the 
line in each direction. We did not hear hi words, but we know them: 
"tell gener X. to send forward the skirmish line." those of us who 
have been out of place resum our positions; the men rest at eas 
straighten themselv and the rank are re-form without a command. 
some of us staff offic dismount and look at our saddl girths; those 
alreadi on the ground remount. 

gallop rapidli along in the edg of the open ground come a young 
offic on a snow-whit horse. hi saddl blanket is scarlet. what a 
fool! No one who ha ever been in action but rememb how natur 
everi rifl turn toward the man on a white horse; no one but ha 
observ how a bit of red enrag the bull of battle. that such color 
are fashion in militari life must be accept as the most 
astonish of all the phenomena of human vanity. they would seem to 
have been devis to increas the death-rate. 

thi young offic is in full uniform, as if on parade. He is all agleam 
with bullion--a blue-and-gold edit of the poetri of war. A wave of 
deris laughter run abreast of him all along the line. but how 
handsom he is!--with what careless grace he sit hi horse! 

He rein up within a respect distanc of the corp command and 
salutes. the old soldier nod familiarly; he evid know him. A 
brief colloquy between them is go on; the young man seem to be 
prefer some request which the elder one is indispos to grant. let 
us ride a littl nearer. ah! too late--it is ended. the young offic 
salut again, wheel hi horse, and ride straight toward the crest of 
the hill! 

A thin line of skirmishers, the men deploy at six pace or so apart, 
now push from the wood into the open. the command speak to hi 
bugler, who clap hi instrument to hi lips. _tra-la-la! tra-la-la!_ 
the skirmish halt in their tracks. 

meantim the young horseman ha advanc a hundr yards. He is ride 
at a walk, straight up the long slope, with never a turn of the head. 
how glorious! gods! what would we not give to be in hi place--with hi 
soul! He doe not draw hi sabre; hi right hand hang easili at hi 
side. the breez catch the plume in hi hat and flutter it smartly. 
the sunshin rest upon hi shoulder-straps, lovingly, like a visibl 
benediction. straight on he rides. ten thousand pair of eye are fix 
upon him with an intens that he can hardli fail to feel; ten thousand 
heart keep quick time to the inaud hoof-beat of hi snowi steed. 
He is not alone--h draw all soul after him. but we rememb that we 
laughed! On and on, straight for the hedge-lin wall, he rides. not a 
look backward. O, if he would but turn--if he could but see the love, 
the adoration, the atonement! 

not a word is spoken; the popul depth of the forest still murmur 
with their unseen and unse swarm, but all along the fring is 
silence. the burli command is an equestrian statu of himself. the 
mount staff officers, their field glass up, are motionless all. the 
line of battl in the edg of the wood stand at a new kind of 
"attention," each man in the attitud in which he wa caught by the 
conscious of what is go on. all these harden and impenit 
man-killers, to whom death in it awfulest form is a fact familiar to 
their every-day observation; who sleep on hill trembl with the 
thunder of great guns, dine in the midst of stream missiles, and play 
at card among the dead face of their dearest friends--al are watch 
with suspend breath and beat heart the outcom of an act involv 
the life of one man. such is the magnet of courag and devotion. 

If now you should turn your head you would see a simultan movement 
among the spectators--a start, as if they had receiv an electr 
shock--and look forward again to the now distant horseman you would 
see that he ha in that instant alter hi direct and is ride at 
an angl to hi former course. the spectat suppos the sudden 
deflect to be caus by a shot, perhap a wound; but take thi 
field-glass and you will observ that he is ride toward a break in the 
wall and hedge. He means, if not killed, to ride through and overlook 
the countri beyond. 

you are not to forget the natur of thi man' act; it is not permit 
to you to think of it as an instanc of bravado, nor, on the other hand, 
a needless sacrific of self. If the enemi ha not retreat he is in 
forc on that ridge. the investig will encount noth less than a 
line-of-battle; there is no need of pickets, videttes, skirmishers, to 
give warn of our approach; our attack line will be visible, 
conspicuous, expos to an artilleri fire that will shave the ground the 
moment they break from cover, and for half the distanc to a sheet of 
rifl bullet in which noth can live. In short, if the enemi is 
there, it would be mad to attack him in front; he must be manoeuvr 
out by the immemori plan of threaten hi line of communication, as 
necessari to hi exist as to the diver at the bottom of the sea hi 
air tube. but how ascertain if the enemi is there? there is but one 
way,--somebodi must go and see. the natur and customari thing to do is 
to send forward a line of skirmishers. but in thi case they will answer 
in the affirm with all their lives; the enemy, crouch in doubl 
rank behind the stone wall and in cover of the hedge, will wait until 
it is possibl to count each assailant' teeth. At the first volley a 
half of the question line will fall, the other half befor it can 
accomplish the predestin retreat. what a price to pay for gratifi 
curiosity! At what a dear rate an armi must sometim purchas 
knowledge! "let me pay all," say thi gallant man--thi militari 
christ! 

there is no hope except the hope against hope that the crest is clear. 
true, he might prefer captur to death. So long as he advances, the line 
will not fire--whi should it? He can safe ride into the hostil rank 
and becom a prison of war. but thi would defeat hi object. It would 
not answer our question; it is necessari either that he return unharm 
or be shot to death befor our eyes. onli so shall we know how to act. 
If captured--why, that might have been done by a half-dozen stragglers. 

now begin an extraordinari contest of intellect between a man and an 
army. our horseman, now within a quarter of a mile of the crest, 
suddenli wheel to the left and gallop in a direct parallel to it. 
He ha caught sight of hi antagonist; he know all. some slight 
advantag of ground ha enabl him to overlook a part of the line. If 
he were here he could tell us in words. but that is now hopeless; he 
must make the best use of the few minut of life remain to him, by 
compel the enemi himself to tell us as much and as plainli as 
possible--which, naturally, that discreet power is reluct to do. not 
a rifleman in those crouch ranks, not a cannon at those mask and 
shot guns, but know the need of the situation, the imper duti 
of forbearance. besides, there ha been time enough to forbid them all 
to fire. true, a singl rifle-shot might drop him and be no great 
disclosure. but fire is infectious--and see how rapidli he moves, with 
never a paus except as he whirl hi hors about to take a new 
direction, never directli backward toward us, never directli forward 
toward hi executioners. all thi is visibl through the glass; it seem 
occur within pistol-shot; we see all but the enemy, whose presence, 
whose thoughts, whose motiv we infer. To the unaid eye there is 
noth but a black figur on a white horse, trace slow zigzag 
against the slope of a distant hill--so slowli they seem almost to 
creep. 

now--th glass again--h ha tire of hi failure, or see hi error, or 
ha gone mad; he is dash directli forward at the wall, as if to take 
it at a leap, hedg and all! one moment onli and he wheel right about 
and is speed like the wind straight down the slope--toward hi 
friends, toward hi death! instantli the wall is top with a fierc 
roll of smoke for a distanc of hundr of yard to right and left. 
thi is as instantli dissip by the wind, and befor the rattl of 
the rifl reach us he is down. no, he recov hi seat; he ha but 
pull hi hors upon it haunches. they are up and away! A tremend 
cheer burst from our ranks, reliev the insupport tension of our 
feelings. and the hors and it rider? yes, they are up and away. away, 
indeed--they are make directli to our left, parallel to the now 
steadili blaze and smoke wall. the rattl of the musketri is 
continuous, and everi bullet' target is that courag heart. 

suddenli a great bank of white smoke push upward from behind the wall. 
anoth and another--a dozen roll up befor the thunder of the 
explos and the hum of the missil reach our ear and the 
missil themselv come bound through cloud of dust into our 
covert, knock over here and there a man and caus a temporari 
distraction, a pass thought of self. 

the dust drift away. incredible!--that enchant hors and rider have 
pass a ravin and are climb anoth slope to unveil anoth 
conspiraci of silence, to thwart the will of anoth arm host. anoth 
moment and that crest too is in eruption. the hors rear and strike 
the air with it forefeet. they are down at last. but look again--th 
man ha detach himself from the dead animal. He stand erect, 
motionless, hold hi sabr in hi right hand straight abov hi head. 
hi face is toward us. now he lower hi hand to a level with hi face 
and move it outward, the blade of the sabr describ a downward 
curve. It is a sign to us, to the world, to posterity. It is a hero' 
salut to death and history. 

again the spell is broken; our men attempt to cheer; they are choke 
with emotion; they utter hoarse, discord cries; they clutch their 
weapon and press tumultu forward into the open. the skirmishers, 
without orders, against orders, are go forward at a keen run, like 
hound unleashed. our cannon speak and the enemy' now open in full 
chorus; to right and left as far as we can see, the distant crest, 
seem now so near, erect it tower of cloud and the great shot pitch 
roar down among our move masses. flag after flag of our emerg 
from the wood, line after line sweep forth, catch the sunlight on 
it burnish arms. the rear battalion alon are in obedience; they 
preserv their proper distanc from the insurg front. 

the command ha not moved. He now remov hi field-glass from hi 
eye and glanc to the right and left. He see the human current 
flow on either side of him and hi huddl escort, like tide wave 
part by a rock. not a sign of feel in hi face; he is thinking. 
again he direct hi eye forward; they slowli travers that malign and 
aw crest. He address a calm word to hi bugler. _tra-la-la! 
tra-la-la!_ the injunct ha an imperi which enforc it. It is 
repeat by all the bugl of all the sub-ordin commanders; the sharp 
metal note assert themselv abov the hum of the advanc and 
penetr the sound of the cannon. To halt is to withdraw. the color 
move slowli back; the line face about and sullenli follow, bear 
their wounded; the skirmish return, gather up the dead. 

ah, those many, mani needless dead! that great soul whose beauti bodi 
is lie over yonder, so conspicu against the sere hillside--could it 
not have been spare the bitter conscious of a vain devotion? would 
one except have mar too much the pitiless perfect of the 
divine, etern plan? 




one OF the miss 

jerom searing, a privat soldier of gener sherman' army, then 
confront the enemi at and about kennesaw mountain, georgia, turn 
hi back upon a small group of offic with whom he had been talk in 
low tones, step across a light line of earthworks, and disappear in 
a forest. none of the men in line behind the work had said a word to 
him, nor had he so much as nod to them in passing, but all who saw 
understood that thi brave man had been intrust with some peril 
duty. jerom searing, though a private, did not serv in the ranks; he 
wa detail for servic at divis headquarters, be born upon the 
roll as an orderly. "orderly" is a word cover a multitud of duties. 
An orderli may be a messenger, a clerk, an officer' servant--anything. 
He may perform servic for which no provis is made in order and 
armi regulations. their natur may depend upon hi aptitude, upon favor, 
upon accident. privat searing, an incompar marksman, young, hardy, 
intellig and insens to fear, wa a scout. the gener command 
hi divis wa not content to obey order blindli without know what 
wa in hi front, even when hi command wa not on detach service, but 
form a fraction of the line of the army; nor wa he satisfi to 
receiv hi knowledg of hi _vis-à-vis_ through the customari channels; 
he want to know more than he wa appris of by the corp command 
and the collis of picket and skirmishers. henc jerom searing, 
with hi extraordinari daring, hi woodcraft, hi sharp eyes, and 
truth tongue. On thi occas hi instruct were simple: to get 
as near the enemy' line as possibl and learn all that he could. 

In a few moment he had arriv at the picket-line, the men on duti 
there lie in group of two and four behind littl bank of earth 
scoop out of the slight depress in which they lay, their rifl 
protrud from the green bough with which they had mask their small 
defenses. the forest extend without a break toward the front, so 
solemn and silent that onli by an effort of the imagin could it be 
conceiv as popul with arm men, alert and vigilant--a forest 
formid with possibl of battle. paus a moment in one of 
these rifle-pit to appris the men of hi intent sear crept 
stealthili forward on hi hand and knee and wa soon lost to view in a 
dens thicket of underbrush. 

"that is the last of him," said one of the men; "I wish I had hi rifle; 
those fellow will hurt some of us with it." 

sear crept on, take advantag of everi accid of ground and 
growth to give himself better cover. hi eye penetr everywhere, hi 
ear took note of everi sound. He still hi breathing, and at the 
crack of a twig beneath hi knee stop hi progress and hug the 
earth. It wa slow work, but not tedious; the danger made it exciting, 
but by no physic sign wa the excit manifest. hi puls wa as 
regular, hi nerv were as steadi as if he were tri to trap a 
sparrow. 

"it seem a long time," he thought, "but I cannot have come veri far; I 
am still alive." 

He smile at hi own method of estim distance, and crept forward. A 
moment later he suddenli flatten himself upon the earth and lay 
motionless, minut after minute. through a narrow open in the bush 
he had caught sight of a small mound of yellow clay--on of the enemy' 
rifle-pits. after some littl time he cautious rais hi head, inch 
by inch, then hi bodi upon hi hands, spread out on each side of him, 
all the while intent regard the hillock of clay. In anoth moment 
he wa upon hi feet, rifl in hand, stride rapidli forward with 
littl attempt at concealment. He had rightli interpret the signs, 
whatev they were; the enemi wa gone. 

To assur himself beyond a doubt befor go back to report upon so 
import a matter, sear push forward across the line of abandon 
pits, run from cover to cover in the more open forest, hi eye 
vigil to discov possibl stragglers. He came to the edg of a 
plantation--on of those forlorn, desert homestead of the last year 
of the war, upgrown with brambles, ugli with broken fenc and desol 
with vacant build have blank apertur in place of door and 
windows. after a keen reconnoiss from the safe seclus of a clump 
of young pine sear ran lightli across a field and through an orchard 
to a small structur which stood apart from the other farm buildings, on 
a slight elevation. thi he thought would enabl him to overlook a larg 
scope of countri in the direct that he suppos the enemi to have 
taken in withdrawing. thi building, which had origin consist of a 
singl room elev upon four post about ten feet high, wa now littl 
more than a roof; the floor had fallen away, the joist and plank 
loos pile on the ground below or rest on end at variou angles, 
not wholli torn from their fasten above. the support post were 
themselv no longer vertical. It look as if the whole edific would 
go down at the touch of a finger. 

conceal himself in the debri of joist and floor sear look 
across the open ground between hi point of view and a spur of kennesaw 
mountain, a half-mil away. A road lead up and across thi spur wa 
crowd with troops--th rear-guard of the retir enemy, their 
gun-barrel gleam in the morn sunlight. 

sear had now learn all that he could hope to know. It wa hi duti 
to return to hi own command with all possibl speed and report hi 
discovery. but the gray column of confeder toil up the mountain 
road wa singularli tempting. hi rifle--an ordinari "springfield," but 
fit with a globe sight and hair-trigger--would easili send it ounc 
and a quarter of lead hiss into their midst. that would probabl not 
affect the durat and result of the war, but it is the busi of a 
soldier to kill. It is also hi habit if he is a good soldier. sear 
cock hi rifl and "set" the trigger. 

but it wa decre from the begin of time that privat sear wa 
not to murder anybodi that bright summer morning, nor wa the 
confeder retreat to be announc by him. for countless age event 
had been so match themselv togeth in that wondrou mosaic to some 
part of which, dimli discernible, we give the name of history, that the 
act which he had in will would have mar the harmoni of the pattern. 
some twenty-f year previous the power charg with the execut 
of the work accord to the design had provid against that mischanc 
by caus the birth of a certain male child in a littl villag at the 
foot of the carpathian mountains, had care rear it, supervis 
it education, direct it desir into a militari channel, and in due 
time made it an offic of artillery. By the concurr of an infinit 
number of favor influenc and their preponder over an infinit 
number of oppos ones, thi offic of artilleri had been made to 
commit a breach of disciplin and flee from hi nativ countri to avoid 
punishment. He had been direct to new orlean (instead of new york), 
where a recruit offic await him on the wharf. He wa enlist and 
promoted, and thing were so order that he now command a confeder 
batteri some two mile along the line from where jerom searing, the 
feder scout, stood cock hi rifle. noth had been neglected--at 
everi step in the progress of both these men' lives, and in the live 
of their contemporari and ancestors, and in the live of the 
contemporari of their ancestors, the right thing had been done to 
bring about the desir result. had anyth in all thi vast 
concaten been overlook privat sear might have fire on the 
retreat confeder that morning, and would perhap have missed. As 
it fell out, a confeder captain of artillery, have noth better 
to do while await hi turn to pull out and be off, amus himself by 
sight a field-piec obliqu to hi right at what he mistook for 
some feder offic on the crest of a hill, and discharg it. the 
shot flew high of it mark. 

As jerom sear drew back the hammer of hi rifl and with hi eye 
upon the distant confeder consid where he could plant hi shot 
with the best hope of make a widow or an orphan or a childless 
mother,--perhap all three, for privat searing, although he had 
repeatedli refus promotion, wa not without a certain kind of 
ambition,--h heard a rush sound in the air, like that made by the 
wing of a great bird swoop down upon it prey. more quickli than he 
could apprehend the gradation, it increas to a hoars and horribl 
roar, as the missil that made it sprang at him out of the sky, strike 
with a deafen impact one of the post support the confus of 
timber abov him, smash it into matchwood, and bring down the 
crazi edific with a loud clatter, in cloud of blind dust! 

when jerom sear recov conscious he did not at onc 
understand what had occurred. It was, indeed, some time befor he open 
hi eyes. for a while he believ that he had die and been buried, and 
he tri to recal some portion of the burial service. He thought that 
hi wife wa kneel upon hi grave, ad her weight to that of the 
earth upon hi breast. the two of them, widow and earth, had crush hi 
coffin. unless the children should persuad her to go home he would not 
much longer be abl to breathe. He felt a sens of wrong. "I cannot 
speak to her," he thought; "the dead have no voice; and if I open my 
eye I shall get them full of earth." 

He open hi eyes. A great expans of blue sky, rise from a fring of 
the top of trees. In the foreground, shut out some of the trees, a 
high, dun mound, angular in outlin and cross by an intricate, 
patternless system of straight lines; the whole an immeasur distanc 
away--a distanc so inconceiv great that it fatigu him, and he 
close hi eyes. the moment that he did so he wa consciou of an 
insuffer light. A sound wa in hi ear like the low, rhythmic 
thunder of a distant sea break in success wave upon the beach, 
and out of thi noise, seem a part of it, or possibl come from 
beyond it, and intermingl with it ceaseless undertone, came the 
articul words: "jerom searing, you are caught like a rat in a trap-- 
in a trap, trap, trap." 

suddenli there fell a great silence, a black darkness, an infinit 
tranquillity, and jerom searing, perfectli consciou of hi rathood, 
and well assur of the trap that he wa in, rememb all and nowis 
alarmed, again open hi eye to reconnoitre, to note the strength of 
hi enemy, to plan hi defense. 

He wa caught in a reclin posture, hi back firmli support by a 
solid beam. anoth lay across hi breast, but he had been abl to 
shrink a littl away from it so that it no longer oppress him, though 
it wa immovable. A brace join it at an angl had wedg him against 
a pile of board on hi left, fasten the arm on that side. hi legs, 
slightli part and straight along the ground, were cover upward to 
the knee with a mass of debri which tower abov hi narrow horizon. 
hi head wa as rigidli fix as in a vise; he could move hi eyes, hi 
chin--no more. onli hi right arm wa partli free. "you must help us out 
of this," he said to it. but he could not get it from under the heavi 
timber athwart hi chest, nor move it outward more than six inch at 
the elbow. 

sear wa not serious injured, nor did he suffer pain. A smart rap 
on the head from a fli fragment of the splinter post, incur 
simultan with the fright sudden shock to the nervou system, 
had momentarili daze him. hi term of unconsciousness, includ the 
period of recovery, dure which he had had the strang fancies, had 
probabl not exceed a few seconds, for the dust of the wreck had not 
wholli clear away as he began an intellig survey of the situation. 

with hi partli free right hand he now tri to get hold of the beam 
that lay across, but not quit against, hi breast. In no way could he 
do so. He wa unabl to depress the shoulder so as to push the elbow 
beyond that edg of the timber which wa nearest hi knees; fail in 
that, he could not rais the forearm and hand to grasp the beam. the 
brace that made an angl with it downward and backward prevent him 
from do anyth in that direction, and between it and hi bodi the 
space wa not half so wide as the length of hi forearm. obvious he 
could not get hi hand under the beam nor over it; the hand could not, 
in fact, touch it at all. have demonstr hi inability, he 
desisted, and began to think whether he could reach ani of the débri 
pile upon hi legs. 

In survey the mass with a view to determin that point, hi 
attent wa arrest by what seem to be a ring of shine metal 
immedi in front of hi eyes. It appear to him at first to 
surround some perfectli black substance, and it wa somewhat more than a 
half-inch in diameter. It suddenli occur to hi mind that the 
black wa simpli shadow and that the ring wa in fact the muzzl of 
hi rifl protrud from the pile of débris. He wa not long in 
satisfi himself that thi wa so--if it wa a satisfaction. By 
close either eye he could look a littl way along the barrel--to the 
point where it wa hidden by the rubbish that held it. He could see the 
one side, with the correspond eye, at appar the same angl as 
the other side with the other eye. look with the right eye, the 
weapon seem to be direct at a point to the left of hi head, and 
_vice-versa._ He wa unabl to see the upper surfac of the barrel, but 
could see the under surfac of the stock at a slight angle. the piec 
was, in fact, aim at the exact centr of hi forehead. 

In the percept of thi circumstance, in the recollect that just 
previous to the mischanc of which thi uncomfort situat wa 
the result he had cock the rifl and set the trigger so that a touch 
would discharg it, privat sear wa affect with a feel of 
uneasiness. but that wa as far as possibl from fear; he wa a brave 
man, somewhat familiar with the aspect of rifl from that point of 
view, and of cannon too. and now he recalled, with someth like 
amusement, an incid of hi experi at the storm of missionari 
ridge, where, walk up to one of the enemy' embrasur from which he 
had seen a heavi gun throw charg after charg of grape among the 
assail he had thought for a moment that the piec had been 
withdrawn; he could see noth in the open but a brazen circle. what 
that wa he had understood just in time to step asid as it pitch 
anoth peck of iron down that swarm slope. To face firearm is one 
of the commonest incid in a soldier' life--firearms, too, with 
malevol eye blaze behind them. that is what a soldier is for. 
still, privat sear did not altogeth relish the situation, and 
turn away hi eyes. 

after groping, aimless, with hi right hand for a time he made an 
ineffectu attempt to releas hi left. then he tri to disengag hi 
head, the fixiti of which wa the more annoy from hi ignor of 
what held it. next he tri to free hi feet, but while exert the 
power muscl of hi leg for that purpos it occur to him that a 
disturb of the rubbish which held them might discharg the rifle; 
how it could have endur what had alreadi befallen it he could not 
understand, although memori assist him with sever instanc in 
point. one in particular he recalled, in which in a moment of mental 
abstract he had club hi rifl and beaten out anoth gentleman' 
brains, observ afterward that the weapon which he had been dilig 
swing by the muzzl wa loaded, capped, and at full cock--knowledg 
of which circumst would doubtless have cheer hi antagonist to 
longer endurance. He had alway smile in recal that blunder of hi 
"green and salad days" as a soldier, but now he did not smile. He turn 
hi eye again to the muzzl of the rifl and for a moment fanci that 
it had moved; it seem somewhat nearer. 

again he look away. the top of the distant tree beyond the bound of 
the plantat interest him: he had not befor observ how light and 
featheri they were, nor how darkli blue the sky was, even among their 
branches, where they somewhat pale it with their green; abov him it 
appear almost black. "it will be uncomfort hot here," he thought, 
"a the day advances. I wonder which way I am looking." 

judg by such shadow as he could see, he decid that hi face wa 
due north; he would at least not have the sun in hi eyes, and north-- 
well, that wa toward hi wife and children. 

"bah!" he exclaim aloud, "what have they to do with it?" 

He close hi eyes. "a I can't get out I may as well go to sleep. the 
rebel are gone and some of our fellow are sure to stray out here 
foraging. they'll find me." 

but he did not sleep. gradual he becam sensibl of a pain in hi 
forehead--a dull ache, hardli percept at first, but grow more and 
more uncomfortable. He open hi eye and it wa gone--clos them and 
it returned. "the devil!" he said, irrelevantly, and stare again at the 
sky. He heard the sing of birds, the strang metal note of the 
meadow lark, suggest the clash of vibrant blades. He fell into 
pleasant memori of hi childhood, play again with hi brother and 
sister, race across the fields, shout to alarm the sedentari larks, 
enter the sombr forest beyond and with timid step follow the faint 
path to ghost rock, stand at last with audibl heart-throb befor 
the dead man' cave and seek to penetr it aw mystery. for the 
first time he observ that the open of the haunt cavern wa 
encircl by a ring of metal. then all els vanish and left him gaze 
into the barrel of hi rifl as before. but wherea befor it had seem 
nearer, it now seem an inconceiv distanc away, and all the more 
sinist for that. He cri out and, startl by someth in hi own 
voice--th note of fear--li to himself in denial: "if I don't sing out 
I may stay here till I die." 

He now made no further attempt to evad the menac stare of the gun 
barrel. If he turn away hi eye an instant it wa to look for 
assist (although he could not see the ground on either side the 
ruin), and he permit them to return, obedi to the imper 
fascination. If he close them it wa from weariness, and instantli the 
poignant pain in hi forehead--th propheci and menac of the bullet-- 
forc him to reopen them. 

the tension of nerv and brain wa too severe; natur came to hi relief 
with interv of unconsciousness. reviv from one of these he becam 
sensibl of a sharp, smart pain in hi right hand, and when he work 
hi finger together, or rub hi palm with them, he could feel that 
they were wet and slippery. He could not see the hand, but he knew the 
sensation; it wa run blood. In hi delirium he had beaten it 
against the jag fragment of the wreck, had clutch it full of 
splinters. He resolv that he would meet hi fate more manly. He wa a 
plain, common soldier, had no religion and not much philosophy; he could 
not die like a hero, with great and wise last words, even if there had 
been some one to hear them, but he could die "game," and he would. but 
if he could onli know when to expect the shot! 

some rat which had probabl inhabit the shed came sneak and 
scamper about. one of them mount the pile of débri that held the 
rifle; anoth follow and another. sear regard them at first with 
indifference, then with friendli interest; then, as the thought flash 
into hi bewild mind that they might touch the trigger of hi rifle, 
he curs them and order them to go away. "it is no busi of 
yours," he cried. 

the creatur went away; they would return later, attack hi face, gnaw 
away hi nose, cut hi throat--h knew that, but he hope by that time 
to be dead. 

noth could now unfix hi gaze from the littl ring of metal with it 
black interior. the pain in hi forehead wa fierc and incessant. He 
felt it gradual penetr the brain more and more deeply, until at 
last it progress wa arrest by the wood at the back of hi head. It 
grew momentarili more insufferable: he began wantonli beat hi 
lacer hand against the splinter again to counteract that horribl 
ache. It seem to throb with a slow, regular recurrence, each pulsat 
sharper than the preceding, and sometim he cri out, think he felt 
the fatal bullet. No thought of home, of wife and children, of country, 
of glory. the whole record of memori wa effaced. the world had pass 
away--not a vestig remained. here in thi confus of timber and 
board is the sole universe. here is immort in time--each pain an 
everlast life. the throb tick off eternities. 

jerom searing, the man of courage, the formid enemy, the strong, 
resolut warrior, wa as pale as a ghost. hi jaw wa fallen; hi eye 
protruded; he trembl in everi fibre; a cold sweat bath hi entir 
body; he scream with fear. He wa not insane--h wa terrified. 

In grope about with hi torn and bleed hand he seiz at last a 
strip of board, and, pulling, felt it give way. It lay parallel with hi 
body, and by bend hi elbow as much as the contract space would 
permit, he could draw it a few inch at a time. final it wa 
altogeth loosen from the wreckag cover hi legs; he could lift 
it clear of the ground it whole length. A great hope came into hi 
mind: perhap he could work it upward, that is to say backward, far 
enough to lift the end and push asid the rifle; or, if that were too 
tightli wedged, so place the strip of board as to deflect the bullet. 
with thi object he pass it backward inch by inch, hardli dare to 
breath lest that act somehow defeat hi intent, and more than ever 
unabl to remov hi eye from the rifle, which might perhap now hasten 
to improv it wane opportunity. someth at least had been gained: 
in the occup of hi mind in thi attempt at self-defens he wa 
less sensibl of the pain in hi head and had ceas to wince. but he 
wa still dread frighten and hi teeth rattl like castanets. 

the strip of board ceas to move to the suasion of hi hand. He tug 
at it with all hi strength, chang the direct of it length all he 
could, but it had met some extend obstruct behind him and the end 
in front wa still too far away to clear the pile of débri and reach 
the muzzl of the gun. It extended, indeed, nearli as far as the trigger 
guard, which, uncov by the rubbish, he could imperfectli see with 
hi right eye. He tri to break the strip with hi hand, but had no 
leverage. In hi defeat, all hi terror returned, augment tenfold. the 
black apertur of the rifl appear to threaten a sharper and more 
immin death in punish of hi rebellion. the track of the bullet 
through hi head ach with an intens anguish. He began to trembl 
again. 

suddenli he becam composed. hi tremor subsided. He clench hi teeth 
and drew down hi eyebrows. He had not exhaust hi mean of defense; a 
new design had shape itself in hi mind--anoth plan of battle. 
rais the front end of the strip of board, he care push it 
forward through the wreckag at the side of the rifl until it press 
against the trigger guard. then he move the end slowli outward until he 
could feel that it had clear it, then, close hi eyes, thrust it 
against the trigger with all hi strength! there wa no explosion; the 
rifl had been discharg as it drop from hi hand when the build 
fell. but it did it work. 

* * * * * 

lieuten adrian searing, in command of the picket-guard on that part 
of the line through which hi brother jerom had pass on hi mission, 
sat with attent ear in hi breastwork behind the line. not the 
faintest sound escap him; the cri of a bird, the bark of a 
squirrel, the nois of the wind among the pines--al were anxious 
note by hi overstrain sense. suddenly, directli in front of hi 
line, he heard a faint, confus rumble, like the clatter of a fall 
build translat by distance. the lieuten mechan look at 
hi watch. six o'clock and eighteen minutes. At the same moment an 
offic approach him on foot from the rear and saluted. 

"lieutenant," said the officer, "the colonel direct you to move forward 
your line and feel the enemi if you find him. If not, continu the 
advanc until direct to halt. there is reason to think that the enemi 
ha retreated." 

the lieuten nod and said nothing; the other offic retired. In a 
moment the men, appris of their duti by the non-commiss offic 
in low tones, had deploy from their rifle-pit and were move forward 
in skirmish order, with set teeth and beat hearts. 

thi line of skirmish sweep across the plantat toward the 
mountain. they pass on both side of the wreck building, observ 
nothing. At a short distanc in their rear their command comes. He 
cast hi eye curious upon the ruin and see a dead bodi half buri 
in board and timbers. It is so cover with dust that it cloth is 
confeder gray. it face is yellowish white; the cheek are fallen in, 
the templ sunken, too, with sharp ridg about them, make the 
forehead forbiddingli narrow; the upper lip, slightli lifted, show the 
white teeth, rigidli clenched. the hair is heavi with moisture, the face 
as wet as the dewi grass all about. from hi point of view the offic 
doe not observ the rifle; the man wa appar kill by the fall of 
the building. 

"dead a week," said the offic curtly, move on and absent pull 
out hi watch as if to verifi hi estim of time. six o'clock and 
forti minutes. 




kill AT resaca 

the best soldier of our staff wa lieuten herman brayle, one of the 
two aides-de-camp. I don't rememb where the gener pick him up; 
from some ohio regiment, I think; none of us had previous known him, 
and it would have been strang if we had, for no two of us came from the 
same state, nor even from adjoin states. the gener seem to think 
that a posit on hi staff wa a distinct that should be so 
judici confer as not to beget ani section jealousi and 
imperil the integr of that part of the countri which wa still an 
integer. He would not even choos offic from hi own command, but by 
some juggleri at depart headquart obtain them from other 
brigades. under such circumstances, a man' servic had to be veri 
distinguish inde to be heard of by hi famili and the friend of hi 
youth; and "the speak trump of fame" wa a trifl hoars from 
loquacity, anyhow. 

lieuten brayl wa more than six feet in height and of splendid 
proportions, with the light hair and gray-blu eye which men so gift 
usual find associ with a high order of courage. As he wa commonli 
in full uniform, especi in action, when most offic are content to 
be less flamboyantli attired, he wa a veri strike and conspicu 
figure. As to the rest, he had a gentleman' manners, a scholar' head, 
and a lion' heart. hi age wa about thirty. 

We all soon came to like brayl as much as we admir him, and it wa 
with sincer concern that in the engag at stone' river--our first 
action after he join us--w observ that he had one most 
objection and unsoldierli quality: he wa vain of hi courage. 
dure all the vicissitud and mutat of that hideou encounter, 
whether our troop were fight in the open cotton fields, in the cedar 
thickets, or behind the railway embankment, he did not onc take cover, 
except when sternli command to do so by the general, who usual had 
other thing to think of than the live of hi staff officers--or those 
of hi men, for that matter. 

In everi later engag while brayl wa with us it wa the same way. 
He would sit hi hors like an equestrian statue, in a storm of bullet 
and grape, in the most expos places--wherever, in fact, duty, 
requir him to go, permit him to remain--when, without troubl and 
with distinct advantag to hi reput for common sense, he might 
have been in such secur as is possibl on a battlefield in the brief 
interv of person inaction. 

On foot, from necess or in defer to hi dismount command or 
associates, hi conduct wa the same. He would stand like a rock in the 
open when offic and men alik had taken to cover; while men older in 
servic and years, higher in rank and of unquestion intrepidity, 
were loyal preserv behind the crest of a hill live infinit 
preciou to their country, thi fellow would stand, equal idle, on the 
ridge, face in the direct of the sharpest fire. 

when battl are go on in open ground it frequent occur that the 
oppos lines, confront each other within a stone' throw for hours, 
hug the earth as close as if they love it. the line offic in their 
proper place flatten themselv no less, and the field officers, their 
hors all kill or sent to the rear, crouch beneath the infern 
canopi of hiss lead and scream iron without a thought of person 
dignity. 

In such circumst the life of a staff offic of a brigad is 
distinctli "not a happi one," mainli becaus of it precari tenur 
and the unnerv altern of emot to which he is exposed. from a 
posit of that compar secur from which a civilian would 
ascrib hi escap to a "miracle," he may be despatch with an order to 
some command of a prone regiment in the front line--a person for the 
moment inconspicu and not alway easi to find without a deal of 
search among men somewhat preoccupied, and in a din in which question 
and answer alik must be impart in the sign language. It is customari 
in such case to duck the head and scuttl away on a keen run, an object 
of live interest to some thousand of admir marksmen. In return 
--well, it is not customari to return. 

brayle' practic wa different. He would consign hi hors to the care 
of an orderly,--h love hi horse,--and walk quietli away on hi 
peril errand with never a stoop of the back, hi splendid figure, 
accentu by hi uniform, hold the eye with a strang fascination. 
We watch him with suspend breath, our heart in our mouths. On one 
occas of thi kind, indeed, one of our number, an impetu 
stammerer, wa so possess by hi emot that he shout at me: 

"i'll b-b-bet you t-two d-d-dollar they d-drop him b-b-befor he g-get 
to that d-d-ditch!" 

I did not accept the brutal wager; I thought they would. 

let me do justic to a brave man' memory; in all these needless 
exposur of life there wa no visibl bravado nor subsequ narration. 
In the few instanc when some of us had ventur to remonstrate, brayl 
had smile pleasantli and made some light reply, which, however, had not 
encourag a further pursuit of the subject. onc he said: 

"captain, if ever I come to grief by forget your advice, I hope my 
last moment will be cheer by the sound of your belov voic 
breath into my ear the bless words, 'I told you so.'" 

We laugh at the captain--just whi we could probabl not have 
explained--and that afternoon when he wa shot to rag from an ambuscad 
brayl remain by the bodi for some time, adjust the limb with 
needless care--ther in the middl of a road swept by gust of grape and 
canister! It is easi to condemn thi kind of thing, and not veri 
difficult to refrain from imitation, but it is imposs not to 
respect, and brayl wa like none the less for the weak which had 
so heroic an expression. We wish he were not a fool, but he went on 
that way to the end, sometim hard hit, but alway return to duti 
about as good as new. 

Of course, it came at last; he who ignor the law of probabl 
challeng an adversari that is seldom beaten. It wa at resaca, in 
georgia, dure the movement that result in the take of atlanta. In 
front of our brigad the enemy' line of earthwork ran through open 
field along a slight crest. At each end of thi open ground we were 
close up to him in the woods, but the clear ground we could not hope to 
occupi until night, when dark would enabl us to burrow like mole 
and throw up earth. At thi point our line wa a quarter-mil away in 
the edg of a wood. roughly, we form a semicircle, the enemy' 
fortifi line be the chord of the arc. 

"lieutenant, go tell colonel ward to work up as close as he can get 
cover, and not to wast much ammunit in unnecessari firing. you may 
leav your horse." 

when the gener gave thi direct we were in the fring of the 
forest, near the right extrem of the arc. colonel ward wa at the 
left. the suggest to leav the hors obvious enough meant that 
brayl wa to take the longer line, through the wood and among the men. 
indeed, the suggest wa needless; to go by the short rout meant 
absolut certain failur to deliv the message. befor anybodi could 
interpose, brayl had canter lightli into the field and the enemy' 
work were in crackl conflagration. 

"stop that damn fool!" shout the general. 

A privat of the escort, with more ambit than brains, spur forward 
to obey, and within ten yard left himself and hi hors dead on the 
field of honor. 

brayl wa beyond recall, gallop easili along, parallel to the enemi 
and less than two hundr yard distant. He wa a pictur to see! hi 
hat had been blown or shot from hi head, and hi long, blond hair rose 
and fell with the motion of hi horse. He sat erect in the saddle, 
hold the rein lightli in hi left hand, hi right hang carelessli 
at hi side. An occasion glimps of hi handsom profil as he turn 
hi head one way or the other prove that the interest which he took in 
what wa go on wa natur and without affectation. 

the pictur wa intens dramatic, but in no degre theatrical. 
success score of rifl spat at him vicious as he came within 
range, and our own line in the edg of the timber broke out in visibl 
and audibl defense. No longer regard of themselv or their orders, 
our fellow sprang to their feet, and swarm into the open sent broad 
sheet of bullet against the blaze crest of the offend works, 
which pour an answer fire into their unprotect group with deadli 
effect. the artilleri on both side join the battle, punctuat the 
rattl and roar with deep, earth-shak explos and tear the air 
with storm of scream grape, which from the enemy' side splinter 
the tree and spatter them with blood, and from our defil the smoke 
of hi arm with bank and cloud of dust from hi parapet. 

My attent had been for a moment drawn to the gener combat, but now, 
glanc down the unobscur avenu between these two thunderclouds, I 
saw brayle, the caus of the carnage. invis now from either side, 
and equal doom by friend and foe, he stood in the shot-swept space, 
motionless, hi face toward the enemy. At some littl distanc lay hi 
horse. I instantli saw what had stop him. 

As topograph engin I had, earli in the day, made a hasti 
examin of the ground, and now rememb that at that point wa a 
deep and sinuou gully, cross half the field from the enemy' line, 
it gener cours at right angl to it. from where we now were it wa 
invisible, and brayl had evid not known about it. clearly, it wa 
impassable. it salient angl would have afford him absolut secur 
if he had chosen to be satisfi with the miracl alreadi wrought in hi 
favor and leapt into it. He could not go forward, he would not turn 
back; he stood await death. It did not keep him long waiting. 

By some mysteri coincidence, almost instantan as he fell, the 
fire ceased, a few desultori shot at long interv serv rather to 
accentu than break the silence. It wa as if both side had suddenli 
repent of their profitless crime. four stretcher-bear of ours, 
follow a sergeant with a white flag, soon afterward move unmolest 
into the field, and made straight for brayle' body. sever confeder 
offic and men came out to meet them, and with uncov head 
assist them to take up their sacr burden. As it wa born toward us 
we heard beyond the hostil work fife and a muffl drum--a dirge. A 
gener enemi honor the fallen brave. 

amongst the dead man' effect wa a soil russia-leath pocketbook. 
In the distribut of memento of our friend, which the general, as 
administrator, decreed, thi fell to me. 

A year after the close of the war, on my way to california, I open and 
idli inspect it. out of an overlook compart fell a letter 
without envelop or address. It wa in a woman' handwriting, and began 
with word of endearment, but no name. 

It had the follow date line: "san francisco, cal., juli 9, 1862." the 
signatur wa "darling," in mark of quotation. incidentally, in the 
bodi of the text, the writer' full name wa given--marian mendenhall. 

the letter show evid of cultiv and good breeding, but it wa 
an ordinari love letter, if a love letter can be ordinary. there wa not 
much in it, but there wa something. It wa this: 

"mr. winters, whom I shall alway hate for it, ha been tell that at 
some battl in virginia, where he got hi hurt, you were seen crouch 
behind a tree. I think he want to injur you in my regard, which he 
know the stori would do if I believ it. I could bear to hear of my 
soldier lover' death, but not of hi cowardice." 

these were the word which on that sunni afternoon, in a distant region, 
had slain a hundr men. Is woman weak? 

one even I call on miss mendenhal to return the letter to her. I 
intended, also, to tell her what she had done--but not that she did it. 
I found her in a handsom dwell on rincon hill. she wa beautiful, 
well bred--in a word, charming. 

"you knew lieuten herman brayle," I said, rather abruptly. "you know, 
doubtless, that he fell in battle. among hi effect wa found thi 
letter from you. My errand here is to place it in your hands." 

she mechan took the letter, glanc through it with deepen 
color, and then, look at me with a smile, said: 

"it is veri good of you, though I am sure it wa hardli worth while." 
she start suddenli and chang color. "thi stain," she said, "i it-- 
sure it is not--" 

"madam," I said, "pardon me, but that is the blood of the truest and 
bravest heart that ever beat." 

she hastili flung the letter on the blaze coals. "uh! I cannot bear 
the sight of blood!" she said. "how did he die?" 

I had involuntarili risen to rescu that scrap of paper, sacr even to 
me, and now stood partli behind her. As she ask the question she 
turn her face about and slightli upward. the light of the burn 
letter wa reflect in her eye and touch her cheek with a ting of 
crimson like the stain upon it page. I had never seen anyth so 
beauti as thi detest creature. 

"he wa bitten by a snake," I replied. 




the affair AT coulter' notch 

"do you think, colonel, that your brave coulter would like to put one of 
hi gun in here?" the gener asked. 

He wa appar not altogeth serious; it certainli did not seem a 
place where ani artillerist, howev brave, would like to put a gun. the 
colonel thought that possibl hi divis command meant 
good-humoredli to intim that in a recent convers between them 
captain coulter' courag had been too highli extolled. 

"general," he repli warmly, "coulter would like to put a gun anywher 
within reach of those people," with a motion of hi hand in the 
direct of the enemy. 

"it is the onli place," said the general. He wa serious, then. 

the place wa a depression, a "notch," in the sharp crest of a hill. It 
wa a pass, and through it ran a turnpike, which reach thi highest 
point in it cours by a sinuou ascent through a thin forest made a 
similar, though less steep, descent toward the enemy. for a mile to the 
left and a mile to the right, the ridge, though occupi by feder 
infantri lie close behind the sharp crest and appear as if held in 
place by atmospher pressure, wa inaccess to artillery. there wa 
no place but the bottom of the notch, and that wa bare wide enough 
for the roadbed. from the confeder side thi point wa command by 
two batteri post on a slightli lower elev beyond a creek, and a 
half-mil away. all the gun but one were mask by the tree of an 
orchard; that one--it seem a bit of impudence--wa on an open lawn 
directli in front of a rather grandios building, the planter' 
dwelling. the gun wa safe enough in it exposure--but onli becaus the 
feder infantri had been forbidden to fire. coulter' notch--it came to 
be call so--wa not, that pleasant summer afternoon, a place where one 
would "like to put a gun." 

three or four dead hors lay there sprawl in the road, three or four 
dead men in a trim row at one side of it, and a littl back, down the 
hill. all but one were cavalrymen belong to the feder advance. one 
wa a quartermaster. the gener command the divis and the colonel 
command the brigade, with their staff and escorts, had ridden into 
the notch to have a look at the enemy' guns--which had straightway 
obscur themselv in tower cloud of smoke. It wa hardli 
profit to be curiou about gun which had the trick of the 
cuttle-fish, and the season of observ had been brief. At it 
conclusion--a short remov backward from where it began--occur the 
convers alreadi partli reported. "it is the onli place," the 
gener repeat thoughtfully, "to get at them." 

the colonel look at him gravely. "there is room for onli one gun, 
general--on against twelve." 

"that is true--for onli one at a time," said the command with 
someth like, yet not altogeth like, a smile. "but then, your brave 
coulter--a whole batteri in himself." 

the tone of ironi wa now unmistakable. It anger the colonel, but he 
did not know what to say. the spirit of militari subordin is not 
favor to retort, nor even to deprecation. 

At thi moment a young offic of artilleri came ride slowli up the 
road attend by hi bugler. It wa captain coulter. He could not have 
been more than twenty-thre year of age. He wa of medium height, but 
veri slender and lithe, and sat hi hors with someth of the air of a 
civilian. In face he wa of a type singularli unlik the men about him; 
thin, high-nosed, gray-eyed, with a slight blond mustache, and long, 
rather straggl hair of the same color. there wa an appar 
neglig in hi attire. hi cap wa worn with the visor a trifl 
askew; hi coat wa button onli at the sword-belt, show a 
consider expans of white shirt, toler clean for that stage of 
the campaign. but the neglig wa all in hi dress and bearing; in 
hi face wa a look of intens interest in hi surroundings. hi gray 
eyes, which seem occasion to strike right and left across the 
landscape, like search-lights, were for the most part fix upon the sky 
beyond the notch; until he should arriv at the summit of the road there 
wa noth els in that direct to see. As he came opposit hi 
divis and brigad command at the road-sid he salut mechan 
and wa about to pass on. the colonel sign to him to halt. 

"captain coulter," he said, "the enemi ha twelv piec over there on 
the next ridge. If I rightli understand the general, he direct that you 
bring up a gun and engag them." 

there wa a blank silence; the gener look stolidli at a distant 
regiment swarm slowli up the hill through rough undergrowth, like a 
torn and draggl cloud of blue smoke; the captain appear not to have 
observ him. present the captain spoke, slowli and with appar 
effort: 

"on the next ridge, did you say, sir? are the gun near the house?" 

"ah, you have been over thi road before. directli at the house." 

"and it is--necessary--to engag them? the order is imperative?" 

hi voic wa huski and broken. He wa visibl paler. the colonel wa 
astonish and mortified. He stole a glanc at the commander. In that 
set, immobil face wa no sign; it wa as hard as bronze. A moment later 
the gener rode away, follow by hi staff and escort. the colonel, 
humili and indignant, wa about to order captain coulter in arrest, 
when the latter spoke a few word in a low tone to hi bugler, saluted, 
and rode straight forward into the notch, where, presently, at the 
summit of the road, hi field-glass at hi eyes, he show against the 
sky, he and hi horse, sharpli defin and statuesque. the bugler had 
dash down the speed and disappear behind a wood. present hi bugl 
wa heard sing in the cedars, and in an incred short time a 
singl gun with it caisson, each drawn by six hors and man by it 
full complement of gunners, came bound and bang up the grade in a 
storm of dust, unlimb under cover, and wa run forward by hand to 
the fatal crest among the dead horses. A gestur of the captain' arm, 
some strang agil movement of the men in loading, and almost befor 
the troop along the way had ceas to hear the rattl of the wheels, a 
great white cloud sprang forward down the slope, and with a deafen 
report the affair at coulter' notch had begun. 

It is not intend to relat in detail the progress and incid of 
that ghastli contest--a contest without vicissitudes, it altern 
onli differ degre of despair. almost at the instant when captain 
coulter' gun blew it challeng cloud twelv answer cloud roll 
upward from among the tree about the plantat house, a deep multipl 
report roar back like a broken echo, and thenceforth to the end the 
feder cannon fought their hopeless battl in an atmospher of 
live iron whose thought were lightn and whose deed were death. 

unwil to see the effort which he could not aid and the slaughter 
which he could not stay, the colonel ascend the ridg at a point a 
quarter of a mile to the left, whenc the notch, itself invisible, but 
push up success mass of smoke, seem the crater of a volcano in 
thunder eruption. with hi glass he watch the enemy' guns, note 
as he could the effect of coulter' fire--if coulter still live to 
direct it. He saw that the feder gunners, ignor those of the 
enemy' piec whose posit could be determin by their smoke only, 
gave their whole attent to the one that maintain it place in the 
open--th lawn in front of the house. over and about that hardi piec 
the shell explod at interv of a few seconds. some explod in the 
house, as could be seen by thin ascens of smoke from the breach 
roof. figur of prostrat men and hors were plainli visible. 

"if our fellow are do so good work with a singl gun," said the 
colonel to an aid who happen to be nearest, "they must be suffer 
like the devil from twelve. Go down and present the command of that 
piec with my congratul on the accuraci of hi fire." 

turn to hi adjutant-gener he said, "did you observ coulter' 
damn reluct to obey orders?" 

"yes, sir, I did." 

"well, say noth about it, please. I don't think the gener will care 
to make ani accusations. He will probabl have enough to do in 
explain hi own connect with thi uncommon way of amus the 
rear-guard of a retreat enemy." 

A young offic approach from below, climb breathless up the 
acclivity. almost befor he had saluted, he gasp out: 

"colonel, I am direct by colonel harmon to say that the enemy' gun 
are within easi reach of our rifles, and most of them visibl from 
sever point along the ridge." 

the brigad command look at him without a trace of interest in hi 
expression. "I know it," he said quietly. 

the young adjut wa visibl embarrassed. "colonel harmon would like 
to have permiss to silenc those guns," he stammered. 

"so should i," the colonel said in the same tone. "present my 
compliment to colonel harmon and say to him that the general' order 
for the infantri not to fire are still in force." 

the adjut salut and retired. the colonel ground hi heel into the 
earth and turn to look again at the enemy' guns. 

"colonel," said the adjutant-general, "I don't know that I ought to say 
anything, but there is someth wrong in all this. Do you happen to 
know that captain coulter is from the south?" 

"no; _was_ he, indeed?" 

"I heard that last summer the divis which the gener then command 
wa in the vicin of coulter' home--camp there for weeks, and--" 

"listen!" said the colonel, interrupt with an upward gesture. "do you 
hear _that_?" 

"that" wa the silenc of the feder gun. the staff, the orderlies, the 
line of infantri behind the crest--al had "heard," and were look 
curious in the direct of the crater, whenc no smoke now ascend 
except desultori cloudlet from the enemy' shells. then came the blare 
of a bugle, a faint rattl of wheels; a minut later the sharp report 
recommenc with doubl activity. the demolish gun had been replac 
with a sound one. 

"yes," said the adjutant-general, resum hi narrative, "the gener 
made the acquaint of coulter' family. there wa trouble--i don't 
know the exact natur of it--someth about coulter' wife. she is a 
red-hot secessionist, as they all are, except coulter himself, but she 
is a good wife and high-br lady. there wa a complaint to armi 
headquarters. the gener wa transfer to thi division. It is odd 
that coulter' batteri should afterward have been assign to it." 

the colonel had risen from the rock upon which they had been sitting. 
hi eye were blaze with a gener indignation. 

"see here, morrison," said he, look hi gossip staff offic 
straight in the face, "did you get that stori from a gentleman or a 
liar?" 

"I don't want to say how I got it, colonel, unless it is necessary"--h 
wa blush a trifle--"but i'll stake my life upon it truth in the 
main." 

the colonel turn toward a small knot of offic some distanc away. 
"lieuten williams!" he shouted. 

one of the offic detach himself from the group and come forward 
saluted, saying: "pardon me, colonel, I thought you had been informed. 
william is dead down there by the gun. what can I do, sir?" 

lieuten william wa the aid who had had the pleasur of convey 
to the offic in charg of the gun hi brigad commander' 
congratulations. 

"go," said the colonel, "and direct the withdraw of that gun 
instantly. no--i'l go myself." 

He strode down the decliv toward the rear of the notch at a 
break-neck pace, over rock and through brambles, follow by hi littl 
retinu in tumultu disorder. At the foot of the decliv they 
mount their wait anim and took to the road at a live trot, 
round a bend and into the notch. the spectacl which they encount 
there wa appalling! 

within that defile, bare broad enough for a singl gun, were pile the 
wreck of no fewer than four. they had note the silenc of onli the 
last one disabled--ther had been a lack of men to replac it quickli 
with another. the débri lay on both side of the road; the men had 
manag to keep an open way between, through which the fifth piec wa 
now firing. the men?--they look like demon of the pit! all were 
hatless, all strip to the waist, their reek skin black with 
blotch of powder and spatter with gout of blood. they work like 
madmen, with rammer and cartridge, lever and lanyard. they set their 
swollen shoulder and bleed hand against the wheel at each recoil 
and heav the heavi gun back to it place. there were no commands; in 
that aw environ of whoop shot, explod shells, shriek 
fragment of iron, and fli splinter of wood, none could have been 
heard. officers, if offic there were, were indistinguishable; all 
work together--each while he lasted--govern by the eye. when the gun 
wa sponged, it wa loaded; when loaded, aim and fired. the colonel 
observ someth new to hi militari experience--someth horribl 
and unnatural: the gun wa bleed at the mouth! In temporari default 
of water, the man spong had dip hi spong into a pool of 
comrade' blood. In all thi work there wa no clashing; the duti of the 
instant wa obvious. when one fell, another, look a trifl cleaner, 
seem to rise from the earth in the dead man' tracks, to fall in hi 
turn. 

with the ruin gun lay the ruin men--alongsid the wreckage, under 
it and atop of it; and back down the road--a ghastli procession!--crept 
on hand and knee such of the wound as were abl to move. the 
colonel--h had compassion sent hi cavalcad to the right about-- 
had to ride over those who were entir dead in order not to crush 
those who were partli alive. into that hell he tranquilli held hi way, 
rode up alongsid the gun, and, in the obscur of the last discharge, 
tap upon the cheek the man hold the rammer--who straightway fell, 
think himself killed. A fiend seven time damn sprang out of the 
smoke to take hi place, but paus and gaze up at the mount offic 
with an unearthli regard, hi teeth flash between hi black lips, hi 
eyes, fierc and expanded, burn like coal beneath hi bloodi brow. 
the colonel made an authorit gestur and point to the rear. the 
fiend bow in token of obedience. It wa captain coulter. 

simultan with the colonel' arrest sign, silenc fell upon the 
whole field of action. the process of missil no longer stream 
into that defil of death, for the enemi also had ceas firing. hi 
armi had been gone for hours, and the command of hi rear-guard, who 
had held hi posit peril long in hope to silenc the feder 
fire, at that strang moment had silenc hi own. "I wa not awar of 
the breadth of my authority," said the colonel to anybody, ride 
forward to the crest to see what had realli happened. An hour later hi 
brigad wa in bivouac on the enemy' ground, and it idler were 
examining, with someth of awe, as the faith inspect a saint' 
relics, a score of straddl dead hors and three disabl guns, all 
spiked. the fallen men had been carri away; their torn and broken 
bodi would have given too great satisfaction. 

naturally, the colonel establish himself and hi militari famili in 
the plantat house. It wa somewhat shattered, but it wa better than 
the open air. the furnitur wa greatli derang and broken. wall and 
ceil were knock away here and there, and a linger odor of 
powder smoke wa everywhere. the beds, the closet of women' clothing, 
the cupboard were not greatli damaged. the new tenant for a night 
made themselv comfortable, and the virtual effac of coulter' 
batteri suppli them with an interest topic. 

dure supper an orderli of the escort show himself into the 
dining-room and ask permiss to speak to the colonel. 

"what is it, barbour?" said that offic pleasantly, have overheard 
the request. 

"colonel, there is someth wrong in the cellar; I don't know what-- 
somebodi there. I wa down there rummag about." 

"I will go down and see," said a staff officer, rising. 

"so will i," the colonel said; "let the other remain. lead on, 
orderly." 

they took a candl from the tabl and descend the cellar stairs, the 
orderli in visibl trepidation. the candl made but a feebl light, but 
presently, as they advanced, it narrow circl of illumin reveal 
a human figur seat on the ground against the black stone wall which 
they were skirting, it knee elevated, it head bow sharpli forward. 
the face, which should have been seen in profile, wa invisible, for the 
man wa bent so far forward that hi long hair conceal it; and, 
strang to relate, the beard, of a much darker hue, fell in a great 
tangl mass and lay along the ground at hi side. they involuntarili 
paused; then the colonel, take the candl from the orderly' shake 
hand, approach the man and attent consid him. the long dark 
beard wa the hair of a woman--dead. the dead woman clasp in her arm 
a dead babe. both were clasp in the arm of the man, press against 
hi breast, against hi lips. there wa blood in the hair of the woman; 
there wa blood in the hair of the man. A yard away, near an irregular 
depress in the beaten earth which form the cellar' floor--fresh 
excav with a convex bit of iron, have jag edges, visibl in 
one of the sides--lay an infant' foot. the colonel held the light as 
high as he could. the floor of the room abov wa broken through, the 
splinter point at all angl downward. "thi casem is not 
bomb-proof," said the colonel gravely. It did not occur to him that hi 
sum up of the matter had ani leviti in it. 

they stood about the group awhil in silence; the staff offic wa 
think of hi unfinish supper, the orderli of what might possibl be 
in one of the cask on the other side of the cellar. suddenli the man 
whom they had thought dead rais hi head and gaze tranquilli into 
their faces. hi complexion wa coal black; the cheek were appar 
tattoo in irregular sinuou line from the eye downward. the lips, 
too, were white, like those of a stage negro. there wa blood upon hi 
forehead. 

the staff offic drew back a pace, the orderli two paces. 

"what are you do here, my man?" said the colonel, unmoved. 

"thi hous belong to me, sir," wa the reply, civilli delivered. 

"to you? ah, I see! and these?" 

"mi wife and child. I am captain coulter." 




the coup DE grâce 

the fight had been hard and continuous; that wa attest by all the 
senses. the veri tast of battl wa in the air. all wa now over; it 
remain onli to succor the wound and buri the dead--to "tidi up a 
bit," as the humorist of a burial squad put it. A good deal of "tidi 
up" wa required. As far as one could see through the forests, among the 
splinter trees, lay wreck of men and horses. among them move the 
stretcher-bearers, gather and carri away the few who show sign 
of life. most of the wound had die of neglect while the right to 
minist to their want wa in dispute. It is an armi regul that 
the wound must wait; the best way to care for them is to win the 
battle. It must be confess that victori is a distinct advantag to a 
man requir attention, but mani do not live to avail themselv of it. 

the dead were collect in group of a dozen or a score and laid side by 
side in row while the trench were dug to receiv them. 

some, found at too great a distanc from these ralli points, were 
buri where they lay. there wa littl attempt at identification, 
though in most cases, the burial parti be detail to glean the 
same ground which they had assist to reap, the name of the victori 
dead were known and listed. the enemy' fallen had to be content with 
counting. but of that they got enough: mani of them were count sever 
times, and the total, as given afterward in the offici report of the 
victori commander, denot rather a hope than a result. 

At some littl distanc from the spot where one of the burial parti 
had establish it "bivouac of the dead," a man in the uniform of a 
feder offic stood lean against a tree. from hi feet upward to 
hi neck hi attitud wa that of weari reposing; but he turn hi 
head uneasili from side to side; hi mind wa appar not at rest. He 
wa perhap uncertain in which direct to go; he wa not like to 
remain long where he was, for alreadi the level ray of the set sun 
straggl redli through the open space of the wood and the weari 
soldier were quit their task for the day. He would hardli make a 
night of it alon there among the dead. 

nine men in ten whom you meet after a battl inquir the way to some 
fraction of the army--a if ani one could know. doubtless thi offic 
wa lost. after rest himself a moment he would presum follow one 
of the retir burial squads. 

when all were gone he walk straight away into the forest toward the 
red west, it light stain hi face like blood. the air of confid 
with which he now strode along show that he wa on familiar ground; he 
had recov hi bearings. the dead on hi right and on hi left were 
unregard as he passed. An occasion low moan from some 
sorely-stricken wretch whom the relief-parti had not reached, and who 
would have to pass a comfortless night beneath the star with hi thirst 
to keep him company, wa equal unheeded. what, indeed, could the 
offic have done, be no surgeon and have no water? 

At the head of a shallow ravine, a mere depress of the ground, lay a 
small group of bodies. He saw, and swerv suddenli from hi cours 
walk rapidli toward them. scan each one sharpli as he passed, he 
stop at last abov one which lay at a slight remov from the others, 
near a clump of small trees. He look at it narrowly. It seem to 
stir. He stoop and laid hi hand upon it face. It screamed. 

* * * * * 

the offic wa captain down madwell, of a massachusett regiment of 
infantry, a dare and intellig soldier, an honor man. 

In the regiment were two brother name halcrow--caff and creed 
halcrow. caffal halcrow wa a sergeant in captain madwell' company, and 
these two men, the sergeant and the captain, were devot friends. In so 
far as dispar of rank, differ in duti and consider of 
militari disciplin would permit they were commonli together. they had, 
indeed, grown up togeth from childhood. A habit of the heart is not 
easili broken off. caffal halcrow had noth militari in hi tast nor 
disposition, but the thought of separ from hi friend wa 
disagreeable; he enlist in the compani in which madwel wa 
second-lieutenant. each had taken two step upward in rank, but between 
the highest non-commiss and the lowest commiss offic the 
gulf is deep and wide and the old relat wa maintain with 
difficulti and a difference. 

creed halcrow, the brother of caffal, wa the major of the regiment--a 
cynical, saturnin man, between whom and captain madwel there wa a 
natur antipathi which circumst had nourish and strengthen to 
an activ animosity. but for the restrain influenc of their mutual 
relat to caffal these two patriot would doubtless have endeavor to 
depriv their countri of each other' services. 

At the open of the battl that morn the regiment wa perform 
outpost duti a mile away from the main army. It wa attack and nearli 
surround in the forest, but stubbornli held it ground. dure a lull 
in the fighting, major halcrow came to captain madwell. the two 
exchang formal salutes, and the major said: "captain, the colonel 
direct that you push your compani to the head of thi ravin and hold 
your place there until recalled. I need hardli appris you of the 
danger charact of the movement, but if you wish, you can, I 
suppose, turn over the command to your first-lieutenant. I wa not, 
however, direct to author the substitution; it is mere a 
suggest of my own, unoffici made." 

To thi deadli insult captain madwel coolli replied: 

"sir, I invit you to accompani the movement. A mount offic would be 
a conspicu mark, and I have long held the opinion that it would be 
better if you were dead." 

the art of reparte wa cultiv in militari circl as earli as 1862. 

A half-hour later captain madwell' compani wa driven from it posit 
at the head of the ravine, with a loss of one-third it number. among 
the fallen wa sergeant halcrow. the regiment wa soon afterward forc 
back to the main line, and at the close of the battl wa mile away. 
the captain wa now stand at the side of hi subordin and friend. 

sergeant halcrow wa mortal hurt. hi cloth wa deranged; it seem 
to have been violent torn apart, expos the abdomen. some of the 
button of hi jacket had been pull off and lay on the ground besid 
him and fragment of hi other garment were strewn about. hi leather 
belt wa part and had appar been drag from beneath him as he 
lay. there had been no great effus of blood. the onli visibl wound 
wa a wide, rag open in the abdomen. 

It wa defil with earth and dead leaves. protrud from it wa a loop 
of small intestine. In all hi experi captain madwel had not seen a 
wound like this. He could neither conjectur how it wa made nor explain 
the attend circumstances--th strang torn clothing, the part 
belt, the besmirch of the white skin. He knelt and made a closer 
examination. when he rose to hi feet, he turn hi eye in differ 
direct as if look for an enemy. fifti yard away, on the crest of 
a low, thinli wood hill, he saw sever dark object move about 
among the fallen men--a herd of swine. one stood with it back to him, 
it shoulder sharpli elevated. it forefeet were upon a human body, it 
head wa depress and invisible. the bristli ridg of it chine show 
black against the red west. captain madwel drew away hi eye and fix 
them again upon the thing which had been hi friend. 

the man who had suffer these monstrou mutil wa alive. At 
interv he move hi limbs; he moan at everi breath. He stare 
blankli into the face of hi friend and if touch screamed. In hi 
giant agoni he had torn up the ground on which he lay; hi clench 
hand were full of leav and twig and earth. articul speech wa 
beyond hi power; it wa imposs to know if he were sensibl to 
anyth but pain. the express of hi face wa an appeal; hi eye 
were full of prayer. for what? 

there wa no misread that look; the captain had too frequent seen 
it in eye of those whose lip had still the power to formul it by an 
entreati for death. conscious or unconsciously, thi writh fragment 
of humanity, thi type and exampl of acut sensation, thi handiwork of 
man and beast, thi humble, unhero prometheus, wa implor 
everything, all, the whole non-ego, for the boon of oblivion. To the 
earth and the sky alike, to the trees, to the man, to whatev took form 
in sens or consciousness, thi incarn suffer address that 
silent plea. 

for what, indeed? for that which we accord to even the meanest creatur 
without sens to demand it, deni it onli to the wretch of our own 
race: for the bless release, the rite of uttermost compassion, the 
_coup de grâce_. 

captain madwel spoke the name of hi friend. He repeat it over and 
over without effect until emot choke hi utterance. 

hi tear plash upon the livid face beneath hi own and blind 
himself. He saw noth but a blur and move object, but the moan 
were more distinct than ever, interrupt at briefer interv by 
sharper shrieks. He turn away, struck hi hand upon hi forehead, and 
strode from the spot. the swine, catch sight of him, threw up their 
crimson muzzles, regard him suspici a second, and then with a 
gruff, concert grunt, race away out of sight. A horse, it foreleg 
splinter by a cannon-shot, lift it head sidewis from the ground 
and neigh piteously. madwel step forward, drew hi revolv and 
shot the poor beast between the eyes, narrowli observ it 
death-struggle, which, contrari to hi expectation, wa violent and 
long; but at last it lay still. the tens muscl of it lips, which had 
uncov the teeth in a horribl grin, relaxed; the sharp, clean-cut 
profil took on a look of profound peac and rest. 

along the distant, thinli wood crest to westward the fring of sunset 
fire had now nearli burn itself out. the light upon the trunk of the 
tree had fade to a tender gray; shadow were in their tops, like great 
dark bird aperch. night wa come and there were mile of haunt 
forest between captain madwel and camp. yet he stood there at the side 
of the dead animal, appar lost to all sens of hi surroundings. 
hi eye were bent upon the earth at hi feet; hi left hand hung 
loos at hi side, hi right still held the pistol. present he 
lift hi face, turn it toward hi die friend and walk rapidli 
back to hi side. He knelt upon one knee, cock the weapon, place the 
muzzl against the man' forehead, and turn away hi eye pull the 
trigger. there wa no report. He had use hi last cartridg for the 
horse. 

the suffer moan and hi lip move convulsively. the froth that ran 
from them had a ting of blood. 

captain madwel rose to hi feet and drew hi sword from the scabbard. 
He pass the finger of hi left hand along the edg from hilt to 
point. He held it out straight befor him, as if to test hi nerves. 
there wa no visibl tremor of the blade; the ray of bleak skylight that 
it reflect wa steadi and true. He stoop and with hi left hand tore 
away the die man' shirt, rose and place the point of the sword just 
over the heart. thi time he did not withdraw hi eyes. grasp the 
hilt with both hands, he thrust downward with all hi strength and 
weight. the blade sank into the man' body--through hi bodi into the 
earth; captain madwel came near fall forward upon hi work. the 
die man drew up hi knee and at the same time threw hi right arm 
across hi breast and grasp the steel so tightli that the knuckl of 
the hand visibl whitened. By a violent but vain effort to withdraw the 
blade the wound wa enlarged; a rill of blood escaped, run sinuous 
down into the derang clothing. At that moment three men step 
silent forward from behind the clump of young tree which had 
conceal their approach. two were hospit attend and carri a 
stretcher. 

the third wa major creed halcrow. 




parker adderson, philosoph 

"prisoner, what is your name?" 

"a I am to lose it at daylight to-morrow morn it is hardli worth 
while conceal it. parker adderson." 

"your rank?" 

"A somewhat humbl one; commiss offic are too preciou to be 
risk in the peril busi of a spy. I am a sergeant." 

"of what regiment?" 

"you must excus me; my answer might, for anyth I know, give you an 
idea of whose forc are in your front. such knowledg as that is what I 
came into your line to obtain, not to impart." 

"you are not without wit." 

"if you have the patienc to wait you will find me dull enough 
to-morrow." 

"how do you know that you are to die to-morrow morning?" 

"among spi captur by night that is the custom. It is one of the nice 
observ of the profession." 

the gener so far laid asid the digniti appropri to a confeder 
offic of high rank and wide renown as to smile. but no one in hi 
power and out of hi favor would have drawn ani happi auguri from that 
outward and visibl sign of approval. It wa neither genial nor 
infectious; it did not commun itself to the other person expos 
to it--th caught spi who had provok it and the arm guard who had 
brought him into the tent and now stood a littl apart, watch hi 
prison in the yellow candle-light. It wa no part of that warrior' 
duti to smile; he had been detail for anoth purpose. the 
convers wa resumed; it wa in charact a trial for a capit 
offense. 

"you admit, then, that you are a spy--that you came into my camp, 
disguis as you are in the uniform of a confeder soldier, to obtain 
inform secretli regard the number and disposit of my 
troops." 

"regarding, particularly, their numbers. their disposit I alreadi 
knew. It is morose." 

the gener brighten again; the guard, with a sever sens of hi 
responsibility, accentu the auster of hi express and stood a 
trifl more erect than before. twirl hi gray slouch hat round and 
round upon hi forefinger, the spi took a leisur survey of hi 
surroundings. they were simpl enough. the tent wa a common "wall 
tent," about eight feet by ten in dimensions, light by a singl tallow 
candl stuck into the haft of a bayonet, which wa itself stuck into a 
pine tabl at which the gener sat, now busili write and appar 
forget of hi unwil guest. An old rag carpet cover the earthen 
floor; an older leather trunk, a second chair and a roll of blanket 
were about all els that the tent contained; in gener clavering' 
command confeder simplic and penuri of "pomp and circumstance" had 
attain their highest development. On a larg nail driven into the tent 
pole at the entranc wa suspend a sword-belt support a long sabre, 
a pistol in it holster and, absurdli enough, a bowie-knife. Of that 
most unmilitari weapon it wa the general' habit to explain that it wa 
a souvenir of the peac day when he wa a civilian. 

It wa a stormi night. the rain cascad upon the canva in torrents, 
with the dull, drum-lik sound familiar to dweller in tents. As the 
whoop blast charg upon it the frail structur shook and sway and 
strain at it confin stake and ropes. 

the gener finish writing, fold the half-sheet of paper and spoke 
to the soldier guard adderson: "here, tassman, take that to the 
adjutant-general; then return." 

"and the prisoner, general?" said the soldier, saluting, with an 
inquir glanc in the direct of that unfortunate. 

"do as I said," repli the officer, curtly. 

the soldier took the note and duck himself out of the tent. gener 
claver turn hi handsom face toward the feder spy, look him in 
the eyes, not unkindly, and said: "it is a bad night, my man." 

"for me, yes." 

"do you guess what I have written?" 

"someth worth reading, I dare say. and--perhap it is my vanity--i 
ventur to suppos that I am mention in it." 

"yes; it is a memorandum for an order to be read to the troop at 
_reveille_ concern your execution. also some note for the guidanc 
of the provost-marsh in arrang the detail of that event." 

"I hope, general, the spectacl will be intellig arranged, for I 
shall attend it myself." 

"have you ani arrang of your own that you wish to make? Do you 
wish to see a chaplain, for example?" 

"I could hardli secur a longer rest for myself by depriv him of some 
of his." 

"good god, man! do you mean to go to your death with noth but joke 
upon your lips? Do you know that thi is a seriou matter?" 

"how can I know that? I have never been dead in all my life. I have 
heard that death is a seriou matter, but never from ani of those who 
have experienc it." 

the gener wa silent for a moment; the man interested, perhap amus 
him--a type not previous encountered. 

"death," he said, "i at least a loss--a loss of such happi as we 
have, and of opportun for more." 

"A loss of which we shall never be consciou can be born with composur 
and therefor expect without apprehension. you must have observed, 
general, that of all the dead men with whom it is your soldierli 
pleasur to strew your path none show sign of regret." 

"if the be dead is not a regrett condition, yet the becom so-- 
the act of dying--appear to be distinctli disagre to one who ha 
not lost the power to feel." 

"pain is disagreeable, no doubt. I never suffer it without more or less 
discomfort. but he who live longest is most expos to it. what you 
call die is simpli the last pain--ther is realli no such thing as 
dying. suppose, for illustration, that I attempt to escape. you lift the 
revolv that you are courteous conceal in your lap, and--" 

the gener blush like a girl, then laugh softly, disclos hi 
brilliant teeth, made a slight inclin of hi handsom head and said 
nothing. the spi continued: "you fire, and I have in my stomach what I 
did not swallow. I fall, but am not dead. after a half-hour of agoni I 
am dead. but at ani given instant of that half-hour I wa either aliv 
or dead. there is no transit period. 

"when I am hang to-morrow morn it will be quit the same; while 
consciou I shall be living; when dead, unconscious. natur appear to 
have order the matter quit in my interest--th way that I should have 
order it myself. It is so simple," he ad with a smile, "that it 
seem hardli worth while to be hang at all." 

At the finish of hi remark there wa a long silence. the gener sat 
impassive, look into the man' face, but appar not attent to 
what had been said. It wa as if hi eye had mount guard over the 
prison while hi mind concern itself with other matters. present 
he drew a long, deep breath, shuddered, as one awaken from a dread 
dream, and exclaim almost inaudibly: "death is horrible!"--thi man of 
death. 

"it wa horribl to our savag ancestors," said the spy, gravely, 
"becaus they had not enough intellig to dissoci the idea of 
conscious from the idea of the physic form in which it is 
manifested--a an even lower order of intelligence, that of the monkey, 
for example, may be unabl to imagin a hous without inhabitants, and 
see a ruin hut fanci a suffer occupant. To us it is horribl 
becaus we have inherit the tendenc to think it so, account for 
the notion by wild and fanci theori of anoth world--a name of 
place give rise to legend explain them and reasonless conduct to 
philosophi in justification. you can hang me, general, but there your 
power of evil ends; you cannot condemn me to heaven." 

the gener appear not to have heard; the spy' talk had mere turn 
hi thought into an unfamiliar channel, but there they pursu their 
will independ to conclus of their own. the storm had ceased, 
and someth of the solemn spirit of the night had impart itself to 
hi reflections, give them the sombr ting of a supernatur dread. 
perhap there wa an element of prescienc in it. "I should not like to 
die," he said--"not to-night." 

He wa interrupted--if, indeed, he had intend to speak further--bi the 
entranc of an offic of hi staff, captain hasterlick, the 
provost-marshal. thi recal him to himself; the absent look pass 
away from hi face. 

"captain," he said, acknowledg the officer' salute, "thi man is a 
yanke spi captur insid our line with incrimin paper on him. 
He ha confessed. how is the weather?" 

"the storm is over, sir, and the moon shining." 

"good; take a file of men, conduct him at onc to the parad ground, and 
shoot him." 

A sharp cri broke from the spy' lips. He threw himself forward, thrust 
out hi neck, expand hi eyes, clench hi hands. 

"good god!" he cri hoarsely, almost inarticulately; "you do not mean 
that! you forget--i am not to die until morning." 

"I have said noth of morning," repli the general, coldly; "that wa 
an assumpt of your own. you die now." 

"but, general, I beg--i implor you to remember; I am to hang! It will 
take some time to erect the gallows--two hours--an hour. spi are 
hanged; I have right under militari law. for heaven' sake, general, 
consid how short--" 

"captain, observ my directions." 

the offic drew hi sword and fix hi eye upon the prison point 
silent to the open of the tent. the prison hesitated; the offic 
grasp him by the collar and push him gentli forward. As he 
approach the tent pole the frantic man sprang to it and with cat-lik 
agil seiz the handl of the bowie-knife, pluck the weapon from 
the scabbard and thrust the captain asid leap upon the gener 
with the furi of a madman, hurl him to the ground and fall 
headlong upon him as he lay. the tabl wa overturned, the candl 
extinguish and they fought blindli in the darkness. the 
provost-marsh sprang to the assist of hi superior offic and wa 
himself prostrat upon the struggl forms. curs and inarticul 
cri of rage and pain came from the welter of limb and bodies; the 
tent came down upon them and beneath it hamper and envelop fold 
the struggl went on. privat tassman, return from hi errand and 
dimli conjectur the situation, threw down hi rifl and lay hold 
of the flounc canva at random vainli tri to drag it off the men 
under it; and the sentinel who pace up and down in front, not dare to 
leav hi beat though the sky should fall, discharg hi rifle. the 
report alarm the camp; drum beat the long roll and bugl sound the 
assembly, bring swarm of half-clad men into the moonlight, dress 
as they ran, and fall into line at the sharp command of their 
officers. thi wa well; be in line the men were under control; they 
stood at arm while the general' staff and the men of hi escort 
brought order out of confus by lift off the fallen tent and 
pull apart the breathless and bleed actor in that strang 
contention. 

breathless, indeed, wa one: the captain wa dead; the handl of the 
bowie-knife, protrud from hi throat, wa press back beneath hi 
chin until the end had caught in the angl of the jaw and the hand that 
deliv the blow had been unabl to remov the weapon. In the dead 
man' hand wa hi sword, clench with a grip that defi the strength 
of the living. it blade wa streak with red to the hilt. 

lift to hi feet, the gener sank back to the earth with a moan and 
fainted. besid hi bruis he had two sword-thrusts--on through the 
thigh, the other through the shoulder. 

the spi had suffer the least damage. apart from a broken right arm, 
hi wound were such onli as might have been incur in an ordinari 
combat with nature' weapons. but he wa daze and seem hardli to know 
what had occurred. He shrank away from those attend him, cower upon 
the ground and utter unintellig remonstrances. hi face, swollen 
by blow and stain with gout of blood, nevertheless show white 
beneath hi dishevel hair--a white as that of a corpse. 

"the man is not insane," said the surgeon, prepar bandag and 
repli to a question; "he is suffer from fright. who and what is 
he?" 

privat tassman began to explain. It wa the opportun of hi life; he 
omit noth that could in ani way accentu the import of hi 
own relat to the night' events. when he had finish hi stori and 
wa readi to begin it again nobodi gave him ani attention. 

the gener had now recov consciousness. He rais himself upon hi 
elbow, look about him, and, see the spi crouch by a camp-fire, 
guarded, said simply: 

"take that man to the parad ground and shoot him." 

"the general' mind wanders," said an offic stand near. 

"hi mind doe _not_ wander," the adjutant-gener said. "I have a 
memorandum from him about thi business; he had given that same order to 
hasterlick"--with a motion of the hand toward the dead provost-marshal-- 
"and, by god! it shall be executed." 

ten minut later sergeant parker adderson, of the feder army, 
philosoph and wit, kneel in the moonlight and beg incoher 
for hi life, wa shot to death by twenti men. As the volley rang out 
upon the keen air of the midnight, gener clavering, lie white and 
still in the red glow of the camp-fire, open hi big blue eyes, look 
pleasantli upon those about him and said: "how silent it all is!" 

the surgeon look at the adjutant-general, grave and significantly. 
the patient' eye slowli closed, and thu he lay for a few moments; 
then, hi face suffus with a smile of ineff sweetness, he said, 
faintly: "I suppos thi must be death," and so pass away. 




AN affair OF outpost 

I 

concern the wish TO BE dead 

two men sat in conversation. one wa the governor of the state. the year 
wa 1861; the war wa on and the governor alreadi famou for the 
intellig and zeal with which he direct all the power and 
resourc of hi state to the servic of the union. 

"what! _you_?" the governor wa say in evid surprise--"y too 
want a militari commission? really, the fife and drum must have 
effect a profound alter in your convictions. In my charact of 
recruit sergeant I suppos I ought not to be fastidious, but"--ther 
wa a touch of ironi in hi manner--"well, have you forgotten that an 
oath of allegi is required?" 

"I have alter neither my convict nor my sympathies," said the 
other, tranquilly. "while my sympathi are with the south, as you do me 
the honor to recollect, I have never doubt that the north wa in the 
right. I am a southern in fact and in feeling, but it is my habit in 
matter of import to act as I think, not as I feel." 

the governor wa absent tap hi desk with a pencil; he did not 
immedi reply. after a while he said: "I have heard that there are 
all kind of men in the world, so I suppos there are some like that, 
and doubtless you think yourself one. i'v known you a long time and-- 
pardon me--i don't think so." 

"then I am to understand that my applic is denied?" 

"unless you can remov my belief that your southern sympathi are in 
some degre a disqualification, yes. I do not doubt your good faith, and 
I know you to be abundantli fit by intellig and special train 
for the duti of an officer. your convictions, you say, favor the union 
cause, but I prefer a man with hi heart in it. the heart is what men 
fight with." 

"look here, governor," said the younger man, with a smile that had more 
light than warmth: "I have someth up my sleeve--a qualif which 
I had hope it would not be necessari to mention. A great militari 
author ha given a simpl recip for be a good soldier: 'tri 
alway to get yourself killed.' It is with that purpos that I wish to 
enter the service. I am not, perhaps, much of a patriot, but I wish to 
be dead." 

the governor look at him rather sharply, then a littl coldly. "there 
is a simpler and franker way," he said. 

"in my family, sir," wa the reply, "we do not do that--no armist ha 
ever done that." 

A long silenc ensu and neither man look at the other. present the 
governor lift hi eye from the pencil, which had resum it tapping, 
and said: 

"who is she?" 

"mi wife." 

the governor toss the pencil into the desk, rose and walk two or 
three time across the room. then he turn to armisted, who also had 
risen, look at him more coldli than befor and said: "but the man-- 
would it not be better that he--could not the countri spare him better 
than it can spare you? Or are the armist oppos to 'the unwritten 
law'?" 

the armisteds, apparently, could feel an insult: the face of the younger 
man flushed, then paled, but he subdu himself to the servic of hi 
purpose. 

"the man' ident is unknown to me," he said, calmli enough. 

"pardon me," said the governor, with even less of visibl contrit 
than commonli underli those words. after a moment' reflect he 
added: "I shall send you to-morrow a captain' commiss in the tenth 
infantry, now at nashville, tennessee. good night." 

"good night, sir. I thank you." 

left alone, the governor remain for a time motionless, lean against 
hi desk. present he shrug hi shoulder as if throw off a 
burden. "thi is a bad business," he said. 

seat himself at a reading-t befor the fire, he took up the book 
nearest hi hand, absent open it. hi eye fell upon thi sentence: 

"when god made it necessari for an unfaith wife to lie about her 
husband in justif of her own sin He had the tender to endow 
men with the folli to believ her." 

He look at the titl of the book; it was, _hi excel the fool_. 

He flung the volum into the fire. 

II 

how TO say what IS worth hear 

the enemy, defeat in two day of battl at pittsburg landing, had 
sullenli retir to corinth, whenc he had come. for manifest 
incompet grant, whose beaten armi had been save from destruct 
and captur by buell' soldierli activ and skill, had been reliev 
of hi command, which nevertheless had not been given to buell, but to 
halleck, a man of unprov powers, a theorist, sluggish, irresolute. 
foot by foot hi troops, alway deploy in line-of-battl to resist the 
enemy' bicker skirmishers, alway entrench against the column 
that never came, advanc across the thirti mile of forest and swamp 
toward an antagonist prepar to vanish at contact, like a ghost at 
cock-crow. It wa a campaign of "excurs and alarums," of 
reconnoiss and counter-marches, of cross-purpos and countermand 
orders. for week the solemn farc held attention, lure distinguish 
civilian from field of polit ambit to see what they safe 
could of the horror of war. among these wa our friend the governor. At 
the headquart of the armi and in the camp of the troop from hi 
state he wa a familiar figure, attend by the sever member of hi 
person staff, showili horsed, faultlessli betailor and brave 
silk-hatted. thing of charm they were, rich in suggest of peac 
land beyond a sea of strife. the bedraggl soldier look up from hi 
trench as they passed, lean upon hi spade and audibl damn them to 
signifi hi sens of their ornament irrelev to the auster of 
hi trade. 

"I think, governor," said gener masterson one day, go into inform 
session atop of hi hors and throw one leg across the pommel of hi 
saddle, hi favorit posture--"i think I would not ride ani farther in 
that direct if I were you. we'v noth out there but a line of 
skirmishers. that, I presume, is whi I wa direct to put these sieg 
gun here: if the skirmish are driven in the enemi will die of 
deject at be unabl to haul them away--they'r a trifl heavy." 

there is reason to fear that the unstrain qualiti of thi militari 
humor drop not as the gentl rain from heaven upon the place beneath 
the civilian' silk hat. anyhow he abat none of hi digniti in 
recognition. 

"I understand," he said, gravely, "that some of my men are out there--a 
compani of the tenth, command by captain armisted. I should like to 
meet him if you do not mind." 

"he is worth meeting. but there' a bad bit of jungl out there, and I 
should advis that you leav your hors and"--with a look at the 
governor' retinue--"your other impedimenta." 

the governor went forward alon and on foot. In a half-hour he had 
push through a tangl undergrowth cover a boggi soil and enter 
upon firm and more open ground. here he found a half-compani of infantri 
loung behind a line of stack rifles. the men wore their 
accoutrements--their belts, cartridge-boxes, haversack and canteens. 
some lie at full length on the dri leav were fast asleep: other in 
small group gossip idli of thi and that; a few play at cards; none 
wa far from the line of stack arms. To the civilian' eye the scene 
wa one of carelessness, confusion, indifference; a soldier would have 
observ expect and readiness. 

At a littl distanc apart an offic in fatigu uniform, armed, sat on 
a fallen tree note the approach of the visitor, to whom a sergeant, 
rise from one of the groups, now came forward. 

"I wish to see captain armisted," said the governor. 

the sergeant eye him narrowly, say nothing, point to the officer, 
and take a rifl from one of the stacks, accompani him. 

"thi man want to see you, sir," said the sergeant, saluting. the 
offic rose. 

It would have been a sharp eye that would have recogn him. hi hair, 
which but a few month befor had been brown, wa streak with gray. 
hi face, tan by exposure, wa seam as with age. A long livid scar 
across the forehead mark the stroke of a sabre; one cheek wa drawn 
and pucker by the work of a bullet. onli a woman of the loyal north 
would have thought the man handsome. 

"armisted--captain," said the governor, extend hi hand, "do you not 
know me?" 

"I know you, sir, and I salut you--a the governor of my state." 

lift hi right hand to the level of hi eye he threw it outward and 
downward. In the code of militari etiquett there is no provis for 
shake hands. that of the civilian wa withdrawn. If he felt either 
surpris or chagrin hi face did not betray it. 

"it is the hand that sign your commission," he said. 

"and it is the hand--" 

the sentenc remain unfinished. the sharp report of a rifl came from 
the front, follow by anoth and another. A bullet hiss through the 
forest and struck a tree near by. the men sprang from the ground and 
even befor the captain' high, clear voic wa done inton the 
command "at-ten-tion!" had fallen into line in rear of the stack arms. 
again--and now through the din of a crackl fusillade--sound the 
strong, deliber sing-song of authority: "take... arms!" follow by 
the rattl of unlock bayonets. 

bullet from the unseen enemi were now fli thick and fast, though 
mostli well spent and emit the hum sound which signifi 
interfer by twig and rotat in the plane of flight. two or three 
of the men in the line were alreadi struck and down. A few wound men 
came limp awkwardli out of the undergrowth from the skirmish line in 
front; most of them did not pause, but held their way with white face 
and set teeth to the rear. 

suddenli there wa a deep, jar report in front, follow by the 
startl rush of a shell, which pass overhead explod in the edg 
of a thicket, set afir the fallen leaves. penetr the din-- 
seem to float abov it like the melodi of a soar bird--rang the 
slow, aspir monoton of the captain' sever commands, without 
emphasis, without accent, music and rest as an evensong under the 
harvest moon. familiar with thi tranquil chant in moment of 
immin peril, these raw soldier of less than a year' train 
yield themselv to the spell, execut it mandat with the 
composur and precis of veterans. even the distinguish civilian 
behind hi tree, hesit between pride and terror, wa access to 
it charm and suasion. He wa consciou of a fortifi resolut and 
ran away onli when the skirmishers, under order to ralli on the 
reserve, came out of the wood like hunt hare and form on the left 
of the stiff littl line, breath hard and thank for the boon of 
breath. 

iii 

the fight OF one whose heart wa not IN the quarrel 

guid in hi retreat by that of the fugit wounded, the governor 
struggl brave to the rear through the "bad bit of jungle." He wa 
well wind and a trifl confused. except a singl rifle-shot now and 
again, there wa no sound of strife behind him; the enemi wa pull 
himself togeth for a new onset against an antagonist of whose number 
and tactic disposit he wa in doubt. the fugit felt that he 
would probabl be spare to hi country, and onli commend the 
arrang of provid to that end, but in leap a small brook in 
more open ground one of the arrang incur the mischanc of a 
disabl sprain at the ankle. He wa unabl to continu hi flight, for 
he wa too fat to hop, and after sever vain attempts, caus 
intoler pain, seat himself on the earth to nurs hi ignobl 
disabl and deprec the militari situation. 

A brisk renew of the fire broke out and stray bullet came flit 
and drone by. then came the crash of two clean, definit volleys, 
follow by a continu rattle, through which he heard the yell and 
cheer of the combatants, punctuat by thunderclap of cannon. all thi 
told him that armisted' littl command wa bitterli beset and fight 
at close quarters. the wound men whom he had distanc began to 
straggl by on either hand, their number visibl augment by new 
levi from the line. singli and by two and threes, some support 
comrad more desper hurt than themselves, but all deaf to hi 
appeal for assistance, they sift through the underbrush and 
disappeared. the fire wa increasingli louder and more distinct, and 
present the ail fugit were succeed by men who strode with a 
firmer tread, occasion face about and discharg their pieces, 
then doggedli resum their retreat, reload as they walked. two or 
three fell as he looked, and lay motionless. one had enough of life left 
in him to make a piti attempt to drag himself to cover. A pass 
comrad paus besid him long enough to fire, apprais the poor 
devil' disabl with a look and move sullenli on, insert a 
cartridg in hi weapon. 

In all thi wa none of the pomp of war--no hint of glory. even in hi 
distress and peril the helpless civilian could not forbear to contrast 
it with the gorgeou parad and review held in honor of himself--with 
the brilliant uniforms, the music, the banners, and the marching. It wa 
an ugli and sicken business: to all that wa artist in hi nature, 
revolting, brutal, in bad taste. 

"ugh!" he grunted, shuddering--"thi is beastly! where is the charm of 
it all? where are the elev sentiments, the devotion, the heroism, 
the--" 

from a point somewher near, in the direct of the pursu enemy, 
rose the clear, deliber sing-song of captain armisted. 

"stead-y, men--stead-y. halt! com-menc fir-ing." 

the rattl of fewer than a score of rifl could be distinguish 
through the gener uproar, and again that penetr falsetto: 

"ceas fir-ing. In re-treat... maaarch!" 

In a few moment thi remnant had drift slowli past the governor, all 
to the right of him as they face in retiring, the men deploy at 
interv of a half-dozen paces. At the extrem left and a few yard 
behind came the captain. the civilian call out hi name, but he did 
not hear. A swarm of men in gray now broke out of cover in pursuit, 
make directli for the spot where the governor lay--som accid of 
the ground had caus them to converg upon that point: their line had 
becom a crowd. In a last struggl for life and liberti the governor 
attempt to rise, and look back the captain saw him. promptly, but 
with the same slow precis as before, he sang hi commands: 

"skirm-ish-ers, halt!" the men stop and accord to rule turn to 
face the enemy. 

"ral-li on the right!"--and they came in at a run, fix bayonet and 
form loos on the man at that end of the line. 

"forward... to save the gov-ern-or of your state... doub-l quick... 
maaarch!" 

onli one man disobey thi astonish command! He wa dead. with a 
cheer they sprang forward over the twenti or thirti pace between them 
and their task. the captain have a shorter distanc to go arriv 
first--simultan with the enemy. A half-dozen hasti shot were 
fire at him, and the foremost man--a fellow of heroic stature, hatless 
and bare-breasted--mad a viciou sweep at hi head with a club 
rifle. the offic parri the blow at the cost of a broken arm and 
drove hi sword to the hilt into the giant' breast. As the bodi fell 
the weapon wa wrench from hi hand and befor he could pluck hi 
revolv from the scabbard at hi belt anoth man leap upon him like 
a tiger, fasten both hand upon hi throat and bear him backward 
upon the prostrat governor, still struggl to rise. thi man wa 
promptli spit upon the bayonet of a feder sergeant and hi 
death-grip on the captain' throat loosen by a kick upon each wrist. 
when the captain had risen he wa at the rear of hi men, who had all 
pass over and around him and were thrust fierc at their more 
numer but less coher antagonists. nearli all the rifl on both 
side were empti and in the crush there wa neither time nor room to 
reload. the confeder were at a disadvantag in that most of them 
lack bayonets; they fought by bludgeoning--and a club rifl is a 
formid arm. the sound of the conflict wa a clatter like that of the 
interlock horn of battl bulls--now and then the pash of a crush 
skull, an oath, or a grunt caus by the impact of a rifle' muzzl 
against the abdomen transfix by it bayonet. through an open made 
by the fall of one of hi men captain armist sprang, with hi dangl 
left arm; in hi right hand a full-charg revolver, which he fire with 
rapid and terribl effect into the thick of the gray crowd: but 
across the bodi of the slain the survivor in the front were push 
forward by their comrad in the rear till again they breast the 
tireless bayonets. there were fewer bayonet now to breast--a beggarli 
half-dozen, all told. A few minut more of thi rough work--a littl 
fight back to back--and all would be over. 

suddenli a live fire wa heard on the right and the left: a fresh 
line of feder skirmish came forward at a run, drive befor them 
those part of the confeder line that had been separ by stay 
the advanc of the centre. and behind these new and noisi combatants, at 
a distanc of two or three hundr yards, could be seen, indistinct 
among the tree a line-of-battle! 

instinct befor retiring, the crowd in gray made a tremend rush 
upon it hand of antagonists, overwhelm them by mere momentum and, 
unabl to use weapon in the crush, trampl them, stamp savag on 
their limbs, their bodies, their necks, their faces; then retir with 
bloodi feet across it own dead it join the gener rout and the 
incid wa at an end. 

IV 

the great honor the great 

the governor, who had been unconscious, open hi eye and stare about 
him, slowli recal the day' events. A man in the uniform of a major 
wa kneel besid him; he wa a surgeon. group about were the 
civilian member of the governor' staff, their face express a 
natur solicitud regard their offices. A littl apart stood gener 
masterson address anoth offic and gesticul with a cigar. He 
wa saying: "it wa the beautifulest fight ever made--bi god, sir, it 
wa great!" 

the beauti and great were attest by a row of dead, trimli 
disposed, and anoth of wounded, less formal placed, restless, 
half-naked, but brave bebandaged. 

"how do you feel, sir?" said the surgeon. "I find no wound." 

"I think I am all right," the patient replied, sit up. "it is that 
ankle." 

the surgeon transfer hi attent to the ankle, cut away the 
boot. all eye follow the knife. 

In move the leg a fold paper wa uncovered. the patient pick it up 
and carelessli open it. It wa a letter three month old, sign 
"julia." catch sight of hi name in it he read it. It wa noth 
veri remarkable--mer a weak woman' confess of unprofit sin-- 
the penit of a faithless wife desert by her betrayer. the letter 
had fallen from the pocket of captain armisted; the reader quietli 
transfer it to hi own. 

An aide-de-camp rode up and dismounted. advanc to the governor he 
saluted. 

"sir," he said, "I am sorri to find you wounded--th command gener 
ha not been informed. He present hi compliment and I am direct to 
say that he ha order for to-morrow a grand review of the reserv 
corp in your honor. I ventur to add that the general' carriag is at 
your servic if you are abl to attend." 

"be pleas to say to the command gener that I am deepli touch by 
hi kindness. If you have the patienc to wait a few moment you shall 
convey a more definit reply." 

He smile brightli and glanc at the surgeon and hi assist added: 
"at present--if you will permit an allus to the horror of peace--i 
am 'in the hand of my friends.'" 

the humor of the great is infectious; all laugh who heard. 

"where is captain armisted?" the governor asked, not altogeth 
carelessly. 

the surgeon look up from hi work, point silent to the nearest 
bodi in the row of dead, the featur discreetli cover with a 
handkerchief. It wa so near that the great man could have laid hi hand 
upon it, but he did not. He may have fear that it would bleed. 




the stori OF A conscienc 

I 

captain parrol hartroy stood at the advanc post of hi picket-guard, 
talk in low tone with the sentinel. thi post wa on a turnpik 
which bisect the captain' camp, a half-mil in rear, though the camp 
wa not in sight from that point. the offic wa appar give the 
soldier certain instructions--wa perhap mere inquir if all were 
quiet in front. As the two stood talk a man approach them from the 
direct of the camp, carelessli whistling, and wa promptli halt by 
the soldier. He wa evid a civilian--a tall person, coars clad 
in the home-mad stuff of yellow gray, call "butternut," which wa 
men' onli wear in the latter day of the confederacy. On hi head wa a 
slouch felt hat, onc white, from beneath which hung mass of uneven 
hair, seemingli unacquaint with either scissor or comb. the man' 
face wa rather striking; a broad forehead, high nose, and thin cheeks, 
the mouth invis in the full dark beard, which seem as neglect as 
the hair. the eye were larg and had that steadi and fixiti of 
attent which so frequent mark a consid intellig and a will 
not easili turn from it purpose--so say those physiognomist who have 
that kind of eyes. On the whole, thi wa a man whom one would be like 
to observ and be observ by. He carri a walking-stick freshli cut 
from the forest and hi ail cowskin boot were white with dust. 

"show your pass," said the feder soldier, a trifl more imperi 
perhap than he would have thought necessari if he had not been under 
the eye of hi commander, who with fold arm look on from the 
roadside. 

"'low you'd rec'lect me, gineral," said the wayfar tranquilly, while 
produc the paper from the pocket of hi coat. there wa someth in 
hi tone--perhap a faint suggest of irony--which made hi elev 
of hi obstructor to exalt rank less agreeabl to that worthi warrior 
than promot is commonli found to be. "you-al have to be purti 
pertickler, I reckon," he added, in a more conciliatori tone, as if in 
half-apolog for be halted. 

have read the pass, with hi rifl rest on the ground, the soldier 
hand the document back without a word, shoulder hi weapon, and 
return to hi commander. the civilian pass on in the middl of the 
road, and when he had penetr the circumjac confederaci a few 
yard resum hi whistl and wa soon out of sight beyond an angl in 
the road, which at that point enter a thin forest. suddenli the 
offic undid hi arm from hi breast, drew a revolv from hi belt 
and sprang forward at a run in the same direction, leav hi sentinel 
in gape astonish at hi post. after make to the variou visibl 
form of natur a solemn promis to be damned, that gentleman resum 
the air of stolid which is suppos to be appropri to a state of 
alert militari attention. 

II 

captain hartroy held an independ command. hi forc consist of a 
compani of infantry, a squadron of cavalry, and a section of artillery, 
detach from the armi to which they belonged, to defend an import 
defil in the cumberland mountain in tennessee. It wa a field 
officer' command held by a line offic promot from the ranks, where 
he had quietli serv until "discovered." hi post wa one of 
except peril; it defens entail a heavi respons and he 
had wise been given correspond discretionari powers, all the more 
necessari becaus of hi distanc from the main army, the precari 
natur of hi commun and the lawless charact of the enemy' 
irregular troop infest that region. He had strongli fortifi hi 
littl camp, which embrac a villag of a half-dozen dwell and a 
countri store, and had collect a consider quantiti of supplies. To 
a few resid civilian of known loyalty, with whom it wa desir to 
trade, and of whose servic in variou way he sometim avail 
himself, he had given written pass admit them within hi lines. It 
is easi to understand that an abus of thi privileg in the interest of 
the enemi might entail seriou consequences. captain hartroy had made an 
order to the effect that ani one so abus it would be summarili shot. 

while the sentinel had been examin the civilian' pass the captain 
had eye the latter narrowly. He thought hi appear familiar and had 
at first no doubt of have given him the pass which had satisfi the 
sentinel. It wa not until the man had got out of sight and hear that 
hi ident wa disclos by a reveal light from memory. with 
soldierli prompt of decis the offic had act on the 
revelation. 

iii 

To ani but a singularli self-possess man the apparit of an offic 
of the militari forces, formid clad, bear in one hand a sheath 
sword and in the other a cock revolver, and rush in furiou 
pursuit, is no doubt disquiet to a high degree; upon the man to whom 
the pursuit wa in thi instanc direct it appear to have no other 
effect than somewhat to intensifi hi tranquillity. He might easili 
enough have escap into the forest to the right or the left, but chose 
anoth cours of action--turn and quietli face the captain, say 
as he came up: "I reckon ye must have someth to say to me, which ye 
disremembered. what mout it be, neighbor?" 

but the "neighbor" did not answer, be engag in the unneighborli act 
of cover him with a cock pistol. 

"surrender," said the captain as calmli as a slight breathless from 
exert would permit, "or you die." 

there wa no menac in the manner of thi demand; that wa all in the 
matter and in the mean of enforc it. there was, too, someth not 
altogeth reassur in the cold gray eye that glanc along the 
barrel of the weapon. for a moment the two men stood look at each 
other in silence; then the civilian, with no appear of fear--with as 
great appar unconcern as when compli with the less auster demand 
of the sentinel--slowli pull from hi pocket the paper which had 
satisfi that humbl functionari and held it out, saying: 

"I reckon thi 'ere parss from mister hartroy is--" 

"the pass is a forgery," the offic said, interrupting. "I am captain 
hartroy--and you are dramer brune." 

It would have requir a sharp eye to observ the slight pallor of the 
civilian' face at these words, and the onli other manifest 
attest their signific wa a voluntari relax of the thumb and 
finger hold the dishonor paper, which, fall to the road, 
unheeded, wa roll by a gentl wind and then lay still, with a coat 
of dust, as in humili for the lie that it bore. A moment later the 
civilian, still look unmov into the barrel of the pistol, said: 

"yes, I am dramer brune, a confeder spy, and your prisoner. I have on 
my person, as you will soon discover, a plan of your fort and it 
armament, a statement of the distribut of your men and their number, 
a map of the approaches, show the posit of all your outposts. My 
life is fairli yours, but if you wish it taken in a more formal way than 
by your own hand, and if you are will to spare me the indign of 
march into camp at the muzzl of your pistol, I promis you that I 
will neither resist, escape, nor remonstrate, but will submit to 
whatev penalti may be imposed." 

the offic lower hi pistol, uncock it, and thrust it into it 
place in hi belt. brune advanc a step, extend hi right hand. 

"it is the hand of a traitor and a spy," said the offic coldly, and 
did not take it. the other bowed. 

"come," said the captain, "let us go to camp; you shall not die until 
to-morrow morning." 

He turn hi back upon hi prisoner, and these two enigmat men 
retrac their step and soon pass the sentinel, who express hi 
gener sens of thing by a needless and exagger salut to hi 
commander. 

IV 

earli on the morn after these event the two men, captor and captive, 
sat in the tent of the former. A tabl wa between them on which lay, 
among a number of letters, offici and private, which the captain had 
written dure the night, the incrimin paper found upon the spy. 
that gentleman had slept through the night in an adjoin tent, 
unguarded. both, have breakfasted, were now smoking. 

"mr. brune," said captain hartroy, "you probabl do not understand whi I 
recogn you in your disguise, nor how I wa awar of your name." 

"I have not sought to learn, captain," the prison said with quiet 
dignity. 

"nevertheless I should like you to know--if the stori will not offend. 
you will perceiv that my knowledg of you goe back to the autumn of 
1861. At that time you were a privat in an ohio regiment--a brave and 
trust soldier. To the surpris and grief of your offic and comrad 
you desert and went over to the enemy. soon afterward you were 
captur in a skirmish, recognized, tri by court-marti and sentenc 
to be shot. await the execut of the sentenc you were confined, 
unfettered, in a freight car stand on a side track of a railway." 

"at grafton, virginia," said brune, push the ash from hi cigar 
with the littl finger of the hand hold it, and without look up. 

"at grafton, virginia," the captain repeated. "one dark and stormi night 
a soldier who had just return from a long, fatigu march wa put on 
guard over you. He sat on a cracker box insid the car, near the door, 
hi rifl load and the bayonet fixed. you sat in a corner and hi 
order were to kill you if you attempt to rise." 

"but if I _asked_ to rise he might call the corpor of the guard." 

"yes. As the long silent hour wore away the soldier yield to the 
demand of nature: he himself incur the death penalti by sleep at 
hi post of duty." 

"you did." 

"what! you recogn me? you have known me all along?" 

the captain had risen and wa walk the floor of hi tent, visibl 
excited. hi face wa flushed, the gray eye had lost the cold, pitiless 
look which they had shown when brune had seen them over the pistol 
barrel; they had soften wonderfully. 

"I knew you," said the spy, with hi customari tranquillity, "the moment 
you face me, demand my surrender. In the circumst it would have 
been hardli becom in me to recal these matters. I am perhap a 
traitor, certainli a spy; but I should not wish to seem a suppliant." 

the captain had paus in hi walk and wa face hi prisoner. there 
wa a singular huski in hi voic as he spoke again. 

"mr. brune, whatev your conscienc may permit you to be, you save my 
life at what you must have believ the cost of your own. until I saw 
you yesterday when halt by my sentinel I believ you dead--thought 
that you had suffer the fate which through my own crime you might 
easili have escaped. you had onli to step from the car and leav me to 
take your place befor the firing-squad. you had a divin compassion. 
you piti my fatigue. you let me sleep, watch over me, and as the 
time drew near for the relief-guard to come and detect me in my crime, 
you gentli wake me. ah, brune, brune, that wa well done--that wa 
great--that--" 

the captain' voic fail him; the tear were run down hi face and 
sparkl upon hi beard and hi breast. resum hi seat at the table, 
he buri hi face in hi arm and sobbed. all els wa silence. 

suddenli the clear warbl of a bugl wa heard sound the "assembly." 
the captain start and rais hi wet face from hi arms; it had turn 
ghastli pale. outside, in the sunlight, were heard the stir of the men 
fall into line; the voic of the sergeant call the roll; the 
tap of the drummer as they brace their drums. the captain spoke 
again: 

"I ought to have confess my fault in order to relat the stori of your 
magnanimity; it might have procur you a pardon. A hundr time I 
resolv to do so, but shame prevented. besides, your sentenc wa just 
and righteous. well, heaven forgiv me! I said nothing, and my regiment 
wa soon afterward order to tennesse and I never heard about you." 

"it wa all right, sir," said brune, without visibl emotion; "I escap 
and return to my colors--th confeder colors. I should like to add 
that befor desert from the feder servic I had earnestli ask a 
discharge, on the ground of alter convictions. I wa answer by 
punishment." 

"ah, but if I had suffer the penalti of my crime--if you had not 
gener given me the life that I accept without gratitud you would 
not be again in the shadow and immin of death." 

the prison start slightli and a look of anxieti came into hi face. 
one would have said, too, that he wa surprised. At that moment a 
lieutenant, the adjutant, appear at the open of the tent and 
saluted. "captain," he said, "the battalion is formed." 

captain hartroy had recov hi composure. He turn to the offic 
and said: "lieutenant, go to captain graham and say that I direct him to 
assum command of the battalion and parad it outsid the parapet. thi 
gentleman is a desert and a spy; he is to be shot to death in the 
presenc of the troops. He will accompani you, unbound and unguarded." 

while the adjut wait at the door the two men insid the tent rose 
and exchang ceremoni bows, brune immedi retiring. 

half an hour later an old negro cook, the onli person left in camp 
except the commander, wa so startl by the sound of a volley of 
musketri that he drop the kettl that he wa lift from a fire. but 
for hi constern and the hiss which the content of the kettl 
made among the embers, he might also have heard, nearer at hand, the 
singl pistol shot with which captain hartroy renounc the life which 
in conscienc he could no longer keep. 

In complianc with the term of a note that he left for the offic who 
succeed him in command, he wa buried, like the desert and spy, 
without militari honors; and in the solemn shadow of the mountain which 
know no more of war the two sleep well in long-forgotten graves. 




one kind OF offic 

I 

OF the use OF civil 

"captain ransome, it is not permit to you to know _anything_. It is 
suffici that you obey my order--which permit me to repeat. If you 
perceiv ani movement of troop in your front you are to open fire, and 
if attack hold thi posit as long as you can. Do I make myself 
understood, sir?" 

"noth could be plainer. lieuten price,"--thi to an offic of hi 
own battery, who had ridden up in time to hear the order--"th general' 
mean is clear, is it not?" 

"perfectly." 

the lieuten pass on to hi post. for a moment gener cameron and 
the command of the batteri sat in their saddles, look at each other 
in silence. there wa no more to say; appar too much had alreadi 
been said. then the superior offic nod coldli and turn hi hors 
to ride away. the artillerist salut slowly, gravely, and with extrem 
formality. one acquaint with the niceti of militari etiquett would 
have said that by hi manner he attest a sens of the rebuk that he 
had incurred. It is one of the import use of civil to signifi 
resentment. 

when the gener had join hi staff and escort, await him at a 
littl distance, the whole cavalcad move off toward the right of the 
gun and vanish in the fog. captain ransom wa alone, silent, 
motionless as an equestrian statue. the gray fog, thicken everi 
moment, close in about him like a visibl doom. 

II 

under what circumst men DO not wish TO BE shot 

the fight of the day befor had been desultori and indecisive. At the 
point of collis the smoke of battl had hung in blue sheet among 
the branch of the tree till beaten into noth by the fall rain. 
In the soften earth the wheel of cannon and ammunit wagon cut 
deep, rag furrows, and movement of infantri seem imped by the 
mud that clung to the soldiers' feet as, with soaken garment and rifl 
imperfectli protect by cape of overcoat they went drag in 
sinuou line hither and thither through drip forest and flood 
field. mount officers, their head protrud from rubber poncho that 
glitter like black armor, pick their way, singli and in loos 
groups, among the men, come and go with appar aimless and 
command attent from nobodi but one another. here and there a dead 
man, hi cloth defil with earth, hi face cover with a blanket or 
show yellow and claylik in the rain, ad hi dispirit influenc 
to that of the other dismal featur of the scene and augment the 
gener discomfort with a particular dejection. veri repuls these 
wreck looked--not at all heroic, and nobodi wa access to the 
infect of their patriot example. dead upon the field of honor, yes; 
but the field of honor wa so veri wet! It make a difference. 

the gener engag that all expect did not occur, none of the 
small advantag accruing, now to thi side and now to that, in isol 
and accident collis be follow up. half-heart attack 
provok a sullen resist which wa satisfi with mere repulse. 
order were obey with mechan fidelity; no one did ani more than 
hi duty. 

"the armi is cowardli to-day," said gener cameron, the command of a 
feder brigade, to hi adjutant-general. 

"the armi is cold," repli the offic addressed, "and--yes, it doesn't 
wish to be like that." 

He point to one of the dead bodies, lie in a thin pool of yellow 
water, it face and cloth bespatt with mud from hoof and wheel. 

the army' weapon seem to share it militari delinquency. the rattl 
of rifl sound flat and contemptible. It had no mean and scarc 
rous to attent and expect the unengag part of the 
line-of-battl and the wait reserves. heard at a littl distance, the 
report of cannon were feebl in volum and _timbre_: they lack sting 
and resonance. the gun seem to be fire with light charges, 
unshotted. and so the futil day wore on to it dreari close, and then 
to a night of discomfort succeed a day of apprehension. 

An armi ha a personality. beneath the individu thought and emot 
of it compon part it think and feel as a unit. and in thi large, 
inclus sens of thing lie a wiser wisdom than the mere sum of all 
that it knows. On that dismal morn thi great brute force, grope at 
the bottom of a white ocean of fog among tree that seem as sea weeds, 
had a dumb conscious that all wa not well; that a day' manoeuvr 
had result in a faulti disposit of it parts, a blind diffus of 
it strength. the men felt insecur and talk among themselv of such 
tactic error as with their meager militari vocabulari they were abl 
to name. field and line offic gather in group and spoke more 
learnedli of what they apprehend with no greater clearness. command 
of brigad and divis look anxious to their connect on the 
right and on the left, sent staff offic on errand of inquiri and 
push skirmish line silent and cautious forward into the dubiou 
region between the known and the unknown. At some point on the line the 
troops, appar of their own volition, construct such defens as 
they could without the silent spade and the noisi ax. 

one of these point wa held by captain ransome' batteri of six guns. 
provid alway with intrench tools, hi men had labor with 
dilig dure the night, and now hi gun thrust their black muzzl 
through the embrasur of a realli formid earthwork. It crown a 
slight accliv devoid of undergrowth and provid an unobstruct 
fire that would sweep the ground for an unknown distanc in front. the 
posit could hardli have been better chosen. It had thi peculiarity, 
which captain ransome, who wa greatli addict to the use of the 
compass, had not fail to observe: it face northward, wherea he knew 
that the gener line of the armi must face eastward. In fact, that part 
of the line wa "refused"--that is to say, bent backward, away from the 
enemy. thi impli that captain ransome' batteri wa somewher near 
the left flank of the army; for an armi in line of battl retir it 
flank if the natur of the ground will permit, they be it 
vulner points. actually, captain ransom appear to hold the 
extrem left of the line, no troop be visibl in that direct 
beyond hi own. immedi in rear of hi gun occur that 
convers between him and hi brigad commander, the conclud and 
more picturesqu part of which is report above. 

iii 

how TO play the cannon without note 

captain ransom sat motionless and silent on horseback. A few yard away 
hi men were stand at their guns. somewhere--everywher within a few 
miles--wer a hundr thousand men, friend and enemies. yet he wa 
alone. the mist had isol him as complet as if he had been in the 
heart of a desert. hi world wa a few squar yard of wet and trampl 
earth about the feet of hi horse. hi comrad in that ghostli domain 
were invis and inaudible. these were condit favor to 
thought, and he wa thinking. Of the natur of hi thought hi 
clear-cut handsom featur yield no attest sign. hi face wa as 
inscrut as that of the sphinx. whi should it have made a record 
which there wa none to observe? At the sound of a footstep he mere 
turn hi eye in the direct whenc it came; one of hi sergeants, 
look a giant in statur in the fals perspect of the fog, 
approached, and when clearli defin and reduc to hi true dimens 
by propinquity, salut and stood at attention. 

"well, morris," said the officer, return hi subordinate' salute. 

"lieuten price direct me to tell you, sir, that most of the 
infantri ha been withdrawn. We have not suffici support." 

"yes, I know." 

"I am to say that some of our men have been out over the work a hundr 
yard and report that our front is not picketed." 

"yes." 

"they were so far forward that they heard the enemy." 

"yes." 

"they heard the rattl of the wheel of artilleri and the command of 
officers." 

"yes." 

"the enemi is move toward our works." 

captain ransome, who had been face to the rear of hi line--toward the 
point where the brigad command and hi cavalcad had been swallow 
up by the fog--rein hi hors about and face the other way. then he 
sat motionless as before. 

"who are the men who made that statement?" he inquired, without look 
at the sergeant; hi eye were direct straight into the fog over the 
head of hi horse. 

"corpor hassman and gunner manning." 

captain ransom wa a moment silent. A slight pallor came into hi face, 
a slight compress affect the line of hi lips, but it would have 
requir a closer observ than sergeant morri to note the change. 
there wa none in the voice. 

"sergeant, present my compliment to lieuten price and direct him to 
open fire with all the guns. grape." 

the sergeant salut and vanish in the fog. 

iv. 

TO introduc gener masterson 

search for hi divis commander, 
gener cameron and hi escort had follow the line of battl for 
nearli a mile to the right of ransome' battery, and there learn that 
the divis command had gone in search of the corp commander. It 
seem that everybodi wa look for hi immedi superior--an omin 
circumstance. It meant that nobodi wa quit at ease. So gener cameron 
rode on for anoth half-mile, where by good luck he met gener 
masterson, the divis commander, returning. 

"ah, cameron," said the higher officer, rein up, and throw hi 
right leg across the pommel of hi saddl in a most unmilitari way-- 
"anyth up? found a good posit for your battery, I hope--if one 
place is better than anoth in a fog." 

"yes, general," said the other, with the greater digniti appropri to 
hi less exalt rank, "mi batteri is veri well placed. I wish I could 
say that it is as well commanded." 

"eh, what' that? ransome? I think him a fine fellow. In the armi we 
should be proud of him." 

It wa customari for offic of the regular armi to speak of it as "the 
army." As the greatest citi are most provincial, so the 
self-complac of aristocraci is most frankli plebeian. 

"he is too fond of hi opinion. By the way, in order to occupi the hill 
that he hold I had to extend my line dangerously. the hill is on my 
left--that is to say the left flank of the army." 

"oh, no, hart' brigad is beyond. It wa order up from drytown dure 
the night and direct to hook on to you. better go and--" 

the sentenc wa unfinished: a live cannonad had broken out on the 
left, and both officers, follow by their retinu of aid and 
orderli make a great jingl and clank, rode rapidli toward the spot. 
but they were soon impeded, for they were compel by the fog to keep 
within sight of the line-of-battle, behind which were swarm of men, all 
in motion across their way. everywher the line wa assum a sharper 
and harder definition, as the men sprang to arm and the officers, with 
drawn swords, "dressed" the ranks. color-bear unfurl the flags, 
bugler blew the "assembly," hospit attend appear with 
stretchers. field offic mount and sent their impedimenta to the 
rear in care of negro servants. back in the ghostli space of the forest 
could be heard the rustl and murmur of the reserves, pull themselv 
together. 

nor wa all thi prepar vain, for scarc five minut had pass 
sinc captain ransome' gun had broken the truce of doubt befor the 
whole region wa aroar: the enemi had attack nearli everywhere. 

V 

how sound can fight shadow 

captain ransom walk up and down behind hi guns, which were fire 
rapidli but with steadiness. the gunner work alertly, but without 
hast or appar excitement. there wa realli no reason for excitement; 
it is not much to point a cannon into a fog and fire it. anybodi can do 
as much as that. 

the men smile at their noisi work, perform it with a lessen 
alacrity. they cast curiou regard upon their captain, who had now 
mount the banquett of the fortif and wa look across the 
parapet as if observ the effect of hi fire. but the onli visibl 
effect wa the substitut of wide, low-li sheet of smoke for their 
bulk of fog. suddenli out of the obscur burst a great sound of 
cheering, which fill the interv between the report of the gun 
with startl distinctness! To the few with leisur and opportun to 
observe, the sound wa inexpress strange--so loud, so near, so 
menacing, yet noth seen! the men who had smile at their work smile 
no more, but perform it with a seriou and feverish activity. 

from hi station at the parapet captain ransom now saw a great 
multitud of dim gray figur take shape in the mist below him and 
swarm up the slope. but the work of the gun wa now fast and 
furious. they swept the popul decliv with gust of grape and 
canister, the whir of which could be heard through the thunder of 
the explosions. In thi aw tempest of iron the assail struggl 
forward foot by foot across their dead, fire into the embrasures, 
reloading, fire again, and at last fall in their turn, a littl in 
advanc of those who had fallen before. soon the smoke wa dens enough 
to cover all. It settl down upon the attack and, drift back, 
involv the defense. the gunner could hardli see to serv their 
pieces, and when occasion figur of the enemi appear upon the 
parapet--hav had the good luck to get near enough to it, between two 
embrasures, to be protect from the guns--they look so unsubstanti 
that it seem hardli worth while for the few infantrymen to go to work 
upon them with the bayonet and tumbl them back into the ditch. 

As the command of a batteri in action can find someth better to do 
than crack individu skulls, captain ransom had retir from the 
parapet to hi proper post in rear of hi guns, where he stood with 
fold arms, hi bugler besid him. here, dure the hottest of the 
fight, he wa approach by lieuten price, who had just sabr a 
dare assail insid the work. A spirit colloquy ensu between the 
two officers--spirited, at least, on the part of the lieutenant, who 
gesticul with energi and shout again and again into hi 
commander' ear in the attempt to make himself heard abov the infern 
din of the guns. hi gestures, if coolli note by an actor, would have 
been pronounc to be those of protestation: one would have said that he 
wa oppos to the proceedings. did he wish to surrender? 

captain ransom listen without a chang of counten or attitude, 
and when the other man had finish hi harangue, look him coldli in 
the eye and dure a season abat of the uproar said: 

"lieuten price, it is not permit to you to know _anything_. It is 
suffici that you obey my orders." 

the lieuten went to hi post, and the parapet be now appar 
clear captain ransom return to it to have a look over. As he mount 
the banquett a man sprang upon the crest, wave a great brilliant 
flag. the captain drew a pistol from hi belt and shot him dead. the 
body, pitch forward, hung over the inner edg of the embankment, the 
arm straight downward, both hand still grasp the flag. the man' 
few follow turn and fled down the slope. look over the parapet, 
the captain saw no live thing. He observ also that no bullet were 
come into the work. 

He made a sign to the bugler, who sound the command to ceas firing. 
At all other point the action had alreadi end with a repuls of the 
confeder attack; with the cessat of thi cannonad the silenc wa 
absolute. 

VI 

why, be affront BY A, IT IS not best TO affront B 

gener masterson rode into the redoubt. the men, gather in groups, 
were talk loudli and gesticulating. they point at the dead, run 
from one bodi to another. they neglect their foul and heat gun and 
forgot to resum their outer clothing. they ran to the parapet and 
look over, some of them leap down into the ditch. A score were 
gather about a flag rigidli held by a dead man. 

"well, my men," said the gener cheerily, "you have had a pretti fight 
of it." 

they stared; nobodi replied; the presenc of the great man seem to 
embarrass and alarm. 

get no respons to hi pleasant condescension, the easy-mann 
offic whistl a bar or two of a popular air, and ride forward to 
the parapet, look over at the dead. In an instant he had whirl hi 
hors about and wa spur along in rear of the guns, hi eye 
everywher at once. An offic sat on the trail of one of the guns, 
smoke a cigar. As the gener dash up he rose and tranquilli 
saluted. 

"captain ransome!"--th word fell sharp and harsh, like the clash of 
steel blades--"y have been fight our own men--our own men, sir; do 
you hear? hart' brigade!" 

"general, I know that." 

"you know it--you know that, and you sit here smoking? oh, damn it, 
hamilton, i'm lose my temper,"--thi to hi provost-marshal. "sir-- 
captain ransome, be good enough to say--to say whi you fought our own 
men." 

"that I am unabl to say. In my order that inform wa withheld." 

appar the gener did not comprehend. 

"who wa the aggressor in thi affair, you or gener hart?" he asked. 

"I was." 

"and could you not have known--could you not see, sir, that you were 
attack our own men?" 

the repli wa astounding! 

"I knew that, general. It appear to be none of my business." 

then, break the dead silenc that follow hi answer, he said: 

"I must refer you to gener cameron." 

"gener cameron is dead, sir--a dead as he can be--a dead as ani man 
in thi army. He lie back yonder under a tree. Do you mean to say that 
he had anyth to do with thi horribl business?" 

captain ransom did not reply. observ the alterc hi men had 
gather about to watch the outcome. they were greatli excited. the fog, 
which had been partli dissip by the firing, had again close in so 
darkli about them that they drew more close togeth till the judg on 
horseback and the accus stand calmli befor him had but a narrow 
space free from intrusion. It wa the most inform of courts-martial, 
but all felt that the formal one to follow would but affirm it 
judgment. It had no jurisdiction, but it had the signific of 
prophecy. 

"captain ransome," the gener cri impetuously, but with someth in 
hi voic that wa almost entreaty, "if you can say anyth to put a 
better light upon your incomprehens conduct I beg you will do so." 

have recov hi temper thi gener soldier sought for someth 
to justifi hi natur sympathet attitud toward a brave man in the 
immin of a dishonor death. 

"where is lieuten price?" the captain said. 

that offic stood forward, hi dark saturnin face look somewhat 
forbid under a bloodi handkerchief bound about hi brow. He 
understood the summon and need no invit to speak. He did not 
look at the captain, but address the general: 

"dure the engag I discov the state of affairs, and appris 
the command of the battery. I ventur to urg that the fire cease. 
I wa insult and order to my post." 

"do you know anyth of the order under which I wa acting?" ask the 
captain. 

"of ani order under which the command of the batteri wa acting," the 
lieuten continued, still address the general, "I know nothing." 

captain ransom felt hi world sink away from hi feet. In those cruel 
word he heard the murmur of the centuri break upon the shore of 
eternity. He heard the voic of doom; it said, in cold, mechanical, and 
measur tones: "ready, aim, fire!" and he felt the bullet tear hi 
heart to shreds. He heard the sound of the earth upon hi coffin and (if 
the good god wa so merciful) the song of a bird abov hi forgotten 
grave. quietli detach hi sabr from it supports, he hand it up to 
the provost-marshal. 




one officer, one man 

captain graffenreid stood at the head of hi company. the regiment wa 
not engaged. It form a part of the front line-of-battle, which 
stretch away to the right with a visibl length of nearli two mile 
through the open ground. the left flank wa veil by woods; to the 
right also the line wa lost to sight, but it extend mani miles. A 
hundr yard in rear wa a second line; behind this, the reserv 
brigad and divis in column. batteri of artilleri occupi the 
space between and crown the low hills. group of horsemen--gener 
with their staff and escorts, and field offic of regiment behind 
the colors--brok the regular of the line and columns. number of 
these figur of interest had field-glass at their eye and sat 
motionless, stolidli scan the countri in front; other came 
and went at a slow canter, bear orders. there were squad of 
stretcher-bearers, ambulances, wagon-train with ammunition, and 
officers' servant in rear of all--of all that wa visible--for still in 
rear of these, along the roads, extend for mani mile all that vast 
multitud of non-combat who with their variou _impedimenta_ are 
assign to the inglori but import duti of suppli the fighters' 
mani needs. 

An armi in line-of-battl await attack, or prepar to deliv it, 
present strang contrasts. At the front are precision, formality, 
fixity, and silence. toward the rear these characterist are less and 
less conspicuous, and finally, in point of space, are lost altogeth in 
confusion, motion and noise. the homogen becom heterogeneous. 
definit is lacking; repos is replac by an appar purposeless 
activity; harmoni vanish in hubbub, form in disorder. commot 
everywher and ceaseless unrest. the men who do not fight are never 
ready. 

from hi posit at the right of hi compani in the front rank, captain 
graffenreid had an unobstruct outlook toward the enemy. A half-mil of 
open and nearli level ground lay befor him, and beyond it an irregular 
wood, cover a slight acclivity; not a human be anywher visible. 
He could imagin noth more peac than the appear of that 
pleasant landscap with it long stretch of brown field over which 
the atmospher wa begin to quiver in the heat of the morn sun. 
not a sound came from forest or field--not even the bark of a dog or 
the crow of a cock at the half-seen plantat hous on the crest 
among the trees. yet everi man in those mile of men knew that he and 
death were face to face. 

captain graffenreid had never in hi life seen an arm enemy, and the 
war in which hi regiment wa one of the first to take the field wa two 
year old. He had had the rare advantag of a militari education, and 
when hi comrad had march to the front he had been detach for 
administr servic at the capit of hi state, where it wa thought 
that he could be most useful. like a bad soldier he protested, and like 
a good one obeyed. In close offici and person relat with the 
governor of hi state, and enjoy hi confid and favor, he had 
firmli refus promot and seen hi junior elev abov him. death 
had been busi in hi distant regiment; vacanc among the field 
offic had occur again and again; but from a chivalr feel 
that war' reward belong of right to those who bore the storm and 
stress of battl he had held hi humbl rank and gener advanc the 
fortun of others. hi silent devot to principl had conquer at 
last: he had been reliev of hi hate duti and order to the 
front, and now, untri by fire, stood in the van of battl in command 
of a compani of hardi veterans, to whom he had been onli a name, and 
that name a by-word. By none--not even by those of hi brother offic 
in whose favor he had waiv hi rights--wa hi devot to duti 
understood. they were too busi to be just; he wa look upon as one who 
had shirk hi duty, until forc unwillingli into the field. too proud 
to explain, yet not too insens to feel, he could onli endur and 
hope. 

Of all the feder armi on that summer morn none had accept battl 
more joyous than anderton graffenreid. hi spirit wa buoyant, hi 
faculti were riotous. He wa in a state of mental exalt and 
scarc could endur the enemy' tardi in advanc to the attack. 
To him thi wa opportunity--for the result he care nothing. victori or 
defeat, as god might will; in one or in the other he should prove 
himself a soldier and a hero; he should vindic hi right to the 
respect of hi men and the companionship of hi brother officers--to the 
consider of hi superiors. how hi heart leap in hi breast as 
the bugl sound the stir note of the "assembly"! with what a 
light tread, scarc consciou of the earth beneath hi feet, he strode 
forward at the head of hi company, and how exultingli he note the 
tactic disposit which place hi regiment in the front line! and 
if perchanc some memori came to him of a pair of dark eye that might 
take on a tender light in read the account of that day' doings, 
who shall blame him for the unmarti thought or count it a debas 
of soldierli ardor? 

suddenly, from the forest a half-mil in front--appar from among 
the upper branch of the trees, but realli from the ridg beyond--ros 
a tall column of white smoke. A moment later came a deep, jar 
explosion, followed--almost attended--bi a hideou rush sound that 
seem to leap forward across the interven space with inconceiv 
rapidity, rise from whisper to roar with too quick a gradat for 
attent to note the success stage of it horribl progression! A 
visibl tremor ran along the line of men; all were startl into 
motion. captain graffenreid dodg and threw up hi hand to one side of 
hi head, palm outward. 

As he did so he heard a keen, ring report, and saw on a hillsid 
behind the line a fierc roll of smoke and dust--th shell' explosion. 
It had pass a hundr feet to hi left! He heard, or fanci he heard, 
a low, mock laugh and turn in the direct whenc it came saw the 
eye of hi first lieuten fix upon him with an unmistak look of 
amusement. He look along the line of face in the front ranks. the men 
were laughing. At him? the thought restor the color to hi bloodless 
face--restor too much of it. hi cheek burn with a fever of shame. 

the enemy' shot wa not answered: the offic in command at that 
expos part of the line had evid no desir to provok a cannonade. 
for the forbear captain graffenreid wa consciou of a sens of 
gratitude. He had not known that the flight of a projectil wa a 
phenomenon of so appal character. hi concept of war had alreadi 
undergon a profound change, and he wa consciou that hi new feel 
wa manifest itself in visibl perturbation. hi blood wa boil in 
hi veins; he had a choke sensat and felt that if he had a command 
to give it would be inaudible, or at least unintelligible. the hand in 
which he held hi sword trembled; the other move automatically, 
clutch at variou part of hi clothing. He found a difficulti in 
stand still and fanci that hi men observ it. wa it fear? He 
fear it was. 

from somewher away to the right came, as the wind served, a low, 
intermitt murmur like that of ocean in a storm--lik that of a 
distant railway train--lik that of wind among the pines--thre sound 
so nearli alik that the ear, unaid by the judgment, cannot 
distinguish them one from another. the eye of the troop were drawn in 
that direction; the mount offic turn their field-glass that 
way. mingl with the sound wa an irregular throbbing. He thought it, 
at first, the beat of hi fever blood in hi ears; next, the 
distant tap of a bass drum. 

"the ball is open on the right flank," said an officer. 

captain graffenreid understood: the sound were musketri and artillery. 
He nod and tri to smile. there wa appar noth infecti in 
the smile. 

present a light line of blue smoke-puff broke out along the edg of 
the wood in front, succeed by a crackl of rifles. there were keen, 
sharp hiss in the air, termin abruptli with a thump near by. 
the man at captain graffenreid' side drop hi rifle; hi knee gave 
way and he pitch awkwardli forward, fall upon hi face. somebodi 
shout "lie down!" and the dead man wa hardli distinguish from the 
living. It look as if those few rifle-shot had slain ten thousand 
men. onli the field offic remain erect; their concess to the 
emerg consist in dismount and send their hors to the 
shelter of the low hill immedi in rear. 

captain graffenreid lay alongsid the dead man, from beneath whose 
breast flow a littl rill of blood. It had a faint, sweetish odor that 
sicken him. the face wa crush into the earth and flattened. It 
look yellow already, and wa repulsive. noth suggest the glori of 
a soldier' death nor mitig the loathsom of the incident. He 
could not turn hi back upon the bodi without face away from hi 
company. 

He fix hi eye upon the forest, where all again wa silent. He tri 
to imagin what wa go on there--th line of troop form to 
attack, the gun be push forward by hand to the edg of the open. 
He fanci he could see their black muzzl protrud from the 
undergrowth, readi to deliv their storm of missiles--such missil as 
the one whose shriek had so unsettl hi nerves. the distens of hi 
eye becam painful; a mist seem to gather befor them; he could no 
longer see across the field, yet would not withdraw hi gaze lest he see 
the dead man at hi side. 

the fire of battl wa not now burn veri brightli in thi warrior' 
soul. from inact had come introspection. He sought rather to analyz 
hi feel than distinguish himself by courag and devotion. the 
result wa profoundli disappointing. He cover hi face with hi hand 
and groan aloud. 

the hoars murmur of battl grew more and more distinct upon the right; 
the murmur had, indeed, becom a roar, the throbbing, a thunder. the 
sound had work round obliqu to the front; evid the enemy' 
left wa be driven back, and the propiti moment to move against 
the salient angl of hi line would soon arrive. the silenc and mysteri 
in front were ominous; all felt that they bode evil to the assailants. 

behind the prostrat line sound the hoofbeat of gallop horses; 
the men turn to look. A dozen staff offic were ride to the 
variou brigad and regiment commanders, who had remounted. A moment 
more and there wa a choru of voices, all utter out of time the same 
words--"attention, battalion!" the men sprang to their feet and were 
align by the compani commanders. they await the word "forward"-- 
awaited, too, with beat heart and set teeth the gust of lead and 
iron that were to smite them at their first movement in obedi to 
that word. the word wa not given; the tempest did not break out. the 
delay wa hideous, maddening! It unnerv like a respit at the 
guillotine. 

captain graffenreid stood at the head of hi company, the dead man at 
hi feet. He heard the battl on the right--rattl and crash of 
musketry, ceaseless thunder of cannon, desultori cheer of invis 
combatants. He mark ascend cloud of smoke from distant forests. He 
note the sinist silenc of the forest in front. these contrast 
extrem affect the whole rang of hi sensibilities. the strain upon 
hi nervou organ wa insupportable. He grew hot and cold by 
turns. He pant like a dog, and then forgot to breath until remind 
by vertigo. 

suddenli he grew calm. glanc downward, hi eye had fallen upon hi 
nake sword, as he held it, point to earth. foreshorten to hi view, 
it resembl somewhat, he thought, the short heavi blade of the ancient 
roman. the fanci wa full of suggestion, malign, fateful, heroic! 

the sergeant in the rear rank, immedi behind captain graffenreid, 
now observ a strang sight. hi attent drawn by an uncommon 
movement made by the captain--a sudden reach forward of the hand and 
their energet withdrawal, throw the elbow out, as in pull an 
oar--h saw spring from between the officer' shoulder a bright point 
of metal which prolong itself outward, nearli a half-arm' length--a 
blade! It wa faintli streak with crimson, and it point approach so 
near to the sergeant' breast, and with so quick a movement, that he 
shrank backward in alarm. that moment captain graffenreid pitch 
heavili forward upon the dead man and died. 

A week later the major-gener command the left corp of the feder 
armi submit the follow offici report: 

"sir: I have the honor to report, with regard to the action of the 19th 
inst, that owe to the enemy' withdraw from my front to reinforc 
hi beaten left, my command wa not serious engaged. My loss wa as 
follows: killed, one officer, one man." 




georg thurston 

three incid IN the life OF A man 

georg thurston wa a first lieuten and aide-de-camp on the staff of 
colonel brough, command a feder brigade. colonel brough wa onli 
temporarili in command, as senior colonel, the brigadier-gener have 
been sever wound and grant a leav of absenc to recover. 
lieuten thurston was, I believe, of colonel brough' regiment, to 
which, with hi chief, he would natur have been releg had he 
live till our brigad commander' recovery. the aid whose place 
thurston took had been kill in battle; thurston' advent among us wa 
the onli chang in the _personnel_ of our staff consequ upon the 
chang in commanders. We did not like him; he wa unsocial. this, 
however, wa more observ by other than by me. whether in camp or on 
the march, in barracks, in tents, or _en bivouac_, my duti as 
topograph engin kept me work like a beaver--al day in the 
saddl and half the night at my drawing-table, plat my surveys. It 
wa hazard work; the nearer to the enemy' line I could penetrate, 
the more valuabl were my field note and the result maps. It wa a 
busi in which the live of men count as noth against the chanc 
of defin a road or sketch a bridge. whole squadron of cavalri 
escort had sometim to be sent thunder against a power infantri 
outpost in order that the brief time between the charg and the 
inevit retreat might be util in sound a ford or determin 
the point of intersect of two roads. 

In some of the dark corner of england and wale they have an immemori 
custom of "beat the bounds" of the parish. On a certain day of the 
year the whole popul turn out and travel in process from one 
landmark to anoth on the boundari line. At the most import point 
lad are soundli beaten with rod to make them rememb the place in 
after life. they becom authorities. our frequent engag with the 
confeder outposts, patrols, and scout parti had, incidentally, 
the same educ value; they fix in my memori a vivid and appar 
imperish pictur of the locality--a pictur serv instead of 
accur field notes, which, indeed, it wa not alway conveni to 
take, with carbin cracking, saber clashing, and hors plung all 
about. these spirit encount were observ enter in red. 

one morn as I set out at the head of my escort on an expedit of 
more than the usual hazard lieuten thurston rode up alongsid and 
ask if I had ani object to hi accompani me, the colonel 
command have given him permission. 

"none whatever," I repli rather gruffly; "but in what capac will 
you go? you are not a topograph engineer, and captain burl 
command my escort." 

"I will go as a spectator," he said. remov hi sword-belt and take 
the pistol from hi holster he hand them to hi servant, who took 
them back to headquarters. I realiz the brutal of my remark, but 
not clearli see my way to an apology, said nothing. 

that afternoon we encount a whole regiment of the enemy' cavalri in 
line and a field-piec that domin a straight mile of the turnpik by 
which we had approached. My escort fought deploy in the wood on both 
sides, but thurston remain in the center of the road, which at 
interv of a few second wa swept by gust of grape and canist that 
tore the air wide open as they passed. He had drop the rein on the 
neck of hi hors and sat bolt upright in the saddle, with fold arms. 
soon he wa down, hi hors torn to pieces. from the side of the road, 
my pencil and field book idle, my duti forgotten, I watch him slowli 
disengag himself from the wreck and rising. At that instant, the 
cannon have ceas firing, a burli confeder trooper on a spirit 
hors dash like a thunderbolt down the road with drawn saber. thurston 
saw him coming, drew himself up to hi full height, and again fold hi 
arms. He wa too brave to retreat befor the word, and my uncivil word 
had disarm him. He wa a spectator. anoth moment and he would have 
been split like a mackerel, but a bless bullet tumbl hi assail 
into the dusti road so near that the impetu sent the bodi roll to 
thurston' feet. that evening, while plat my hasti survey, I found 
time to frame an apology, which I think took the rude, primit form of 
a confess that I had spoken like a malici idiot. 

A few week later a part of our armi made an assault upon the enemy' 
left. the attack, which wa made upon an unknown posit and across 
unfamiliar ground, wa led by our brigade. the ground wa so broken and 
the underbrush so thick that all mount offic and men were compel 
to fight on foot--th brigad command and hi staff included. In the 
_mêlée_ thurston wa part from the rest of us, and we found him, 
horribl wounded, onli when we had taken the enemy' last defense. He 
wa some month in hospit at nashville, tennessee, but final 
rejoin us. He said littl about hi misadventure, except that he had 
been bewild and had stray into the enemy' line and been shot 
down; but from one of hi captors, whom we in turn had captured, we 
learn the particulars. "he came walk right upon us as we lay in 
line," said thi man. "A whole compani of us instantli sprang up and 
level our rifl at hi breast, some of them almost touch him. 
'throw down that sword and surrender, you damn yank!' shout some one 
in authority. the fellow ran hi eye along the line of rifl barrels, 
fold hi arm across hi breast, hi right hand still clutch hi 
sword, and deliber replied, 'I will not.' If we had all fire he 
would have been torn to shreds. some of us didn't. I didn't, for one; 
noth could have induc me." 

when one is tranquilli look death in the eye and refus him ani 
concess one natur ha a good opinion of one' self. I don't know 
if it wa thi feel that in thurston found express in a stiffish 
attitud and fold arms; at the mess tabl one day, in hi absence, 
anoth explan wa suggest by our quartermaster, an irreclaim 
stammer when the wine wa in: "it' h--i w--ay of m-m-master a 
c-c-consti-t-tu-t t-tendenc to r--un aw--ay." 

"what!" I flame out, indignantli rising; "you intim that thurston is 
a coward--and in hi absence?" 

"if he w--ere a cow--wow-ard h--e w--wouldn't t-tri to m-m-master it; 
and if he w--ere p-present I w--wouldn't d-d-dare to d-d-discuss it," 
wa the mollifi reply. 

thi intrepid man, georg thurston, die an ignobl death. the brigad 
wa in camp, with headquart in a grove of immens trees. To an upper 
branch of one of these a venturesom climber had attach the two end 
of a long rope and made a swing with a length of not less than one 
hundr feet. plung downward from a height of fifti feet, along the 
arc of a circl with such a radius, soar to an equal altitude, 
paus for one breathless instant, then sweep dizzili backward--no 
one who ha not tri it can conceiv the terror of such sport to the 
novice. thurston came out of hi tent one day and ask for instruct 
in the mysteri of propel the swing--th art of rise and sitting, 
which everi boy ha mastered. In a few moment he had acquir the trick 
and wa swing higher than the most experienc of us had dared. We 
shudder to look at hi fear flights. 

"st-t-top him," said the quartermaster, snail lazili along from the 
mess-tent, where he had been lunching; "h--e d-doesn't know that if h--e 
g-g-goe c-clear over h--e'll w--ind up the sw--ing." 

with such energi wa that strong man cannonad himself through the air 
that at each extrem of hi increas arc hi body, stand in the 
swing, wa almost horizontal. should he onc pass abov the level of the 
rope' attach he would be lost; the rope would slacken and he would 
fall vertic to a point as far below as he had gone above, and then 
the sudden tension of the rope would wrest it from hi hands. all saw 
the peril--al cri out to him to desist, and gesticul at him as, 
indistinct and with a nois like the rush of a cannon shot in flight, he 
swept past us through the lower reach of hi hideou oscillation. A 
woman stand at a littl distanc away faint and fell unobserved. 
men from the camp of a regiment near by ran in crowd to see, all 
shouting. suddenly, as thurston wa on hi upward curve, the shout all 
ceased. 

thurston and the swing had parted--that is all that can be known; both 
hand at onc had releas the rope. the impetu of the light swing 
exhausted, it wa fall back; the man' momentum wa carri him, 
almost erect, upward and forward, no longer in hi arc, but with an 
outward curve. It could have been but an instant, yet it seem an age. 
I cri out, or thought I cri out: "mi god! will he never stop go 
up?" He pass close to the branch of a tree. I rememb a feel of 
delight as I thought he would clutch it and save himself. I specul 
on the possibl of it sustain hi weight. He pass abov it, and 
from my point of view wa sharpli outlin against the blue. At thi 
distanc of mani year I can distinctli recal that imag of a man in 
the sky, it head erect, it feet close together, it hands--i do not 
see it hands. all at once, with astonish sudden and rapidity, it 
turn clear over and pitch downward. there is anoth cri from the 
crowd, which ha rush instinct forward. the man ha becom mere 
a whirl object, mostli legs. then there is an indescrib sound-- 
the sound of an impact that shake the earth, and these men, familiar 
with death in it most aw aspects, turn sick. mani walk unsteadili 
away from the spot; other support themselv against the trunk of 
tree or sit at the roots. death ha taken an unfair advantage; he ha 
struck with an unfamiliar weapon; he ha execut a new and disquiet 
stratagem. We did not know that he had so ghastli resources, 
possibl of terror so dismal. 

thurston' bodi lay on it back. one leg, bent beneath, wa broken abov 
the knee and the bone driven into the earth. the abdomen had burst; the 
bowel protruded. the neck wa broken. 

the arm were fold tightli across the breast. 




the mocking-bird 

the time, a pleasant sunday afternoon in the earli autumn of 1861. the 
place, a forest' heart in the mountain region of southwestern virginia. 
privat grayrock of the feder armi is discov seat comfort at 
the root of a great pine tree, against which he leans, hi leg extend 
straight along the ground, hi rifl lie across hi thighs, hi hand 
(clasp in order that they may not fall away to hi sides) rest upon 
the barrel of the weapon. the contact of the back of hi head with the 
tree ha push hi cap downward over hi eyes, almost conceal them; 
one see him would say that he slept. 

privat grayrock did not sleep; to have done so would have imperil the 
interest of the unit states, for he wa a long way outsid the line 
and subject to captur or death at the hand of the enemy. moreover, he 
wa in a frame of mind unfavor to repose. the caus of hi 
perturb of spirit wa this: dure the previou night he had serv 
on the picket-guard, and had been post as a sentinel in thi veri 
forest. the night wa clear, though moonless, but in the gloom of the 
wood the dark wa deep. grayrock' post wa at a consider 
distanc from those to right and left, for the picket had been thrown 
out a needless distanc from the camp, make the line too long for the 
forc detail to occupi it. the war wa young, and militari camp 
entertain the error that while sleep they were better protect by 
thin line a long way out toward the enemi than by thicker one close 
in. and sure they need as long notic as possibl of an enemy' 
approach, for they were at that time addict to the practic of 
undressing--than which noth could be more unsoldierly. On the morn 
of the memor 6th of april, at shiloh, mani of grant' men when 
spit on confeder bayonet were as nake as civilians; but it 
should be allow that thi wa not becaus of ani defect in their 
picket line. their error wa of anoth sort: they had no pickets. thi 
is perhap a vain digression. I should not care to undertak to interest 
the reader in the fate of an army; what we have here to consid is that 
of privat grayrock. 

for two hour after he had been left at hi lone post that saturday 
night he stood stock-still, lean against the trunk of a larg tree, 
stare into the dark in hi front and tri to recogn known 
objects; for he had been post at the same spot dure the day. but all 
wa now different; he saw noth in detail, but onli group of things, 
whose shapes, not observ when there wa someth more of them to 
observe, were now unfamiliar. they seem not to have been there before. 
A landscap that is all tree and undergrowth, moreover, lack 
definition, is confus and without accentu point upon which 
attent can gain a foothold. add the gloom of a moonless night, and 
someth more than great natur intellig and a citi educ is 
requir to preserv one' knowledg of direction. and that is how it 
occur that privat grayrock, after vigilantli watch the space in 
hi front and then imprud execut a circumspect of hi whole 
dimli visibl environ (silent walk around hi tree to 
accomplish it) lost hi bear and serious impair hi use 
as a sentinel. lost at hi post--un to say in which direct to 
look for an enemy' approach, and in which lay the sleep camp for 
whose secur he wa account with hi life--conscious, too, of mani 
anoth awkward featur of the situat and of consider affect 
hi own safety, privat grayrock wa profoundli disquieted. nor wa he 
given time to recov hi tranquillity, for almost at the moment that he 
realiz hi awkward predica he heard a stir of leav and a snap of 
fallen twigs, and turn with a still heart in the direct whenc 
it came, saw in the gloom the indistinct outlin of a human figure. 

"halt!" shout privat grayrock, peremptorili as in duti bound, back 
up the command with the sharp metal snap of hi cock rifle--"who 
goe there?" 

there wa no answer; at least there wa an instant' hesitation, and the 
answer, if it came, wa lost in the report of the sentinel' rifle. In 
the silenc of the night and the forest the sound wa deafening, and 
hardli had it die away when it wa repeat by the piec of the 
picket to right and left, a sympathet fusillade. for two hour everi 
unconvert civilian of them had been evolv enemi from hi 
imagination, and peopl the wood in hi front with them, and 
grayrock' shot had start the whole encroach host into visibl 
existence. have fired, all retreated, breathless, to the reserves--al 
but grayrock, who did not know in what direct to retreat. when, no 
enemi appearing, the rous camp two mile away had undress and got 
itself into bed again, and the picket line wa cautious 
re-established, he wa discov brave hold hi ground, and wa 
compliment by the offic of the guard as the one soldier of that 
devot band who could rightli be consid the moral equival of 
that uncommon unit of value, "a whoop in hell." 

In the mean time, however, grayrock had made a close but unavail 
search for the mortal part of the intrud at whom he had fired, and 
whom he had a marksman' intuit sens of have hit; for he wa one 
of those born expert who shoot without aim by an instinct sens of 
direction, and are nearli as danger by night as by day. dure a full 
half of hi twenty-four year he had been a terror to the target of all 
the shooting-galleri in three cities. unabl now to produc hi dead 
game he had the discret to hold hi tongue, and wa glad to observ 
in hi offic and comrad the natur assumpt that not have run 
away he had seen noth hostile. hi "honor mention" had been 
earn by not run away anyhow. 

nevertheless, privat grayrock wa far from satisfi with the night' 
adventure, and when the next day he made some fair enough pretext to 
appli for a pass to go outsid the lines, and the gener command 
promptli grant it in recognit of hi braveri the night before, he 
pass out at the point where that had been displayed. tell the 
sentinel then on duti there that he had lost something,--which wa true 
enough--h renew the search for the person whom he suppos himself to 
have shot, and whom if onli wound he hope to trail by the blood. He 
wa no more success by daylight than he had been in the darkness, and 
after cover a wide area and boldli penetr a long distanc into 
"the confederacy" he gave up the search, somewhat fatigued, seat 
himself at the root of the great pine tree, where we have seen him, and 
indulg hi disappointment. 

It is not to be infer that grayrock' wa the chagrin of a cruel 
natur balk of it bloodi deed. In the clear larg eyes, fine 
wrought lips, and broad forehead of that young man one could read quit 
anoth story, and in point of fact hi charact wa a singularli 
felicit compound of bold and sensibility, courag and conscience. 

"I find myself disappointed," he said to himself, sit there at the 
bottom of the golden haze submerg the forest like a subtler sea-- 
"disappoint in fail to discov a fellow-man dead by my hand! Do I 
then realli wish that I had taken life in the perform of a duti as 
well perform without? what more could I wish? If ani danger 
threatened, my shot avert it; that is what I wa there to do. no, I am 
glad inde if no human life wa needlessli extinguish by me. but I am 
in a fals position. I have suffer myself to be compliment by my 
offic and envi by my comrades. the camp is ring with prais of 
my courage. that is not just; I know myself courageous, but thi prais 
is for specif act which I did not perform, or performed--otherwise. 
It is believ that I remain at my post bravely, without firing, 
wherea it wa I who began the fusillade, and I did not retreat in the 
gener alarm becaus bewildered. what, then, shall I do? explain that I 
saw an enemi and fired? they have all said that of themselves, yet none 
believ it. shall I tell a truth which, discredit my courage, will 
have the effect of a lie? ugh! it is an ugli busi altogether. I wish 
to god I could find my man!" 

and so wishing, privat grayrock, overcom at last by the languor of the 
afternoon and lull by the stilli sound of insect drone and prose 
in certain fragrant shrubs, so far forgot the interest of the unit 
state as to fall asleep and expos himself to capture. and sleep he 
dreamed. 

He thought himself a boy, live in a far, fair land by the border of a 
great river upon which the tall steamboat move grandli up and down 
beneath their tower evolut of black smoke, which announc them 
long befor they had round the bend and mark their movement when 
mile out of sight. with him always, at hi side as he watch them, wa 
one to whom he gave hi heart and soul in love--a twin brother. togeth 
they stroll along the bank of the stream; togeth explor the 
field lie farther away from it, and gather pungent mint and stick 
of fragrant sassafra in the hill overlook all--beyond which lay the 
realm of conjecture, and from which, look southward across the great 
river, they caught glimps of the enchant land. hand in hand and 
heart in heart they two, the onli children of a widow mother, walk 
in path of light through valley of peace, see new thing under a 
new sun. and through all the golden day float one unceas sound-- 
the rich, thrill melodi of a mocking-bird in a cage by the cottag 
door. It pervad and possess all the spiritu interv of the 
dream, like a music benediction. the joyou bird wa alway in song; 
it infinit variou note seem to flow from it throat, effortless, 
in bubbl and rill at each heart-beat, like the water of a puls 
spring. that fresh, clear melodi seemed, indeed, the spirit of the 
scene, the mean and interpret to sens of the mysteri of life 
and love. 

but there came a time when the day of the dream grew dark with sorrow 
in a rain of tears. the good mother wa dead, the meadowsid home by the 
great river wa broken up, and the brother were part between two of 
their kinsmen. william (the dreamer) went to live in a popul citi in 
the realm of conjecture, and john, cross the river into the enchant 
land, wa taken to a distant region whose peopl in their live and way 
were said to be strang and wicked. To him, in the distribut of the 
dead mother' estate, had fallen all that they deem of value--th 
mocking-bird. they could be divided, but it could not, so it wa carri 
away into the strang country, and the world of william knew it no more 
forever. yet still through the aftertim of hi loneli it song 
fill all the dream, and seem alway sound in hi ear and in hi 
heart. 

the kinsmen who had adopt the boy were enemies, hold no 
communication. for a time letter full of boyish bravado and boast 
narr of the new and larger experience--grotesqu descript of 
their widen live and the new world they had conquered--pass 
between them; but these gradual becam less frequent, and with 
william' remov to anoth and greater citi ceas altogether. but 
ever through it all ran the song of the mocking-bird, and when the 
dreamer open hi eye and stare through the vista of the pine forest 
the cessat of it music first appris him that he wa awake. 

the sun wa low and red in the west; the level ray project from the 
trunk of each giant pine a wall of shadow travers the golden haze to 
eastward until light and shade were blend in undistinguish blue. 

privat grayrock rose to hi feet, look cautious about him, 
shoulder hi rifl and set off toward camp. He had gone perhap a 
half-mile, and wa pass a thicket of laurel, when a bird rose from 
the midst of it and perch on the branch of a tree above, pour from 
it joyou breast so inexhaust flood of song as but one of all 
god' creatur can utter in hi praise. there wa littl in that--it 
wa onli to open the bill and breathe; yet the man stop as if struck 
--stop and let fall hi rifle, look upward at the bird, cover hi 
eye with hi hand and wept like a child! for the moment he was, 
indeed, a child, in spirit and in memory, dwell again by the great 
river, over-against the enchant land! then with an effort of the will 
he pull himself together, pick up hi weapon and audibl damn 
himself for an idiot strode on. pass an open that reach into the 
heart of the littl thicket he look in, and there, supin upon the 
earth, it arm all abroad, it gray uniform stain with a singl spot 
of blood upon the breast, it white face turn sharpli upward and 
backward, lay the imag of himself!--th bodi of john grayrock, dead of 
a gunshot wound, and still warm! He had found hi man. 

As the unfortun soldier knelt besid that masterwork of civil war the 
shrill bird upon the bough overhead still her song and, flush 
with sunset' crimson glory, glide silent away through the solemn 
space of the wood. At roll-cal that even in the feder camp the 
name william grayrock brought no response, nor ever again there-after. 





civilian 





the man out OF the nose 

At the intersect of two certain street in that part of san francisco 
known by the rather loos appli name of north beach, is a vacant 
lot, which is rather more nearli level than is usual the case with 
lots, vacant or otherwise, in that region. immedi at the back of 
it, to the south, however, the ground slope steepli upward, the 
accliv broken by three terrac cut into the soft rock. It is a place 
for goat and poor persons, sever famili of each class have 
occupi it jointli and amic "from the foundat of the city." one 
of the humbl habit of the lowest terrac is notic for it 
rude resembl to the human face, or rather to such a simulacrum of it 
as a boy might cut out of a hollow pumpkin, mean no offens to hi 
race. the eye are two circular windows, the nose is a door, the mouth 
an apertur caus by remov of a board below. there are no doorsteps. 
As a face, thi hous is too large; as a dwelling, too small. the blank, 
unmean stare of it lidless and browless eye is uncanny. 

sometim a man step out of the nose, turns, pass the place where the 
right ear should be and make hi way through the throng of children 
and goat obstruct the narrow walk between hi neighbors' door and 
the edg of the terrac gain the street by descend a flight of 
ricketi stairs. here he paus to consult hi watch and the stranger who 
happen to pass wonder whi such a man as that can care what is the 
hour. longer observ would show that the time of day is an 
import element in the man' movements, for it is at precis two 
o'clock in the afternoon that he come forth 365 time in everi year. 

have satisfi himself that he ha made no mistak in the hour he 
replac the watch and walk rapidli southward up the street two 
squares, turn to the right and as he approach the next corner fix 
hi eye on an upper window in a three-stori build across the way. 
thi is a somewhat dingi structure, origin of red brick and now 
gray. It show the touch of age and dust. built for a dwelling, it is 
now a factory. I do not know what is made there; the thing that are 
commonli made in a factory, I suppose. I onli know that at two o'clock 
in the afternoon of everi day but sunday it is full of activ and 
clatter; pulsat of some great engin shake it and there are 
recurr scream of wood torment by the saw. At the window on which 
the man fix an intens expect gaze noth ever appears; the 
glass, in truth, ha such a coat of dust that it ha long ceas to 
be transparent. the man look at it without stopping; he mere keep 
turn hi head more and more backward as he leav the build 
behind. pass along to the next corner, he turn to the left, goe 
round the block, and come back till he reach the point diagon 
across the street from the factory--point on hi former course, which he 
then retraces, look frequent backward over hi right shoulder at 
the window while it is in sight. for mani year he ha not been known to 
vari hi rout nor to introduc a singl innov into hi action. In 
a quarter of an hour he is again at the mouth of hi dwelling, and a 
woman, who ha for some time been stand in the nose, assist him to 
enter. He is seen no more until two o'clock the next day. the woman is 
hi wife. she support herself and him by wash for the poor peopl 
among whom they live, at rate which destroy chines and domest 
competition. 

thi man is about fifty-seven year of age, though he look greatli 
older. hi hair is dead white. He wear no beard, and is alway newli 
shaven. hi hand are clean, hi nail well kept. In the matter of dress 
he is distinctli superior to hi position, as indic by hi 
surround and the busi of hi wife. He is, indeed, veri neatly, 
if not quit fashionably, clad. hi silk hat ha a date no earlier than 
the year befor the last, and hi boots, scrupul polished, are 
innoc of patches. I am told that the suit which he wear dure hi 
daili excurs of fifteen minut is not the one that he wear at 
home. like everyth els that he has, thi is provid and kept in 
repair by the wife, and is renew as frequent as her scanti mean 
permit. 

thirti year ago john hardshaw and hi wife live on rincon hill in one 
of the finest resid of that onc aristocrat quarter. He had onc 
been a physician, but have inherit a consider estat from hi 
father concern himself no more about the ailment of hi 
fellow-creatur and found as much work as he care for in manag hi 
own affairs. both he and hi wife were highli cultiv persons, and 
their hous wa frequent by a small set of such men and women as 
person of their tast would think worth knowing. So far as these knew, 
mr. and mrs. hardshaw live happili together; certainli the wife wa 
devot to her handsom and accomplish husband and exceedingli proud 
of him. 

among their acquaint were the barwells--man, wife and two young 
children--of sacramento. mr. barwel wa a civil and mine engineer, 
whose duti took him much from home and frequent to san francisco. On 
these occas hi wife commonli accompani him and pass much of her 
time at the hous of her friend, mrs. hardshaw, alway with her two 
children, of whom mrs. hardshaw, childless herself, grew fond. 
unluckily, her husband grew equal fond of their mother--a good deal 
fonder. still more unluckily, that attract ladi wa less wise than 
weak. 

At about three o'clock one autumn morn offic no. 13 of the 
sacramento polic saw a man stealthili leav the rear entranc of a 
gentleman' resid and promptli arrest him. the man--who wore a 
slouch hat and shaggi overcoat--off the policeman one hundred, then 
five hundred, then one thousand dollar to be released. As he had less 
than the first mention sum on hi person the offic treat hi 
propos with virtuou contempt. befor reach the station the 
prison agre to give him a check for ten thousand dollar and remain 
iron in the willow along the river bank until it should be paid. As 
thi onli provok new deris he would say no more, mere give an 
obvious fictiti name. when he wa search at the station noth 
of valu wa found on him but a miniatur portrait of mrs. barwell--th 
ladi of the hous at which he wa caught. the case wa set with costli 
diamonds; and someth in the qualiti of the man' linen sent a pang of 
unavail regret through the sever incorrupt bosom of offic 
no. 13. there wa noth about the prisoner' cloth nor person to 
identifi him and he wa book for burglari under the name that he had 
given, the honor name of john K. smith. the K. wa an inspir 
upon which, doubtless, he greatli pride himself. 

In the mean time the mysteri disappear of john hardshaw wa 
agit the gossip of rincon hill in san francisco, and wa even 
mention in one of the newspapers. It did not occur to the ladi whom 
that journal consider describ as hi "widow," to look for him in 
the citi prison at sacramento--a town which he wa not known ever to 
have visited. As john K. smith he wa arraign and, waiv 
examination, commit for trial. 

about two week befor the trial, mrs. hardshaw, accident learn 
that her husband wa held in sacramento under an assum name on a 
charg of burglary, hasten to that citi without dare to mention the 
matter to ani one and present herself at the prison, ask for an 
interview with her husband, john K. smith. haggard and ill with anxiety, 
wear a plain travel wrap which cover her from neck to foot, and 
in which she had pass the night on the steamboat, too anxiou to 
sleep, she hardli show for what she was, but her manner plead for 
her more strongli than anyth that she chose to say in evid of her 
right to admittance. she wa permit to see him alone. 

what occur dure that distress interview ha never transpired; 
but later event prove that hardshaw had found mean to subdu her will 
to hi own. she left the prison, a broken-heart woman, refus to 
answer a singl question, and return to her desol home renewed, in 
a half-heart way, her inquiri for her miss husband. A week later 
she wa herself missing: she had "gone back to the states"--nobodi knew 
ani more than that. 

On hi trial the prison plead guilty--"bi advic of hi counsel," so 
hi counsel said. nevertheless, the judge, in whose mind sever unusu 
circumst had creat a doubt, insist on the district attorney 
place offic no. 13 on the stand, and the deposit of mrs. barwell, 
who wa too ill to attend, wa read to the jury. It wa veri brief: she 
knew noth of the matter except that the like of herself wa her 
property, and had, she thought, been left on the parlor tabl when she 
had retir on the night of the arrest. she had intend it as a present 
to her husband, then and still absent in europ on busi for a mine 
company. 

thi witness' manner when make the deposit at her resid wa 
afterward describ by the district attorney as most extraordinary. 
twice she had refus to testify, and once, when the deposit lack 
noth but her signature, she had caught it from the clerk' hand and 
torn it in pieces. she had call her children to the bedsid and 
embrac them with stream eyes, then suddenli send them from the 
room, she verifi her statement by oath and signature, and fainted-- 
"slick away," said the district attorney. It wa at that time that her 
physician, arriv upon the scene, took in the situat at a glanc 
and grasp the repres of the law by the collar chuck him 
into the street and kick hi assist after him. the insult majesti 
of the law wa not vindicated; the victim of the indign did not even 
mention anyth of all thi in court. He wa ambiti to win hi case, 
and the circumst of the take of that deposit were not such as 
would give it weight if related; and after all, the man on trial had 
commit an offens against the law' majesti onli less heinou than 
that of the irasc physician. 

By suggest of the judg the juri render a verdict of guilty; there 
wa noth els to do, and the prison wa sentenc to the 
penitentiari for three years. hi counsel, who had object to noth 
and had made no plea for lenity--had, in fact, hardli said a word--wrung 
hi client' hand and left the room. It wa obviou to the whole bar 
that he had been engag onli to prevent the court from appoint 
counsel who might possibl insist on make a defense. 

john hardshaw serv out hi term at san quentin, and when discharg 
wa met at the prison gate by hi wife, who had return from "the 
states" to receiv him. It is thought they went straight to europe; 
anyhow, a gener power-of-attorney to a lawyer still live among us-- 
from whom I have mani of the fact of thi simpl history--wa execut 
in paris. thi lawyer in a short time sold everyth that hardshaw 
own in california, and for year noth wa heard of the unfortun 
couple; though mani to whose ear had come vagu and inaccur 
intim of their strang story, and who had known them, recal 
their person with tender and their misfortun with compassion. 

some year later they returned, both broken in fortun and spirit and 
he in health. the purpos of their return I have not been abl to 
ascertain. for some time they lived, under the name of johnson, in a 
respect enough quarter south of market street, pretti well put, and 
were never seen away from the vicin of their dwelling. they must have 
had a littl money left, for it is not known that the man had ani 
occupation, the state of hi health probabl not permitting. the woman' 
devot to her invalid husband wa matter of remark among their 
neighbors; she seem never absent from hi side and alway support 
and cheer him. they would sit for hour on one of the bench in a 
littl public park, she read to him, hi hand in hers, her light 
touch occasion visit hi pale brow, her still beauti eye 
frequent lift from the book to look into hi as she made some 
comment on the text, or close the volum to beguil hi mood with talk 
of--what? nobodi ever overheard a convers between these two. the 
reader who ha had the patienc to follow their histori to thi point 
may possibl find a pleasur in conjecture: there wa probabl someth 
to be avoided. the bear of the man wa one of profound dejection; 
indeed, the unsympathet youth of the neighborhood, with that keen 
sens for visibl characterist which ever distinguish the young 
male of our species, sometim mention him among themselv by the 
name of spooni glum. 

It occur one day that john hardshaw wa possess by the spirit of 
unrest. god know what led him whither he went, but he cross market 
street and held hi way northward over the hills, and downward into the 
region known as north beach. turn aimlessli to the left he follow 
hi toe along an unfamiliar street until he wa opposit what for that 
period wa a rather grand dwelling, and for thi is a rather shabbi 
factory. cast hi eye casual upward he saw at an open window what 
it had been better that he had not seen--th face and figur of elvira 
barwell. their eye met. with a sharp exclamation, like the cri of a 
startl bird, the ladi sprang to her feet and thrust her bodi half out 
of the window, clutch the case on each side. arrest by the cry, 
the peopl in the street below look up. hardshaw stood motionless, 
speechless, hi eye two flames. "take care!" shout some one in the 
crowd, as the woman strain further and further forward, defi the 
silent, implac law of gravitation, as onc she had defi that other 
law which god thunder from sinai. the sudden of her movement had 
tumbl a torrent of dark hair down her shoulders, and now it wa blown 
about her cheeks, almost conceal her face. A moment so, and then--! A 
fear cri rang through the street, as, lose her balance, she pitch 
headlong from the window, a confus and whirl mass of skirts, limbs, 
hair, and white face, and struck the pavement with a horribl sound and 
a forc of impact that wa felt a hundr feet away. for a moment all 
eye refus their offic and turn from the sicken spectacl on the 
sidewalk. drawn again to that horror, they saw it strang augmented. A 
man, hatless, seat flat upon the pave stones, held the broken, 
bleed bodi against hi breast, kiss the mangl cheek and 
stream mouth through tangl of wet hair, hi own featur 
indistinguish crimson with the blood that half-strangl him and ran 
in rill from hi soaken beard. 

the reporter' task is nearli finished. the barwel had that veri 
morn return from a two years' absenc in peru. A week later the 
widower, now doubli desolate, sinc there could be no miss the 
signific of hardshaw' horribl demonstration, had sail for I know 
not what distant port; he ha never come back to stay. hardshaw--a 
johnson no longer--pass a year in the stockton asylum for the insane, 
where also, through the influenc of piti friends, hi wife wa 
admit to care for him. when he wa discharged, not cure but 
harmless, they return to the city; it would seem ever to have had some 
dread fascin for them. for a time they live near the mission 
dolores, in poverti onli less abject than that which is their present 
lot; but it wa too far away from the object point of the man' daili 
pilgrimage. they could not afford car fare. So that poor devil of an 
angel from heaven--wif to thi convict and lunatic--obtained, at a fair 
enough rental, the blank-fac shanti on the lower terrac of goat hill. 
thenc to the structur that wa a dwell and is a factori the 
distanc is not so great; it is, in fact, an agreeabl walk, judg 
from the man' eager and cheer look as he take it. the return 
journey appear to be a trifl wearisome. 




AN adventur AT brownville[1] 

[1] thi stori wa written in collabor with miss ina lillian 
peterson, to whom is rightli due the credit for whatev merit it may 
have. 

I taught a littl countri school near brownville, which, as everi one 
know who ha had the good luck to live there, is the capit of a 
consider expans of the finest sceneri in california. the town is 
somewhat frequent in summer by a class of person whom it is the habit 
of the local journal to call "pleasur seekers," but who by a juster 
classif would be known as "the sick and those in adversity." 
brownvil itself might rightli enough be described, indeed, as a summer 
place of last resort. It is fairli well endow with boarding-houses, at 
the least pernici of which I perform twice a day (lunch at the 
schoolhouse) the humbl rite of cement the allianc between soul and 
body. from thi "hostelry" (a the local journal prefer to call it 
when it did not call it a "caravanserai") to the schoolhous the 
distanc by the wagon road wa about a mile and a half; but there wa a 
trail, veri littl used, which led over an interven rang of low, 
heavili wood hills, consider shorten the distance. By thi 
trail I wa return one even later than usual. It wa the last day 
of the term and I had been detain at the schoolhous until almost 
dark, prepar an account of my stewardship for the trustees--two of 
whom, I proudli reflected, would be abl to read it, and the third (an 
instanc of the dominion of mind over matter) would be overrul in hi 
customari antagon to the schoolmast of hi own creation. 

I had gone not more than a quarter of the way when, find an interest 
in the antic of a famili of lizard which dwelt thereabout and seem 
full of reptilian joy for their immun from the ill incid to life 
at the brownvil house, I sat upon a fallen tree to observ them. As I 
lean wearili against a branch of the gnarl old trunk the twilight 
deepen in the somber wood and the faint new moon began cast 
visibl shadow and gild the leav of the tree with a tender but 
ghostli light. 

I heard the sound of voices--a woman's, angry, impetuous, rise against 
deep masculin tones, rich and musical. I strain my eyes, peer 
through the duski shadow of the wood, hope to get a view of the 
intrud on my solitude, but could see no one. for some yard in each 
direct I had an uninterrupt view of the trail, and know of no 
other within a half mile thought the person heard must be approach 
from the wood at one side. there wa no sound but that of the voices, 
which were now so distinct that I could catch the words. that of the man 
gave me an impress of anger, abundantli confirm by the matter 
spoken. 

"I will have no threats; you are powerless, as you veri well know. let 
thing remain as they are or, by god! you shall both suffer for it." 

"what do you mean?"--thi wa the voic of the woman, a cultiv 
voice, the voic of a lady. "you would not--murd us." 

there wa no reply, at least none that wa audibl to me. dure the 
silenc I peer into the wood in hope to get a glimps of the speakers, 
for I felt sure that thi wa an affair of graviti in which ordinari 
scrupl ought not to count. It seem to me that the woman wa in 
peril; at ani rate the man had not disavow a willing to murder. 
when a man is enact the rôle of potenti assassin he ha not the 
right to choos hi audience. 

after some littl time I saw them, indistinct in the moonlight among the 
trees. the man, tall and slender, seem cloth in black; the woman 
wore, as nearli as I could make out, a gown of gray stuff. evid 
they were still unawar of my presenc in the shadow, though for some 
reason when they renew their convers they spoke in lower tone 
and I could no longer understand. As I look the woman seem to sink 
to the ground and rais her hand in supplication, as is frequent done 
on the stage and never, so far as I knew, anywher else, and I am now 
not altogeth sure that it wa done in thi instance. the man fix hi 
eye upon her; they seem to glitter bleakli in the moonlight with an 
express that made me apprehens that he would turn them upon me. I 
do not know by what impuls I wa moved, but I sprang to my feet out of 
the shadow. At that instant the figur vanished. I peer in vain 
through the space among the tree and clump of undergrowth. the night 
wind rustl the leaves; the lizard had retir early, reptil of 
exemplari habits. the littl moon wa alreadi slip behind a black 
hill in the west. 

I went home, somewhat disturb in mind, half doubt that I had heard 
or seen ani live thing except the lizards. It all seem a trifl 
odd and uncanny. It wa as if among the sever phenomena, object and 
subjective, that made the sum total of the incid there had been an 
uncertain element which had diffus it dubiou charact over all--had 
leaven the whole mass with unreality. I did not like it. 

At the breakfast tabl the next morn there wa a new face; opposit 
me sat a young woman at whom I mere glanc as I took my seat. In 
speak to the high and mighti femal personag who condescend to 
seem to wait upon us, thi girl soon invit my attent by the sound 
of her voice, which wa like, yet not altogeth like, the one still 
murmur in my memori of the previou evening' adventure. A moment 
later anoth girl, a few year older, enter the room and sat at the 
left of the other, speak to her a gentl "good morning." By _her_ 
voic I wa startled: it wa without doubt the one of which the first 
girl' had remind me. here wa the ladi of the sylvan incid sit 
bodili befor me, "in her habit as she lived." 

evid enough the two were sisters. 

with a nebul kind of apprehens that I might be recogn as the 
mute inglori hero of an adventur which had in my conscious and 
conscienc someth of the charact of eavesdropping, I allow myself 
onli a hasti cup of the lukewarm coffe thought provid by the 
prescient waitress for the emergency, and left the table. As I pass 
out of the hous into the ground I heard a rich, strong male voic 
sing an aria from "rigoletto." I am bound to say that it wa 
exquisit sung, too, but there wa someth in the perform that 
displeas me, I could say neither what nor why, and I walk rapidli 
away. 

return later in the day I saw the elder of the two young women 
stand on the porch and near her a tall man in black clothing--th man 
whom I had expect to see. all day the desir to know someth of 
these person had been uppermost in my mind and I now resolv to learn 
what I could of them in ani way that wa neither dishonor nor low. 

the man wa talk easili and affabl to hi companion, but at the 
sound of my footstep on the gravel walk he ceased, and turn about 
look me full in the face. He wa appar of middl age, dark and 
uncommonli handsome. hi attir wa faultless, hi bear easi and 
graceful, the look which he turn upon me open, free, and devoid of ani 
suggest of rudeness. nevertheless it affect me with a distinct 
emot which on subsequ analysi in memori appear to be compound 
of hatr and dread--i am unwil to call it fear. A second later the 
man and woman had disappeared. they seem to have a trick of 
disappearing. On enter the house, however, I saw them through the 
open doorway of the parlor as I passed; they had mere step through 
a window which open down to the floor. 

cautious "approached" on the subject of her new guest my landladi 
prove not ungracious. restat with, I hope, some small rever for 
english grammar the fact were these: the two girl were paulin and eva 
maynard of san francisco; the elder wa pauline. the man wa richard 
benning, their guardian, who had been the most intim friend of their 
father, now deceased. mr. ben had brought them to brownvil in the 
hope that the mountain climat might benefit eva, who wa thought to be 
in danger of consumption. 

upon these short and simpl annal the landladi wrought an embroideri of 
eulogium which abundantli attest her faith in mr. benning' will and 
abil to pay for the best that her hous afforded. that he had a good 
heart wa evid to her from hi devot to hi two beauti ward 
and hi realli touch solicitud for their comfort. the evid 
impress me as insuffici and I silent found the scotch verdict, 
"not proven." 

certainli mr. ben wa most attent to hi wards. In my stroll 
about the countri I frequent encount them--sometim in compani 
with other guest of the hotel--explor the gulches, fishing, rifl 
shooting, and otherwis wile away the monotoni of countri life; and 
although I watch them as close as good manner would permit I saw 
noth that would in ani way explain the strang word that I had 
overheard in the wood. I had grown toler well acquaint with the 
young ladi and could exchang look and even greet with their 
guardian without actual repugnance. 

A month went by and I had almost ceas to interest myself in their 
affair when one night our entir littl commun wa thrown into 
excit by an event which vividli recal my experi in the 
forest. 

thi wa the death of the elder girl, pauline. 

the sister had occupi the same bedroom on the third floor of the 
house. wake in the gray of the morn eva had found paulin dead 
besid her. later, when the poor girl wa weep besid the bodi amid a 
throng of sympathet if not veri consider persons, mr. ben 
enter the room and appear to be about to take her hand. she drew 
away from the side of the dead and move slowli toward the door. 

"it is you," she said--"you who have done this. you--you--you!" 

"she is raving," he said in a low voice. He follow her, step by step, 
as she retreated, hi eye fix upon her with a steadi gaze in which 
there wa noth of tender nor of compassion. she stopped; the hand 
that she had rais in accus fell to her side, her dilat eye 
contract visibly, the lid slowli drop over them, veil their 
strang wild beauty, and she stood motionless and almost as white as the 
dead girl lie near. the man took her hand and put hi arm gentli about 
her shoulders, as if to support her. suddenli she burst into a passion 
of tear and clung to him as a child to it mother. He smile with a 
smile that affect me most disagreeably--perhap ani kind of smile 
would have done so--and led her silent out of the room. 

there wa an inquest--and the customari verdict: the deceased, it 
appeared, came to her death through "heart disease." It wa befor the 
invent of heart _failure_, though the heart of poor paulin had 
indubit failed. the bodi wa embalm and taken to san francisco by 
some one summon thenc for the purpose, neither eva nor ben 
accompani it. some of the hotel gossip ventur to think that veri 
strange, and a few hardi spirit went so far as to think it veri strang 
indeed; but the good landladi gener threw herself into the breach, 
say it wa owe to the precari natur of the girl' health. It is 
not of record that either of the two person most affect and 
appar least concern made ani explanation. 

one even about a week after the death I went out upon the veranda of 
the hotel to get a book that I had left there. under some vine shut 
out the moonlight from a part of the space I saw richard benning, for 
whose apparit I wa prepar by have previous heard the low, 
sweet voic of eva maynard, whom also I now discerned, stand befor 
him with one hand rais to hi shoulder and her eyes, as nearli as I 
could judge, gaze upward into his. He held her disengag hand and hi 
head wa bent with a singular digniti and grace. their attitud wa that 
of lovers, and as I stood in deep shadow to observ I felt even guiltier 
than on that memor night in the wood. I wa about to retire, when 
the girl spoke, and the contrast between her word and her attitud wa 
so surpris that I remained, becaus I had mere forgotten to go 
away. 

"you will take my life," she said, "a you did pauline's. I know your 
intent as well as I know your power, and I ask nothing, onli that you 
finish your work without needless delay and let me be at peace." 

He made no reply--mer let go the hand that he wa holding, remov 
the other from hi shoulder, and turn away descend the step 
lead to the garden and disappear in the shrubbery. but a moment 
later I heard, seemingli from a great distance, hi fine clear voic in 
a barbar chant, which as I listen brought befor some inner 
spiritu sens a conscious of some far, strang land peopl with 
be have forbidden powers. the song held me in a kind of spell, but 
when it had die away I recov and instantli perceiv what I thought 
an opportunity. I walk out of my shadow to where the girl stood. she 
turn and stare at me with someth of the look, it seem to me, of 
a hunt hare. possibl my intrus had frighten her. 

"miss maynard," I said, "I beg you to tell me who that man is and the 
natur of hi power over you. perhap thi is rude in me, but it is not 
a matter for idl civilities. when a woman is in danger ani man ha a 
right to act." 

she listen without visibl emotion--almost I thought without interest, 
and when I had finish she close her big blue eye as if unspeak 
weary. 

"you can do nothing," she said. 

I took hold of her arm, gentli shake her as one shake a person 
fall into a danger sleep. 

"you must rous yourself," I said; "someth must be done and you must 
give me leav to act. you have said that that man kill your sister, 
and I believ it--that he will kill you, and I believ that." 

she mere rais her eye to mine. 

"will you not tell me all?" I added. 

"there is noth to be done, I tell you--nothing. and if I could do 
anyth I would not. It doe not matter in the least. We shall be here 
onli two day more; we go away then, oh, so far! If you have observ 
anything, I beg you to be silent." 

"but thi is madness, girl." I wa tri by rough speech to break the 
deadli repos of her manner. "you have accus him of murder. unless you 
explain these thing to me I shall lay the matter befor the 
authorities." 

thi rous her, but in a way that I did not like. she lift her head 
proudli and said: "do not meddle, sir, in what doe not concern you. 
thi is my affair, mr. moran, not yours." 

"it concern everi person in the country--in the world," I answered, 
with equal coldness. "if you had no love for your sister I, at least, am 
concern for you." 

"listen," she interrupted, lean toward me. "I love her, yes, god 
knows! but more than that--beyond all, beyond expression, I love _him_. 
you have overheard a secret, but you shall not make use of it to harm 
him. I shall deni all. your word against mine--it will be that. Do you 
think your 'authorities' will believ you?" 

she wa now smile like an angel and, god help me! I wa heel over 
head in love with her! did she, by some of the mani method of 
divin known to her sex, read my feelings? her whole manner had 
altered. 

"come," she said, almost coaxingly, "promis that you will not be 
impolit again." she took my arm in the most friendli way. "come, I will 
walk with you. He will not know--h will remain away all night." 

Up and down the veranda we pace in the moonlight, she seemingli 
forget her recent bereavement, coo and murmur girl-wis of 
everi kind of noth in all brownville; I silent, conscious awkward 
and with someth of the feel of be concern in an intrigue. It 
wa a revelation--thi most charm and appar blameless creatur 
coolli and confessedli deceiv the man for whom a moment befor she 
had acknowledg and shown the suprem love which find even death an 
accept endearment. 

"truly," I thought in my inexperience, "here is someth new under the 
moon." 

and the moon must have smiled. 

befor we part I had exact a promis that she would walk with me the 
next afternoon--befor go away forever--to the old mill, one of 
brownville' rever antiquities, erect in 1860. 

"if he is not about," she ad gravely, as I let go the hand she had 
given me at parting, and of which, may the good saint forgiv me, I 
strove vainli to repossess myself when she had said it--so charming, as 
the wise frenchman ha point out, do we find woman' infidel when 
we are it objects, not it victims. In apport hi benefact 
that night the angel of sleep overlook me. 

the brownvil hous dine early, and after dinner the next day miss 
maynard, who had not been at table, came to me on the veranda, attir 
in the demurest of walk costumes, say not a word. "he" wa 
evid "not about." We went slowli up the road that led to the old 
mill. she wa appar not strong and at time took my arm, 
relinquish it and take it again rather capriciously, I thought. her 
mood, or rather her success of moods, wa as mutabl as skylight in a 
rippl sea. she jest as if she had never heard of such a thing as 
death, and laugh on the lightest incitement, and directli afterward 
would sing a few bar of some grave melodi with such tender of 
express that I had to turn away my eye lest she should see the 
evid of her success in art, if art it was, not artlessness, as then 
I wa compel to think it. and she said the oddest thing in the most 
unconvent way, skirt sometim unfathom abysm of thought, 
where I had hardli the courag to set foot. In short, she wa 
fascin in a thousand and fifti differ ways, and at everi step I 
execut a new and profound emot folly, a hardier spiritu 
indiscretion, incur fresh liabil to arrest by the constabulari of 
conscienc for infract of my own peace. 

arriv at the mill, she made no pretens of stopping, but turn into 
a trail lead through a field of stubbl toward a creek. cross by a 
rustic bridg we continu on the trail, which now led uphil to one of 
the most picturesqu spot in the country. the eagle' nest, it wa 
called--th summit of a cliff that rose sheer into the air to a height 
of hundr of feet abov the forest at it base. from thi elev 
point we had a nobl view of anoth valley and of the opposit hill 
flush with the last ray of the set sun. 

As we watch the light escap to higher and higher plane from the 
encroach flood of shadow fill the valley we heard footsteps, and 
in anoth moment were join by richard benning. 

"I saw you from the road," he said carelessly; "so I came up." 

be a fool, I neglect to take him by the throat and pitch him into 
the treetop below, but mutter some polit lie instead. On the girl 
the effect of hi come wa immedi and unmistakable. her face wa 
suffus with the glori of love' transfiguration: the red light of the 
sunset had not been more obviou in her eye than wa now the lovelight 
that replac it. 

"I am so glad you came!" she said, give him both her hands; and, god 
help me! it wa manifestli true. 

seat himself upon the ground he began a live dissert upon the 
wild flower of the region, a number of which he had with him. In the 
middl of a faceti sentenc he suddenli ceas speak and fix hi 
eye upon eva, who lean against the stump of a tree, absent plait 
grasses. she lift her eye in a startl way to his, as if she had 
_felt_ hi look. she then rose, cast away her grasses, and move slowli 
away from him. He also rose, continu to look at her. He had still in 
hi hand the bunch of flowers. the girl turned, as if to speak, but said 
nothing. I recal clearli now someth of which I wa but 
half-consci then--th dread contrast between the smile upon her 
lip and the terrifi express in her eye as she met hi steadi and 
imper gaze. I know noth of how it happened, nor how it wa that 
I did not sooner understand; I onli know that with the smile of an angel 
upon her lip and that look of terror in her beauti eye eva maynard 
sprang from the cliff and shot crash into the top of the pine 
below! 

how and how long afterward I reach the place I cannot say, but richard 
ben wa alreadi there, kneel besid the dread thing that had 
been a woman. 

"she is dead--quit dead," he said coldly. "I will go to town for 
assistance. pleas do me the favor to remain." 

He rose to hi feet and move away, but in a moment had stop and 
turn about. 

"you have doubtless observed, my friend," he said, "that thi wa 
entir her own act. I did not rise in time to prevent it, and you, not 
know her mental condition--y could not, of course, have suspected." 

hi manner madden me. 

"you are as much her assassin," I said, "a if your damnabl hand had 
cut her throat." He shrug hi shoulder without repli and, turning, 
walk away. A moment later I heard, through the deepen shadow of 
the wood into which he had disappeared, a rich, strong, bariton voic 
sing "_la donna e mobile_," from "rigoletto." 




the famou gilson bequest 

It wa rough on gilson. such wa the terse, cold, but not altogeth 
unsympathet judgment of the better public opinion at mammon hill--th 
dictum of respectability. the verdict of the opposite, or rather the 
opposing, element--th element that lurk red-ey and restless about 
moll gurney' "deadfall," while respect took it with sugar at mr. 
jo. bentley' gorgeou "saloon"--wa to pretti much the same gener 
effect, though somewhat more ornat express by the use of 
picturesqu expletives, which it is needless to quote. virtually, mammon 
hill wa a unit on the gilson question. and it must be confess that in 
a mere tempor sens all wa not well with mr. gilson. He had that 
morn been led into town by mr. brentshaw and publicli charg with 
hors stealing; the sheriff meantim busi himself about the tree with 
a new manila rope and carpent pete be activ employ between 
drink upon a pine box about the length and breadth of mr. gilson. 
societi have render it verdict, there remain between gilson and 
etern onli the decent formal of a trial. 

these are the short and simpl annal of the prisoner: He had recent 
been a resid of new jerusalem, on the north fork of the littl stony, 
but had come to the newli discov placer of mammon hill immedi 
befor the "rush" by which the former place wa depopulated. the 
discoveri of the new dig had occur opportun for mr. gilson, 
for it had onli just befor been intim to him by a new jerusalem 
vigil committe that it would better hi prospect in, and for, life 
to go somewhere; and the list of place to which he could safe go did 
not includ ani of the older camps; so he natur establish himself 
at mammon hill. be eventu follow thither by all hi judges, he 
order hi conduct with consider circumspection, but as he had 
never been known to do an honest day' work at ani industri sanction 
by the stern local code of moral except draw poker he wa still an 
object of suspicion. indeed, it wa conjectur that he wa the author 
of the mani dare depred that had recent been commit with 
pan and brush on the sluic boxes. 

promin among those in whom thi suspicion had ripen into a 
steadfast convict wa mr. brentshaw. At all season and 
unseason time mr. brentshaw avow hi belief in mr. gilson' 
connect with these unholi midnight enterprises, and hi own 
willing to prepar a way for the solar beam through the bodi of ani 
one who might think it expedi to utter a differ opinion--which, in 
hi presence, no one wa more care not to do than the peace-lov 
person most concerned. whatev may have been the truth of the matter, 
it is certain that gilson frequent lost more "clean dust" at jo. 
bentley' faro tabl than it wa record in local histori that he had 
ever honestli earn at draw poker in all the day of the camp' 
existence. but at last mr. bentley--fearing, it may be, to lose the more 
profit patronag of mr. brentshaw--peremptorili refus to let 
gilson copper the queen, intim at the same time, in hi frank, 
forthright way, that the privileg of lose money at "thi bank" wa a 
bless appertain to, proceed logic from, and cotermin 
with, a condit of notori commerci righteous and social good 
repute. 

the hill thought it high time to look after a person whom it most 
honor citizen had felt it hi duti to rebuk at a consider 
person sacrifice. the new jerusalem contingent, particularly, began to 
abat someth of the toler begotten of amus at their own 
blunder in exil an objection neighbor from the place which they 
had left to the place whither they had come. mammon hill wa at last of 
one mind. not much wa said, but that gilson must hang wa "in the air." 
but at thi critic junctur in hi affair he show sign of an 
alter life if not a chang heart. perhap it wa onli that "the bank" 
be close against him he had no further use for gold dust. anyhow the 
sluic box were molest no more forever. but it wa imposs to 
repress the abound energi of such a natur as his, and he 
continued, possibl from habit, the tortuou cours which he had 
pursu for profit of mr. bentley. after a few tent and resultless 
undertak in the way of highway robbery--if one may ventur to 
design road-ag by so harsh a name--h made one or two modest 
essay in horse-herding, and it wa in the midst of a promis 
enterpris of thi character, and just as he had taken the tide in hi 
affair at it flood, that he made shipwreck. for on a misty, moonlight 
night mr. brentshaw rode up alongsid a person who wa evid leav 
that part of the country, laid a hand upon the halter connect mr. 
gilson' wrist with mr. harper' bay mare, tap him familiarli on the 
cheek with the barrel of a navi revolv and request the pleasur of 
hi compani in a direct opposit to that in which he wa traveling. 

It wa inde rough on gilson. 

On the morn after hi arrest he wa tried, convicted, and sentenced. 
It onli remains, so far as concern hi earthli career, to hang him, 
reserv for more particular mention hi last will and testament, 
which, with great labor, he contriv in prison, and in which, probabl 
from some confus and imperfect notion of the right of captors, he 
bequeath everyth he own to hi "lawfl execketer," mr. brentshaw. 
the bequest, however, wa made condit on the legate take the 
testator' bodi from the tree and "plant it white." 

So mr. gilson was--i wa about to say "swung off," but I fear there ha 
been alreadi someth too much of slang in thi straightforward 
statement of facts; besides, the manner in which the law took it cours 
is more accur describ in the term employ by the judg in 
pass sentence: mr. gilson wa "strung up." 

In due season mr. brentshaw, somewhat touched, it may well be, by the 
empti compliment of the bequest, repair to the tree to pluck the fruit 
thereof. when taken down the bodi wa found to have in it waistcoat 
pocket a duli attest codicil to the will alreadi noted. the natur of 
it provis account for the manner in which it had been withheld, 
for had mr. brentshaw previous been made awar of the condit under 
which he wa to succeed to the gilson estat he would indubit have 
declin the responsibility. briefli stated, the purport of the codicil 
wa as follows: 

whereas, at diver time and in sundri places, certain person had 
assert that dure hi life the testat had rob their sluic 
boxes; therefore, if dure the five year next succeed the date of 
thi instrument ani one should make proof of such assert befor a 
court of law, such person wa to receiv as repar the entir 
person and real estat of which the testat die seiz and 
possessed, minu the expens of court and a state compens to the 
executor, henri clay brentshaw; provided, that if more than one person 
made such proof the estat wa to be equal divid between or among 
them. but in case none should succeed in so establish the testator' 
guilt, then the whole property, minu court expenses, as aforesaid, 
should go to the said henri clay brentshaw for hi own use, as state in 
the will. 

the syntax of thi remark document wa perhap open to critic 
objection, but that wa clearli enough the mean of it. the 
orthographi conform to no recogn system, but be mainli phonet 
it wa not ambiguous. As the probat judg remarked, it would take five 
ace to beat it. mr. brentshaw smile good-humoredly, and after 
perform the last sad rite with amus ostentation, had himself duli 
sworn as executor and condit legate under the provis of a law 
hastili pass (at the instanc of the member from the mammon hill 
district) by a faceti legislature; which law wa afterward discov 
to have creat also three or four lucr offic and author the 
expenditur of a consider sum of public money for the construct 
of a certain railway bridg that with greater advantag might perhap 
have been erect on the line of some actual railway. 

Of cours mr. brentshaw expect neither profit from the will nor 
litig in consequ of it unusu provisions; gilson, although 
frequent "flush," had been a man whom assessor and tax collector 
were well satisfi to lose no money by. but a careless and mere 
formal search among hi paper reveal titl deed to valuabl estat 
in the east and certif of deposit for incred sum in bank 
less sever scrupul than that of mr. jo. bentley. 

the astound news got abroad directly, throw the hill into a fever 
of excitement. the mammon hill _patriot_, whose editor had been a 
lead spirit in the proceed that result in gilson' departur 
from new jerusalem, publish a most complimentari obituari notic of 
the deceased, and wa good enough to call attent to the fact that hi 
degrad contemporary, the squaw gulch _clarion_, wa bring virtu 
into contempt by beslav with flatteri the memori of one who in life 
had spurn the vile sheet as a nuisanc from hi door. undet by 
the press, however, claimant under the will were not slow in present 
themselv with their evidence; and great as wa the gilson estat it 
appear conspicu paltri consid the vast number of sluic 
box from which it wa aver to have been obtained. the countri rose 
as one man! 

mr. brentshaw wa equal to the emergency. with a shrewd applic of 
humbl auxiliari devices, he at onc erect abov the bone of hi 
benefactor a costli monument, overtop everi rough headboard in the 
cemetery, and on thi he judici caus to be inscrib an epitaph 
of hi own composing, eulog the honesty, public spirit and cognat 
virtu of him who slept beneath, "a victim to the unjust aspers of 
slander' viper brood." 

moreover, he employ the best legal talent in the territori to defend 
the memori of hi depart friend, and for five long year the 
territori court were occupi with litig grow out of the 
gilson bequest. To fine forens abil mr. brentshaw oppos 
abil more fine forensic; in bid for purchas favor he 
offer price which utterli derang the market; the judg found at 
hi hospit board entertain for man and beast, the like of which 
had never been spread in the territory; with mendaci wit he 
confront wit of superior mendacity. 

nor wa the battl confin to the templ of the blind goddess--it 
invad the press, the pulpit, the drawing-room. It rage in the mart, 
the exchange, the school; in the gulches, and on the street corners. and 
upon the last day of the memor period to which legal action under 
the gilson will wa limited, the sun went down upon a region in which 
the moral sens wa dead, the social conscienc callous, the 
intellectu capac dwarfed, enfeebled, and confused! but mr. 
brentshaw wa victori all along the line. 

On that night it so happen that the cemeteri in one corner of which 
lay the now honor ash of the late milton gilson, esq., wa partli 
under water. swollen by incess rains, cat creek had spill over it 
bank an angri flood which, after scoop out unsightli hollow 
wherev the soil had been disturbed, had partli subsided, as if asham 
of the sacrilege, leav expos much that had been piousli concealed. 
even the famou gilson monument, the pride and glori of mammon hill, wa 
no longer a stand rebuk to the "viper brood"; succumb to the 
sap current it had toppl prone to earth. the ghoulish flood had 
exhum the poor, decay pine coffin, which now lay half-exposed, in 
piti contrast to the pompou monolith which, like a giant note of 
admiration, emphas the disclosure. 

To thi depress spot, drawn by some subtl influenc he had sought 
neither to resist nor analyze, came mr. brentshaw. An alter man wa 
mr. brentshaw. five year of toil, anxiety, and wake had dash 
hi black lock with streak and patch of gray, bow hi fine figure, 
drawn sharp and angular hi face, and debas hi walk to a dodder 
shuffle. nor had thi lustrum of fierc content wrought less upon hi 
heart and intellect. the careless good humor that had prompt him to 
accept the trust of the dead man had given place to a fix habit of 
melancholy. the firm, vigor intellect had overripen into the mental 
mellow of second childhood. hi broad understand had narrow to 
the accommod of a singl idea; and in place of the quiet, cynic 
incredul of former days, there wa in him a haunt faith in the 
supernatural, that flit and flutter about hi soul, shadowy, 
batlike, omin of insanity. unsettl in all else, hi understand 
clung to one convict with the tenac of a wreck intellect. that 
wa an unshaken belief in the entir blameless of the dead gilson. 
He had so often sworn to thi in court and assert it in privat 
conversation--had so frequent and so triumphantli establish it by 
testimoni that had come expens to him (for that veri day he had paid 
the last dollar of the gilson estat to mr. jo. bentley, the last 
wit to the gilson good character)--that it had becom to him a sort 
of religi faith. It seem to him the one great central and basic 
truth of life--th sole seren veriti in a world of lies. 

On that night, as he seat himself pensiv upon the prostrat 
monument, tri by the uncertain moonlight to spell out the epitaph 
which five year befor he had compos with a chuckl that memori had 
not recorded, tear of remors came into hi eye as he rememb that 
he had been mainli instrument in compass by a fals accus thi 
good man' death; for dure some of the legal proceedings, mr. harper, 
for a consider (forgotten) had come forward and sworn that in the 
littl transact with hi bay mare the deceas had act in strict 
accord with the harperian wishes, confidenti commun to the 
deceas and by him faith conceal at the cost of hi life. all 
that mr. brentshaw had sinc done for the dead man' memori seem 
piti inadequate--most mean, paltry, and debas with selfishness! 

As he sat there, tortur himself with futil regrets, a faint shadow 
fell across hi eyes. look toward the moon, hang low in the west, 
he saw what seem a vague, wateri cloud obscur her; but as it move 
so that her beam lit up one side of it he perceiv the clear, sharp 
outlin of a human figure. the apparit becam momentarili more 
distinct, and grew, visibly; it wa draw near. daze as were hi 
senses, half lock up with terror and confound with dread 
imaginings, mr. brentshaw yet could but perceive, or think he perceived, 
in thi unearthli shape a strang similitud to the mortal part of the 
late milton gilson, as that person had look when taken from the tree 
five year before. the like wa inde complete, even to the full, 
stoni eyes, and a certain shadowi circl about the neck. It wa without 
coat or hat, precis as gilson had been when laid in hi poor, cheap 
casket by the not ungentl hand of carpent pete--for whom some one 
had long sinc perform the same neighborli office. the spectre, if 
such it was, seem to bear someth in it hand which mr. brentshaw 
could not clearli make out. It drew nearer, and paus at last besid 
the coffin contain the ash of the late mr. gilson, the lid of which 
wa awry, half disclos the uncertain interior. bend over this, the 
phantom seem to shake into it from a basin some dark substanc of 
dubiou consistency, then glide stealthili back to the lowest part of 
the cemetery. here the retir flood had strand a number of open 
coffins, about and among which it gurgl with low sob and stilli 
whispers. stoop over one of these, the apparit care brush 
it content into the basin, then return to it own casket, empti 
the vessel into that, as before. thi mysteri oper wa repeat 
at everi expos coffin, the ghost sometim dip it laden basin 
into the run water, and gentli agit it to free it of the baser 
clay, alway hoard the residuum in it own privat box. In short, the 
immort part of the late milton gilson wa clean up the dust of it 
neighbor and provid ad the same to it own. 

perhap it wa a phantasm of a disord mind in a fever body. 
perhap it wa a solemn farc enact by prank exist that throng 
the shadow lie along the border of anoth world. god knows; to us is 
permit onli the knowledg that when the sun of anoth day touch 
with a grace of gold the ruin cemeteri of mammon hill hi kindliest 
beam fell upon the white, still face of henri brentshaw, dead among the 
dead. 




the applic 

push hi adventur shin through the deep snow that had fallen 
overnight, and encourag by the glee of hi littl sister, follow in 
the open way that he made, a sturdi small boy, the son of grayville' 
most distinguish citizen, struck hi foot against someth of which 
there wa no visibl sign on the surfac of the snow. It is the purpos 
of thi narr to explain how it came to be there. 

No one who ha had the advantag of pass through grayvil by day can 
have fail to observ the larg stone build crown the low hill to 
the north of the railway station--that is to say, to the right in go 
toward great mowbray. It is a somewhat dull-look edifice, of the 
earli comatos order, and appear to have been design by an architect 
who shrank from publicity, and although unabl to conceal hi work--even 
compelled, in thi instance, to set it on an emin in the sight of 
men--did what he honestli could to insur it against a second look. So 
far as concern it outer and visibl aspect, the abersush home for old 
men is unquestion inhospit to human attention. but it is a 
build of great magnitude, and cost it benevol founder the profit 
of mani a cargo of the tea and silk and spice that hi ship brought 
up from the under-world when he wa in trade in boston; though the main 
expens wa it endowment. altogether, thi reckless person had rob 
hi heirs-at-law of no less a sum than half a million dollar and flung 
it away in riotou giving. possibl it wa with a view to get out of 
sight of the silent big wit to hi extravag that he shortli 
afterward dispos of all hi grayvil properti that remain to him, 
turn hi back upon the scene of hi prodig and went off across 
the sea in one of hi own ships. but the gossip who got their 
inspir most directli from heaven declar that he went in search of 
a wife--a theori not easili reconcil with that of the villag 
humorist, who solemnli aver that the bachelor philanthropist had 
depart thi life (left grayville, to wit) becaus the marriag 
maiden had made it too hot to hold him. howev thi may have been, he 
had not returned, and although at long interv there had come to 
grayville, in a desultori way, vagu rumor of hi wander in strang 
lands, no one seem certainli to know about him, and to the new 
gener he wa no more than a name. but from abov the portal of the 
home for old men the name shout in stone. 

despit it unpromis exterior, the home is a fairli commodi place 
of retreat from the ill that it inmat have incur by be poor 
and old and men. At the time embrac in thi brief chronicl they were 
in number about a score, but in acerbity, querulousness, and gener 
ingratitud they could hardli be reckon at fewer than a hundred; at 
least that wa the estim of the superintendent, mr. sila tilbody. It 
wa mr. tilbody' steadfast convict that always, in admit new old 
men to replac those who had gone to anoth and a better home, the 
truste had distinctli in will the infract of hi peace, and the 
trial of hi patience. In truth, the longer the institut wa 
connect with him, the stronger wa hi feel that the founder' 
scheme of benevol wa sadli impair by provid ani inmat at 
all. He had not much imagination, but with what he had he wa addict 
to the reconstruct of the home for old men into a kind of "castl in 
spain," with himself as castellan, hospit entertain about a score 
of sleek and prosper middle-ag gentlemen, consumm good-humor 
and civilli will to pay for their board and lodging. In thi revis 
project of philanthropi the trustees, to whom he wa indebt for hi 
offic and respons for hi conduct, had not the happi to appear. 
As to them, it wa held by the villag humorist aforement that in 
their manag of the great chariti provid had thought 
suppli an incent to thrift. with the infer which he expect to 
be drawn from that view we have noth to do; it had neither support 
nor denial from the inmates, who certainli were most concerned. they 
live out their littl remnant of life, crept into grave neatli 
numbered, and were succeed by other old men as like them as could be 
desir by the adversari of peace. If the home wa a place of punish 
for the sin of unthrift the veteran offend sought justic with a 
persist that attest the sincer of their penitence. It is to one 
of these that the reader' attent is now invited. 

In the matter of attir thi person wa not altogeth engaging. but for 
thi season, which wa midwinter, a careless observ might have look 
upon him as a clever devic of the husbandman indispos to share the 
fruit of hi toil with the crow that toil not, neither spin--an error 
that might not have been dispel without longer and closer observ 
than he seem to court; for hi progress up abersush street, toward the 
home in the gloom of the winter evening, wa not visibl faster than 
what might have been expect of a scarecrow bless with youth, health, 
and discontent. the man wa indisput ill-clad, yet not without a 
certain fit and good taste, withal; for he wa obvious an 
applic for admitt to the home, where poverti wa a qualification. 
In the armi of indig the uniform is rags; they serv to distinguish 
the rank and file from the recruit officers. 

As the old man, enter the gate of the grounds, shuffl up the broad 
walk, alreadi white with the fast-fal snow, which from time to time 
he feebli shook from it variou coign of vantag on hi person, he 
came under inspect of the larg globe lamp that burn alway by 
night over the great door of the building. As if unwil to incur it 
reveal beams, he turn to the left and, pass a consider 
distanc along the face of the building, rang at a smaller door emit 
a dimmer ray that came from within, through the fanlight, and expend 
itself incuri overhead. the door wa open by no less a personag 
than the great mr. tilbodi himself. observ hi visitor, who at onc 
uncovered, and somewhat shorten the radiu of the perman curvatur 
of hi back, the great man gave visibl token of neither surpris nor 
displeasure. mr. tilbodi was, indeed, in an uncommonli good humor, a 
phenomenon ascrib doubtless to the cheer influenc of the season; 
for thi wa christma eve, and the morrow would be that bless 365th 
part of the year that all christian soul set apart for mighti feat of 
good and joy. mr. tilbodi wa so full of the spirit of the season 
that hi fat face and pale blue eyes, whose ineffectu fire serv to 
distinguish it from an untim summer squash, effus so genial a glow 
that it seem a piti that he could not have lain down in it, bask in 
the conscious of hi own identity. He wa hatted, booted, 
overcoated, and umbrellaed, as becam a person who wa about to expos 
himself to the night and the storm on an errand of charity; for mr. 
tilbodi had just part from hi wife and children to go "down town" and 
purchas the wherewith to confirm the annual falsehood about the 
hunch-belli saint who frequent the chimney to reward littl boy and 
girl who are good, and especi truthful. So he did not invit the 
old man in, but salut him cheerily: 

"hello! just in time; a moment later and you would have miss me. come, 
I have no time to waste; we'll walk a littl way together." 

"thank you," said the old man, upon whose thin and white but not ignobl 
face the light from the open door show an express that wa perhap 
disappointment; "but if the trustees--if my application--" 

"the trustees," mr. tilbodi said, close more door than one, and 
cut off two kind of light, "have agre that your applic 
disagre with them." 

certain sentiment are inappropri to christmastide, but humor, like 
death, ha all season for hi own. 

"oh, my god!" cri the old man, in so thin and huski a tone that the 
invoc wa anyth but impressive, and to at least one of hi two 
auditor sounded, indeed, somewhat ludicrous. To the other--but that is 
a matter which laymen are devoid of the light to expound. 

"yes," continu mr. tilbody, accommod hi gait to that of hi 
companion, who wa mechanically, and not veri successfully, retrac 
the track that he had made through the snow; "they have decid that, 
under the circumstances--und the veri peculiar circumstances, you 
understand--it would be inexpedi to admit you. As superintend and 
_ex officio_ secretari of the honor board"--a mr. tilbodi "read hi 
titl clear" the magnitud of the big building, seen through it veil of 
fall snow, appear to suffer somewhat in comparison--"it is my duti 
to inform you that, in the word of deacon byram, the chairman, your 
presenc in the home would--und the circumstances--b peculiarli 
embarrassing. I felt it my duti to submit to the honor board the 
statement that you made to me yesterday of your needs, your physic 
condition, and the trial which it ha pleas provid to send upon 
you in your veri proper effort to present your claim in person; but, 
after careful, and I may say prayerful, consider of your case--with 
someth too, I trust, of the larg charit appropri to the 
season--it wa decid that we would not be justifi in do anyth 
like to impair the use of the institut intrust (under 
providence) to our care." 

they had now pass out of the grounds; the street lamp opposit the 
gate wa dimli visibl through the snow. alreadi the old man' former 
track wa obliterated, and he seem uncertain as to which way he should 
go. mr. tilbodi had drawn a littl away from him, but paus and turn 
half toward him, appar reluct to forego the continu 
opportunity. 

"under the circumstances," he resumed, "the decision--" 

but the old man wa inaccess to the suasion of hi verbosity; he had 
cross the street into a vacant lot and wa go forward, rather 
devious toward nowher in particular--which, he have nowher in 
particular to go to, wa not so reasonless a proceed as it looked. 

and that is how it happen that the next morning, when the church bell 
of all grayvil were ring with an ad unction appropri to the 
day, the sturdi littl son of deacon byram, break a way through the 
snow to the place of worship, struck hi foot against the bodi of amasa 
abersush, philanthropist. 




A watcher BY the dead 

I 

In an upper room of an unoccupi dwell in the part of san francisco 
known as north beach lay the bodi of a man, under a sheet. the hour wa 
near nine in the evening; the room wa dimli light by a singl candle. 
although the weather wa warm, the two windows, contrari to the custom 
which give the dead plenti of air, were close and the blind drawn 
down. the furnitur of the room consist of but three pieces--an 
arm-chair, a small reading-stand support the candle, and a long 
kitchen table, support the bodi of the man. all these, as also the 
corpse, seem to have been recent brought in, for an observer, had 
there been one, would have seen that all were free from dust, wherea 
everyth els in the room wa pretti thickli coat with it, and there 
were cobweb in the angl of the walls. 

under the sheet the outlin of the bodi could be traced, even the 
features, these have that unnatur sharp definit which seem to 
belong to face of the dead, but is realli characterist of those onli 
that have been wast by disease. from the silenc of the room one would 
rightli have infer that it wa not in the front of the house, face 
a street. It realli face noth but a high breast of rock, the rear of 
the build be set into a hill. 

As a neighbor church clock wa strike nine with an indol which 
seem to impli such an indiffer to the flight of time that one 
could hardli help wonder whi it took the troubl to strike at all, 
the singl door of the room wa open and a man entered, advanc 
toward the body. As he did so the door closed, appar of it own 
volition; there wa a grating, as of a key turn with difficulty, and 
the snap of the lock bolt as it shot into it socket. A sound of 
retir footstep in the passag outsid ensued, and the man wa to all 
appear a prisoner. advanc to the table, he stood a moment look 
down at the body; then with a slight shrug of the shoulder walk over 
to one of the window and hoist the blind. the dark outsid wa 
absolute, the pane were cover with dust, but by wipe thi away he 
could see that the window wa fortifi with strong iron bar cross 
it within a few inch of the glass and imbed in the masonri on each 
side. He examin the other window. It wa the same. He manifest no 
great curios in the matter, did not even so much as rais the sash. 
If he wa a prison he wa appar a tractabl one. have complet 
hi examin of the room, he seat himself in the arm-chair, took a 
book from hi pocket, drew the stand with it candl alongsid and began 
to read. 

the man wa young--not more than thirty--dark in complexion, 
smooth-shaven, with brown hair. hi face wa thin and high-nosed, with a 
broad forehead and a "firmness" of the chin and jaw which is said by 
those have it to denot resolution. the eye were gray and steadfast, 
not move except with definit purpose. they were now for the greater 
part of the time fix upon hi book, but he occasion withdrew them 
and turn them to the bodi on the table, not, apparently, from ani 
dismal fascin which under such circumst it might be suppos 
to exercis upon even a courag person, nor with a consciou 
rebellion against the contrari influenc which might domin a timid 
one. He look at it as if in hi read he had come upon someth 
recal him to a sens of hi surroundings. clearli thi watcher by 
the dead wa discharg hi trust with intellig and composure, as 
becam him. 

after read for perhap a half-hour he seem to come to the end of a 
chapter and quietli laid away the book. He then rose and take the 
reading-stand from the floor carri it into a corner of the room near 
one of the windows, lift the candl from it and return to the empti 
fireplac befor which he had been sitting. 

A moment later he walk over to the bodi on the table, lift the sheet 
and turn it back from the head, expos a mass of dark hair and a 
thin face-cloth, beneath which the featur show with even sharper 
definit than before. shade hi eye by interpos hi free hand 
between them and the candle, he stood look at hi motionless 
companion with a seriou and tranquil regard. satisfi with hi 
inspection, he pull the sheet over the face again and return to the 
chair, took some match off the candlestick, put them in the side 
pocket of hi sack-coat and sat down. He then lift the candl from it 
socket and look at it critically, as if calcul how long it would 
last. It wa bare two inch long; in anoth hour he would be in 
darkness. He replac it in the candlestick and blew it out. 

II 

In a physician' offic in kearni street three men sat about a table, 
drink punch and smoking. It wa late in the evening, almost midnight, 
indeed, and there had been no lack of punch. the gravest of the three, 
dr. helberson, wa the host--it wa in hi room they sat. He wa about 
thirti year of age; the other were even younger; all were physicians. 

"the superstiti awe with which the live regard the dead," said dr. 
helberson, "i hereditari and incurable. one need no more be asham of 
it than of the fact that he inherits, for example, an incapac for 
mathematics, or a tendenc to lie." 

the other laughed. "oughtn't a man to be asham to lie?" ask the 
youngest of the three, who wa in fact a medic student not yet 
graduated. 

"mi dear harper, I said noth about that. the tendenc to lie is one 
thing; lie is another." 

"but do you think," said the third man, "that thi superstiti 
feeling, thi fear of the dead, reasonless as we know it to be, is 
universal? I am myself not consciou of it." 

"oh, but it is 'in your system' for all that," repli helberson; "it 
need onli the right conditions--what shakespear call the 'confeder 
season'--to manifest itself in some veri disagre way that will open 
your eyes. physician and soldier are of cours more nearli free from 
it than others." 

"physician and soldiers!--whi don't you add hangmen and headsmen? let 
us have in all the assassin classes." 

"no, my dear mancher; the juri will not let the public execution 
acquir suffici familiar with death to be altogeth unmov by 
it." 

young harper, who had been help himself to a fresh cigar at the 
sideboard, resum hi seat. "what would you consid condit under 
which ani man of woman born would becom insupport consciou of hi 
share of our common weak in thi regard?" he asked, rather 
verbosely. 

"well, I should say that if a man were lock up all night with a 
corpse--alone--in a dark room--of a vacant house--with no bed cover to 
pull over hi head--and live through it without go altogeth mad, 
he might justli boast himself not of woman born, nor yet, like macduff, 
a product of cæsarean section." 

"I thought you never would finish pile up conditions," said harper, 
"but I know a man who is neither a physician nor a soldier who will 
accept them all, for ani stake you like to name." 

"who is he?" 

"hi name is jarette--a stranger here; come from my town in new york. I 
have no money to back him, but he will back himself with load of it." 

"how do you know that?" 

"he would rather bet than eat. As for fear--i dare say he think it some 
cutan disorder, or possibl a particular kind of religi heresy." 

"what doe he look like?" helberson wa evid becom interested. 

"like mancher, here--might be hi twin brother." 

"I accept the challenge," said helberson, promptly. 

"aw oblig to you for the compliment, i'm sure," drawl mancher, 
who wa grow sleepy. "can't I get into this?" 

"not against me," helberson said. "I don't want _your_ money." 

"all right," said mancher; "i'll be the corpse." 

the other laughed. 

the outcom of thi crazi convers we have seen. 




iii 

In extinguish hi meagr allow of candl mr. jarette' object wa 
to preserv it against some unforeseen need. He may have thought, too, 
or half thought, that the dark would be no wors at one time than 
another, and if the situat becam insupport it would be better to 
have a mean of relief, or even release. At ani rate it wa wise to have 
a littl reserv of light, even if onli to enabl him to look at hi 
watch. 

No sooner had he blown out the candl and set it on the floor at hi 
side than he settl himself comfort in the arm-chair, lean back 
and close hi eyes, hope and expect to sleep. In thi he wa 
disappointed; he had never in hi life felt less sleepy, and in a few 
minut he gave up the attempt. but what could he do? He could not go 
grope about in absolut dark at the risk of bruis himself--at 
the risk, too, of blunder against the tabl and rude disturb the 
dead. We all recogn their right to lie at rest, with immun from 
all that is harsh and violent. jarett almost succeed in make 
himself believ that consider of thi kind restrain him from 
risk the collis and fix him to the chair. 

while think of thi matter he fanci that he heard a faint sound in 
the direct of the table--what kind of sound he could hardli have 
explained. He did not turn hi head. whi should he--in the darkness? but 
he listened--whi should he not? and listen he grew giddi and grasp 
the arm of the chair for support. there wa a strang ring in hi 
ears; hi head seem bursting; hi chest wa oppress by the 
constrict of hi clothing. He wonder whi it wa so, and whether 
these were symptom of fear. then, with a long and strong expiration, 
hi chest appear to collapse, and with the great gasp with which he 
refil hi exhaust lung the vertigo left him and he knew that so 
intent had he listen that he had held hi breath almost to 
suffocation. the revel wa vexatious; he arose, push away the 
chair with hi foot and strode to the centr of the room. but one doe 
not stride far in darkness; he began to grope, and find the wall 
follow it to an angle, turned, follow it past the two window and 
there in anoth corner came into violent contact with the 
reading-stand, overturn it. It made a clatter that startl him. He 
wa annoyed. "how the devil could I have forgotten where it was?" he 
muttered, and grope hi way along the third wall to the fireplace. "I 
must put thing to rights," said he, feel the floor for the candle. 

have recov that, he light it and instantli turn hi eye to 
the table, where, naturally, noth had undergon ani change. the 
reading-stand lay unobserv upon the floor: he had forgotten to "put it 
to rights." He look all about the room, dispers the deeper shadow 
by movement of the candl in hi hand, and cross over to the door 
test it by turn and pull the knob with all hi strength. It did 
not yield and thi seem to afford him a certain satisfaction; indeed, 
he secur it more firmli by a bolt which he had not befor observed. 
return to hi chair, he look at hi watch; it wa half-past nine. 
with a start of surpris he held the watch at hi ear. It had not 
stopped. the candl wa now visibl shorter. He again extinguish it, 
place it on the floor at hi side as before. 

mr. jarett wa not at hi ease; he wa distinctli dissatisfi with hi 
surroundings, and with himself for be so. "what have I to fear?" he 
thought. "thi is ridicul and disgraceful; I will not be so great a 
fool." but courag doe not come of saying, "I will be courageous," nor 
of recogn it appropri to the occasion. the more jarett 
condemn himself, the more reason he gave himself for condemnation; the 
greater the number of variat which he play upon the simpl theme 
of the harmless of the dead, the more insupport grew the discord 
of hi emotions. "what!" he cri aloud in the anguish of hi spirit, 
"what! shall I, who have not a shade of superstit in my nature--i, 
who have no belief in immortality--i, who know (and never more clearli 
than now) that the after-lif is the dream of a desire--shal I lose at 
onc my bet, my honor and my self-respect, perhap my reason, becaus 
certain savag ancestor dwell in cave and burrow conceiv the 
monstrou notion that the dead walk by night?--that--" distinctly, 
unmistakably, mr. jarett heard behind him a light, soft sound of 
footfalls, deliberate, regular, success nearer! 

IV 

just befor daybreak the next morn dr. helberson and hi young 
friend harper were drive slowli through the street of north beach in 
the doctor' coupé. 

"have you still the confid of youth in the courag or stolid of 
your friend?" said the elder man. "do you believ that I have lost thi 
wager?" 

"I _know_ you have," repli the other, with enfeebl emphasis. 

"well, upon my soul, I hope so." 

It wa spoken earnestly, almost solemnly. there wa a silenc for a few 
moments. 

"harper," the doctor resumed, look veri seriou in the shift 
half-light that enter the carriag as they pass the street lamps, 
"I don't feel altogeth comfort about thi business. If your friend 
had not irrit me by the contemptu manner in which he treat my 
doubt of hi endurance--a pure physic quality--and by the cool 
incivil of hi suggest that the corps be that of a physician, I 
should not have gone on with it. If anyth should happen we are 
ruined, as I fear we deserv to be." 

"what can happen? even if the matter should be take a seriou turn, of 
which I am not at all afraid, mancher ha onli to 'resurrect' himself 
and explain matters. with a genuin 'subject' from the dissecting-room, 
or one of your late patients, it might be different." 

dr. mancher, then, had been as good as hi promise; he wa the "corpse." 

dr. helberson wa silent for a long time, as the carriage, at a snail' 
pace, crept along the same street it had travel two or three time 
already. present he spoke: "well, let us hope that mancher, if he ha 
had to rise from the dead, ha been discreet about it. A mistak in that 
might make matter wors instead of better." 

"yes," said harper, "jarett would kill him. but, doctor"--look at 
hi watch as the carriag pass a ga lamp--"it is nearli four o'clock 
at last." 

A moment later the two had quit the vehicl and were walk briskli 
toward the long-unoccupi hous belong to the doctor in which they 
had immur mr. jarett in accord with the term of the mad wager. 
As they near it they met a man running. "can you tell me," he cried, 
suddenli check hi speed, "where I can find a doctor?" 

"what' the matter?" helberson asked, non-committal. 

"go and see for yourself," said the man, resum hi running. 

they hasten on. arriv at the house, they saw sever person 
enter in hast and excitement. In some of the dwell near by and 
across the way the chamber window were thrown up, show a protrus 
of heads. all head were ask questions, none heed the question of 
the others. A few of the window with close blind were illuminated; 
the inmat of those room were dress to come down. exactli opposit 
the door of the hous that they sought a street lamp threw a yellow, 
insuffici light upon the scene, seem to say that it could disclos 
a good deal more if it wished. harper paus at the door and laid a hand 
upon hi companion' arm. "it is all up with us, doctor," he said in 
extrem agitation, which contrast strang with hi free-and-easi 
words; "the game ha gone against us all. let' not go in there; i'm for 
lie low." 

"i'm a physician," said dr. helberson, calmly; "there may be need of 
one." 

they mount the doorstep and were about to enter. the door wa open; 
the street lamp opposit light the passag into which it opened. It 
wa full of men. some had ascend the stair at the farther end, and, 
deni admitt above, wait for better fortune. all were talking, 
none listening. suddenly, on the upper land there wa a great 
commotion; a man had sprung out of a door and wa break away from 
those endeavor to detain him. down through the mass of affright 
idler he came, push them aside, flatten them against the wall on 
one side, or compel them to cling to the rail on the other, 
clutch them by the throat, strike them savagely, thrust them 
back down the stair and walk over the fallen. hi cloth wa in 
disorder, he wa without a hat. hi eyes, wild and restless, had in them 
someth more terrifi than hi appar superhuman strength. hi 
face, smooth-shaven, wa bloodless, hi hair frost-white. 

As the crowd at the foot of the stairs, have more freedom, fell away 
to let him pass harper sprang forward. "jarette! jarette!" he cried. 

dr. helberson seiz harper by the collar and drag him back. the man 
look into their face without seem to see them and sprang through 
the door, down the steps, into the street, and away. A stout policeman, 
who had had inferior success in conquer hi way down the stairway, 
follow a moment later and start in pursuit, all the head in the 
windows--thos of women and children now--scream in guidance. 

the stairway be now partli cleared, most of the crowd have rush 
down to the street to observ the flight and pursuit, dr. helberson 
mount to the landing, follow by harper. At a door in the upper 
passag an offic deni them admittance. "we are physicians," said the 
doctor, and they pass in. the room wa full of men, dimli seen, 
crowd about a table. the newcom edg their way forward and look 
over the shoulder of those in the front rank. upon the table, the lower 
limb cover with a sheet, lay the bodi of a man, brilliantli 
illumin by the beam of a bull's-ey lantern held by a policeman 
stand at the feet. the others, except those near the head--th 
offic himself--al were in darkness. the face of the bodi show 
yellow, repulsive, horrible! the eye were partli open and upturn and 
the jaw fallen; trace of froth defil the lips, the chin, the cheeks. 
A tall man, evid a doctor, bent over the bodi with hi hand thrust 
under the shirt front. He withdrew it and place two finger in the open 
mouth. "thi man ha been about six hour dead," said he. "it is a case 
for the coroner." 

He drew a card from hi pocket, hand it to the offic and made hi 
way toward the door. 

"clear the room--out, all!" said the officer, sharply, and the bodi 
disappear as if it had been snatch away, as shift the lantern he 
flash it beam of light here and there against the face of the crowd. 
the effect wa amazing! the men, blinded, confused, almost terrified, 
made a tumultu rush for the door, pushing, crowding, and tumbl 
over one anoth as they fled, like the host of night befor the shaft 
of apollo. upon the struggling, trampl mass the offic pour hi 
light without piti and without cessation. caught in the current, 
helberson and harper were swept out of the room and cascad down the 
stair into the street. 

"good god, doctor! did I not tell you that jarett would kill him?" said 
harper, as soon as they were clear of the crowd. 

"I believ you did," repli the other, without appar emotion. 

they walk on in silence, block after block. against the gray east 
the dwell of the hill tribe show in silhouette. the familiar milk 
wagon wa alreadi astir in the streets; the baker' man would soon come 
upon the scene; the newspap carrier wa abroad in the land. 

"it strike me, youngster," said helberson, "that you and I have been 
have too much of the morn air lately. It is unwholesome; we need a 
change. what do you say to a tour in europe?" 

"when?" 

"i'm not particular. I should suppos that four o'clock thi afternoon 
would be earli enough." 

"i'll meet you at the boat," said harper. 

seven year afterward these two men sat upon a bench in madison square, 
new york, in familiar conversation. anoth man, who had been observ 
them for some time, himself unobserved, approach and, courteous 
lift hi hat from lock as white as frost, said: "I beg your pardon, 
gentlemen, but when you have kill a man by come to life, it is best 
to chang cloth with him, and at the first opportun make a break 
for liberty." 

helberson and harper exchang signific glances. they were obvious 
amused. the former then look the stranger kindli in the eye and 
replied: 

"that ha alway been my plan. I entir agre with you as to it 
advant--" 

He stop suddenly, rose and went white. He stare at the man, 
open-mouthed; he trembl visibly. 

"ah!" said the stranger, "I see that you are indisposed, doctor. If you 
cannot treat yourself dr. harper can do someth for you, I am sure." 

"who the devil are you?" said harper, bluntly. 

the stranger came nearer and, bend toward them, said in a whisper: "I 
call myself jarett sometimes, but I don't mind tell you, for old 
friendship, that I am dr. william mancher." 

the revel brought harper to hi feet. "mancher!" he cried; and 
helberson added: "it is true, by god!" 

"yes," said the stranger, smile vaguely, "it is true enough, no 
doubt." 

He hesit and seem to be tri to recal something, then began 
hum a popular air. He had appar forgotten their presence. 

"look here, mancher," said the elder of the two, "tell us just what 
occur that night--to jarette, you know." 

"oh, yes, about jarette," said the other. "it' odd I should have 
neglect to tell you--i tell it so often. you see I knew, by 
over-hear him talk to himself, that he wa pretti badli 
frightened. So I couldn't resist the temptat to come to life and have 
a bit of fun out of him--i couldn't really. that wa all right, though 
certainli I did not think he would take it so seriously; I did not, 
truly. and afterward--well, it wa a tough job chang place with him, 
and then--damn you! you didn't let me out!" 

noth could exceed the feroc with which these last word were 
delivered. both men step back in alarm. 

"we?--why--why," helberson stammered, lose hi self-possess 
utterly, "we had noth to do with it." 

"didn't I say you were drs. hell-born and sharper?" inquir the man, 
laughing. 

"mi name is helberson, yes; and thi gentleman is mr. harper," repli 
the former, reassur by the laugh. "but we are not physician now; we 
are--well, hang it, old man, we are gamblers." 

and that wa the truth. 

"A veri good profession--veri good, indeed; and, by the way, I hope 
sharper here paid over jarette' money like an honest stakeholder. A 
veri good and honor profession," he repeated, thoughtfully, move 
carelessli away; "but I stick to the old one. I am high suprem medic 
offic of the bloomingdal asylum; it is my duti to cure the 
superintendent." 




the man and the snake 

It is of veritabyl report, and attest of so mani that there be now 
of wyse and learn none to gaynsay it, that y'e serpent hy eye 
hath a magnetick properti that whoso falleth into it svasion is 
drawn forward in despyt of hi wille, and perisheth miserabyl by 
y'e creatur hy byte. 

stretch at eas upon a sofa, in gown and slippers, harker brayton 
smile as he read the forego sentenc in old morryster' _marvel of 
science._ "the onli marvel in the matter," he said to himself, "i that 
the wise and learn in morryster' day should have believ such 
nonsens as is reject by most of even the ignor in ours." A train 
of reflect followed--for brayton wa a man of thought--and he 
unconsci lower hi book without alter the direct of hi 
eyes. As soon as the volum had gone below the line of sight, someth 
in an obscur corner of the room recal hi attent to hi 
surroundings. what he saw, in the shadow under hi bed, wa two small 
point of light, appar about an inch apart. they might have been 
reflect of the ga jet abov him, in metal nail heads; he gave them 
but littl thought and resum hi reading. A moment later something-- 
some impuls which it did not occur to him to analyze--impel him to 
lower the book again and seek for what he saw before. the point of 
light were still there. they seem to have becom brighter than before, 
shine with a greenish lustr that he had not at first observed. He 
thought, too, that they might have move a trifle--wer somewhat nearer. 
they were still too much in shadow, however, to reveal their natur and 
origin to an indol attention, and again he resum hi reading. 
suddenli someth in the text suggest a thought that made him start 
and drop the book for the third time to the side of the sofa, whence, 
escap from hi hand, it fell sprawl to the floor, back upward. 
brayton, half-risen, wa stare intent into the obscur beneath the 
bed, where the point of light shone with, it seem to him, an ad 
fire. hi attent wa now fulli aroused, hi gaze eager and 
imperative. It disclosed, almost directli under the foot-rail of the 
bed, the coil of a larg serpent--th point of light were it eyes! 
it horribl head, thrust flatli forth from the innermost coil and 
rest upon the outermost, wa direct straight toward him, the 
definit of the wide, brutal jaw and the idiot-lik forehead serv 
to show the direct of it malevol gaze. the eye were no longer 
mere lumin points; they look into hi own with a meaning, a 
malign significance. 

II 

A snake in a bedroom of a modern citi dwell of the better sort is, 
happily, not so common a phenomenon as to make explan altogeth 
needless. harker brayton, a bachelor of thirty-five, a scholar, idler 
and someth of an athlete, rich, popular and of sound health, had 
return to san francisco from all manner of remot and unfamiliar 
countries. hi tastes, alway a trifl luxurious, had taken on an ad 
exuber from long privation; and the resourc of even the castl 
hotel be inadequ to their perfect gratification, he had gladli 
accept the hospit of hi friend, dr. druring, the distinguish 
scientist. dr. druring' house, a large, old-fashion one in what is 
now an obscur quarter of the city, had an outer and visibl aspect of 
proud reserve. It plainli would not associ with the contigu 
element of it alter environment, and appear to have develop some 
of the eccentr which come of isolation. one of these wa a 
"wing," conspicu irrelev in point of architecture, and no less 
rebelli in matter of purpose; for it wa a combin of laboratory, 
menageri and museum. It wa here that the doctor indulg the 
scientif side of hi natur in the studi of such form of anim life 
as engag hi interest and comfort hi taste--which, it must be 
confessed, ran rather to the lower types. for one of the higher nimbl 
and sweetli to recommend itself unto hi gentl sens it had at least 
to retain certain rudimentari characterist alli it to such 
"dragon of the prime" as toad and snakes. hi scientif sympathi 
were distinctli reptilian; he love nature' vulgarian and describ 
himself as the zola of zoölogy. hi wife and daughter not have the 
advantag to share hi enlighten curios regard the work and 
way of our ill-star fellow-creatures, were with needless auster 
exclud from what he call the snakeri and doom to companionship 
with their own kind, though to soften the rigor of their lot he had 
permit them out of hi great wealth to outdo the reptil in the 
gorgeous of their surround and to shine with a superior 
splendor. 

architectur and in point of "furnishing" the snakeri had a sever 
simplic befit the humbl circumst of it occupants, mani of 
whom, indeed, could not safe have been intrust with the liberti that 
is necessari to the full enjoy of luxury, for they had the 
troublesom peculiar of be alive. In their own apartments, 
however, they were under as littl person restraint as wa compat 
with their protect from the bane habit of swallow one another; 
and, as brayton had thought been apprised, it wa more than a 
tradit that some of them had at diver time been found in part of 
the premis where it would have embarrass them to explain their 
presence. despit the snakeri and it uncanni associations--to which, 
indeed, he gave littl attention--brayton found life at the drure 
mansion veri much to hi mind. 

iii 

beyond a smart shock of surpris and a shudder of mere loath mr. 
brayton wa not greatli affected. hi first thought wa to ring the call 
bell and bring a servant; but although the bell cord dangl within easi 
reach he made no movement toward it; it had occur to hi mind that 
the act might subject him to the suspicion of fear, which he certainli 
did not feel. He wa more keenli consciou of the incongru natur of 
the situat than affect by it perils; it wa revolting, but absurd. 

the reptil wa of a speci with which brayton wa unfamiliar. it 
length he could onli conjecture; the bodi at the largest visibl part 
seem about as thick as hi forearm. In what way wa it dangerous, if 
in ani way? wa it venomous? wa it a constrictor? hi knowledg of 
nature' danger signal did not enabl him to say; he had never 
deciph the code. 

If not danger the creatur wa at least offensive. It wa _de trop_-- 
"matter out of place"--an impertinence. the gem wa unworthi of the 
setting. even the barbar tast of our time and country, which had 
load the wall of the room with pictures, the floor with furnitur and 
the furnitur with bric-a-brac, had not quit fit the place for thi 
bit of the savag life of the jungle. besides--insupport thought!-- 
the exhal of it breath mingl with the atmospher which he 
himself wa breathing. 

these thought shape themselv with greater or less definit in 
brayton' mind and begot action. the process is what we call 
consider and decision. It is thu that we are wise and unwise. It 
is thu that the wither leaf in an autumn breez show greater or less 
intellig than it fellows, fall upon the land or upon the lake. 
the secret of human action is an open one: someth contract our 
muscles. doe it matter if we give to the preparatori molecular chang 
the name of will? 

brayton rose to hi feet and prepar to back softli away from the 
snake, without disturb it if possible, and through the door. men 
retir so from the presenc of the great, for great is power and 
power is a menace. He knew that he could walk backward without error. 
should the monster follow, the tast which had plaster the wall with 
paint had consist suppli a rack of murder orient weapon 
from which he could snatch one to suit the occasion. In the mean time 
the snake' eye burn with a more pitiless malevol than before. 

brayton lift hi right foot free of the floor to step backward. that 
moment he felt a strong avers to do so. 

"I am account brave," he thought; "i bravery, then, no more than 
pride? becaus there are none to wit the shame shall I retreat?" 

He wa steadi himself with hi right hand upon the back of a chair, 
hi foot suspended. 

"nonsense!" he said aloud; "I am not so great a coward as to fear to 
seem to myself afraid." 

He lift the foot a littl higher by slightli bend the knee and 
thrust it sharpli to the floor--an inch in front of the other! He could 
not think how that occurred. A trial with the left foot had the same 
result; it wa again in advanc of the right. the hand upon the chair 
back wa grasp it; the arm wa straight, reach somewhat backward. 
one might have said that he wa reluct to lose hi hold. the snake' 
malign head wa still thrust forth from the inner coil as before, the 
neck level. It had not moved, but it eye were now electr sparks, 
radiat an infin of lumin needles. 

the man had an ashi pallor. again he took a step forward, and another, 
partli drag the chair, which when final releas fell upon the 
floor with a crash. the man groaned; the snake made neither sound nor 
motion, but it eye were two dazzl suns. the reptil itself wa 
wholli conceal by them. they gave off enlarg ring of rich and 
vivid colors, which at their greatest expans success vanish 
like soap-bubbles; they seem to approach hi veri face, and anon were 
an immeasur distanc away. He heard, somewhere, the continu 
throb of a great drum, with desultori burst of far music, 
inconceiv sweet, like the tone of an æolian harp. He knew it for 
the sunris melodi of memnon' statue, and thought he stood in the 
nilesid reed hear with exalt sens that immort anthem through 
the silenc of the centuries. 

the music ceased; rather, it becam by insens degre the distant 
roll of a retreat thunder-storm. A landscape, glitter with sun and 
rain, stretch befor him, arch with a vivid rainbow frame in it 
giant curv a hundr visibl cities. In the middl distanc a vast 
serpent, wear a crown, rear it head out of it volumin 
convolut and look at him with hi dead mother' eyes. suddenli 
thi enchant landscap seem to rise swiftli upward like the drop 
scene at a theatre, and vanish in a blank. someth struck him a hard 
blow upon the face and breast. He had fallen to the floor; the blood ran 
from hi broken nose and hi bruis lips. for a time he wa daze and 
stunned, and lay with close eyes, hi face against the floor. In a few 
moment he had recovered, and then knew that thi fall, by withdraw 
hi eyes, had broken the spell that held him. He felt that now, by 
keep hi gaze averted, he would be abl to retreat. but the thought 
of the serpent within a few feet of hi head, yet unseen--perhap in the 
veri act of spring upon him and throw it coil about hi throat-- 
wa too horrible! He lift hi head, stare again into those bale 
eye and wa again in bondage. 

the snake had not move and appear somewhat to have lost it power 
upon the imagination; the gorgeou illus of a few moment befor 
were not repeated. beneath that flat and brainless brow it black, beadi 
eye simpli glitter as at first with an express unspeak 
malignant. It wa as if the creature, assur of it triumph, had 
determin to practis no more allur wiles. 

now ensu a fear scene. the man, prone upon the floor, within a yard 
of hi enemy, rais the upper part of hi bodi upon hi elbows, hi 
head thrown back, hi leg extend to their full length. hi face wa 
white between it stain of blood; hi eye were strain open to their 
uttermost expansion. there wa froth upon hi lips; it drop off in 
flakes. strong convuls ran through hi body, make almost 
serpentil undulations. He bent himself at the waist, shift hi leg 
from side to side. and everi movement left him a littl nearer to the 
snake. He thrust hi hand forward to brace himself back, yet constantli 
advanc upon hi elbows. 

IV 

dr. drure and hi wife sat in the library. the scientist wa in rare 
good humor. 

"I have just obtain by exchang with anoth collector," he said, "a 
splendid specimen of the _ophiophagus_." 

"and what may that be?" the ladi inquir with a somewhat languid 
interest. 

"why, bless my soul, what profound ignorance! My dear, a man who 
ascertain after marriag that hi wife doe not know greek is entitl 
to a divorce. the _ophiophagus_ is a snake that eat other snakes." 

"I hope it will eat all yours," she said, absent shift the lamp. 
"but how doe it get the other snakes? By charm them, I suppose." 

"that is just like you, dear," said the doctor, with an affect of 
petulance. "you know how irrit to me is ani allus to that vulgar 
superstit about a snake' power of fascination." 

the convers wa interrupt by a mighti cry, which rang through the 
silent hous like the voic of a demon shout in a tomb! again and yet 
again it sounded, with terribl distinctness. they sprang to their feet, 
the man confused, the ladi pale and speechless with fright. almost 
befor the echo of the last cri had die away the doctor wa out of 
the room, spring up the stair two step at a time. In the corridor 
in front of brayton' chamber he met some servant who had come from the 
upper floor. togeth they rush at the door without knocking. It wa 
unfasten and gave way. brayton lay upon hi stomach on the floor, 
dead. hi head and arm were partli conceal under the foot rail of the 
bed. they pull the bodi away, turn it upon the back. the face wa 
daub with blood and froth, the eye were wide open, staring--a 
dread sight! 

"di in a fit," said the scientist, bend hi knee and place hi 
hand upon the heart. while in that position, he chanc to look under 
the bed. "good god!" he added, "how did thi thing get in here?" 

He reach under the bed, pull out the snake and flung it, still 
coiled, to the center of the room, whenc with a harsh, shuffl sound 
it slid across the polish floor till stop by the wall, where it lay 
without motion. It wa a stuf snake; it eye were two shoe buttons. 




A holi terror 

I 

there wa an entir lack of interest in the latest arriv at 
hurdy-gurdy. He wa not even christen with the picturesqu 
descript nick-nam which is so frequent a mine camp' word of 
welcom to the newcomer. In almost ani other camp thereabout thi 
circumst would of itself have secur him some such appel as 
"the white-head conundrum," or "no sarvey"--an express naiv 
suppos to suggest to quick intellig the spanish _quien sabe_. He 
came without provok a rippl of concern upon the social surfac of 
hurdy-gurdy--a place which to the gener californian contempt of men' 
person histori superad a local indiffer of it own. the time 
wa long past when it wa of ani import who came there, or if 
anybodi came. No one wa live at hurdy-gurdy. 

two year before, the camp had boast a stir popul of two or 
three thousand male and not fewer than a dozen females. A major of 
the former had done a few weeks' earnest work in demonstrating, to the 
disgust of the latter, the singularli mendaci charact of the person 
whose ingeni tale of rich gold deposit had lure them thither-- 
work, by the way, in which there wa as littl mental satisfact as 
pecuniari profit; for a bullet from the pistol of a public-spirit 
citizen had put that imagin gentleman beyond the reach of aspers 
on the third day of the camp' existence. still, hi fiction had a 
certain foundat in fact, and mani had linger a consider time in 
and about hurdy-gurdy, though now all had been long gone. 

but they had left ampl evid of their sojourn. from the point where 
injun creek fall into the rio san juan smith, up along both bank of 
the former into the cañon whenc it emerges, extend a doubl row of 
forlorn shanti that seem about to fall upon one another' neck to 
bewail their desolation; while about an equal number appear to have 
straggl up the slope on either hand and perch themselv upon 
command eminences, whenc they crane forward to get a good view of 
the affect scene. most of these habit were emaci as by 
famin to the condit of mere skeletons, about which clung unlov 
tatter of what might have been skin, but wa realli canvas. the littl 
valley itself, torn and gash by pick and shovel, wa unhandsom with 
long, bend line of decay flume rest here and there upon the 
summit of sharp ridges, and stilt awkwardli across the interv 
upon unhewn poles. the whole place present that raw and forbid 
aspect of arrest develop which is a new country' substitut for 
the solemn grace of ruin wrought by time. wherev there remain a 
patch of the origin soil a rank overgrowth of weed and brambl had 
spread upon the scene, and from it dank, unwholesom shade the visitor 
curiou in such matter might have obtain numberless souvenir of the 
camp' former glory--fellowless boot mantl with green mould and 
plethor of rot leaves; an occasion old felt hat; desultori 
remnant of a flannel shirt; sardin box inhumanli mutil and a 
surpris profus of black bottl distribut with a truli cathol 
impartiality, everywhere. 

II 

the man who had now rediscov hurdy-gurdi wa evid not curiou 
as to it archæology. nor, as he look about him upon the dismal 
evid of wast work and broken hopes, their dispirit 
signific accentu by the iron pomp of a cheap gild by the 
rise sun, did he supplement hi sigh of weari by one of 
sensibility. He simpli remov from the back of hi tire burro a 
miner' outfit a trifl larger than the anim itself, picket that 
creatur and select a hatchet from hi kit move off at onc across 
the dri bed of injun creek to the top of a low, gravelli hill beyond. 

step across a prostrat fenc of brush and board he pick up one 
of the latter, split it into five part and sharpen them at one end. 
He then began a kind of search, occasion stoop to examin 
someth with close attention. At last hi patient scrutini appear to 
be reward with success, for he suddenli erect hi figur to it full 
height, made a gestur of satisfaction, pronounc the word "scarry" and 
at onc strode away with long, equal steps, which he counted. then he 
stop and drove one of hi stake into the earth. He then look 
care about him, measur off a number of pace over a singularli 
uneven ground and hammer in another. pace off twice the distanc at 
a right angl to hi former cours he drove down a third, and repeat 
the process sank home the fourth, and then a fifth. thi he split at the 
top and in the cleft insert an old letter envelop cover with an 
intric system of pencil tracks. In short, he stake off a hill claim 
in strict accord with the local mine law of hurdy-gurdi and put 
up the customari notice. 

It is necessari to explain that one of the adjunct to hurdy-gurdy--on 
to which that metropoli becam afterward itself an adjunct--wa a 
cemetery. In the first week of the camp' exist thi had been 
thought laid out by a committe of citizens. the day after had been 
signal by a debat between two member of the committee, with 
refer to a more elig site, and on the third day the necropoli 
wa inaugur by a doubl funeral. As the camp had wane the cemeteri 
had waxed; and long befor the ultim inhabitant, victori alik 
over the insidi malaria and the forthright revolver, had turn the 
tail of hi pack-ass upon injun creek the outli settlement had becom 
a popul if not popular suburb. and now, when the town wa fallen into 
the sere and yellow leaf of an unlov senility, the graveyard--though 
somewhat mar by time and circumstance, and not altogeth exempt from 
innov in grammar and experi in orthography, to say noth of 
the devast coyote--answ the humbl need of it denizen with 
reason completeness. It compris a gener two acr of ground, 
which with commend thrift but needless care had been select for 
it miner unworth, contain two or three skeleton tree (one of which 
had a stout later branch from which a weather-wast rope still 
significantli dangled), half a hundr gravelli mounds, a score of rude 
headboard display the literari peculiar abov mention and a 
struggl coloni of prickli pears. altogether, god' location, as with 
characterist rever it had been called, could justli boast of an 
indubit superior qualiti of desolation. It wa in the most thickli 
settl part of thi interest demesn that mr. jefferson doman stake 
off hi claim. If in the prosecut of hi design he should deem it 
expedi to remov ani of the dead they would have the right to be 
suitabl reinterred. 

iii 

thi mr. jefferson doman wa from elizabethtown, new jersey, where six 
year befor he had left hi heart in the keep of a golden-haired, 
demure-mann young woman name mari matthews, as collater secur 
for hi return to claim her hand. 

"I just _know_ you'll never get back alive--y never do succeed in 
anything," wa the remark which illustr miss matthews' notion of 
what constitut success and, inferentially, her view of the natur of 
encouragement. she added: "if you don't i'll go to california too. I can 
put the coin in littl bag as you dig them out." 

thi characterist feminin theori of aurifer deposit did not 
commend itself to the masculin intelligence: it wa mr. doman' belief 
that gold wa found in a liquid state. He deprec her intent with 
consider enthusiasm, suppress her sob with a light hand upon her 
mouth, laugh in her eye as he kiss away her tears, and with a 
cheer "ta-ta" went to california to labor for her through the long, 
loveless years, with a strong heart, an alert hope and a steadfast 
fidel that never for a moment forgot what it wa about. In the 
mean time, miss matthew had grant a monopoli of her humbl talent for 
sack up coin to mr. jo. seeman, of new york, gambler, by whom it wa 
better appreci than her command geniu for unsack and 
bestow them upon hi local rivals. Of thi latter aptitude, indeed, 
he manifest hi disapprov by an act which secur him the posit 
of clerk of the laundri in the state prison, and for her the _sobriquet_ 
of "split-fac moll." At about thi time she wrote to mr. doman a 
touch letter of renunciation, inclos her photograph to prove that 
she had no longer had a right to indulg the dream of becom mrs. 
doman, and recount so graphic her fall from a hors that the 
staid "plug" upon which mr. doman had ridden into red dog to get the 
letter made vicari aton under the spur all the way back to camp. 
the letter fail in a signal way to accomplish it object; the fidel 
which had befor been to mr. doman a matter of love and duti wa 
thenceforth a matter of honor also; and the photograph, show the onc 
pretti face sadli disfigur as by the slash of a knife, wa duli 
instat in hi affect and it more come predecessor treat with 
contumeli neglect. On be inform of this, miss matthews, it is 
onli fair to say, appear less surpris than from the appar low 
estim of mr. doman' generos which the tone of her former letter 
attest one would natur have expect her to be. soon after, 
however, her letter grew infrequent, and then ceas altogether. 

but mr. doman had anoth correspondent, mr. barney bree, of 
hurdy-gurdy, formerli of red dog. thi gentleman, although a notabl 
figur among miners, wa not a miner. hi knowledg of mine consist 
mainli in a marvel command of it slang, to which he made copiou 
contributions, enrich it vocabulari with a wealth of uncommon 
phrase more remark for their apt than their refinement, and 
which impress the unlearn "tenderfoot" with a live sens of the 
profund of their inventor' acquirements. when not entertain a 
circl of admir auditor from san francisco or the east he could 
commonli be found pursu the compar obscur industri of 
sweep out the variou danc hous and purifi the cuspidors. 

barney had appar but two passion in life--lov of jefferson doman, 
who had onc been of some servic to him, and love of whisky, which 
certainli had not. He had been among the first in the rush to 
hurdy-gurdy, but had not prospered, and had sunk by degre to the 
posit of grave digger. thi wa not a vocation, but barney in a 
desultori way turn hi trembl hand to it whenev some local 
misunderstand at the card tabl and hi own partial recoveri from a 
prolong debauch occur coincid in point of time. one day mr. 
doman received, at red dog, a letter with the simpl postmark, "hurdy, 
cal.," and be occupi with anoth matter, carelessli thrust it into 
a chink of hi cabin for futur perusal. some two year later it wa 
accident dislodg and he read it. It ran as follows:-- 

hurdy, june 6. 

friend jeff: i'v hit her hard in the boneyard. she' blind and lousy. 
i'm on the divvy--that' me, and mum' my lay till you toot. 
yours, barney. 

p.s.--i'v clay her with scarry. 

with some knowledg of the gener mine camp _argot_ and of mr. bree' 
privat system for the commun of idea mr. doman had no 
difficulti in understand by thi uncommon epistl that barney while 
perform hi duti as grave digger had uncov a quartz ledg with no 
outcroppings; that it wa visibl rich in free gold; that, move by 
consider of friendship, he wa will to accept mr. doman as a 
partner and await that gentleman' declar of hi will in the 
matter would discreetli keep the discoveri a secret. from the postscript 
it wa plainli infer that in order to conceal the treasur he had 
buri abov it the mortal part of a person name scarry. 

from subsequ events, as relat to mr. doman at red dog, it would 
appear that befor take thi precaut mr. bree must have had the 
thrift to remov a modest compet of the gold; at ani rate, it wa at 
about that time that he enter upon that memor seri of potat 
and treat which is still one of the cherish tradit of the san 
juan smith country, and is spoken of with respect as far away as ghost 
rock and lone hand. At it conclus some former citizen of 
hurdy-gurdy, for whom he had perform the last kindli offic at the 
cemetery, made room for him among them, and he rest well. 

IV 

have finish stake off hi claim mr. doman walk back to the 
centr of it and stood again at the spot where hi search among the 
grave had expir in the exclamation, "scarry." He bent again over the 
headboard that bore that name and as if to reinforc the sens of sight 
and hear ran hi forefing along the rude carv letters. 
re-erect himself he append oral to the simpl inscript the 
shockingli forthright epitaph, "she wa a holi terror!" 

had mr. doman been requir to make these word good with proof--as, 
consid their somewhat censori character, he doubtless should 
have been--h would have found himself embarrass by the absenc of 
reput witnesses, and hearsay evid would have been the best he 
could command. At the time when scarri had been preval in the mine 
camp thereabout--when, as the editor of the _hurdi herald_ would have 
phrase it, she wa "in the plenitud of her power"--mr. doman' 
fortun had been at a low ebb, and he had led the vagrantli labori 
life of a prospector. hi time had been mostli spent in the mountains, 
now with one companion, now with another. It wa from the admir 
recit of these casual partners, fresh from the variou camps, that 
hi judgment of scarri had been made up; he himself had never had the 
doubt advantag of her acquaint and the precari distinct of 
her favor. and when, finally, on the termin of her pervers career 
at hurdy-gurdi he had read in a chanc copi of the _herald_ her 
column-long obituari (written by the local humorist of that live sheet 
in the highest style of hi art) doman had paid to her memori and to her 
historiographer' geniu the tribut of a smile and chivalr 
forgotten her. stand now at the grave-sid of thi mountain messalina 
he recal the lead event of her turbul career, as he had heard 
them celebr at hi sever campfires, and perhap with an 
unconsci attempt at self-justif repeat that she wa a holi 
terror, and sank hi pick into her grave up to the handle. At that 
moment a raven, which had silent settl upon a branch of the blast 
tree abov hi head, solemnli snap it beak and utter it mind 
about the matter with an approv croak. 

pursu hi discoveri of free gold with great zeal, which he probabl 
credit to hi conscienc as a grave digger, mr. barney bree had made 
an unusu deep sepulcher, and it wa near sunset befor mr. doman, 
labor with the leisur deliber of one who ha "a dead sure 
thing" and no fear of an advers claimant' enforc of a prior 
right, reach the coffin and uncov it. when he had done so he wa 
confront by a difficulti for which he had made no provision; the 
coffin--a mere flat shell of not veri well-preserv redwood boards, 
apparently--had no handles, and it fill the entir bottom of the 
excavation. the best he could do without violat the decent sanctiti 
of the situat wa to make the excav suffici longer to 
enabl him to stand at the head of the casket and get hi power 
hand underneath erect it upon it narrow end; and thi he proceed 
to do. the approach of night quicken hi efforts. He had no thought of 
abandon hi task at thi stage to resum it on the morrow under more 
advantag conditions. the feverish stimul of cupid and the 
fascin of terror held him to hi dismal work with an iron 
authority. He no longer idled, but wrought with a terribl zeal. hi 
head uncovered, hi outer garment discarded, hi shirt open at the 
neck and thrown back from hi breast, down which ran sinuou rill of 
perspiration, thi hardi and impenit gold-gett and grave-robb 
toil with a giant energi that almost dignifi the charact of hi 
horribl purpose; and when the sun fring had burn themselv out 
along the crest line of the western hills, and the full moon had climb 
out of the shadow that lay along the purpl plain, he had erect the 
coffin upon it foot, where it stood prop against the end of the open 
grave. then, stand up to hi neck in the earth at the opposit 
extrem of the excavation, as he look at the coffin upon which the 
moonlight now fell with a full illumin he wa thrill with a 
sudden terror to observ upon it the startl apparit of a dark 
human head--th shadow of hi own. for a moment thi simpl and natur 
circumst unnerv him. the nois of hi labor breath frighten 
him, and he tri to still it, but hi burst lung would not be 
denied. then, laugh half-aud and wholli without spirit, he began 
make movement of hi head from side to side, in order to compel the 
apparit to repeat them. He found a comfort reassur in 
assert hi command over hi own shadow. He wa temporizing, making, 
with unconsci prudence, a dilatori opposit to an impend 
catastrophe. He felt that invis forc of evil were close in upon 
him, and he parley for time with the inevitable. 

He now observ in success sever unusu circumstances. the surfac 
of the coffin upon which hi eye were fasten wa not flat; it 
present two distinct ridges, one longitudin and the other 
transverse. where these intersect at the widest part there wa a 
corrod metal plate that reflect the moonlight with a dismal 
lustre. along the outer edg of the coffin, at long intervals, were 
rust-eaten head of nails. thi frail product of the carpenter' art had 
been put into the grave the wrong side up! 

perhap it wa one of the humor of the camp--a practic manifest 
of the faceti spirit that had found literari express in the 
topsy-turvi obituari notic from the pen of hurdy-gurdy' great 
humorist. perhap it had some occult person signif impenetr 
to understand uninstruct in local traditions. A more charit 
hypothesi is that it wa owe to a misadventur on the part of mr. 
barney bree, who, make the inter unassist (either by choic for 
the conserv of hi golden secret, or through public apathy), had 
commit a blunder which he wa afterward unabl or unconcern to 
rectify. howev it had come about, poor scarri had indubit been put 
into the earth face downward. 

when terror and absurd make alliance, the effect is frightful. thi 
strong-heart and dare man, thi hardi night worker among the dead, 
thi defiant antagonist of dark and desolation, succumb to a 
ridicul surprise. He wa smitten with a thrill chill--shivered, 
and shook hi massiv shoulder as if to throw off an ici hand. He no 
longer breathed, and the blood in hi veins, unabl to abat it 
impetus, surg hotli beneath hi cold skin. unleaven with oxygen, it 
mount to hi head and congest hi brain. hi physic function had 
gone over to the enemy; hi veri heart wa array against him. He did 
not move; he could not have cri out. He need but a coffin to be 
dead--a dead as the death that confront him with onli the length of 
an open grave and the thick of a rot plank between. 

then, one by one, hi sens returned; the tide of terror that had 
overwhelm hi faculti began to recede. but with the return of hi 
sens he becam singularli unconsci of the object of hi fear. He 
saw the moonlight gild the coffin, but no longer the coffin that it 
gilded. rais hi eye and turn hi head, he noted, curious and 
with surprise, the black branch of the dead tree, and tri to 
estim the length of the weather-worn rope that dangl from it 
ghostli hand. the monoton bark of distant coyot affect him as 
someth he had heard year ago in a dream. An owl flap awkwardli 
abov him on noiseless wings, and he tri to forecast the direct of 
it flight when it should encount the cliff that rear it 
illumin front a mile away. hi hear took account of a gopher' 
stealthi tread in the shadow of the cactus. He wa intens observant; 
hi sens were all alert; but he saw not the coffin. As one can gaze at 
the sun until it look black and then vanishes, so hi mind, have 
exhaust it capac of dread, wa no longer consciou of the 
separ exist of anyth dreadful. the assassin wa cloak the 
sword. 

It wa dure thi lull in the battl that he becam sensibl of a 
faint, sicken odor. At first he thought it wa that of a 
rattle-snake, and involuntarili tri to look about hi feet. they were 
nearli invis in the gloom of the grave. A hoarse, gurgl sound, 
like the death-rattl in a human throat, seem to come out of the sky, 
and a moment later a great, black, angular shadow, like the same sound 
made visible, drop curv from the topmost branch of the spectral 
tree, flutter for an instant befor hi face and sail fierc away 
into the mist along the creek. 

It wa the raven. the incid recal him to a sens of the situation, 
and again hi eye sought the upright coffin, now illumin by the 
moon for half it length. He saw the gleam of the metal plate and 
tri without move to deciph the inscription. then he fell to 
specul upon what wa behind it. hi creativ imagin present 
him a vivid picture. the plank no longer seem an obstacl to hi 
vision and he saw the livid corps of the dead woman, stand in 
grave-clothes, and stare vacantli at him, with lidless, shrunken eyes. 
the lower jaw wa fallen, the upper lip drawn away from the uncov 
teeth. He could make out a mottl pattern on the hollow cheeks--th 
macul of decay. By some mysteri process hi mind revert for 
the first time that day to the photograph of mari matthews. He 
contrast it blond beauti with the forbid aspect of thi dead 
face--th most belov object that he knew with the most hideou that he 
could conceive. 

the assassin now advanc and display the blade laid it against the 
victim' throat. that is to say, the man becam at first dimly, then 
definitely, awar of an impress coincidence--a relation--a parallel 
between the face on the card and the name on the headboard. the one wa 
disfigured, the other describ a disfiguration. the thought took hold 
of him and shook him. It transform the face that hi imagin had 
creat behind the coffin lid; the contrast becam a resemblance; the 
resembl grew to identity. rememb the mani descript of 
scarry' person appear that he had heard from the gossip of hi 
camp-fir he tri with imperfect success to recal the exact natur of 
the disfigur that had given the woman her ugli name; and what wa 
lack in hi memori fanci supplied, stamp it with the valid of 
conviction. In the madden attempt to recal such scrap of the 
woman' histori as he had heard, the muscl of hi arm and hand were 
strain to a pain tension, as by an effort to lift a great weight. 
hi bodi writh and twist with the exertion. the tendon of hi neck 
stood out as tens as whip-cords, and hi breath came in short, sharp 
gasps. the catastroph could not be much longer delayed, or the agoni of 
anticip would leav noth to be done by the _coup de grâce_ of 
verification. the scar face behind the lid would slay him through the 
wood. 

A movement of the coffin divert hi thought. It came forward to within 
a foot of hi face, grow visibl larger as it approached. the rust 
metal plate, with an inscript illeg in the moonlight, look 
him steadili in the eye. determin not to shrink, he tri to brace hi 
shoulder more firmli against the end of the excavation, and nearli fell 
backward in the attempt. there wa noth to support him; he had 
unconsci move upon hi enemy, clutch the heavi knife that he 
had drawn from hi belt. the coffin had not advanc and he smile to 
think it could not retreat. lift hi knife he struck the heavi hilt 
against the metal plate with all hi power. there wa a sharp, ring 
percussion, and with a dull clatter the whole decay coffin lid broke 
in piec and came away, fall about hi feet. the quick and the dead 
were face to face--th frenzied, shriek man--th woman stand 
tranquil in her silences. she wa a holi terror! 

V 

some month later a parti of men and women belong to the highest 
social circl of san francisco pass through hurdy-gurdi on their way 
to the yosemit valley by a new trail. they halt for dinner and dure 
it prepar explor the desol camp. one of the parti had been at 
hurdy-gurdi in the day of it glory. He had, indeed, been one of it 
promin citizens; and it use to be said that more money pass over 
hi faro tabl in ani one night than over those of all hi competitor 
in a week; but be now a millionair engag in greater enterprises, 
he did not deem these earli success of suffici import to merit 
the distinct of remark. hi invalid wife, a ladi famou in san 
francisco for the costli natur of her entertain and her exact 
rigor with regard to the social posit and "antecedents" of those who 
attend them, accompani the expedition. dure a stroll among the 
shanti of the abandon camp mr. porfer direct the attent of hi 
wife and friend to a dead tree on a low hill beyond injun creek. 

"a I told you," he said, "I pass through thi camp in 1852, and wa 
told that no fewer than five men had been hang here by vigilant at 
differ times, and all on that tree. If I am not mistaken, a rope is 
dangl from it yet. let us go over and see the place." 

mr. porfer did not add that the rope in question wa perhap the veri 
one from whose fatal embrac hi own neck had onc had an escap so 
narrow that an hour' delay in take himself out of that region would 
have span it. 

proceed leisur down the creek to a conveni crossing, the parti 
came upon the cleanli pick skeleton of an anim which mr. porfer 
after due examin pronounc to be that of an ass. the 
distinguish ear were gone, but much of the ined head had been 
spare by the beast and birds, and the stout bridl of horsehair wa 
intact, as wa the riata, of similar material, connect it with a 
picket pin still firmli sunken in the earth. the wooden and metal 
element of a miner' kit lay near by. the customari remark were made, 
cynic on the part of the men, sentiment and refin by the lady. A 
littl later they stood by the tree in the cemeteri and mr. porfer 
suffici unbent from hi digniti to place himself beneath the rotten 
rope and confid lay a coil of it about hi neck, somewhat, it 
appeared, to hi own satisfaction, but greatli to the horror of hi 
wife, to whose sensibl the perform gave a smart shock. 

An exclam from one of the parti gather them all about an open 
grave, at the bottom of which they saw a confus mass of human bone 
and the broken remnant of a coffin. coyot and buzzard had perform 
the last sad rite for pretti much all else. two skull were visibl and 
in order to investig thi somewhat unusu redund one of the 
younger men had the hardihood to spring into the grave and hand them up 
to anoth befor mrs. porfer could indic her mark disapprov of 
so shock an act, which, nevertheless, she did with consider 
feel and in veri choic words. pursu hi search among the dismal 
debri at the bottom of the grave the young man next hand up a rust 
coffin plate, with a rude cut inscription, which with difficulti mr. 
porfer deciph and read aloud with an earnest and not altogeth 
unsuccess attempt at the dramat effect which he deem befit to 
the occas and hi rhetor abilities: 

manuelita murphy. 
born at the mission san pedro--di in 
hurdy-gurdy, 
age 47. 
hell' full of such. 

In defer to the pieti of the reader and the nerv of mrs. porfer' 
fastidi sisterhood of both sex let us not touch upon the pain 
impress produc by thi uncommon inscription, further than to say 
that the elocutionari power of mr. porfer had never befor met with so 
spontan and overwhelm recognition. 

the next morsel that reward the ghoul in the grave wa a long tangl 
of black hair defil with clay: but thi wa such an anti-climax that 
it receiv littl attention. suddenly, with a short exclam and a 
gestur of excitement, the young man unearth a fragment of grayish 
rock, and after a hurri inspect hand it up to mr. porfer. As the 
sunlight fell upon it it glitter with a yellow luster--it wa thickli 
stud with gleam points. mr. porfer snatch it, bent hi head over 
it a moment and threw it lightli away with the simpl remark: 

"iron pyrites--fool' gold." 

the young man in the discoveri shaft wa a trifl disconcerted, 
apparently. 

meanwhile, mrs. porfer, unabl longer to endur the disagre 
business, had walk back to the tree and seat herself at it root. 
while rearrang a tress of golden hair which had slip from it 
confin she wa attract by what appear to be and realli wa the 
fragment of an old coat. look about to assur herself that so 
unladylik an act wa not observed, she thrust her jewel hand into the 
expos breast pocket and drew out a mouldi pocket-book. it content 
were as follows: 

one bundl of letters, postmark "elizabethtown, new jersey." 

one circl of blond hair tie with a ribbon. 

one photograph of a beauti girl. 

one ditto of same, singularli disfigured. 

one name on back of photograph--"jefferson doman." 

A few moment later a group of anxiou gentlemen surround mrs. porfer 
as she sat motionless at the foot of the tree, her head drop forward, 
her finger clutch a crush photograph. her husband rais her head, 
expos a face ghastli white, except the long, deform cicatrice, 
familiar to all her friends, which no art could ever hide, and which now 
travers the pallor of her counten like a visibl curse. 

mari matthew porfer had the bad luck to be dead. 




the suitabl surround 

the night 

one midsumm night a farmer' boy live about ten mile from the citi 
of cincinnati wa follow a bridl path through a dens and dark 
forest. He had lost himself while search for some miss cows, and 
near midnight wa a long way from home, in a part of the countri with 
which he wa unfamiliar. but he wa a stout-heart lad, and know hi 
gener direct from hi home, he plung into the forest without 
hesitation, guid by the stars. come into the bridl path, and 
observ that it ran in the right direction, he follow it. 

the night wa clear, but in the wood it wa exceedingli dark. It wa 
more by the sens of touch than by that of sight that the lad kept the 
path. He could not, indeed, veri easili go astray; the undergrowth on 
both side wa so thick as to be almost impenetrable. He had gone into 
the forest a mile or more when he wa surpris to see a feebl gleam of 
light shine through the foliag skirt the path on hi left. the 
sight of it startl him and set hi heart beat audibly. 

"the old breed hous is somewher about here," he said to himself. 
"thi must be the other end of the path which we reach it by from our 
side. ugh! what should a light be do there?" 

nevertheless, he push on. A moment later he had emerg from the 
forest into a small, open space, mostli upgrown to brambles. there were 
remnant of a rot fence. A few yard from the trail, in the middl 
of the "clearing," wa the hous from which the light came, through an 
unglaz window. the window had onc contain glass, but that and it 
support frame had long ago yield to missil flung by hand of 
venturesom boy to attest alik their courag and their hostil to 
the supernatural; for the breed hous bore the evil reput of be 
haunted. possibl it wa not, but even the hardiest sceptic could not 
deni that it wa deserted--which in rural region is much the same 
thing. 

look at the mysteri dim light shine from the ruin window the 
boy rememb with apprehens that hi own hand had assist at the 
destruction. hi penit wa of cours poignant in proport to it 
tardi and inefficacy. He half expect to be set upon by all the 
unworldli and bodiless malevol whom he had outrag by assist to 
break alik their window and their peace. yet thi stubborn lad, 
shake in everi limb, would not retreat. the blood in hi vein wa 
strong and rich with the iron of the frontiersman. He wa but two 
remov from the gener that had subdu the indian. He start to 
pass the house. 

As he wa go by he look in at the blank window space and saw a 
strang and terrifi sight,--th figur of a man seat in the centr 
of the room, at a tabl upon which lay some loos sheet of paper. the 
elbow rest on the table, the hand support the head, which wa 
uncovered. On each side the finger were push into the hair. the face 
show dead-yellow in the light of a singl candl a littl to one side. 
the flame illumin that side of the face, the other wa in deep 
shadow. the man' eye were fix upon the blank window space with a 
stare in which an older and cooler observ might have discern 
someth of apprehension, but which seem to the lad altogeth 
soulless. He believ the man to be dead. 

the situat wa horrible, but not with out it fascination. the boy 
stop to note it all. He wa weak, faint and trembling; he could feel 
the blood forsak hi face. nevertheless, he set hi teeth and 
resolut advanc to the house. He had no consciou intention--it wa 
the mere courag of terror. He thrust hi white face forward into the 
illumin opening. At that instant a strange, harsh cry, a shriek, 
broke upon the silenc of the night--th note of a screech-owl. the man 
sprang to hi feet, overturn the tabl and extinguish the candle. 
the boy took to hi heels. 

the day befor 

"good-morning, colston. I am in luck, it seems. you have often said that 
my commend of your literari work wa mere civility, and here you 
find me absorbed--actu merged--in your latest stori in the 
_messenger_. noth less shock than your touch upon my shoulder 
would have rous me to consciousness." 

"the proof is stronger than you seem to know," repli the man 
addressed: "so keen is your eager to read my stori that you are 
will to renounc selfish consider and forego all the pleasur 
that you could get from it." 

"I don't understand you," said the other, fold the newspap that he 
held and put it into hi pocket. "you writer are a queer lot, 
anyhow. come, tell me what I have done or omit in thi matter. In 
what way doe the pleasur that I get, or might get, from your work 
depend on me?" 

"in mani ways. let me ask you how you would enjoy your breakfast if you 
took it in thi street car. suppos the phonograph so perfect as to be 
abl to give you an entir opera,--singing, orchestration, and all; do 
you think you would get much pleasur out of it if you turn it on at 
your offic dure busi hours? Do you realli care for a serenad by 
schubert when you hear it fiddl by an untim italian on a morn 
ferryboat? are you alway cock and prime for enjoyment? Do you keep 
everi mood on tap, readi to ani demand? let me remind you, sir, that the 
stori which you have done me the honor to begin as a mean of becom 
oblivi to the discomfort of thi car is a ghost story!" 

"well?" 

"well! ha the reader no duti correspond to hi privileges? you 
have paid five cent for that newspaper. It is yours. you have the right 
to read it when and where you will. much of what is in it is neither 
help nor harm by time and place and mood; some of it actual 
requir to be read at once--whil it is fizzing. but my stori is not of 
that character. It is not 'the veri latest advices' from ghostland. you 
are not expect to keep yourself _au courant_ with what is go on in 
the realm of spooks. the stuff will keep until you have leisur to put 
yourself into the frame of mind appropri to the sentiment of the 
piece--which I respect submit that you cannot do in a street car, 
even if you are the onli passenger. the solitud is not of the right 
sort. An author ha right which the reader is bound to respect." 

"for specif example?" 

"the right to the reader' undivid attention. To deni him thi is 
immoral. To make him share your attent with the rattl of a street 
car, the move panorama of the crowd on the sidewalks, and the 
build beyond--with ani of the thousand of distract which make 
our customari environment--i to treat him with gross injustice. By god, 
it is infamous!" 

the speaker had risen to hi feet and wa steadi himself by one of 
the strap hang from the roof of the car. the other man look up at 
him in sudden astonishment, wonder how so trivial a grievanc could 
seem to justifi so strong language. He saw that hi friend' face wa 
uncommonli pale and that hi eye glow like live coals. 

"you know what I mean," continu the writer, impetu crowd hi 
words--"you know what I mean, marsh. My stuff in thi morning' 
_messenger_ is plainli sub-head 'A ghost story.' that is ampl notic 
to all. everi honor reader will understand it as prescrib by 
implic the condit under which the work is to be read." 

the man address as marsh winc a trifle, then ask with a smile: 
"what conditions? you know that I am onli a plain busi man who 
cannot be suppos to understand such things. how, when, where should I 
read your ghost story?" 

"in solitude--at night--bi the light of a candle. there are certain 
emot which a writer can easili enough excite--such as compass or 
merriment. I can move you to tear or laughter under almost ani 
circumstances. but for my ghost stori to be effect you must be made 
to feel fear--at least a strong sens of the supernatural--and that is a 
difficult matter. I have a right to expect that if you read me at all 
you will give me a chance; that you will make yourself access to the 
emot that I tri to inspire." 

the car had now arriv at it terminu and stopped. the trip just 
complet wa it first for the day and the convers of the two 
earli passeng had not been interrupted. the street were yet silent 
and desolate; the hous top were just touch by the rise sun. As 
they step from the car and walk away togeth marsh narrowli eye 
hi companion, who wa reported, like most men of uncommon literari 
ability, to be addict to variou destruct vices. that is the 
reveng which dull mind take upon bright one in resent of their 
superiority. mr. colston wa known as a man of genius. there are honest 
soul who believ that geniu is a mode of excess. It wa known that 
colston did not drink liquor, but mani said that he ate opium. someth 
in hi appear that morning--a certain wild of the eyes, an 
unusu pallor, a thick and rapid of speech--wer taken by mr. 
marsh to confirm the report. nevertheless, he had not the self-deni to 
abandon a subject which he found interesting, howev it might excit 
hi friend. 

"do you mean to say," he began, "that if I take the troubl to observ 
your directions--plac myself in the condit that you demand: 
solitude, night and a tallow candle--y can with your ghostli work give 
me an uncomfort sens of the supernatural, as you call it? can you 
acceler my pulse, make me start at sudden noises, send a nervou 
chill along my spine and caus my hair to rise?" 

colston turn suddenli and look him squar in the eye as they 
walked. "you would not dare--y have not the courage," he said. He 
emphas the word with a contemptu gesture. "you are brave enough 
to read me in a street car, but--in a desert house--alone--in the 
forest--at night! bah! I have a manuscript in my pocket that would kill 
you." 

marsh wa angry. He knew himself courageous, and the word stung him. 
"if you know such a place," he said, "take me there to-night and leav 
me your stori and a candle. call for me when i'v had time enough to 
read it and i'll tell you the entir plot and--kick you out of the 
place." 

that is how it occur that the farmer' boy, look in at an unglaz 
window of the breed house, saw a man sit in the light of a candle. 

the day after 

late in the afternoon of the next day three men and a boy approach the 
breed hous from that point of the compass toward which the boy had 
fled the preced night. the men were in high spirits; they talk veri 
loudli and laughed. they made faceti and good-humor iron 
remark to the boy about hi adventure, which evid they did not 
believ in. the boy accept their railleri with seriousness, make no 
reply. He had a sens of the fit of thing and knew that one who 
profess to have seen a dead man rise from hi seat and blow out a 
candl is not a credibl witness. 

arriv at the hous and find the door unlocked, the parti of 
investig enter without ceremony. lead out of the passag into 
which thi door open wa anoth on the right and one on the left. 
they enter the room on the left--th one which had the blank front 
window. here wa the dead bodi of a man. 

It lay partli on one side, with the forearm beneath it, the cheek on the 
floor. the eye were wide open; the stare wa not an agreeabl thing to 
encounter. the lower jaw had fallen; a littl pool of saliva had 
collect beneath the mouth. An overthrown table, a partli burn 
candle, a chair and some paper with write on it were all els that the 
room contained. the men look at the body, touch the face in turn. 
the boy grave stood at the head, assum a look of ownership. It wa 
the proudest moment of hi life. one of the men said to him, "you'r a 
good 'un"--a remark which wa receiv by the two other with nod of 
acquiescence. It wa sceptic apolog to truth. then one of the 
men took from the floor the sheet of manuscript and step to the 
window, for alreadi the even shadow were gloom the forest. the 
song of the whip-poor-wil wa heard in the distanc and a monstrou 
beetl sped by the window on roar wing and thunder away out of 
hearing. the man read: 

the manuscript 

"befor commit the act which, rightli or wrongly, I have resolv 
on and appear befor my maker for judgment, I, jame R. colston, 
deem it my duti as a journalist to make a statement to the public. My 
name is, I believe, toler well known to the peopl as a writer of 
tragic tales, but the somberest imagin never conceiv anyth 
so tragic as my own life and history. not in incident: my life ha 
been destitut of adventur and action. but my mental career ha been 
lurid with experi such as kill and damn. I shall not recount them 
here--som of them are written and readi for public elsewhere. 
the object of these line is to explain to whomsoev may be 
interest that my death is voluntary--mi own act. I shall die at 
twelv o'clock on the night of the 15th of july--a signific 
anniversari to me, for it wa on that day, and at that hour, that my 
friend in time and eternity, charl breede, perform hi vow to me 
by the same act which hi fidel to our pledg now entail upon me. 
He took hi life in hi littl hous in the copeton woods. there wa 
the customari verdict of 'temporari insanity.' had I testifi at that 
inquest--had I told all I knew, they would have call _me_ mad!" 

here follow an evid long passag which the man read read to 
himself only. the rest he read aloud. 

"I have still a week of life in which to arrang my worldli affair 
and prepar for the great change. It is enough, for I have but few 
affair and it is now four year sinc death becam an imper 
obligation. 

"I shall bear thi write on my body; the finder will pleas hand it 
to the coroner. 

"jame R. colston. 

"p.s.--willard marsh, on thi the fatal fifteenth day of juli I hand 
you thi manuscript, to be open and read under the condit agre 
upon, and at the place which I designated. I forego my intent to 
keep it on my bodi to explain the manner of my death, which is not 
important. It will serv to explain the manner of yours. I am to call 
for you dure the night to receiv assur that you have read the 
manuscript. you know me well enough to expect me. but, my friend, it 
_will be after twelv o'clock._ may god have merci on our souls! 

"j.r.c." 

befor the man who wa read thi manuscript had finished, the candl 
had been pick up and lighted. when the reader had done, he quietli 
thrust the paper against the flame and despit the protest of the 
other held it until it wa burnt to ashes. the man who did this, and 
who afterward placidli endur a sever reprimand from the coroner, wa 
a son-in-law of the late charl breede. At the inquest noth could 
elicit an intellig account of what the paper had contained. 

from "the times" 

"yesterday the commission of lunaci commit to the asylum mr. 
jame R. colston, a writer of some local reputation, connect with 
the _messenger_. It will be rememb that on the even of the 15th 
inst. mr. colston wa given into custodi by one of hi fellow-lodg 
in the bain house, who had observ him act veri suspiciously, 
bare hi throat and whet a razor--occasion tri it edg 
by actual cut through the skin of hi arm, etc. On be hand 
over to the police, the unfortun man made a desper resistance, 
and ha ever sinc been so violent that it ha been necessari to keep 
him in a strait-jacket. most of our esteem contemporary' other 
writer are still at large." 




the board window 

In 1830, onli a few mile away from what is now the great citi of 
cincinnati, lay an immens and almost unbroken forest. the whole region 
wa spars settl by peopl of the frontier--restless soul who no 
sooner had hewn fairli habit home out of the wilder and 
attain to that degre of prosper which to-day we should call 
indig than impel by some mysteri impuls of their natur they 
abandon all and push farther westward, to encount new peril and 
privat in the effort to regain the meagr comfort which they had 
voluntarili renounced. mani of them had alreadi forsaken that region for 
the remot settlements, but among those remain wa one who had been 
of those first arriving. He live alon in a hous of log surround on 
all side by the great forest, of whose gloom and silenc he seem a 
part, for no one had ever known him to smile nor speak a needless word. 
hi simpl want were suppli by the sale or barter of skin of wild 
anim in the river town, for not a thing did he grow upon the land 
which, if needful, he might have claim by right of undisturb 
possession. there were evid of "improvement"--a few acr of ground 
immedi about the hous had onc been clear of it trees, the 
decay stump of which were half conceal by the new growth that had 
been suffer to repair the ravag wrought by the ax. appar the 
man' zeal for agricultur had burn with a fail flame, expir in 
penitenti ashes. 

the littl log house, with it chimney of sticks, it roof of warp 
clapboard weight with travers pole and it "chinking" of clay, 
had a singl door and, directli opposite, a window. the latter, however, 
wa board up--nobodi could rememb a time when it wa not. and none 
knew whi it wa so closed; certainli not becaus of the occupant' 
dislik of light and air, for on those rare occas when a hunter had 
pass that lone spot the reclus had commonli been seen sun 
himself on hi doorstep if heaven had provid sunshin for hi need. I 
fanci there are few person live to-day who ever knew the secret of 
that window, but I am one, as you shall see. 

the man' name wa said to be murlock. He wa appar seventi year 
old, actual about fifty. someth besid year had had a hand in hi 
aging. hi hair and long, full beard were white, hi gray, lustreless 
eye sunken, hi face singularli seam with wrinkl which appear to 
belong to two intersect systems. In figur he wa tall and spare, 
with a stoop of the shoulders--a burden bearer. I never saw him; these 
particular I learn from my grandfather, from whom also I got the 
man' stori when I wa a lad. He had known him when live near by in 
that earli day. 

one day murlock wa found in hi cabin, dead. It wa not a time and 
place for coron and newspapers, and I suppos it wa agre that he 
had die from natur caus or I should have been told, and should 
remember. I know onli that with what wa probabl a sens of the fit 
of thing the bodi wa buri near the cabin, alongsid the grave of hi 
wife, who had preced him by so mani year that local tradit had 
retain hardli a hint of her existence. that close the final chapter 
of thi true story--excepting, indeed, the circumst that mani year 
afterward, in compani with an equal intrepid spirit, I penetr to 
the place and ventur near enough to the ruin cabin to throw a stone 
against it, and ran away to avoid the ghost which everi well-inform 
boy thereabout knew haunt the spot. but there is an earlier chapter-- 
that suppli by my grandfather. 

when murlock built hi cabin and began lay sturdili about with hi ax 
to hew out a farm--th rifle, meanwhile, hi mean of support--h wa 
young, strong and full of hope. In that eastern countri whenc he came 
he had married, as wa the fashion, a young woman in all way worthi of 
hi honest devotion, who share the danger and privat of hi lot 
with a will spirit and light heart. there is no known record of her 
name; of her charm of mind and person tradit is silent and the 
doubter is at liberti to entertain hi doubt; but god forbid that I 
should share it! Of their affect and happi there is abund 
assur in everi ad day of the man' widow life; for what but the 
magnet of a bless memori could have chain that venturesom spirit 
to a lot like that? 

one day murlock return from gun in a distant part of the forest to 
find hi wife prostrat with fever, and delirious. there wa no 
physician within miles, no neighbor; nor wa she in a condit to be 
left, to summon help. So he set about the task of nurs her back to 
health, but at the end of the third day she fell into unconsci 
and so pass away, apparently, with never a gleam of return reason. 

from what we know of a natur like hi we may ventur to sketch in some 
of the detail of the outlin pictur drawn by my grandfather. when 
convinc that she wa dead, murlock had sens enough to rememb that 
the dead must be prepar for burial. In perform of thi sacr duti 
he blunder now and again, did certain thing incorrectly, and other 
which he did correctli were done over and over. hi occasion failur 
to accomplish some simpl and ordinari act fill him with astonishment, 
like that of a drunken man who wonder at the suspens of familiar 
natur laws. He wa surprised, too, that he did not weep--surpris and 
a littl ashamed; sure it is unkind not to weep for the dead. 
"to-morrow," he said aloud, "I shall have to make the coffin and dig the 
grave; and then I shall miss her, when she is no longer in sight; but 
now--sh is dead, of course, but it is all right--it _must_ be all 
right, somehow. thing cannot be so bad as they seem." 

He stood over the bodi in the fade light, adjust the hair and 
put the finish touch to the simpl toilet, do all 
mechanically, with soulless care. and still through hi conscious 
ran an undersens of convict that all wa right--that he should have 
her again as before, and everyth explained. He had had no experi 
in grief; hi capac had not been enlarg by use. hi heart could not 
contain it all, nor hi imagin rightli conceiv it. He did not know 
he wa so hard struck; _that_ knowledg would come later, and never go. 
grief is an artist of power as variou as the instrument upon which he 
play hi dirg for the dead, evok from some the sharpest, shrillest 
notes, from other the low, grave chord that throb recurr like the 
slow beat of a distant drum. some natur it startles; some it 
stupefies. To one it come like the stroke of an arrow, sting all the 
sensibl to a keener life; to anoth as the blow of a bludgeon, 
which in crush benumbs. We may conceiv murlock to have been that way 
affected, for (and here we are upon surer ground than that of 
conjecture) no sooner had he finish hi piou work than, sink into 
a chair by the side of the tabl upon which the bodi lay, and note how 
white the profil show in the deepen gloom, he laid hi arm upon 
the table' edge, and drop hi face into them, tearless yet and 
unutter weary. At that moment came in through the open window a 
long, wail sound like the cri of a lost child in the far deep of the 
darken wood! but the man did not move. again, and nearer than before, 
sound that unearthli cri upon hi fail sense. perhap it wa a wild 
beast; perhap it wa a dream. for murlock wa asleep. 

some hour later, as it afterward appeared, thi unfaith watcher 
awok and lift hi head from hi arm intent listened--h knew not 
why. there in the black dark by the side of the dead, recal all 
without a shock, he strain hi eye to see--h knew not what. hi 
sens were all alert, hi breath wa suspended, hi blood had still 
it tide as if to assist the silence. who--what had wake him, and 
where wa it? 

suddenli the tabl shook beneath hi arms, and at the same moment he 
heard, or fanci that he heard, a light, soft step--another--sound as 
of bare feet upon the floor! 

He wa terrifi beyond the power to cri out or move. perforc he 
waited--wait there in the dark through seem centuri of such 
dread as one may know, yet live to tell. He tri vainli to speak the 
dead woman' name, vainli to stretch forth hi hand across the tabl to 
learn if she were there. hi throat wa powerless, hi arm and hand 
were like lead. then occur someth most frightful. some heavi bodi 
seem hurl against the tabl with an impetu that push it against 
hi breast so sharpli as nearli to overthrow him, and at the same 
instant he heard and felt the fall of someth upon the floor with so 
violent a thump that the whole hous wa shaken by the impact. A 
scuffl ensued, and a confus of sound imposs to describe. 
murlock had risen to hi feet. fear had by excess forfeit control of 
hi faculties. He flung hi hand upon the table. noth wa there! 

there is a point at which terror may turn to madness; and mad 
incit to action. with no definit intent, from no motiv but the 
wayward impuls of a madman, murlock sprang to the wall, with a littl 
grope seiz hi load rifle, and without aim discharg it. By the 
flash which lit up the room with a vivid illumination, he saw an 
enorm panther drag the dead woman toward the window, it teeth 
fix in her throat! then there were dark blacker than before, and 
silence; and when he return to conscious the sun wa high and the 
wood vocal with song of birds. 

the bodi lay near the window, where the beast had left it when 
frighten away by the flash and report of the rifle. the cloth wa 
deranged, the long hair in disorder, the limb lay anyhow. from the 
throat, dread lacerated, had issu a pool of blood not yet 
entir coagulated. the ribbon with which he had bound the wrist wa 
broken; the hand were tightli clenched. between the teeth wa a 
fragment of the animal' ear. 




A ladi from redhors 

coronado, june 20. 

I find myself more and more interest in him. It is not, I am sure, 
his--do you know ani good noun correspond to the adject 
"handsome"? one doe not like to say "beauty" when speak of a man. He 
is beauti enough, heaven knows; I should not even care to trust you 
with him--faithfulest of all possibl wive that you are--when he look 
hi best, as he alway does. nor do I think the fascin of hi 
manner ha much to do with it. you recollect that the charm of art 
inher in that which is undefinable, and to you and me, my dear irene, 
I fanci there is rather less of that in the branch of art under 
consider than to girl in their first season. I fanci I know how my 
fine gentleman produc mani of hi effect and could perhap give him a 
pointer on heighten them. nevertheless, hi manner is someth truli 
delightful. I suppos what interest me chiefli is the man' brains. hi 
convers is the best I have ever heard and altogeth unlik ani one 
else's. He seem to know everything, as inde he ought, for he ha been 
everywhere, read everything, seen all there is to see--sometim I think 
rather more than is good for him--and had acquaint with the 
_queerest_ people. and then hi voice--irene, when I hear it I actual 
feel as if I ought to have paid at the door, though of cours it is my 
own door. 

juli 3. 

I fear my remark about dr. barritz must have been, be thoughtless, 
veri silly, or you would not have written of him with such levity, not 
to say disrespect. believ me, dearest, he ha more digniti and 
serious (of the kind, I mean, which is not inconsist with a 
manner sometim play and alway charming) than ani of the men that 
you and I ever met. and young raynor--y knew raynor at monterey--tel 
me that the men all like him and that he is treat with someth like 
defer everywhere. there is a mystery, too--someth about hi 
connect with the blavatski peopl in northern india. raynor either 
would not or could not tell me the particulars. I infer that dr. barritz 
is thought--don't you dare to laugh!--a magician. could anyth be 
finer than that? 

An ordinari mysteri is not, of course, so good as a scandal, but when it 
relat to dark and dread practices--to the exercis of unearthli 
powers--could anyth be more piquant? It explains, too, the singular 
influenc the man ha upon me. It is the undefin in hi art--black 
art. seriously, dear, I quit trembl when he look me full in the eye 
with those unfathom orb of his, which I have alreadi vainli 
attempt to describ to you. how dread if he ha the power to make 
one fall in love! Do you know if the blavatski crowd have that power-- 
outsid of sepoy? 

juli 16. 

the strangest thing! last even while aunti wa attend one of the 
hotel hop (I hate them) dr. barritz called. It wa scandal late--i 
actual believ that he had talk with aunti in the ballroom and 
learn from her that I wa alone. I had been all the even contriv 
how to worm out of him the truth about hi connect with the thug in 
sepoy, and all of that black business, but the moment he fix hi eye 
on me (for I admit him, i'm asham to say) I wa helpless. I 
trembled, I blushed, i--o irene, irene, I love the man beyond express 
and you know how it is yourself. 

fancy! I, an ugli duckl from redhorse--daught (they say) of old 
calam jim--certainli hi heiress, with no live relat but an 
absurd old aunt who spoil me a thousand and fifti ways--absolut 
destitut of everyth but a million dollar and a hope in paris,--i 
dare to love a god like him! My dear, if I had you here I could tear 
your hair out with mortification. 

I am convinc that he is awar of my feeling, for he stay but a few 
moments, said noth but what anoth man might have said half as well, 
and pretend that he had an engag went away. I learn to-day (a 
littl bird told me--th bell-bird) that he went straight to bed. how 
doe that strike you as evid of exemplari habits? 

juli 17. 

that littl wretch, raynor, call yesterday and hi babbl set me 
almost wild. He never run down--that is to say, when he extermin a 
score of reputations, more or less, he doe not paus between one 
reput and the next. (bi the way, he inquir about you, and hi 
manifest of interest in you had, I confess, a good deal of 
_vraisemblance._.) mr. raynor observ no game laws; like death (which 
he would inflict if slander were fatal) he ha all season for hi own. 
but I like him, for we knew each other at redhors when we were young. 
He wa known in those day as "giggles," and i--o irene, can you ever 
forgiv me?--i wa call "gunny." god know why; perhap in allus to 
the materi of my pinafores; perhap becaus the name is in 
alliter with "giggles," for gig and I were insepar playmates, 
and the miner may have thought it a delic civil to recogn some 
kind of relationship between us. 

later, we took in a third--anoth of adversity' brood, who, like 
garrick between tragedi and comedy, had a chronic inabl to 
adjud the rival claim of frost and famine. between him and miseri 
there wa seldom anyth more than a singl suspend and the hope of a 
meal which would at the same time support life and make it 
insupportable. He liter pick up a precari live for himself 
and an age mother by "chlorid the dumps," that is to say, the miner 
permit him to search the heap of wast rock for such piec of "pay 
ore" as had been overlooked; and these he sack up and sold at the 
syndic mill. He becam a member of our firm--"gunny, giggles, and 
dumps" thenceforth--through my favor; for I could not then, nor can I 
now, be indiffer to hi courag and prowess in defend against 
giggl the immemori right of hi sex to insult a strang and 
unprotect female--myself. after old jim struck it in the calam and 
I began to wear shoe and go to school, and in emul giggl took to 
wash hi face and becam jack raynor, of wells, fargo & co., and old 
mrs. bart wa herself chlorid to her fathers, dump drift over to 
san juan smith and turn stage driver, and wa kill by road agents, 
and so forth. 

whi do I tell you all this, dear? becaus it is heavi on my heart. 
becaus I walk the valley of humility. becaus I am subdu myself to 
perman conscious of my unworthi to unloos the latchet of dr. 
barritz' shoe. because, oh dear, oh dear, there' a cousin of dump at 
thi hotel! I haven't spoken to him. I never had much acquaint with 
him,--but do you suppos he ha recogn me? do, pleas give me in 
your next your candid, sure-enough opinion about it, and say you don't 
think so. Do you suppos He know about me already, and that that is whi 
He left me last even when He saw that I blush and trembl like a 
fool under hi eyes? you know I can't bribe _all_ the newspapers, and I 
can't go back on anybodi who wa civil to gunni at redhorse--not if i'm 
pitch out of societi into the sea. So the skeleton sometim rattl 
behind the door. I never care much before, as you know, but now--_now_ 
it is not the same. jack raynor I am sure of--h will not tell him. He 
seems, indeed, to hold him in such respect as hardli to dare speak to 
him at all, and i'm a good deal that way myself. dear, dear! I wish I 
had someth besid a million dollars! If jack were three inch 
taller i'd marri him aliv and go back to redhors and wear sackcloth 
again to the end of my miser days. 

juli 25. 

We had a perfectli splendid sunset last even and I must tell you all 
about it. I ran away from aunti and everybodi and wa walk alon on 
the beach. I expect you to believe, you infidel! that I had not look 
out of my window on the seaward side of the hotel and seen him walk 
alon on the beach. If you are not lost to everi feel of womanli 
delicaci you will accept my statement without question. I soon 
establish myself under my sunshad and had for some time been gaze 
out dreamili over the sea, when he approached, walk close to the edg 
of the water--it wa ebb tide. I assur you the wet sand actual 
brighten about hi feet! As he approach me he lift hi hat, 
saying, "miss dement, may I sit with you?--or will you walk with me?" 

the possibl that neither might be agreeabl seem not to have 
occur to him. did you ever know such assurance? assurance? My dear, 
it wa gall, downright _gall!_ well, I didn't find it wormwood, and 
replied, with my untutor redhors heart in my throat, "i--i shall be 
pleas to do _anything_." could word have been more stupid? there are 
depth of fatuiti in me, friend o' my soul, that are simpli bottomless! 

He extend hi hand, smiling, and I deliv mine into it without a 
moment' hesitation, and when hi finger close about it to assist me 
to my feet the conscious that it trembl made me blush wors than 
the red west. I got up, however, and after a while, observ that he 
had not let go my hand I pull on it a little, but unsuccessfully. He 
simpli held on, say nothing, but look down into my face with some 
kind of smile--i didn't know--how could i?--wheth it wa affectionate, 
derisive, or what, for I did not look at him. how beauti he was!-- 
with the red fire of the sunset burn in the depth of hi eyes. Do 
you know, dear, if the thug and expert of the blavatski region have 
ani special kind of eyes? ah, you should have seen hi superb attitude, 
the god-lik inclin of hi head as he stood over me after I had got 
upon my feet! It wa a nobl picture, but I soon destroy it, for I 
began at onc to sink again to the earth. there wa onli one thing for 
him to do, and he did it; he support me with an arm about my waist. 

"miss dement, are you ill?" he said. 

It wa not an exclamation; there wa neither alarm nor solicitud in it. 
If he had added: "I suppos that is about what I am expect to say," he 
would hardli have express hi sens of the situat more clearly. hi 
manner fill me with shame and indignation, for I wa suffer 
acutely. I wrench my hand out of his, grasp the arm support me 
and push myself free, fell plump into the sand and sat helpless. My 
hat had fallen off in the struggl and my hair tumbl about my face and 
shoulder in the most mortifi way. 

"go away from me," I cried, half choking. "O _please_ go away, you--you 
thug! how dare you think _that_ when my leg is asleep?" 

I actual said those ident words! and then I broke down and sobbed. 
irene, I _blubbered_! 

hi manner alter in an instant--i could see that much through my 
finger and hair. He drop on one knee besid me, part the tangl of 
hair and said in the tenderest way: "mi poor girl, god know I have not 
intend to pain you. how should i?--i who love you--i who have love 
you for--for year and years!" 

He had pull my wet hand away from my face and wa cover them with 
kisses. My cheek were like two coals, my whole face wa flame and, I 
think, steaming. what could I do? I hid it on hi shoulder--ther wa no 
other place. and, O my dear friend, how my leg tingl and thrilled, and 
how I want to kick! 

We sat so for a long time. He had releas one of my hand to pass hi 
arm about me again and I possess myself of my handkerchief and wa 
dri my eye and my nose. I would not look up until that wa done; he 
tri in vain to push me a littl away and gaze into my face. presently, 
when all wa right, and it had grown a bit dark, I lift my head, 
look him straight in the eye and smile my best--mi level best, dear. 

"what do you mean," I said, "bi 'year and years'?" 

"dearest," he replied, veri gravely, veri earnestly, "in the absenc of 
the sunken cheeks, the hollow eyes, the lank hair, the slouch gait, 
the rags, dirt, and youth, can you not--wil you not understand? gunny, 
i'm dumps!" 

In a moment I wa upon my feet and he upon his. I seiz him by the 
lapel of hi coat and peer into hi handsom face in the deepen 
darkness. I wa breathless with excitement. 

"and you are not dead?" I asked, hardli know what I said. 

"onli dead in love, dear. I recov from the road agent' bullet, but 
this, I fear, is fatal." 

"but about jack--mr. raynor? don't you know--" 

"I am asham to say, darling, that it wa through that unworthi 
person' suggest that I came here from vienna." 

irene, they have rope in your affection friend, 

mari jane dement. 

p.s.--the worst of it is that there is no mystery; that wa the 
invent of jack raynor, to arous my curiosity. jame is not a thug. 
He solemnli assur me that in all hi wander he ha never set foot 
in sepoy. 




the eye OF the panther 

I 

one doe not alway marri when insan 

A man and a woman--natur had done the grouping--sat on a rustic seat, 
in the late afternoon. the man wa middle-aged, slender, swarthy, with 
the express of a poet and the complexion of a pirate--a man at whom 
one would look again. the woman wa young, blonde, graceful, with 
someth in her figur and movement suggest the word "lithe." she 
wa habit in a gray gown with odd brown mark in the texture. she 
may have been beautiful; one could not readili say, for her eye deni 
attent to all else. they were gray-green, long and narrow, with an 
express defi analysis. one could onli know that they were 
disquieting. cleopatra may have had such eyes. 

the man and the woman talked. 

"yes," said the woman, "I love you, god knows! but marri you, no. I 
cannot, will not." 

"irene, you have said that mani times, yet alway have deni me a 
reason. i'v a right to know, to understand, to feel and prove my 
fortitud if I have it. give me a reason." 

"for love you?" 

the woman wa smile through her tear and her pallor. that did not 
stir ani sens of humor in the man. 

"no; there is no reason for that. A reason for not marri me. i'v a 
right to know. I must know. I will know!" 

He had risen and wa stand befor her with clench hands, on hi 
face a frown--it might have been call a scowl. He look as if he 
might attempt to learn by strangl her. she smile no more--mer sat 
look up into hi face with a fixed, set regard that wa utterli 
without emot or sentiment. yet it had someth in it that tame hi 
resent and made him shiver. 

"you are determin to have my reason?" she ask in a tone that wa 
entir mechanical--a tone that might have been her look made audible. 

"if you please--if i'm not ask too much." 

appar thi lord of creation wa yield some part of hi dominion 
over hi co-creature. 

"veri well, you shall know: I am insane." 

the man started, then look incredul and wa consciou that he ought 
to be amused. but, again, the sens of humor fail him in hi need and 
despit hi disbelief he wa profoundli disturb by that which he did 
not believe. between our convict and our feel there is no good 
understanding. 

"that is what the physician would say," the woman continued--"if they 
knew. I might myself prefer to call it a case of 'possession.' sit down 
and hear what I have to say." 

the man silent resum hi seat besid her on the rustic bench by the 
wayside. over-against them on the eastern side of the valley the hill 
were alreadi sunset-flush and the still all about wa of that 
peculiar qualiti that foretel the twilight. someth of it 
mysteri and signific solemn had impart itself to the man' 
mood. In the spiritual, as in the materi world, are sign and presag 
of night. rare meet her look, and whenev he did so consciou of 
the indefin dread with which, despit their felin beauty, her eye 
alway affect him, jenner brade listen in silenc to the stori 
told by iren marlowe. In defer to the reader' possibl prejudic 
against the artless method of an unpractis historian the author 
ventur to substitut hi own version for hers. 

II 

A room may BE too narrow for three, though one IS outsid 

In a littl log hous contain a singl room spare and rude 
furnished, crouch on the floor against one of the walls, wa a woman, 
clasp to her breast a child. outside, a dens unbroken forest 
extend for mani mile in everi direction. thi wa at night and the 
room wa black dark: no human eye could have discern the woman and the 
child. yet they were observed, narrowly, vigilantly, with never even a 
momentari slacken of attention; and that is the pivot fact upon 
which thi narr turns. 

charl marlow wa of the class, now extinct in thi country, of 
woodmen pioneers--men who found their most accept surround in 
sylvan solitud that stretch along the eastern slope of the 
mississippi valley, from the great lake to the gulf of mexico. for more 
than a hundr year these men push ever westward, gener after 
generation, with rifl and ax, reclaim from natur and her savag 
children here and there an isol acreag for the plow, no sooner 
reclaim than surrend to their less venturesom but more thrifti 
successors. At last they burst through the edg of the forest into the 
open countri and vanish as if they had fallen over a cliff. the 
woodman pioneer is no more; the pioneer of the plains--h whose easi 
task it wa to subdu for occup two-third of the countri in a 
singl generation--i anoth and inferior creation. with charl 
marlow in the wilderness, share the dangers, hardship and privat 
of that strange, unprofit life, were hi wife and child, to whom, in 
the manner of hi class, in which the domest virtu were a religion, 
he wa passion attached. the woman wa still young enough to be 
comely, new enough to the aw isol of her lot to be cheerful. By 
withhold the larg capac for happi which the simpl 
satisfact of the forest life could not have filled, heaven had dealt 
honor with her. In her light household tasks, her child, her husband 
and her few foolish books, she found abund provis for her needs. 

one morn in midsumm marlow took down hi rifl from the wooden 
hook on the wall and signifi hi intent of get game. 

"we'v meat enough," said the wife; "pleas don't go out to-day. I 
dream last night, O, such a dread thing! I cannot recollect it, but 
i'm almost sure that it will come to pass if you go out." 

It is pain to confess that marlow receiv thi solemn statement 
with less of graviti than wa due to the mysteri natur of the 
calam foreshadowed. In truth, he laughed. 

"tri to remember," he said. "mayb you dream that babi had lost the 
power of speech." 

the conjectur wa obvious suggest by the fact that baby, cling 
to the fring of hi hunting-coat with all her ten pudgi thumb wa at 
that moment utter her sens of the situat in a seri of exult 
goo-goo inspir by sight of her father' raccoon-skin cap. 

the woman yielded: lack the gift of humor she could not hold out 
against hi kindli badinage. so, with a kiss for the mother and a kiss 
for the child, he left the hous and close the door upon hi happi 
forever. 

At nightfal he had not returned. the woman prepar supper and waited. 
then she put babi to bed and sang softli to her until she slept. By thi 
time the fire on the hearth, at which she had cook supper, had burn 
out and the room wa light by a singl candle. thi she afterward 
place in the open window as a sign and welcom to the hunter if he 
should approach from that side. she had thought close and bar 
the door against such wild anim as might prefer it to an open window 
--of the habit of beast of prey in enter a hous uninvit she wa 
not advised, though with true femal previs she may have consid 
the possibl of their entranc by way of the chimney. As the night 
wore on she becam not less anxious, but more drowsy, and at last rest 
her arm upon the bed by the child and her head upon the arms. the 
candl in the window burn down to the socket, sputter and flare a 
moment and went out unobserved; for the woman slept and dreamed. 

In her dream she sat besid the cradl of a second child. the first one 
wa dead. the father wa dead. the home in the forest wa lost and the 
dwell in which she live wa unfamiliar. there were heavi oaken 
doors, alway closed, and outsid the windows, fasten into the thick 
stone walls, were iron bars, obvious (so she thought) a provis 
against indians. all thi she note with an infinit self-pity, but 
without surprise--an emot unknown in dreams. the child in the cradl 
wa invis under it coverlet which someth impel her to remove. 
she did so, disclos the face of a wild animal! In the shock of thi 
dread revel the dreamer awoke, trembl in the dark of her 
cabin in the wood. 

As a sens of her actual surround came slowli back to her she felt 
for the child that wa not a dream, and assur herself by it breath 
that all wa well with it; nor could she forbear to pass a hand lightli 
across it face. then, move by some impuls for which she probabl 
could not have accounted, she rose and took the sleep babe in her 
arms, hold it close against her breast. the head of the child' cot 
wa against the wall to which the woman now turn her back as she 
stood. lift her eye she saw two bright object star the dark 
with a reddish-green glow. she took them to be two coal on the hearth, 
but with her return sens of direct came the disquiet 
conscious that they were not in that quarter of the room, moreov 
were too high, be nearli at the level of the eyes--of her own eyes. 
for these were the eye of a panther. 

the beast wa at the open window directli opposit and not five pace 
away. noth but those terribl eye wa visible, but in the dread 
tumult of her feel as the situat disclos itself to her 
understand she somehow knew that the anim wa stand on it 
hinder feet, support itself with it paw on the window-ledge. that 
signifi a malign interest--not the mere gratif of an indol 
curiosity. the conscious of the attitud wa an ad horror, 
accentu the menac of those aw eyes, in whose steadfast fire her 
strength and courag were alik consumed. under their silent question 
she shudder and turn sick. her knee fail her, and by degrees, 
instinct strive to avoid a sudden movement that might bring the 
beast upon her, she sank to the floor, crouch against the wall and 
tri to shield the babe with her trembl bodi without withdraw her 
gaze from the lumin orb that were kill her. No thought of her 
husband came to her in her agony--no hope nor suggest of rescu or 
escape. her capac for thought and feel had narrow to the 
dimens of a singl emotion--fear of the animal' spring, of the 
impact of it body, the buffet of it great arms, the feel of it 
teeth in her throat, the mangl of her babe. motionless now and in 
absolut silence, she await her doom, the moment grow to hours, to 
years, to ages; and still those devilish eye maintain their watch. 

return to hi cabin late at night with a deer on hi shoulder 
charl marlow tri the door. It did not yield. He knocked; there wa 
no answer. He laid down hi deer and went round to the window. As he 
turn the angl of the build he fanci he heard a sound as of 
stealthi footfal and a rustl in the undergrowth of the forest, but 
they were too slight for certainty, even to hi practis ear. 
approach the window, and to hi surpris find it open, he threw 
hi leg over the sill and entered. all wa dark and silence. He 
grope hi way to the fire-place, struck a match and lit a candle. 

then he look about. cower on the floor against a wall wa hi wife, 
clasp hi child. As he sprang toward her she rose and broke into 
laughter, long, loud, and mechanical, devoid of glad and devoid of 
sense--th laughter that is not out of keep with the clank of a 
chain. hardli know what he did he extend hi arms. she laid the 
babe in them. It wa dead--press to death in it mother' embrace. 

iii 

the theori OF the defens 

that is what occur dure a night in a forest, but not all of it did 
iren marlow relat to jenner brading; not all of it wa known to her. 
when she had conclud the sun wa below the horizon and the long summer 
twilight had begun to deepen in the hollow of the land. for some 
moment brade wa silent, expect the narr to be carri 
forward to some definit connect with the convers introduc 
it; but the narrat wa as silent as he, her face averted, her hand 
clasp and unclasp themselv as they lay in her lap, with a 
singular suggest of an activ independ of her will. 

"it is a sad, a terribl story," said brade at last, "but I do not 
understand. you call charl marlow father; that I know. that he is old 
befor hi time, broken by some great sorrow, I have seen, or thought I 
saw. but, pardon me, you said that you--that you--" 

"that I am insane," said the girl, without a movement of head or body. 

"but, irene, you say--please, dear, do not look away from me--you say 
that the child wa dead, not demented." 

"yes, that one--i am the second. I wa born three month after that 
night, my mother be merci permit to lay down her life in 
give me mine." 

brade wa again silent; he wa a trifl daze and could not at onc 
think of the right thing to say. her face wa still turn away. In hi 
embarrass he reach impuls toward the hand that lay close 
and unclos in her lap, but something--h could not have said what-- 
restrain him. He then remembered, vaguely, that he had never 
altogeth care to take her hand. 

"i it likely," she resumed, "that a person born under such 
circumst is like others--i what you call sane?" 

brade did not reply; he wa preoccupi with a new thought that wa 
take shape in hi mind--what a scientist would have call an 
hypothesis; a detective, a theory. It might throw an ad light, albeit 
a lurid one, upon such doubt of her saniti as her own assert had not 
dispelled. 

the countri wa still new and, outsid the villages, spars populated. 
the profession hunter wa still a familiar figure, and among hi 
trophi were head and pelt of the larger kind of game. tale 
various credibl of nocturn meet with savag anim in lone 
road were sometim current, pass through the customari stage of 
growth and decay, and were forgotten. A recent addit to these popular 
apocrypha, originating, apparently, by spontan gener in sever 
households, wa of a panther which had frighten some of their member 
by look in at window by night. the yarn had caus it littl rippl 
of excitement--had even attain to the distinct of a place in the 
local newspaper; but brade had given it no attention. it like to 
the stori to which he had just listen now impress him as perhap 
more than accidental. wa it not possibl that the one stori had 
suggest the other--that find congeni condit in a morbid mind 
and a fertil fancy, it had grown to the tragic tale that he had heard? 

brade recal certain circumst of the girl' histori and 
disposition, of which, with love' incuriosity, he had hitherto been 
heedless--such as her solitari life with her father, at whose hous no 
one, apparently, wa an accept visitor and her strang fear of the 
night, by which those who knew her best account for her never be 
seen after dark. sure in such a mind imagin onc kindl might 
burn with a lawless flame, penetr and envelop the entir 
structure. that she wa mad, though the convict gave him the acutest 
pain, he could no longer doubt; she had onli mistaken an effect of her 
mental disord for it cause, bring into imaginari relat with her 
own person the vagari of the local myth-makers. with some vagu 
intent of test hi new "theory," and no veri definit notion of 
how to set about it he said, gravely, but with hesitation: 

"irene, dear, tell me--i beg you will not take offence, but tell me--" 

"I have told you," she interrupted, speak with a passion 
earnest that he had not known her to show--"i have alreadi told you 
that we cannot marry; is anyth els worth saying?" 

befor he could stop her she had sprung from her seat and without 
anoth word or look wa glide away among the tree toward her 
father' house. brade had risen to detain her; he stood watch her 
in silenc until she had vanish in the gloom. suddenli he start as 
if he had been shot; hi face took on an express of amaz and 
alarm: in one of the black shadow into which she had disappear he had 
caught a quick, brief glimps of shine eyes! for an instant he wa 
daze and irresolute; then he dash into the wood after her, shouting: 
"irene, irene, look out! the panther! the panther!" 

In a moment he had pass through the fring of forest into open ground 
and saw the girl' gray skirt vanish into her father' door. No 
panther wa visible. 

IV 

AN appeal TO the conscienc OF god 

jenner brading, attorney-at-law, live in a cottag at the edg of the 
town. directli behind the dwell wa the forest. be a bachelor, and 
therefore, by the draconian moral code of the time and place deni the 
servic of the onli speci of domest servant known thereabout, the 
"hire girl," he board at the villag hotel, where also wa hi 
office. the woodsid cottag wa mere a lodg maintained--at no 
great cost, to be sure--a an evid of prosper and respectability. 
It would hardli do for one to whom the local newspap had point with 
pride as "the foremost jurist of hi time" to be "homeless," albeit he 
may sometim have suspect that the word "home" and "house" were not 
strictli synonymous. indeed, hi conscious of the dispar and hi 
will to harmon it were matter of logic inference, for it wa 
gener report that soon after the cottag wa built it owner had 
made a futil ventur in the direct of marriage--had, in truth, gone 
so far as to be reject by the beauti but eccentr daughter of old 
man marlowe, the recluse. thi wa publicli believ becaus he had told 
it himself and she had not--a revers of the usual order of thing 
which could hardli fail to carri conviction. 

brading' bedroom wa at the rear of the house, with a singl window 
face the forest. 

one night he wa awaken by a nois at that window; he could hardli 
have said what it wa like. with a littl thrill of the nerv he sat up 
in bed and laid hold of the revolv which, with a forethought most 
commend in one addict to the habit of sleep on the ground floor 
with an open window, he had put under hi pillow. the room wa in 
absolut darkness, but be unterrifi he knew where to direct hi 
eyes, and there he held them, await in silenc what further might 
occur. He could now dimli discern the aperture--a squar of lighter 
black. present there appear at it lower edg two gleam eye that 
burn with a malign lustr inexpress terrible! brading' heart 
gave a great jump, then seem to stand still. A chill pass along hi 
spine and through hi hair; he felt the blood forsak hi cheeks. He 
could not have cri out--not to save hi life; but be a man of 
courag he would not, to save hi life, have done so if he had been 
able. some trepid hi coward bodi might feel, but hi spirit wa of 
sterner stuff. slowli the shine eye rose with a steadi motion that 
seem an approach, and slowli rose brading' right hand, hold the 
pistol. He fired! 

blind by the flash and stun by the report, brade nevertheless 
heard, or fanci that he heard, the wild, high scream of the panther, 
so human in sound, so devilish in suggestion. leap from the bed he 
hastili cloth himself and, pistol in hand, sprang from the door, 
meet two or three men who came run up from the road. A brief 
explan wa follow by a cautiou search of the house. the grass 
wa wet with dew; beneath the window it had been trodden and partli 
level for a wide space, from which a deviou trail, visibl in the 
light of a lantern, led away into the bushes. one of the men stumbl 
and fell upon hi hands, which as he rose and rub them togeth were 
slippery. On examin they were seen to be red with blood. 

An encounter, unarmed, with a wound panther wa not agreeabl to their 
taste; all but brade turn back. he, with lantern and pistol, push 
courag forward into the wood. pass through a difficult 
undergrowth he came into a small opening, and there hi courag had it 
reward, for there he found the bodi of hi victim. but it wa no 
panther. what it wa is told, even to thi day, upon a weather-worn 
headston in the villag churchyard, and for mani year wa attest 
daili at the gravesid by the bent figur and sorrow-seam face of old 
man marlowe, to whose soul, and to the soul of hi strange, unhappi 
child, peace. peac and reparation. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the collect work of ambros bierce, 
vol. ii: In the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilians, by ambros bierc 

*** end OF thi project gutenberg ebook ambros bierce, vol. II *** 

***** thi file should be name 13334-8.txt or 13334-8.zip ***** 
thi and all associ file of variou format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/3/13334/ 

produc by jonathan ingram, carol david and PG distribut proofread 

updat edit will replac the previou one--th old edit 
will be renamed. 

creat the work from public domain print edit mean that no 
one own a unit state copyright in these works, so the foundat 
(and you!) can copi and distribut it in the unit state without 
permiss and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the gener term of use part of thi license, appli to 
copi and distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a regist trademark, and may not be use if you 
charg for the ebooks, unless you receiv specif permission. If you 
do not charg anyth for copi of thi ebook, compli with the 
rule is veri easy. you may use thi ebook for nearli ani purpos 
such as creation of deriv works, reports, perform and 
research. they may be modifi and print and given away--y may do 
practic anyth with public domain ebooks. redistribut is 
subject to the trademark license, especi commerci 
redistribution. 



*** start: full licens *** 

the full project gutenberg licens 
pleas read thi befor you distribut OR use thi work 

To protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promot the free 
distribut of electron works, by use or distribut thi work 
(or ani other work associ in ani way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agre to compli with all the term of the full project 
gutenberg-tm licens (avail with thi file or onlin at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. gener term of use and redistribut project gutenberg-tm 
electron work 

1.a. By read or use ani part of thi project gutenberg-tm 
electron work, you indic that you have read, understand, agre to 
and accept all the term of thi licens and intellectu properti 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agre to abid by all 
the term of thi agreement, you must ceas use and return or destroy 
all copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtain a copi of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work and you do not agre to be bound by the 
term of thi agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entiti to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a regist trademark. It may onli be 
use on or associ in ani way with an electron work by peopl who 
agre to be bound by the term of thi agreement. there are a few 
thing that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electron work 
even without compli with the full term of thi agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of thing you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electron work if you follow the term of thi agreement 
and help preserv free futur access to project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compil copyright in the collect of project 
gutenberg-tm electron works. nearli all the individu work in the 
collect are in the public domain in the unit states. If an 
individu work is in the public domain in the unit state and you are 
locat in the unit states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or creat deriv 
work base on the work as long as all refer to project gutenberg 
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promot free access to electron work by 
freeli share project gutenberg-tm work in complianc with the term of 
thi agreement for keep the project gutenberg-tm name associ with 
the work. you can easili compli with the term of thi agreement by 
keep thi work in the same format with it attach full project 
gutenberg-tm licens when you share it without charg with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are locat also govern 
what you can do with thi work. copyright law in most countri are in 
a constant state of change. If you are outsid the unit states, check 
the law of your countri in addit to the term of thi agreement 
befor downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribut or 
creat deriv work base on thi work or ani other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundat make no represent concern 
the copyright statu of ani work in ani countri outsid the unit 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remov all refer to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the follow sentence, with activ link to, or other immedi 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm licens must appear promin 
whenev ani copi of a project gutenberg-tm work (ani work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copi or distributed: 

thi ebook is for the use of anyon anywher at no cost and with 
almost no restrict whatsoever. you may copi it, give it away or 
re-us it under the term of the project gutenberg licens includ 
with thi ebook or onlin at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is deriv 
from the public domain (doe not contain a notic indic that it is 
post with permiss of the copyright holder), the work can be copi 
and distribut to anyon in the unit state without pay ani fee 
or charges. If you are redistribut or provid access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associ with or appear on the 
work, you must compli either with the requir of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permiss for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. If an individu project gutenberg-tm electron work is post 
with the permiss of the copyright holder, your use and distribut 
must compli with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and ani addit 
term impos by the copyright holder. addit term will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm licens for all work post with the 
permiss of the copyright holder found at the begin of thi work. 

1.e.4. Do not unlink or detach or remov the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens term from thi work, or ani file contain a part of thi 
work or ani other work associ with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribut or redistribut thi 
electron work, or ani part of thi electron work, without 
promin display the sentenc set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
activ link or immedi access to the full term of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribut thi work in ani binary, 
compressed, mark up, nonproprietari or proprietari form, includ ani 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provid access to or 
distribut copi of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the offici version 
post on the offici project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no addit cost, fee or expens to the user, provid a 
copy, a mean of export a copy, or a mean of obtain a copi upon 
request, of the work in it origin "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. ani altern format must includ the full project gutenberg-tm 
licens as specifi in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. Do not charg a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copi or distribut ani project gutenberg-tm work 
unless you compli with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charg a reason fee for copi of or provid 
access to or distribut project gutenberg-tm electron work provid 
that 

- you pay a royalti fee of 20% of the gross profit you deriv from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm work calcul use the method 
you alreadi use to calcul your applic taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
ha agre to donat royalti under thi paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literari archiv foundation. royalti payment 
must be paid within 60 day follow each date on which you 
prepar (or are legal requir to prepare) your period tax 
returns. royalti payment should be clearli mark as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat at the 
address specifi in section 4, "inform about donat to 
the project gutenberg literari archiv foundation." 

- you provid a full refund of ani money paid by a user who notifi 
you in write (or by e-mail) within 30 day of receipt that s/he 
doe not agre to the term of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must requir such a user to return or 
destroy all copi of the work possess in a physic medium 
and discontinu all use of and all access to other copi of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accord with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of ani 
money paid for a work or a replac copy, if a defect in the 
electron work is discov and report to you within 90 day 
of receipt of the work. 

- you compli with all other term of thi agreement for free 
distribut of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. If you wish to charg a fee or distribut a project gutenberg-tm 
electron work or group of work on differ term than are set 
forth in thi agreement, you must obtain permiss in write from 
both the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundat as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunt and employe expend consider 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcrib and proofread 
public domain work in creat the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despit these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electron 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limit to, incomplete, inaccur or 
corrupt data, transcript errors, a copyright or other intellectu 
properti infringement, a defect or damag disk or other medium, a 
comput virus, or comput code that damag or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limit warranty, disclaim OF damag - except for the "right 
of replac or refund" describ in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and ani other parti distribut a project 
gutenberg-tm electron work under thi agreement, disclaim all 
liabil to you for damages, cost and expenses, includ legal 
fees. you agre that you have NO remedi for negligence, strict 
liability, breach OF warranti OR breach OF contract except those 
provid IN paragraph f3. you agre that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and ani distributor under thi agreement will not BE 
liabl TO you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punit OR 
incident damag even IF you give notic OF the possibl OF such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limit right OF replac OR refund - If you discov a 
defect in thi electron work within 90 day of receiv it, you can 
receiv a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explan to the person you receiv the work from. If you 
receiv the work on a physic medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entiti that provid you with 
the defect work may elect to provid a replac copi in lieu of a 
refund. If you receiv the work electronically, the person or entiti 
provid it to you may choos to give you a second opportun to 
receiv the work electron in lieu of a refund. If the second copi 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in write without further 
opportun to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limit right of replac or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, thi work is provid to you 'as-is' with NO other 
warranti OF ani kind, express OR implied, includ but not limit TO 
warranti OF merchant OR fit for ani purpose. 

1.f.5. some state do not allow disclaim of certain impli 
warranti or the exclus or limit of certain type of damages. 
If ani disclaim or limit set forth in thi agreement violat the 
law of the state applic to thi agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaim or limit permit by 
the applic state law. the invalid or unenforc of ani 
provis of thi agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemn - you agre to indemnifi and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, ani agent or employe of the foundation, anyon 
provid copi of project gutenberg-tm electron work in accord 
with thi agreement, and ani volunt associ with the production, 
promot and distribut of project gutenberg-tm electron works, 
harmless from all liability, cost and expenses, includ legal fees, 
that aris directli or indirectli from ani of the follow which you do 
or caus to occur: (a) distribut of thi or ani project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addit or delet to ani 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) ani defect you cause. 


section 2. inform about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonym with the free distribut of 
electron work in format readabl by the widest varieti of comput 
includ obsolete, old, middle-ag and new computers. It exist 
becaus of the effort of hundr of volunt and donat from 
peopl in all walk of life. 

volunt and financi support to provid volunt with the 
assist they need, is critic to reach project gutenberg-tm' 
goal and ensur that the project gutenberg-tm collect will 
remain freeli avail for gener to come. In 2001, the project 
gutenberg literari archiv foundat wa creat to provid a secur 
and perman futur for project gutenberg-tm and futur generations. 
To learn more about the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat 
and how your effort and donat can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundat web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. inform about the project gutenberg literari archiv 
foundat 

the project gutenberg literari archiv foundat is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educ corpor organ under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt statu by the intern 
revenu service. the foundation' ein or feder tax identif 
number is 64-6221541. it 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribut to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. feder law and your state' laws. 

the foundation' princip offic is locat at 4557 melan dr. S. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but it volunt and employe are scatter 
throughout numer locations. it busi offic is locat at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact link and up to date contact 
inform can be found at the foundation' web site and offici 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for addit contact information: 
dr. gregori B. newbi 
chief execut and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. inform about donat to the project gutenberg 
literari archiv foundat 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot surviv without wide 
spread public support and donat to carri out it mission of 
increas the number of public domain and licens work that can be 
freeli distribut in machin readabl form access by the widest 
array of equip includ outdat equipment. mani small donat 
($1 to $5,000) are particularli import to maintain tax exempt 
statu with the irs. 

the foundat is commit to compli with the law regul 
chariti and charit donat in all 50 state of the unit 
states. complianc requir are not uniform and it take a 
consider effort, much paperwork and mani fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. We do not solicit donat in locat 
where we have not receiv written confirm of compliance. To 
send donat or determin the statu of complianc for ani 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribut from state where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibit 
against accept unsolicit donat from donor in such state who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

intern donat are grate accepted, but we cannot make 
ani statement concern tax treatment of donat receiv from 
outsid the unit states. u.s. law alon swamp our small staff. 

pleas check the project gutenberg web page for current donat 
method and addresses. donat are accept in a number of other 
way includ includ checks, onlin payment and credit card 
donations. To donate, pleas visit: http://pglaf.org/don 


section 5. gener inform about project gutenberg-tm electron 
works. 

professor michael S. hart is the origin of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a librari of electron work that could be freeli share 
with anyone. for thirti years, he produc and distribut project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with onli a loos network of volunt support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often creat from sever print 
editions, all of which are confirm as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notic is included. thus, we do not necessarili 
keep ebook in complianc with ani particular paper edition. 


most peopl start at our web site which ha the main PG search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

thi web site includ inform about project gutenberg-tm, 
includ how to make donat to the project gutenberg literari 
archiv foundation, how to help produc our new ebooks, and how to 
subscrib to our email newslett to hear about new ebooks. 
