inconveni murder 
By bari weiss 

two year ago, a 27-year-old man name kobili traoré walk into the pari apart of a 65-year-old kindergarten teacher name sarah halimi. mr. traoré beat ms. halimi and stab her. accord to witnesses, he call her a demon and a dirti jew. He shouted, "allahu akbar," then threw ms. halimi’ batter bodi out of her third-stori apart window. 

thi is what mr. traoré told prosecutors: "I felt persecuted. when I saw the torah and a chandeli in her home I felt oppressed. I saw her face transforming." 

one would think that thi would be an open-and-shut hate crime. It wa the coldblood murder of a woman in her own home for the sin of be a jew. but french prosecutor decid to drop murder charg against mr. traoré becaus he … had smoke cannabis. 

If france’ betray of sarah halimi is shock to you, perhap you haven’t been pay much attent to what by now can be describ as a moral calam sweep the west of which her stori is onli the clearest example. A crisis, I hasten to add, that’ perhap less known becaus it ha been larg overlook by the mainstream press. 

the most gener read of thi enorm blind spot is that the stori is not alway straightforward; there have been some laudabl step to fight back. On tuesday, for example, the french parliament formal adopt the intern holocaust remembr alliance’ definit of anti-semit when it pass a motion declar anti-zion a form of jew-hatred. yet on the same day, more than 100 jewish graveston were found spray-paint with swastika in a cemeteri near strasbourg — a potent remind that govern are onli as good as the cultur and the peopl uphold them. 

So allow me to put it plainly: We are suffer from a widespread social health epidem and it is root in the cheapen of jewish blood. If hatr of jew can be justifi as a misunderstand or ignor as a mistak or play down as a slip of the tongu or wave away as "just anti-zionism," you can all but guarante it will be. 

yet beneath the finger-point and the victim-blam and the accus of panic lob against a peopl that know a littl someth about persecution, there is the same old bigotri — the hatr of jew that ha presag the death of so mani seemingli civil societies. A hatr that still, after centuries, exert it power allur dure period of polit and econom unrest, when the angry, the confused, the shortchang and the scare look for simpl explan and a scapegoat. and even those who seek to uplift the margin can’t seem to find their voic when it come to jew face anti-semitism. 

take a look at some of the event around the thanksgiv holiday, incid that have kept jew all over the world glu to their phones, and which have driven some to updat their and their children’ passports. 

start with britain. last friday night, a rabbi who had just left a synagogu wa beaten on the street by teenag screaming, "kill the jews." these now-regular occurr come as there’ a decent chanc that the labour leader jeremi corbyn will becom the next prime minist — give anti-semit the imprimatur of a major western government. 

mr. corbyn’ long histori of slur against jew and israel, hi warm word about hi "friends" in hezbollah, and hi worldview, which find far more to admir in countri like russia and venezuela than england itself, are well documented. To choos just the latest headline: the bbc, he said on iranian state television, is "biased" toward say that "israel ha a right to exist." (mi favorit remain hi remark that british zionist "who, have live in thi countri for a veri long time, probabl all their lives, don’t understand english irony.") 

the fish rot from the head, and so it ha with labour. accord to britain’ chief rabbi, ephraim mirvis, there are 130 case of outstand complaint of anti-semit against labour parti members. ninety-thre percent of british jew say they won’t vote for labour. forty-seven percent say they will "serious consider" emigr if labour wins. and yet the latest poll show labour rallying. 

other issues, jew are told, are more import than their own safety. sometim their fear are dismiss as "hysteria." the socialist filmmak ken loach ha call it a "witch hunt." the power union leader len mccluskey ha accus the jewish commun of "intransig hostility." when rabbi mirvi took the extraordinari step of weigh in on the election, insist that the veri "soul of our nation is at stake," he wa accused, variously, of bad faith, of take focu away from the real threat of right-w bigotry, and of actual stoke anti-semit himself. 

jewish voic for labour, the party’ pet jewish front group, ha codifi all of these gaslight tactic in a document that help lay out the strategi for how other polit group and movement with a will to power can shut down jewish concern about organized, system anti-semitism. 

over in italy, the town of schio decid against establish a holocaust memori — the subtle, brass "stumbl stones" call stolperstein that dot the street of european citi where survivor of hitler’ genocid still stroll — on the ground that 14 stone in a citi of 40,000 would prove too divisive. "let the victim rest in peace" said alberto bertoldo, a local politician. the memorial, he said, would risk "gener new hatr and division." 

while in schio the holocaust prove a divis moral issue, in montreal it wa a plan trip to israel. jordyn wright is a jewish sophomor who sit on the board of the students’ societi of mcgill university. over winter break, she is planning, like hundr of other north american jewish colleg students, to go to israel with hillel. As a result of that trip, the student govern vote to call for her resignation. never mind that the trip includ time with palestinian in the west bank. never mind that anoth student govern leader is also going; appar becaus that student is not a jew, no resign wa required. 

I toggl over the weekend between ms. wright’ chill account of the histori of anti-jewish discrimin at her school and the washington post, which had publish a frothi profil of valeri plame, the former c.i.a. offic who is now run for congress as a democrat in new mexico. 

there we learn that ms. plame look "astoundingli good, at 56, as if the high-altitud desert air ha preserv her skin sinc the day she arriv here 12 year ago." yet nowher in the long articl doe the reader learn that two year ago, ms. plame tweet an essay call "american jew are drive america’ wars" by a man famou for hi anti-jewish conspiraci think on a websit that flirt with holocaust denial. she also share an articl that link israel to the sept. 11 attacks. It somehow didn’t merit mention. 

elsewher in the democrat party, linda sarsour, the activist who wa remov from her leadership posit in the women’ march thank to her histori of anti-semit scandal and who now serv as a surrog for the presidenti candid berni sanders, gave a talk on friday to a group call american muslim for palestine. the part of her talk that circul onlin focus on the appar hypocrisi of progress zionists: how, ms. sarsour ask about peopl who are the no. 1 target of white supremacists, can they claim to oppos white supremaci when they support "a state like israel that is built on supremacy, that is built on the idea that jew are suprem to everybodi else?" 

lest you think thi is "just anti-zionism," consid that the sander surrog wa speak at a confer that print the follow sentenc in it program: "zionism ha come in like a diseas to destroy the puriti of Al quds." (al qud is the arab name for jerusalem.) 

should I tell you about a christian fundamentalist show on trunew host by a man name rick wiles? trunew wa grant an interview by donald trump jr. and it repres wa call on by presid trump at a news conference. last week on hi show mr. wile claim that jew are behind the impeach proceed against the president. A "jew coup," he call it, that would replac mr. trump with "a jewish cabal." 

should I tell you about the swastika found at sixth & I, a synagogu and a hub of jewish cultur and intellectu life in washington? Or the one paint in red on a statu of the great yiddish writer sholem aleichem in ukraine? 

Or that on monday morn in crown heights, brooklyn, a jewish subway rider report that anoth woman yell slur and threaten to throw her onto the tracks? and that the follow day, also in crown heights, three teenag hurl rock at a jewish elementari school bus, break a window. 

there is a theme here. the theme is that jew-hatr is surg and yet jewish victimhood doe not command attent or inspir popular outrage. that unless jew are murder by neo-nazis, the one group everyon of conscienc recogn as evil, jews’ inconveni murders, their beatings, their discrimination, the singl out of their state for demon will be explain away. 

when you look at each of these incidents, perhap it is possibl still to pretend that these are random burst of bigotri perpetr by hooligan lack ani real organ or power behind them. 

but mr. corbyn’ elector prospect in britain tell a different, far more distress stori — that a person with some of the same impuls as those hooligan can stand within spit distanc of the offic of prime minister. thi is what happen when a cultur decid that jewish live are stumbl stones. 
