jare kushner fail up, again 
By frank bruni 
nov. 26, 2019 

jare kushner just got a promotion. anoth one. At least I think we can call it that, and it’ a delici perfect assignment. the pallid princel is now respons for speed construct of the border wall. In other words, a make-believ fixer will overse a fairy-tal fix. 

josh dawsey and nick miroff of the washington post broke the news, and when I read it, I realiz that I hadn’t heard much about jare — or, for that matter, ivanka — in a good long while. they’r front and center when the administr is announc some ostens sensibl initi or claim a pittanc of progress. but when it corrupt is be expos and the drizzl of subpoena becom a downpour, they vanish, cuddl for warmth under the gild umbrella of their hallucinatori virtue. 

We can pretti much chart the weather of the administr by the rel visibl of donald jr., so loud and hirsute, and jared, so smooth-cheek and mute. donald jr. thrive when it’ nastiest, stomp gleefulli through the muck. jare come out onli if hi suit won’t get dirti or hi hair wet. 

dure the impeach inquiry, we’v seen a lot of donald jr. that’ partli becaus he ha been hawk hi new book, copi of which the republican nation committe spent nearli $100,000 on. but it’ also becaus he’ such a ready, eager conduit for hi father’ wrath, with a talent for exagger and misdirect that’ clearli chromosomal. 

jare kushner just got a promotion. anoth one. At least I think we can call it that, and it’ a delici perfect assignment. the pallid princel is now respons for speed construct of the border wall. In other words, a make-believ fixer will overse a fairy-tal fix. 

josh dawsey and nick miroff of the washington post broke the news, and when I read it, I realiz that I hadn’t heard much about jare — or, for that matter, ivanka — in a good long while. they’r front and center when the administr is announc some ostens sensibl initi or claim a pittanc of progress. but when it corrupt is be expos and the drizzl of subpoena becom a downpour, they vanish, cuddl for warmth under the gild umbrella of their hallucinatori virtue. 

We can pretti much chart the weather of the administr by the rel visibl of donald jr., so loud and hirsute, and jared, so smooth-cheek and mute. donald jr. thrive when it’ nastiest, stomp gleefulli through the muck. jare come out onli if hi suit won’t get dirti or hi hair wet. 

dure the impeach inquiry, we’v seen a lot of donald jr. that’ partli becaus he ha been hawk hi new book, copi of which the republican nation committe spent nearli $100,000 on. but it’ also becaus he’ such a ready, eager conduit for hi father’ wrath, with a talent for exagger and misdirect that’ clearli chromosomal. 

jare and ivanka have been strateg scarce, though ivanka did flutter into view, in a fashion, when presid trump boast two week ago that she had creat 14 million job sinc the inauguration. "fourteen million and go up!" he clarified, lest anyon get the misimpress that she thought her work wa done. never! On behalf of the american people, ivanka is tireless. there’ no rest for the weary, and there’ even less of it for those who live at the crossroad of self-infatu and delusion. 

In an interview last month on fox business, ivanka said that she and dad were "fight everi day for the american worker" and that she wa determin to "drive hard everi singl day to make an impact." 

"your time and servic — our time here — is finite," she mused, and while i’d love to believ that she wa prophesi her and her father’ immin evict from the white house, I think she wa referring, in her deepli spiritu way, to the span of a human life. "it’ sand through an hourglass." As ivanka serv us, she never forget the sand. 

democrat believ that the trump administration’ void of ethic will sour american voter on the president. but those voter are likeli to abandon him for the administration’ vacuum of compet — for hi nonsens manageri style, captur in hi magic think about jared. 

He task jare with reinvent the feder government. unless constant rash firings, unfil job and shakedown of foreign govern constitut reinvention, thi remain on jared’ infinit to-do list. the presid put jare in charg of broker a durabl peac between isra and palestinians. insert punch line here. He follow jared’ counsel that faith be place in saudi arabia and it crown prince, moham bin salman. We know how that work out. 

the presid somehow look at that track record and decid that the dynamo he should entrust with hi central campaign promis — a secur barrier between the unit state and mexico — wa … jared! and so we have the trillionth gorgeou exampl of hi invest in fiction. 

nearli three year into trump’ presidency, the border wall bare exists. subtract the upgrad of fenc and such that wa alreadi there and trump has, by some recent estimates, construct fewer than 25 mile of actual new barrier. the southwestern border is nearli 2,000 mile long. 

but jare is on the case! accord to the post, he "conven biweekli meet in the west wing, where he question an array of govern offici about progress" and "explain the president’ wishes." huh. those wish are hardli cryptic, and how complic can thi question be? already, the post reported, there’ grumbl that jare is just an annoyance. 

that belittl hi symbol significance. mani journalists, includ me, have tri to settl on the perfect mascot for the trump administration. there are choic galore. the greedy, vainglori scott pruitt, who did hi best to decim the environment protect agency, fit the bill, but he’ long gone. mike pompeo embodi the faustian arc of so mani of the president’ aid and allies, from principle-driven dismiss of trump dure the 2016 campaign to reputation-torch submiss when he dangl a ticket to the big time. 

but for nake opportun and situat scruples, jared’ my guy. rememb how he and ivanka were go to contain the president’ ego, blunt hi cruelty, whisper sweet moder in hi ear? that wa then. now he’ devot himself to an exorbitant, unnecessari monument to trump’ nativ and xenophobia. 

there’ an upside, though. with jare in the saddle, thi hors won’t go far. 
