joe biden Is stronger than you think 
By david brook 
jan. 23, 2020 

It wa yet anoth epic failur of polit punditry. Go back to the earli month of joe biden’ presidenti campaign and read what the consult and comment were say about him: hi support is just name recognition; he’ll fade! he’ too old! he’ run a zombi campaign! the parti ha move left and he’ out of touch! He vote for the crime bill! 

almost everybodi wa bearish on joe. but now look where we are, week from actual voting. If the poll are to be believed, biden will win iowa, he’ll come in second in new hampshire, he will easili win nevada, he will domin in south carolina. he’ now tie for the lead in california and he’ way ahead in texas. 

I don’t know if he’ll win the nomin (both he and berni sander look strong), but thi is not where a lot of peopl six month ago thought we’d be. 

it’ the 947th consecut sign that we in the coastal chatter class have not cure our insular problem. it’ the 947th case in which we see that everi second you spend on twitter detract from your knowledg of american politics, and that the onli cure to thi insular diseas is constant travel and interviewing, close attent to state and local data and raw abject humil about the fact that the attitud and academ degre that you think make you clever are actual the attitud and academ degre that separ you from the real textur of american life. 

biden didn’t just luck into this. He and hi team grasp six truths: 

understand the year you are run in. sander and elizabeth warren are run the same basic campaign they would have run in 2012 or 2016. biden’ campaign is complet focus on the central problem of 2020: that donald trump is a steam hot mess in the middl of nation life. 

biden ha fixat hi campaign on the trump problem and fight for the soul of america. nearli twice as mani democrat say it’ more import to beat trump than to have a candid with whom they agre on all issues. 

understand your party’ core challenge. all around the world parti on the left are lose becaus they have lost touch with the work class. these parti think they can reconnect with that class by swing even further left. but jeremi corbyn in britain and berni sander here are a doctor student’ idea of a working-class candidate, not an actual work person’ idea of one. 

biden ha critic hi own parti for lose touch with thi class. He emerg from it, is focus hi attent on it and is win support from it. 

moder are still powerful. the democrat parti is move left, but about half of democrat still say they are moder or conservative. No candid ha ever won a nomin without strong support from these voters, while college-town candid — howard dean, gari hart — tend to falter. In everi presidenti gener elect that democrat have won sinc 1988, they carri moder by more than 12 percentag points. In everi race they have lost, they fail to do that. biden kept hi moder credenti when mani other candid saw a.o.c. on twitter and decid to move left. 

mani democrat resent their own elites. there is a quiet tension between democrat who wield cultur power and those who don’t. the former are activ on social media, and clobber the latter — peopl who say or write the "wrong" thing. 

the non-elit tend to feel judg and look down on by the self-appoint savior class. "polit correct" ha becom the phrase peopl use to defin those who use cultur power to enforc ideolog conformity. seventi percent of democrat who are not on social media say polit correct is a big problem. these are peopl silent but vehement react against thi social reign of terror. biden commun affection, not judgment, acceptance, not expulsion. 

have a better theori of social change. sander and warren imagin they can ralli movement of progress supermajor to transform american politics. the realiti is that if they are elect we’ll be stuck with the same 42 percent-to-42 percent stagnant polit war we have now. 

biden start with the understand that we are a close divid nation. He understand the element fact that if you want to pass law you have to go through congress. As damon linker point out recent in the week, biden’ argument is that a center-left congression coalit is the best we can do under present circumstances. that’ a more realist theori of change. A belov legisl like biden is more like to transform the polit landscap than a down-the-lin progressive. 

connection. connection. connection. mani candid pound the podium and lectur at their rallies. it’ the big leader onstag and the passion mass of follow down below. nobodi make an individu connect as well as biden. In a time when peopl feel exhausted, isol and alienated, a candid who seem normal and emot relat is go to have a lot of appeal. 

the iron fact is that the candid who can be vulner ha a surpris power. 
