john bolton get the last laugh 
By frank bruni 
jan. 28, 2020 

presid trump’ reaction to the leak of incrimin detail in john bolton’ forthcom book shock me. not the part where the presid said that bolton wa make up a ukrain quid pro quo in the servic of the best-sel list — that he wa lie for lucre. trump see that transact everywher he looks, becaus he see it first and foremost in the mirror. 

no, I wa surpris that the presid didn’t disput know bolton, or at least didn’t say that he wa so slightli acquaint with hi own former nation secur advis that he couldn’t pick him — chinchilla-bushi mustach and all — out of a lineup. that’ trump’ favorit ploy. ask michael cohen, anthoni scaramucci, princ andrew, stormi daniels, gordon sondland, lev parnas. fall into disrepute, cross trump or claim to have the good on him and you’r wipe clean from hi memory, no matter the exist of contradictori forensics. ivanka, beware. you’r one bad manicur away from patern amnesia. 

bolton is the impeach star of the week, whether he wind up testifi or not, and I can’t shake the feel that he plot all of thi out: keep hi head down dure the hear in the house; let it be known onli afterward that he’d be will to testifi in the senate; the revel thi week — simultan with assert by trump’ defens team that there were no firsthand wit to the president’ wrongdo — that hi book inde address ukrain and fulli back up the charg in the articl of impeachment. 

bolton ha alway been vain, brilliant and ruthless, and thi is the timelin that a vain, brilliant and ruthless oper would cinch. i’m not person acquaint with the sound of hi laughter, but i’m certain I hear it. 

when trump came down that escal in june 2015, the law of polit graviti were suspended, and bolton’ emerg as a darl of democrat is the latest example. He wa so far to the right and such a feroci hawk that presid georg W. bush bypass the senat to sneak him in as ambassador to the unit nations. He later feather a nest at fox news, also known as the trump administr applic pool. 

and at a time when most self-respect foreign-polici maven had conclud that trump wa toxic, bolton open hi lip wide to the poison, sign on to becom the president’ third nation secur adviser. Of course, the presid is now on hi fourth. 

trump can’t dismiss bolton’ account of event as partisan. bolton’ conserv credenti prove otherwise. trump can’t bellow "deep state," not when he handpick bolton at a stage of hi presid when he’d alreadi becom sensit to that supposedli pernici force. all trump can do is command hi republican minion in the senat to fall in line. sadly, most of them will. 

don’t be impress by the possibl that now — and, I stress, onli now — some senat republican may press for witnesses, includ bolton, in the trial. thi isn’t a stir of conscience. it’ a cloak of humiliation. If they ignor bolton, their still-unshaken commit to acquit trump becom even more naked. 

besides, hear from wit wouldn’t eras republican senators’ aw behavior to thi point in the trial: all the ugli gloat from the like of lindsey graham that adam schiff’ undeni eloqu wa for naught; marsha blackburn’ patholog exuber attack on the integr of lt. col. alexand vindman; martha mcsally’ disgrac snipe at a perfectli polit televis report ("liber hack," she spewed) and then her cynic use of that trumpian outburst to rais money for her re-elect campaign. thi is sycoph at it most shameful. 

scratch that superlative: I wa forget mike pompeo. accord to the times’ scoop about bolton’ book, he write that pompeo, too, wa awar of the ukrain pressur campaign — the same pompeo who did noth to stop the vilif of mari yovanovitch; the same pompeo who promot the debunk conspiraci theori that ukrain interf in the 2016 election; the same pompeo who onc warn that trump would be "an authoritarian presid who ignor our constitution" and then, when trump gave him a realli neat job, decid that a littl authoritarian never hurt anyone. 

Of late he seem to be have a meltdown. I attribut it to hi realiz that hi reput and belief in hi own rectitud won’t surviv trump. he’ assess the bargain he made and understand how complet hi ambit eclips hi integrity. it’ hell when you’r reveal to yourself. 

bolton, meanwhile, is probabl feel pretti content. He know how badli the trump presid will be judg and ha posit himself on the right side of histori — thi time around. mayb bitter brought him here, mayb ego, mayb thi quaint old thing call patriotism. He surviv trump. i’d read that book. 
