pete ain’t It 
By farhad manjoo 
dec. 18, 2019 

A funni debat ha been roil the onlin left: Do young liber hate pete buttigieg too little, or too much? 

In the past few months, buttigieg, the presidenti candid and young mayor of tini south bend, ind., ha enjoy a steady, unlik rise in earli state polls. but with success ha come a backlash, and then a backlash to the backlash. 

On paper, buttigieg tick a lot of presidential-candid boxes; you can’t write about mayor pete without mention he’ a rhode scholar, he’ a veteran and he ha an articulate, cool-temp decenc reminisc of barack obama. and yet the mayor ha drawn the ire of the plugged-in progress left. there’ someth curiou about the disdain, note derek thompson in the atlantic. In a field of mani other milquetoast moder — includ the front-runn joe biden — whi ha mayor pete been singl out for special skewer by young radicals? 

I am not so young, but I am one of those crazi radic who have been concern about the intract domin of our societi by a small band of wealthi interests. So i’ll tell you whi I don’t like buttigieg. it’ not becaus I think he’d be an especi bad president. like biden, the mayor seem to possess the baselin capac to run america in a way that isn’t an embarrass or a disgrace, which would certainli be a step up from the current administration. He ha also articul some interest polici ideas, and he ha manag to win a lot of heart onlin — a talent, of a sort, in an elect measur in cheesi viral hits. 

yet everi time I hear him speak, I get the sens that he’ tri too hard to pleas everyon and that — in a way that recal some of obama’ worst tendenc toward misguid centrism — he’ll end up pleas no one in the process. ultimately, I worri buttigieg will easili lose to trump becaus he is ill suit to make the simplest and most power argument against the current administration’ appar econom successes. 

that argument goe like this: though the econom stat look pretti good, the trump boom is a mirag and a moral disgrace. today’ seemingli rosi climat is the culmin of a polit economi that consist reward the alreadi wealthi at the expens of everyon else. the onli way to revers the trend toward inequ is to reform the way america doe business. A politician who push for these reform need courage, becaus the forc array against structur chang are powerful. 

but while mayor pete ha outlin sever progressive-sound idea for overhaul americans’ econom live — includ a call for univers health care (that will still includ a hefti role for privat corporations), an idea for lower student debt (but not make colleg free), a promis to strengthen regul against monopoli (but a reluct to break up big tech) — he lack authenticity. rather than fundament reform, mani of hi propos end up sound like opportunist incrementalism, as if he want to be seen to be do someth without realli do much at all, for fear of arous the forc array against reform. even biden, who ha built hi brand on common-man folksisms, seem more believable, and he ha explicitli promis billionair that noth much will chang for them. 

My fear about mayor pete’ easi way with the wealthi were confirm thi week, when he conven a group of big-money donor on a tour through silicon valley. I wasn’t surpris that he ha prove so attract to the tech set. with hi slick, easi optimism, mayor pete remind me of so mani techi who promis big, disrupt chang while refus to accept the full cost of achiev their idealism. for them, there’ alway an easy, slapdash, cost-fre revolution: just use the right hashtag on instagram and you, too, can spark regim chang in the arab world. 

I suspect we’ll need a bolder candid to take on trumpism and corpor control. the mayor from mckinsey is the wrong man to make the case. 

the democrat who meet trump in 2020 will face a big challenge: counter the idea that trump’ econom polici are "working," at least accord to the tradit way we measur thi stuff. 

the american economy, we are told, is resplend and aglow. thank to a tax cut that swell corpor coffer and a frenzi of deregul that unleash long-term danger in exchang for short-term profits, the hit just keep coming: we’r now in the longest expans in history, with littl sign of abating. job growth regularli defi naysayers. the stock market seem to set a record more often than peopl stream mariah carey christma hits. 

On cnbc the other day, the anchor jim cramer, reflect the mood of wall street, said, "these are the best number of our lives." 

for the president, the polit argument here is straightforward. like bill clinton in 1996 or ronald reagan in 1984, trump is plan to point to an economi do it best georg costanza: we’r back, baby, we’r back! everi week on twitter, trump chef-kiss new econom stat as if he’d person assembl the nation dish. 

that’ one way to put it. here’ anoth way: thi economi is stupid. 

As my colleagu david leonhardt writes, headlin econom stat are increasingli divorc from more substant metric on american well-being. thi is a countri in which prosper rain on the rich while hundr of thousand of peopl go bankrupt everi year for get sick. thi is a countri in which it is not unusu to encount developing-world miseri alongsid the most obscen collect of wealth ever recorded. there’ a lot of job growth, but a lot of the job are low-wage, high-toil jobs. it’ a countri in which everi nearli everi econom sector trend toward monopoli and oligarchy, and in which regul let compani call the shot — see the f.a.a. and boe or the f.t.c. and google. 

elizabeth warren and berni sander have turn these dismal realiti into the central pillar of their campaigns. both are call for polici that fundament overhaul corpor control of the economy. As their detractor note, it’ unlik that they will be abl to achiev mani of those goal in our polar polit climate. but what matter to me is that they are make the case. they have articul both far-reaching, structur polici goal and polit strategi that mesh with the spirit of those goals. not onli are they call for fundament chang that will alter vast sector of the economy; they are also commit to undo the influenc of corpor and the wealthi in their own path to the white house, underscor their commit to their goals. 

I don’t see how mayor pete can make a similarli compel case. I don’t see how he can take on trump’ economi without at least attempt to fight the c.e.o. who champion the corpor cash-grab that made it so hot. and I don’t see how he can take on those c.e.o. while hold fund-rais in napa valley "wine caves." 

mayor pete seem like a love man. that’ the problem. he’ll get eaten aliv by the corpor machin that now run the world. 
