pompeo call Me a ‘liar.’ that’ not what bother me. 
By mari louis kelli 
jan. 28, 2020 

ask journalist whi they do the job they do, and you’ll hear a rang of answers. here’ mine: not everi day, but on the best ones, we get to put question to power peopl and hold them to account. thi is both a privileg and a responsibility. 

januari ha been an interest month on thi front. i’v had the opportun to put questions, one on one, to the top diplomat of both the unit state and iran, in their respect capitals. 

iran’ foreign minister, javad zarif, spoke to me on jan. 7 in tehran. secretari of state mike pompeo spoke to me last friday, in washington. each man repres a nation in conflict with the other; speak with them, I wonder what path either could see out of the situation. In both cases, I wa allot 10 minut for questions. 

It turn out you can cover a lot of ground in 10 minutes. when mr. zarif sat down with me, on the sidelin of a big think tank confer focus on secur in the persian gulf, it wa just four day after an american drone strike had kill maj. gen. qassim suleimani. We start there. 

how might iran retali for gener suleimani’ death? "the unit state ha commit a grave error," mr. zarif told me. "and it will pay for that grave error." I do not know whether, at that moment, he wa awar that just hour later, iran would unleash missil on iraqi militari base where american troop are housed. 

We move on to whether he would travel to new york later that week, to attend secur council meet at the unit nations. 

"no," he told me, "becaus mike pompeo decid I wa too danger for the unit states." the unit state had deni mr. zarif a visa, in what some have brand a violat of the 1947 unit nation headquart agreement, which gener requir the unit state to grant access to the unit nation for foreign diplomats. 

next I ask whether we were wit the death of the 2015 nuclear deal. mr. zarif insist no — even as he acknowledg that iran wa suspend complianc with centrifug limits. 

the foreign minist and I end with a tens exchang on what is an uncomfort question for him: the statu of unit state citizen imprison in iran, and whether futur prison exchang were off the table. "we had propos a univers exchang of all prison and we were do that in good faith," mr. zarif said. but are those channel still open? no, he conceded, saying, "those talk are certainli suspend now." 

My interview with secretari pompeo came two week and three day later, in the east hall of the treati room, on the seventh floor of the state department. By then an uneasi paus had taken hold; the unit state and iran appeared, for the moment, to have step back from the brink of war. 

I kick off with a question on diplomacy. Is there ani seriou initi underway to reopen diplomaci with iran? "we’v been engag in deep diplomat effort sinc the first day of the trump administration," mr. pompeo replied, underlin american effort to build a coalit to counter and contain iran. 

but in term of american engag with iran, I went on, are there ani plan for talks? "the diplomat effort on thi front ha been vigorous, robust and enorm successful," mr. pompeo said, chang the subject back to engag american alli to put pressur on iran. 

anoth question I wa curiou to hear secretari pompeo answer wa how the trump administr plan to prevent iran from build nuclear weapons, should it decid to do so, given that iran is closer to a nuclear weapon capabl than when presid trump took office. 

here’ the relev portion of the interview: 

kelly: how do you stop iran from get a nuclear weapon? 

pompeo: we’ll stop them. 

kelly: how? sanctions? 

pompeo: we’ll stop them. 

He did not offer specifics. nor did he elaborate, when press on how to squar hi resolv with what mr. zarif had just told me — that all limit on iran’ centrifug program have been suspended. 

"yeah," mr. pompeo said. "he’ blustering." 

Do you have evid that he’ blustering? He did not directli answer. (in fairness, I could hardli expect him to telegraph what intellig the unit state may possess on the iranian regime’ nuclear ambitions.) 

I write about all thi now to refocu attent on the substanc of the interviews, which ha been overshadow by mr. pompeo’ subsequ swear at me, call me a liar and challeng me to find ukrain on an unmark map. 

for the record, I did. that’ not the point. the point is that recent the risk of miscalcul — of two old adversari misread each other and accident escal into arm confront — ha felt veri real. It occur to me that swap insult through interview with journalist such as me might, terrifyingly, be as close as the top diplomat of the unit state and iran came to commun thi month. 

there is a reason that freedom of the press is enshrin in the constitution. there is a reason it matter that peopl in posit of power — peopl charg with steer the foreign polici of entir nation — be held to account. the stake are too high for their impuls and decis not to be examin in as thought and rigor an interview as is possible. 

journalist don’t sit down with senior govern offici in the servic of score polit points. We do it in the servic of ask tough questions, on behalf of our fellow citizens. and then share the answer — or lack thereof — with the world. 
