‘sesam street’ Is open Up to syrian refuge 
By alex carp 
jan. 31, 2020 

In it 50 year on television, "sesam street" ha present an expans idea of the challeng of childhood, offer lesson on divorce, racism, griev and autism — as well as help with the alphabet and accept friend who are a bit taller and more birdlike. 

next week, a new version of the show will begin air for an audienc that, less than a decad ago, didn’t exist: children displac by the war in syria and their neighbor in the commun where mani of the refuge have fled or sought asylum. "at thi point, there are lot of 7-year-old who were born as refuge from syria" and remain far from perman resettlement, a staff member on the project said recently. "that’ not chang soon." 

sinc the start of the conflict, in 2011, nearli seven of everi 10 resid of syria have been forc from their homes. more than 11 million have fled to unfamiliar part of syria or to the countri across it borders, with onli around 150,000 perman resettled. they are now the largest displac popul in the world. and displacement, in the middl east and elsewhere, last longer than ever before: "onc refuge are displac for at least five years, as is the case for most syrian refugees," the presid of the intern rescu committee, david miliband, said at a senat hear last year, they’r like to stay displac for more than two decades. 

"sesam street" began as an experi in televis and becam a global model for early-childhood education. it new project, launch with the i.r.c. and educ in syria, iraq, jordan and lebanon, is an effort to rethink humanitarian aid. "aid is good at keep peopl alive," mr. miliband ha argued. "but it doesn’t give them the tool to thrive." It ha tradit been direct to immedi need — nutrition, security, shelter — but displac that can last for decad present a veri differ kind of problem. 

parent often carri the trauma of forc migrat with them in unexpect ways, and a childhood of makeshift housing, isol from an extend commun of familiar faces, and few safe place to play can affect not onli children’ behavior and learn skill but also brain development, gene express and the abil to build the fundament tool of resiliency. "it can be veri hard to moderate, or to cope," said sherri westin, sesam workshop’ presid of social impact and philanthropy. preliminari research conduct in jordan and lebanon found that displac children have troubl find the languag to express their emotions. they describ what they feel onli veri broadly: sad, happy, scared. 

the show will focu on identifi and manag emotions, and will be coupl with thousand of outreach worker go to clinics, commun centers, home and other gather space in the four countries, where they will meet with children, parent and caregiv to provid support and extend mani lesson of the series. today, less than 2 percent of humanitarian aid worldwid is target at education, "and just a tini fraction of that goe to earli education," ms. westin said. "we’r talk about a generation-scal intervention." 

just as american "sesam street" teach count and the alphabet befor deeper literaci and numeracy, the new series, call "ahlan simsim," or "welcom sesame," will start with the basics. "we want thi first season to dive into identifi differ emotions, like frustrat and anger, nervous and loneliness, fear," scott cameron, an execut produc at sesam workshop, said. "but we also have to make that entertaining. and we have to do that without, in the case of fear, terrifi the kids." 

To do that, mr. cameron and hi colleagu built on techniqu develop throughout the program’ year on the air. "we thought a lot about the icon ‘sesame’ charact who’v been use for curriculum goal in the past," he said. "we need some kind of comed foils, but we don’t want to do neg model — we don’t want villains." 

"oscar the grouch, for example, wa develop in the veri earli stage of ‘sesame’ as a way to repres differences, and a kind of mutual respect," mr. cameron explained. "he’ grumpy, and he think smelli fish are great. but he can help model differ perspectives. oscar and grover and cooki monster are all monster — mean they’r not humanoid, like bert and erni — so they’r a littl bit remov from humans," mr. cameron explained. "you get a littl more leeway that way." 

"ahlan simsim," which will air in arab and kurdish, ha two main characters. both were built at jim henson’ creatur shop in queens, where row of desk are cover with half-construct muppet and older one midrepair. (muppet bigger than a desk — mr. snuffleupagus, for exampl — might lean against a wall.) jordan pioneer product company, base in jordan, collabor with sesam workshop to develop the characters, write script and shoot the episodes. when produc from "sesame" made a seri of visit to the creatur shop last year to discuss muppet design and look at prototypes, zaid baqaeen and khale haddad of jordan pioneers, the show’ head writer and an execut producer, join from amman via video chat. 

"jordan pioneer pitch us a boy and a girl charact that were roughli the same age, and we love that," mr. cameron said. "two new friend who go on adventur together." for names, they suggest basma and jad. "basma mean smile, and jad ha a bunch of meanings, but connot somebodi who’ kind of gener but a littl bit button up. veri earnest." 

mr. baqaeen added: "complet different, but they complement each other. basma is dynamic, adventurous, go-go-go. she’ kind of impati when she’ excit about an idea or a challeng that she want to take on. jad, we think of him as the planner, meticulous." he’ a painter, and he like to paint plan in midair; viewer will learn that hi brush onc belong to hi grandfather, who is absent from the show. 

what basma should look like came rel easili — a purpl non-humanoid girl ("like elmo is a boy, but not necessarili a human boy," mr. cameron explained.) skew pigtails, oval face, no bracelet or jewelry. and no clothing, which can bring in local connot that interfer with a character’ identity. It can also be hard to adjust: bert and erni have been stuck in stripe shirt sinc 1969. 

jad wa trickier. the team pass around some earli sketches. "we drag a whole bunch of our monster muppet out," said rolli krewson, a master builder at the creatur shop. she and jason weber, the creatur shop’ new york creativ supervisor and an expert fabric painter and dyer, call them "anyth muppets" — on occasion, they sit in for firefight or polic offic in the background of a scene, or once, for elmo’ grandmother. 

"we had one in a drawer that sound like what they were describing, just character-wise," mr. weber said. "it ha thi beauti roundish head, and the mouth is straight across, but when you chang the angl to make eye contact with the viewer, you can start to see a friendly, open smile just underneath." 

ms. krewson adjust the design to commun jad’ introvers and express the challeng he sometim ha let hi feel out. "he can also look veri contemplative," she said. "he’ got a veri loos jaw. I can push it way forward, and I can pull hi chin back, so he can look perplex and sad, more internal." 

mr. weber added, "he ha what we call a veri good smile curve." smaller touch link the charact visually. jad’ nose is purple, like basma’s, and basma’ nose is jad’ golden yellow. 

the pair is join by ma’zooza, a goat sidekick who provid comic relief, mostli by eat everyth in sight. "she’ a baby, learn how to walk and climb, and she’ voracious," in the tradit of cooki monster, mr. cameron said. "cooki ha troubl with self-regulation, self-control. and ma’zooza allow basma and jad, who are almost 6, to have a younger friend that they can nurture, so they’r not alway the one be nurtured. she also ha these long, floppi ears, which are adorable." 

ms. westin said that "with basma and jad, one ha left hi home, becom best friend with someon from somewher else. you can see where that creat opportun for children to relat to those stori and feel less alone." most refuge famili live in host commun and neighborhoods, and "the benefit of mass media is that we know we can reach not onli displac syrian children, but we can reach them side by side with their new neighbors." 

befor shoot could begin, basma, jad and ma’zooza were bagged, pack in box and ship to amman. sesam estim that the project, through television, mobil phones, home visits, preschool and the effort of educ across the region, will reach as mani as nine million children — what they expect to be the largest early-childhood intervent in the histori of humanitarian response. To measur it effect with parents, caregiv and on tv, childhood develop specialist will design and conduct studi dure the project’ first five years. 

their work will doubl the amount of research avail on the experi of childhood in humanitarian crisis. "we’r go to share what work and what doesn’t work, and not just to help us achiev the outcom we’r set out to achiev here," ms. westin said. It will be one of the first project of it scale to think about how fuller live might be live within the consequ of the conflict and within long-term crise elsewhere. "we want thi project to be a model for humanitarian respons not just in the middl east," ms. westin added, "but for refuge children wherev they may be." 
