tech lose a prophet. just when It need one. 
By kara swisher 
jan. 29, 2020 

it’ noth but noise, all the time. We get hammer everi second from an incess sousaphon of tweet and from the righteou rage machin that scream at us in thi digit 24/7/365 commun world that we have built. 

what you might not know is that we have long had a name for what start thi all: "disrupt innovation." the concept wa pioneer by clay christensen, a high-profil and well-regard harvard professor of manag who die of cancer last week at 67. professor christensen’ remark legaci grew out of a semin book he publish in 1997, "the innovator’ dilemma." 

the book cover esoter industri like the disk drive market and excav to analyz and illustr the power of disrupt technologies. hi idea explod through the then-nasc internet scene and throughout silicon valley. I recal read an earli copi and think that it wa a manifesto that the tech world would embrac — and that professor christensen wa tech’ prophet. 

the intel founder and chief execut andi grove wa a fan. So wa the appl legend steve jobs. both men were doubtlessli attract to the idea that start-up made up of outsid could find way to creat new market and new valu — and disrupt and overwhelm establish companies. 

In the face of disruption, older compani could do almost nothing. It wasn’t that they couldn’t see the new threat of start-ups, but that they were stuck on serv their current businesses, and they fail to chang their product and servic out of fear of cut into profits. 

professor christensen’ formula wa elegant: "first, disrupt product are simpler and cheaper; they gener promis lower margins, not greater profits. second, disrupt technolog typic are first commerci in emerg or insignific markets. and third, lead firms’ most profit custom gener don’t want, and inde initi can’t use, product base on disrupt technologies." 

It wa that simple. professor christensen’ book came out a year befor googl wa founded, seven year befor facebook, eight year befor youtub and 11 year befor uber. each of these companies, knowingli or unknowingly, would follow hi map. 

while professor christensen would go on to write a sequel and mani more book on adjac topic ripe for disruption, like educ ("disrupt class" in 2008) and health care ("innovator’ prescription" in 2009), it wa hi initi idea that wa devastatingli insightful. 

I use the term devast because, though no fault of professor christensen’s, disrupt innov took a turn for the wors in tech. silicon valley fail to marri disrupt with a concept of corpor responsibility, and growth at all cost becam it motto. the more measur approach that professor christensen taught wa ignored. 

thus, in tech, the idea wa more like "destruct innovation," which to me wa distil in facebook’ famou sign that wa onc plaster all over the wall at it headquarters: "move fast and break things." 

I have alway wonder whi the compani chose those words. I have no problem with "move fast," which professor christensen would not have quibbl with, sinc be nimbl wa a core compet that he touted. It wa the word "break" that stuck in my head like a bad migraine. 

whi use a violent and thoughtless word like "break" and not one more hopeful, like "change" or "transform" or "invent"? and, if "break" wa to be the choice, what would happen after the breaking? would there be fixing? could there be ani fix after the breaking? "break" sound painful. and, back to today’ subject, professor christensen never talk about that. 

In fact, professor christensen’ approach wa quit the opposite. He learn in 2010 that he had lymphoma, then he had a stroke. within two years, he publish the book that I like best, titl "how will you measur your life?" It is at turn spiritu and sometim self-helpy, take professor christensen’ manag think and appli it to how to live a life. 

thi book should be newli relevant, as tech is cast about for it next act; we’v been talk about the neg impact of tech’ disrupt innov for a while now. techi measur everyth — and so professor christensen’ brace prescript are perhap perfect as the tech industri seek redemption. 

for example, he wrote: 

"it’ easier to hold your principl 100 percent of the time than it is to hold them 98 percent of the time." 

and: "in fact, how you alloc your own resourc can make your life turn out to be exactli as you hope or veri differ from what you intend." 

and, most of all: "decid what you stand for. and then stand for it all the time." 

perhap the tech industri doe not deserv the kind and good advic that professor christensen imparted, but it should take it anyway. that way, while he rest in peace, it could give us some, too. 
