that belov hospital? it’ drive Up health care cost 
By elisabeth rosenth 
sept. 1, 2019 

As voter fume about the high cost of health care, politician have been target two well-deserv villains: pharmaceut companies, whose price have risen more than inflation, and insurers, who pay their execut million in salari while rais premium and deductibles. 

but while the democrat presidenti candid have devot copiou airtim to debat health care, mani of the country’ lead health polici expert have wonder whi they have given a total pass to arguabl a primari culprit behind runaway medic inflation: america’ hospitals. 

data show that hospit are by far the biggest cost in our $3.5 trillion health care system, where spend is grow faster than gross domest product, inflat and wage growth. spend on hospit repres 44 percent of person expens for the privat insured, accord to rand. 

A report thi year from research at yale and other univers found that hospit price increas a whop 42 percent from 2007 to 2014 for inpati care and 25 percent for outpati care, compar with 18 percent and 6 percent for physicians. 

So whi have politician on both the left and right let hospit off scot-free? becaus a web of tie bind politician to the health care system. 

everi senator, virtual everi congressman and everi mayor of everi larg citi ha a power hospit system in hi or her district. and those hospit are as polit untouch as soybean grower in iowa or oil produc in texas. 

As hospit and hospit system have consolidated, they have becom the biggest employ in numer citi and states. they have replac manufactur as the hometown industri in a number of rust-belt cities, includ cleveland and pittsburgh. 

can kamala harri ignor the request of sutter health, kaiser permanente, u.c.l.a. or ani of the big health care system in california? can elizabeth warren ignor the need of partner healthcare, boston’ behemoth? (berni sander may be somewhat differ on thi front becaus vermont doesn’t have ani nation rank hospitals.) 

beyond that, hospit are often belov by constituents. it’ easi to get voter rile up about a drug maker in silicon valley or an insur in hartford. it’ much riskier to tri to direct their venom at the place where their children were born; that employ their parent as nurses, doctor and orderlies; that sponsor local littl leagu teams; that wa associ with their cathol church. 

and, of course, there’ elect money. hospit trade groups, medic center and their employe are major polit donors, contribut to whichev parti hold power — and often to the out-of-pow parti as well. In 2018, pac associ with the greater new york hospit association, and individu link to it, gave $4.5 million to the democrats’ senat major pac and $1 million to their hous major pac. it chief lobbyist person gave nearli a quarter of a million dollar to dozen of campaign last year. 

senat sander ha call on hi competitor for the democrat nomin to follow hi lead and reject contribut from pharma and insurance. can ani candid do the same for hospitals? the campaign committe of all 10 candid particip in the upcom democrat debat have plenti donat link to the hospit and health care industry, accord to open secrets. 

but the symbiosi between hospit and politician oper most insidi in the subtl fuel of each other’ interests. zack cooper, a health economist at yale, and hi colleagu look at thi life cycl of influenc by analyz how member of congress vote for a medicar provis that allow hospit to appli to have their govern payment increased. hospit in district of member who vote yea got more money than hospit whose repres vote nay, to the collect tune of $100 million. they use that money to hire more staff and increas payroll. they also spent million lobbi to extend the program. 

member who vote yea in turn receiv a 25 percent increas in total campaign contribut and a 65 percent increas in contribut from individu work in the health care industri in their home states. It wa a win-win for both sides. 

To defend their high prices, medic center assert that they couldn’t afford to oper on medicar payments, which are gener lower than what privat insur pay. but the argument isn’t convincing. 

the cost of a hospit stay in the unit state averag $5,220 a day in 2015 — and could be as high as over $17,000, compar with $765 in australia. In a rand studi publish earlier thi year, research calcul that hospit treat patient with privat health insur were paid, overall, 2.4 time the medicar rate in 2017, and nearli three time the rate for outpati care. If the plan had paid accord to medicare’ formula, their spend would be reduc by over half. 

most economist think hospit could do just fine with far less than they get today from privat insurance. 

while on paper mani hospit oper on the thinnest of margins, that is in part a choice, result from extravagance. 

It would be unseemli for these nonprofit medic center to make barrel of money. So when their oper gener huge surplus — as mani big medic center do — they plow the money back into the system. they build anoth cancer clinic, increas c.e.o. pay, buy the newest scanner (whether it is need or not) or instal spa and zen gardens. 

some rural hospit are genuin struggling. but mani american hospit have been spend capit "like water," said kevin schulman a physician-economist at stanford. the high cost of hospit today, he said, is often a function of the cost of new infrastructur or poor manag decisions. "medicar is suppos to pay the cost of an effici hospital," he said. "if they’v made bad decisions, whi should we keep pay for that?" 

If hospit were paid less via regul or genuin competition, they would look different, and they’d make differ purchas decis about technology. but would that matter to medic results? compar with their european counterparts, some american hospit resembl seven-star hotels. and yet, on average, the unit state doesn’t have better outcom than other wealthi nations. By some measur — such as life expect and infant mortal — it score wors than average. 

As attorney gener in california, kamala harri in 2012 initi an antitrust investig into hospitals’ high charges. but as a senat and presidenti candidate, she ha been larg silent on the issu — as have all the other candidates. 

As uwe reinhardt, the rever princeton health economist who die in 2017, told me, "if you want to save money, you have to pay less." that mean take on hospit pricing. 

So fine, go after drug maker and insurers. and for good measure, attack the devic maker who profit from huge markups, and the pharmaci benefit manag — the middlemen who negoti drug price down for insurers, then keep the differ for themselves. 

but with congress return to washington in the come day and a new democrat debat less than two week away, our elect offici need to address the eleph in the room and tell us how they plan to rein in hospit excesses. 
