bewar the pandem panic 
By farhad manjoo 
jan. 29, 2020 

coronaviru is start to freak me out — not the ill itself but the amped-up, ill-consid way our frighten world might respond to it. 

yes, the novel viru appear to be spread quickli at the outbreak’ epicent in the chines provinc of hubei, but after a late start the chines govern is now impos unpreced measur to contain it. As the world health organ declar last week, it remain too earli to call the outbreak a global public health emergency. 

So far, the wuhan coronaviru is not much more frighten than the outbreak of other recent coronavirus like sar in 2003 or mer in 2012, each of which kill fewer than a thousand peopl around the world. the new virus’ death toll ha just exceed 130; for context, accord to the cdc, about 15 million american have been sicken by the season flu so far in the 2019-2020 flu season, and 8,200 have die from it. (the flu kill between 300,000 and 650,000 peopl around the world annually.) 

what worri me more than the new diseas is that fear of a vagu and terrifi new ill might spiral into panic, and that it might be use to justifi unnecessarili sever limit on movement and on civil liberties, especi of racial and religi minor around the world. 

I also worri that the onlin world may give rise to danger skepticism, and that in the event of an actual pandem a larg number of peopl may delay treatment or refus vaccin becaus they don’t believ the scienc or are suspici of the government. 

"I predict that the next major outbreak — whether of a highli fatal strain of influenza or someth els — will not be due to a lack of prevent technologies," warn heidi larson, the director of the vaccin confid project, in a 2018 articl in the journal nature. "instead, emot contagion, digit enabled, could erod trust in vaccin so much as to render them moot." social media, she added, "should be recogn as a global public-health threat." 

tech giant have been race to tamp down conspiraci theori and hoax about the wuhan virus, but I worri that their effort won’t be veri successful, becaus societi seem to have no good answer to the kind of emot contagion dr. larson describes. it’ not just that mani peopl get their news from a medium given to rumor, exagger and wild misinformation, especi on issu about health or scienc — see the persist of antivax or climate-chang deniers. there is also a grow partisan divid over how american interpret scientif expertis and health policy, leav decis about public health vulner to the kind of partisan squabbl you hear on cabl news everi night. 

I also worri about the hair-trigg state of geopolitics. from donald trump to Xi jinp to bori johnson, strongmen with authoritarian tendenc run mani of the world’ most power governments. It is worth rememb that disease, or the fear of disease, can bring out the worst in human — pandem often feed scapego (jew were wide blame for the black death), creat a fertil field for demagogues. when you put all these factor together, you’v got a danger recip for global repression. 

already, china’ respons appear to be driven by polit consider more than epidemiolog ones. the govern ha impos a travel lockdown on more than 35 million people, which expert say is a quarantin of unpreced size and scale, yet it may not even turn out to be veri effective. expert say that quarantin work best dure the earliest stage of an outbreak, but that they can also backfire, caus medic shortages, corrod trust in health offici and push some peopl to look to evad care to escap ani restrict on their rights. china took week to mount a full-scal respons to the virus. accord to wuhan’ mayor, five million peopl left the citi befor restrict were imposed, suggest the countri is effect lock the barn door after the hors ha run off. 

"they’r do it becaus peopl who are in polit leadership alway think that if you do someth dramat and visibl that you’ll gain popular support," lawrenc O. gostin, a professor of global health law at georgetown university, told the washington post. "they couldn’t have ani sound public health advice." 

We should keep thi sens of caution in mind in case american politician begin push for travel bans, overbroad quarantin or other measur that might not be support by the science. 

you might wonder what the great harm is — if the govern need to temporarili limit people’ movement or prevent some peopl from enter the country, shouldn’t it take those measur in the face of danger illness? perhaps, but given the checker histori of quarantin — throughout history, they have been use to persecut the margin — lawmak and the media should rigor examin the base for ani such restrictions. We should especi make sure ani restrict impos are inde temporari and adher to the scienc — someth we don’t alway do. consid that 30 year after the aid outbreak, men who have sex with men are still restrict from donat blood in the unit states, long after the scientif basi for such a ban ha passed. 

So far, presid trump ha offer a measur respons to the virus. "we have it total under control," he said thi week. but online, misinform about the scale of the viru is alreadi trending. (it is not, as you might have read on twitter, "thermonuclear pandem level bad.") So are racist meme blame chines peopl and chines cultur for the virus. 

I fear that the condit are ripe for a situat similar to what occur in the summer of 2014, when an outbreak of ebola overran west africa. after the obama administr scrambl to bring home two american health worker who had becom infect with the diseas in liberia, trump went on a monthslong twitter tirad about ebola. 

the futur presid favor extrem isolationism, see no benefit to american help in africa. "peopl that go to far away place to help out are great-but must suffer the consequences!" he wrote — ultim spark a grow partisan movement against the government’ respons to the virus. 

today, trump run an administr that is hemorrhag scientif expertise, and hi polit agenda is rife with effort to target immigrants, minor and the poor. In 2016, a terrorist attack prompt trump to propos ban muslim from the country; when he won the white house, he institut a version of that ban. 

I fear that panic about a foreign viru offer societi anoth chanc to target margin people. So let’ keep our fear in check; panic will hurt us far more than it’ll help. 
