the next decad will Be just as bad 
By farhad manjoo 
nov. 20, 2019 

We will rememb the 2010 as a grifter’ paradise. these were the year when our collect sens of object realiti total fell apart and when politics, business, technology, cultur and even ordinari life fell fulli under the sway of a new breed of swindler, huckster, influencer, troll and hacker. 

scam and fakeri were not just ascend thi decad — they were often the domin stori line. It wa a time of "life come at you fast" and "milkshak duck." the primari feel of the 2010 wa one of punch-drunken disorientation, of alway have the rug pull out from under you. and thi wa the big lesson of the 2010s: almost noth is as it seems. doubt everything. trust no one. 

not that thi idea work veri well: doubt everyth may be a workabl plan for individu surviv in a fractur media univers domin by algorithm and digit media of dubiou authenticity, but pervas doubt could just as well bring on civiliz ruin. get through modern life seem to requir adopt a corros view of societi that make a hash of our fundament idea about the valu of cooper and trust among our fellow humans. we’r bring on a death-spir of distrust — and I fear that in the 2020 and beyond, grifter peddl altern fact may come to suffoc us all. 

the most obviou exampl of the huckster’ rise was, of course, donald trump. when trump announc hi bid for the presid in 2015, much of the polit and media establishment, includ mani lead republicans, thought the idea of a self-dealing, conspiraci theoriz realiti TV star win the white hous wa a pretti funni joke. few of them understood trump’ effect at hack the news landscap to command our attent completely. few of them could have guess that rather than the establish foil trump, hi slipperi style and overwhelm blizzard of lie would so fulli alter polit and media cultur that by the end of the decade, member of the g.o.p. would be embrac and echo hi conspiraci theori as a way to forestal hi remov from office. 

while conspiraci think took full flower on the right, it began to bloom on the left, too. trump’ elect wa follow by the rise of anti-trump onlin influenc who came to domin news and activism. these were the "resist grifters" — michael avenatti, the brother Ed and brian krassenstein, the nearli self-parod louis mensch — who peddl a self-serv brand of breathless anti-trump heavili pepper with call to buy their book and other merch. A specter of foreign disinform led to widespread suspicion, and it becam a handi defens for grifter to dismiss opposit as bot or russian shills. 

the grift wasn’t limit to politics. the tech industri welcom huckster with open arms. look at wework, uber and therano — onc high-fli start-up that promis to chang the world in big way and small, each unmask for peddl fals prospects, unreal tech or hide system corrupt and abuse. facebook and other social media servic were not just a haven of state-sponsor disinformation; with dodgy, easili game stats, social media increasingli came to provid a fals view of the world. 

facebook admit a seri of error overst advertis metrics. youtube’ stat were shown to be lousi with fake views, twitter’ were overwhelm by fake follow and amazon wa full of fake luxuri goods. scam pervad new technolog and old ones. the spectacular rise in the price of bitcoin in 2017 wa later found to be the product of market manipulation. and, accord to a report by the telecommun firm first orion, about 29 percent of all voic call place in 2018 were scam robocalls; one estim put the volum of spam call at billion per month. 

whi are we be overrun by scams? society’ signal for judg reput and trustworthi haven’t caught up with the chang tech. even though we know better, we reflex mistak instagram for realiti — onlin influenc is seen as a proxi for real-world authenticity, and so we are constantli fall under the sway of peopl who’v found way to game the digit realm. On your phone, the fyre festiv look irresistible. 

We are also too easili blind by wealth, or marker for wealth. anna sorokin, the russian immigr convict thi year of con new york societi into think she wa a german heiress name anna delvey, defraud hotel and bank of hundr of thousand of dollar by pretend to be rich. she’d hand out $100 bill to anyon and everyone. "for a stretch of time in new york, no small amount of the cash in circul wa come from anna delvey," jessica pressler wrote. 

you could argu that my take on the end of truth is too gloomy. consid the clarifi power of #metoo — how in the case of harvey weinstein, jeffrey epstein, bill cosbi and other once-pow men, we wit the power of fact and objective, clear eye investig to alter the brutal power structur that had long held victim in silence. 

you might also argu that collectively, we’r get better at spot huckster and frauds. the resist grifter had a good run, but we found them out. less than a year from now, if not sooner, trump, too, may hit the end of hi run. 

but i’m skeptic that these thing signal some reason for optimism. our inform system ha slip it moorings, and as a result, lie and scheme and fraud ha simpli becom too effect a life strategy. As I argu in march, when the celebr colleg admiss scandal broke, we’r see the "uberization" of corrupt — bend the rule is becom routin and pervasive, a push-button cheat code for modern life. 

it’ not a big leap from "trust no one" to "swindl everyone." happi new decade, I guess. 
