trump ha made Us all stupid 
By david brook 

donald trump is impulse-driven, ignorant, narcissist and intellectu dishonest. So you’d think that those of us in the anti-trump camp would go out of our way to show we’r not like him — that we are judicious, informed, matur and reasonable. 

but the event of the past week have shown that the anti-trump echo chamber is becom a mirror imag of trump himself — overwrought, uncalibr and incap of have an intellig convers about ani complex polici problem. 

for example, there’ a complex polici problem at the heart of thi week’ iran episode. iran is not power becaus it ha a strong economi or military. It is power becaus it sponsor militia across the middl east, destabil regim and spread genocid and sectarian cleansing. over the past few year those militias, orchestr by qassim suleimani, have felt free to oper more in the open with greater destruct effect. 

we’r not go to go in and destroy the militias. So how can we keep them in check so they don’t destabil the region? that’ the hard problem — one that stymi past administrations. 

In the middl east, and wherev there are protract conflicts, nation have a way to address thi problem. they use violenc as a form of communication. A nation tri to maintain order will assassin a terror leader or destroy a terror facility. the attack says: "hey, we know we’r in a long-term conflict, but let’ not let it get out of hand. that’ not in either of our interests." 

the attack is a way to seiz control of the escal process and set a boundari marker. 

these sort of oper have risk and rewards. A risk is that it won’t ceas the escalation, just acceler it. the radic on the other side will get enrag and take to the streets. their leader will have to appeas that rage. 

A reward is that mayb you do halt the escalation. the other side implicitli says: "messag received. we’ll do some face-sav thing to appeas the streets, but we don’t want thi to get out of hand, either." anoth reward is that you’v manag to elimin an effect terrorist like suleimani. talent doesn’t grow on trees. 

the decis to undertak thi sort of oper is a matter of weigh risk and reward. and after the suleimani killing, you saw american secur profession talk in the languag of balanc risk and reward. stanley mcchrystal, a retir general, and michael mullen, a retir admiral, thought it wa worth the risk. susan rice, a former nation secur adviser, thought it wasn’t. 

but in the anti-trump echo chamber, that’ not how most peopl were thinking. led by berni sander and elizabeth warren, they avoid the hard, complex problem of how to set boundari around militias. instead, they pontif on the easi question not actual on the table: should we have a massiv invas of iran? 

A great cri went up from the echo chamber. we’r on the brink of war! trump is lead us to more endless war in the middl east! we’r on the precipic of total chaos! thi wa not the calibr languag of risk and reward. It wa fear-stok apocalypt language. By be so overwrought and exaggerated, the echo chamber drown out ani practic convers about how to stabil the middl east so we could have anoth righteou choru of "donald trump is a monster!" 

thi is trump’ ultim victory. everi argument on everi topic is now all about him. hate trump togeth ha becom the ultim bonding, attention-grab and profit-maxim mechan for those of us in anti-trump world. So you get a seri of exagger fervor — the mueller report! impeachment! the steel dossier! — that lead ultim nowhere. 

most of thi week’ argument about the middl east wasn’t realli about the middl east. It wa all narcissist about ourselves! democrat defend terrorists! republican are warmongers! actual iranian are just bit player in our imperialist soap opera, the passiv recipi of our great or perfidy. 

the world is more complic than thi cartoon. love or hate him, trump ha use militari forc less than ani other presid sinc jimmi carter. when it come to foreign policy, he is not like recent republicans. He is, as my colleagu ross douthat put it, a jacksonian figure, want to get america out of foreign entangl while lob a few long-dist attack to ensur the crazi foreign stick to kill one anoth and not us. 

and thi is the final paradox. for all the sturm und drang that surround trump, populist republican and democrat are gravit toward the same foreign policy: we’r in the middl of a clash of civilizations; the middl east is so screw up, we should just get out; we’r too stupid/ineffective/racist/imperialist to do ani good there anyway. 

We fight vicious about trump, but underneath, a populist left-right curtain is descend around america, separ us from the mideast, china, even europe. the real high-risk move is the one both parti are make together: that if we ignor the world it will ignor us. (it won’t.) 

mayb onc the inflammatori one is final gone from the scene we can have an intellig convers about that. 
