trump want law and order front and center 
By thoma B. edsal 
jan. 8, 2020 

unexpectedly, the 2020 presidenti campaign is drill down on petti crime and homelessness. donald trump and hi republican alli are reviv law-and-ord theme similar to those use effect by richard nixon and spiro agnew in the late 1960 and earli 1970 to demon racial minorities. 

To thi end, republican seek to discredit liber law enforc initi adopt by a new breed of democrat prosecutors. 

these democrat district attorney — in cities, counti and suburb from philadelphia, orlando, chicago and st. loui to contra costa county, calif., suffolk county, mass., and durham county, n.c. — are pursu polici intend to decrimin vagrancy, and elimin cash bail, and they are aggress pursu charg in case of shoot by polic officers. 

they are play a key role in a hotli politic movement to curb mass incarcer and to roll back what ha becom known as "the carcer state." 

the decarcer movement is back by a wide array of organ tightli align with the progress wing of the democrat party: the real justic pac, black live matter, the brennan center for justice, the aclu, justic democrats, moveon.org and brand new congress. 

michael waldman, presid of the brennan center, and adureh onyekwere, a senior research and program associ there, along with inimai chettiar and priya raghavan, describ the goal of the movement in a may 2019 essay, "end mass incarceration: idea from today’ leaders": 
mass incarcer is the civil right crisi of our time. the racial dispar pervas in our justic system compound at everi juncture: african american are more like to be stop by police, arrested, detain befor trial, and given harsher sentenc than whites. 

how do we achiev change, the author ask? the solut they envisag rang broadli 
from elimin prison for lower-level crime to incentiv state to decarcerate, from end bail to abolish privat prisons, from reform hous and employ law to chang the public percept of the justic system and cultiv respect for all lives. 

At the same time, as thi movement ha been gain momentum, it ha provid ammunit for a power counterattack from presid trump, hi attorney general, william barr, and other law-and-ord republicans. 

the result is that the 2020 elect is expand the 50-year-old cultur war into new territori as democrat — often under pressur from younger voter — seek to extend broader right to those who have been previous stigmat or marginalized, now move beyond protect for minorities, women and gays, to provid more freedom to crimin defendants, the homeless, the mental ill and unknown number of men and women imprison through prosecutori misconduct, judici error or other form of system failure. 

republicans, in turn, are bet that the democrat presidenti candid have move substanti farther to the left on issu of crime and punish than the vote public. 

lead democrat presidenti candidates, for their part, are not shi away from the challenge, endors in whole or in part the decarcer and decrimin agenda. 

even joe biden, one of the more moder 2020 candidates, argu at the septemb democrat presidenti debat that "we should be talk about rehabilitation. nobodi should be in jail for a nonviol crime" and that "nobodi should be in jail for a drug problem. We build more rehabilit centers, not prisons." 

onc a strong support of the death penalty, biden now call for it elimination, note on hi website: 
over 160 individu who’v been sentenc to death in thi countri sinc 1973 have later been exonerated. becaus we cannot ensur we get death penalti case right everi time, biden will work to pass legisl to elimin the death penalti at the feder level. 

while mani of the democrat presidenti candid have effect join the decarcer movement, the same uniti cannot be found among hous and senat democrats. At thi level, the movement is one more sourc of conflict between the alexandria ocasio-cortez wing and the mani member of the hous and senat who must fight for re-elect in more moder district and states, includ those that cast major for trump in 2016. 

laurenc tribe, a professor of constitut law at harvard, describ the think underpin progress democrat polici broaden the right of the homeless. In an email, tribe wrote: 
the suppos "rights" of those who are upset or psycholog threaten by the homeless, the deinstitutionalized, or other similarli situat are what I would call second-ord rights, right that a politi cannot fairli treat as have as strong a claim to protection, as trump that overrid utilitarian claim as is true of genuin rights. 

put anoth way, tribe continued, 
my "right" not to be upset by your appear or life choic cannot occupi the same plane as your right to live your life as you opt to, or are compel to, live it if we are to have a viabl social and legal system. one needn’t be a libertarian to recogn that there is a differ in kind between someone’ genuin right to be free of another’ physic intrus or displac and someone’ ersatz right to be free of another’ mere offend or upset behavior or circumstances. 

In thi view, accord to tribe, "right of the first, or primary, sort can be univers recognized; right of the second sort must be subordin if social life is to be tolerable." 

trump, for hi part, clearli reject tribe’ distinct between first versu second order, or genuin versu ersatz, rights. for trump, the peopl who come into contact with the homeless have first order rights. In a juli 1, 2019, interview with fox’ tucker carlson, trump declared: 
you can’t have what’ happen — where polic offic are get sick just by walk the beat. I mean, they’r get actual veri sick, where peopl are get sick, where the peopl live there live in hell, too. 

trump went on: 
We cannot ruin our cities. and you have peopl that work in those cities. they work in offic build and to get into the building, they have to walk through a scene that nobodi would have believ possibl three year ago. and thi is the liber establishment. thi is what i’m fighting. 

republican are respond to the initi of progress prosecutor with a vengeance. 

In a fieri speech on aug. 12 at the grand lodg fratern order of police’ confer in new orleans, barr warn that progress prosecutor in citi across the nation are "demor to law enforc and danger to public safety." 

thi threat, barr continued, come from 
the emerg in some of our larg citi of district attorney that style themselv as ‘social justice’ reformers, who spend their time undercut the police, let crimin off the hook, and refus to enforc the law. 

these prosecutors, barr declared, 
have been announc their refus to enforc broad swath of the crimin law. most disturb is that some are refus to prosecut case of resist police. some are refus to prosecut variou theft case or drug cases, even where the suspect is involv in distribution. and when they do deign to charg a crimin suspect, they are frequent seek sentenc that are pathet lenient. So these citi are head back to the day of revolv door justice. the result will be predictable. more crime; more victims. 

three day later, william M. mcswain, the trump-appoint unit state attorney for the eastern district of pennsylvania, call a news confer to explicitli attack the philadelphia district attorney, larri krasner. krasner wa elect in 2017 on a platform promis to 
end mass incarceration; stop prosecut insuffici and insignific cases; review past convictions, free the wrong convicted; stop cash bail imprisonment; treat addict as a medic problem, not a crime. 

To mcswain these polici are heretical: 
there is a new cultur of disrespect for law enforc in thi citi that is promot and champion by district attorney larri krasner — and I am fed up with it. It start with chant at the da’ victori parti — chant of "f*** the police" and "no good cop in a racist system." 

there are, mcswain argued, 
plenti of crimin law in thi citi — but what we don’t have is robust enforc by the district attorney. instead, we have diversionari program for gun offenses, the routin downgrad of charg for violent crime, and entir section of the crimin code that are ignored. 

most recently, presid trump, at a ralli on dec. 10 in hershey, pa., told the crowd "you have the worst district attorney," refer to the philadelphia d.a., roughli 95 mile east. "i’v been hear about thi guy, he let killer out almost immediately. you better get yourself a new prosecutor." 

turn the decarcer movement into a 2020 campaign issu fit into trump’ go-to strategi of inflam divis conflicts, especi those involv disput right — particularli those benefit minor — in order to activ racial resentment, to mobil hi core voter and to goad swing voter into line up against the democrat party. 

while trump’ strategi wa success in 2016, it is by no mean clear that thi strategi will work as well in 2020. 

A februari 2019 paper, "evalu the impact of elimin prosecutori request for cash bail," by auréli ouss, professor of criminolog at the univers of pennsylvania, and megan stevenson, a law professor at georg mason, examin the consequ of philadelphia’ "no-cash-bail" policies. 

contrari to fear that the elimin of cash bail would "decreas account and increas failure-to-appear in court," the author detect 
no chang in failure-to-appear in court or in recidivism, suggest that reduct in the use of monetari bail can be made without signific advers consequences. 

At the same time, however, the violent crime rate in philadelphia ha increas by 5 percent from 2018 to 2019, accord to the city’ polic department. while homicid and rape both declin by 5 and 9 percent respectively, robberi without a gun increas 11 percent, aggrav assault with a gun by 13 percent and assault without a gun by 3 percent. 

there is no evid that the partial elimin of cash bail caus the increas in violent crime. In fact, in 2018, the first full year when the polici were in effect, crime drop 5 percent. 

In some other citi that have elect to reduc the use of cash bail, crime ha gone down. 

In boston, crime drop 5 percent from 2018 to 2019, the first full year in offic for rachel rollins, the suffolk counti district attorney. rollin pledg that she would not prosecut such crime as 
larceni under $250, disorderli conduct, disturb the peace, receiv stolen property" along with "break and enter — where it is into a vacant properti or where it is for the purpos of sleep or seek refug from the cold and there is no actual damag to properti break and entering, wanton or malici destruct of property, drug possess with intent to distribut and a stand-alon resist arrest charge, i.e. case where a person is charg with resist arrest and that is the onli charge. 

the approach to prosecut adopt by rollin and other directli contradict the "broken windows" polic strategi that wa wide popular among both democrat and republican in the 1990s. the economist describ the premis behind broken window law enforc thi way: "in environ where disorderli behavior goe uncheck — where prostitut visibl pli their trade or beggar accost passers-bi — more seriou street crime flourishes." 

over the past four years, mani progress democrat have turn sharpli against the aggress polic that broken window enforc produced, argu that it ha contribut to excess incarcer that result in the disproportion imprison of african-american and other minorities. 

At the presidenti debat in september, virtual everi candid voic strong opposit to mass incarcer and support for the releas or sentenc reduct of those convict of nonviol crime. 

mani of the crime progress prosecutor are declin to press charg on are link to homelessness, vagrancy, drug possession, disorderli conduct, break into vacant property, and so forth — which, from a strateg point of view, enabl trump and hi alli to link homeless with progress democrat law enforc policies. 

On thi issue, one of trump’ key alli is tucker carlson. everi night thi week, carlson is devot segment of hi fox new show to homelessness. hi show will reinforc the 2020 republican elect theme that democrat are foster endem social disorder. 

On jan. 3, carlson tweeted: "drugs. homelessness. third world inequality. san francisco’ radic left wing govern ha turn their citi into an american dystopia." 

thi week’ seri is the second time in less than a year that carlson ha devot five straight night to homelessness, with footag of men and women inject themselves, evid of public defecation, the vagrant mental ill, and sidewalk in california line for block with tents. 

the trump administr ha been work for month to develop a new, hard-nos feder polici on homelessness. citylab and other public report that the administr is expect to fund local polic effort to remov public encamp and to put the homeless in feder shelter requir strict adher to rule of sobrieti and non-disrupt behavior. 

"the white hous is take step toward decis new action on homelessness, buck polici favor by advoc in favor of an aggress approach that center the role of law enforcement," citylab report on dec 17, 2019: 
advoc say that they expect an execut order on homeless to assign new resourc to polic depart to remov homeless encamp and even strip hous fund from citi that choos to toler these encampments. 

the trump campaign is gambl that democrat are outsid the mainstream of public opinion on these issues, while the lead democrat candid are convinc that enough of the elector ha becom suffici skeptic of law-and-ord strategi — and the accompani racial underton (and overtones) — to produc a democrat victori on nov. 3, 2020. 

over the past 50 years, democrat strategi base on the presumpt of increas liber among voter at larg have rare succeeded. perhap 2020 will be different. 
