black briton know whi meghan markl want out 
By afua hirsch 
jan. 9, 2020 

the british press ha succeed in it appar project of hound meghan, duchess of sussex, out of britain. the part it perhap didn’t bargain for, however, is the loss of princ harri — a much love royal and a key part of the family’ global brand — along with her. 

In a statement releas thi week, the coupl said they want to "carv out a progress new role" within the royal famili and would "step back as ‘senior’ members, and work to becom financi independent." 

the british press react with surpris at the "shock move abroad," describ various as "seismic," "selfish," "rogue" and "an atroci laps of judgment." 

If the media paid more attent to britain’ commun of color, perhap it would find the announc far less surprising. with a new prime minist whose track record includ overtli racist statements, some of which would make even donald trump blush, a brexit project link to nativ nation and a desir to rid britain of larg number of immigrants, and an ever thicken loom of imperi nostalgia, mani of us are also think about moving. 

from the veri first headlin about her be "(almost) straight outta compton" and have "exotic" dna, the racist treatment of meghan ha been imposs to ignore. princess michael of kent wore an overtli racist brooch in the duchess’ company. A bbc host compar the couple’ newborn babi to a chimpanzee. then there wa the sublim ludicr suggest that meghan’ avocado consumpt is respons for mass murder, while her chariti cookbook wa portray as somehow help terrorists. 

those who claim frequent attack against the duchess have noth to do with her race have a hard time explain these attempt to link her with particularli racial form of crime — terror and gang activ — as well as the fact that she ha been most venom attack for act that attract prais when other royal did them. her decis to guest-edit british vogue, for example, wa roundli condemn by larg part of the british media, in stark contrast to princ charles’ two-tim guest editorship of countri life magazine, princ harry’ of a bbc program and kate middleton’ at huffington post, all of which were quietli prais at the time. 

her treatment ha prove what mani of us have alway known: No matter how beauti you are, whom you marry, what palac you occupy, chariti you support, how faith you are, how much money you accumul or what good deed you perform, in thi societi racism will still follow you. 

In britain’ rigid class society, there is still a deep correl between privileg and race. the rel few peopl of color — and even fewer if you count onli those who have african heritag — who rise to promin and prosper in britain are often told we should be "grateful" or told to leav if we don’t like it here. 

the legaci of britain’ histori of empir — a global construct base on a doctrin of white supremaci — it pioneer role in the slave trade and ideolog of racism that enabl it, and polici of recruit peopl from the caribbean and africa for low-paid work and then discrimin against them in educ and housing, is with us today: the scandal surround the wrong deport of black british peopl in recent year is still reverberating. 

meghan’ decis to join the famili that is the symbol heart of the establish respons for thi troubl histori wa perplex to mani black british people, as we wonder whether she fulli appreci the institut she had entered. 

both she and harri appear to have gain crystal clear vision as to their reality. it’ no wonder the coupl want to leav and — as the code statement that they want to rais their son, archie, "with the space to focu on the next chapter" seem to suggest — protect him from the bile to which they’v been exposed. 

the british press, have attack the coupl continuously, now react with shock at thi move. but the clue have been there for some time for anyon will to read them. 

there wa the decis not to give archi a titl from birth — someth that is expect among royal children of thi rank but which meghan and harri appear to have chosen to avoid. then there were the rumor last spring that they might reloc to a countri in southern africa. 

In recent months, the coupl have begun bypass offici royal channel and commun with the press directli — most notabl when the duchess said in a televis documentari that she found adjust to royal life "hard," and harri reveal that the tragic experi of the death of hi mother, diana, princess of wales, made him want to "protect" hi wife and family. 

all were sign that the coupl would not abid by royal busi as usual, to the extent that even announc thi decis to step down from their role as senior royal appear to have taken buckingham palac by surprise. 

I am not at all surprised. thi wa the bitter shadow of their sunni may 2018 wedding. how mani of us suspect — hope but doubt we were wrong — that what would realli initi meghan into her new role as a briton with african heritag would be her experi of british racism. and ironically, by take matter into their own hands, harri and meghan’ act of leav — two finger up at the racism of the british establish — might be the most meaning act of royal leadership i’m ever like to see. 
