We made the coronaviru epidem 
By david quammen 
jan. 28, 2020 

the latest scari new viru that ha captur the world’ horrifi attention, caus a lockdown of 56 million peopl in china, disrupt travel plan around the globe and spark a run on medic mask from wuhan, hubei province, to bryan, texas, is known provision as "ncov-2019." it’ a clunki monik for a lurid threat. 

the name, pick by the team of chines scientist who isol and identifi the virus, is short for "novel coronaviru of 2019." It reflect the fact that the viru wa first recogn to have infect human late last year — in a seafood and live-anim market in wuhan — and that it belong to the coronaviru family, a notori group. the sar epidem of 2002-3, which infect 8,098 peopl worldwide, kill 774 of them, wa caus by a coronavirus, and so wa the mer outbreak that began on the arabian peninsula in 2012 and still linger (2,494 peopl infect and 858 death as of november). 

despit the new virus’ name, though, and as the peopl who christen it well know, ncov-2019 isn’t as novel as you might think. 

someth veri much like it wa found sever year ago in a cave in yunnan, a provinc roughli a thousand mile southwest of wuhan, by a team of perspicaci researchers, who note it exist with concern. the fast spread of ncov-2019 — more than 4,500 confirm cases, includ at least 106 deaths, as of tuesday morning, and the figur will have risen by the time you read thi — is startl but not unforeseeable. that the viru emerg from a nonhuman animal, probabl a bat, and possibl after pass through anoth creature, may seem spooky, yet it is utterli unsurpris to scientist who studi these things. 

one such scientist is zheng-li shi, of the wuhan institut of virology, a senior author of the draft paper (not yet peer review and so far avail onli in preprint) that gave ncov-2019 it ident and name. It wa ms. shi and her collabor who, back in 2005, show that the sar pathogen wa a bat viru that had spill over into people. ms. shi and colleagu have been trace coronavirus in bat sinc then, warn that some of them are uniqu suit to caus human pandemics. 

In a 2017 paper, they set out how, after nearli five year of collect fecal sampl from bat in the yunnan cave, they had found coronavirus in multipl individu of four differ speci of bats, includ one call the intermedi horsesho bat, becaus of the half-ov flap of skin protrud like a saucer around it nostrils. the genom of that virus, ms. shi and her colleagu have now announced, is 96 percent ident to the wuhan viru that ha recent been found in humans. and those two constitut a pair distinct from all other known coronaviruses, includ the one that caus sars. In thi sense, ncov-2019 is novel — and possibl even more danger to human than the other coronaviruses. 

I say "possibly" becaus so far, not onli do we not know how danger it is, we can’t know. outbreak of new viral diseas are like the steel ball in a pinbal machine: you can slap your flipper at them, rock the machin on it leg and bonk the ball to the jitteri rings, but where they end up drop depend on 11 level of chanc as well as on anyth you do. thi is true with coronavirus in particular: they mutat often while they replicate, and can evolv as quickli as a nightmar ghoul. 

peter daszak, the presid of ecohealth alliance, a privat research organ base in new york that focus on the connect between human and wildlif health, is one of ms. shi’ longtim partners. "we’v been rais the flag on these virus for 15 years," he told me on friday with calm frustration. "ever sinc sars." He wa a co-author of the 2005 bats-and-sar study, and again of the 2017 paper about the multipl sars-lik coronavirus in the yunnan cave. 

mr. daszak told me that, dure that second study, the field team took blood sampl from a coupl of thousand yunnanes people, about 400 of whom live near the cave. roughli 3 percent of them carri antibodi against sars-rel coronaviruses. 

"we don’t know if they got sick. We don’t know if they were expos as children or adults," mr. daszak said. "but what it tell you is that these virus are make the jump, repeatedly, from bat to humans." In other words, thi wuhan emerg is no novel event. it’ part of a sequenc of relat conting that stretch back into the past and will stretch forward into the future, as long as current circumst persist. 

So when you’r done worri about thi outbreak, worri about the next one. Or do someth about the current circumstances. 

current circumst includ a peril trade in wildlif for food, with suppli chain stretch through asia, africa and to a lesser extent, the unit state and elsewhere. that trade ha now been outlaw in china, on a temporari basis; but it wa outlaw also dure sars, then allow to resum — with bats, civets, porcupines, turtles, bamboo rats, mani kind of bird and other anim pile togeth in market such as the one in wuhan. 

current circumst also includ 7.6 billion hungri humans: some of them impoverish and desper for protein; some affluent and wast and empow to travel everi which way by airplane. these factor are unpreced on planet earth: We know from the fossil record, by absenc of evidence, that no large-bodi anim ha ever been nearli so abund as human are now, let alon so effect at arrog resources. and one consequ of that abundance, that power, and the consequ ecolog disturb is increas viral exchang — first from anim to human, then from human to human, sometim on a pandem scale. 

We invad tropic forest and other wild landscapes, which harbor so mani speci of anim and plant — and within those creatures, so mani unknown viruses. We cut the trees; we kill the anim or cage them and send them to markets. We disrupt ecosystems, and we shake virus loos from their natur hosts. when that happens, they need a new host. often, we are it. 

the list of such virus emerg into human sound like a grim drumbeat: machupo, bolivia, 1961; marburg, germany, 1967; ebola, zair and sudan, 1976; h.i.v., recogn in new york and california, 1981; a form of hanta (now known as sin nombre), southwestern unit states, 1993; hendra, australia, 1994; bird flu, hong kong, 1997; nipah, malaysia, 1998; west nile, new york, 1999; sars, china, 2002-3; mers, saudi arabia, 2012; ebola again, west africa, 2014. and that’ just a selection. now we have ncov-2019, the latest thump on the drum. 

current circumst also includ bureaucrat who lie and conceal bad news, and elect offici who brag to the crowd about cut forest to creat job in the timber industri and agricultur or about cut budget for public health and research. the distanc from wuhan or the amazon to paris, toronto or washington is short for some viruses, measur in hours, given how well they can ride within airplan passengers. and if you think fund pandem prepared is expensive, wait until you see the final cost of ncov-2019. 

fortunately, current circumst also includ brilliant, dedic scientist and outbreak-respons medic peopl — such as mani at the wuhan institut of virology, ecohealth alliance, the unit state center for diseas control and prevent (c.d.c.), the chines c.d.c. and numer other institutions. these are the peopl who go into bat caves, swamp and high-secur contain laboratories, often risk their lives, to bring out bat fece and blood and other preciou evid to studi genom sequenc and answer the key questions. 

As the number of ncov-2019 case ha increased, and the death toll along with it, one metric, the case fatal rate, ha remain rather steadi so far: at about or below 3 percent. As of tuesday, less than three out of 100 confirm case had died. that’ rel good luck — wors than for most strain of influenza, better than for sars. 

thi good luck may not last. nobodi know where the pinbal will go. four day from today, the number of case may be in the ten of thousands. six month from today, wuhan pneumonia may be reced into memory. Or not. 

We are face with two mortal challenges, in the short term and the long term. short term: We must do everyth we can, with intelligence, calm and a full commit of resources, to contain and extinguish thi ncov-2019 outbreak befor it becomes, as it could, a devast global pandemic. long term: We must remember, when the dust settles, that ncov-2019 wa not a novel event or a misfortun that befel us. It wa — it is — part of a pattern of choic that we human are making. 
