whi america need a royal famili 
By jennif weiner 
jan. 10, 2020 

like everyon els on the internet, i’v been watch the royal rumble, as princ harri and hi american bride are attempt to carv out new role in the royal family, and i’v reach a conclusion: we, the american people, need some royal of our own. 

I know. you’r thinking: didn’t we fight a revolut so we wouldn’t have kings? aren’t monarchi expens and aren’t european nation streamlin their monarchi for thi veri reason? and isn’t princ harri quit so that he won’t have to particip in an archaic, obsolet system with unpleas echo of imperi and elit that ha made hi wife a target for racists? 

all true. but hear me out, because, as the hous of windsor burns, and as recrimin ricochet from instagram to the tabloids, with courtier and confer call and compet tale of who knew what when, there’ the kernel of someth that might be worth pull out of the dumpster fire and reinvent as our own. 

base on my understand of british govern (which, full disclosure, is larg inform by memori of my 10th-grade world histori class, plu three season of "the crown"), the prime minist and parliament are democrat elected, and do the actual governing, while the dynastic, unelect royal have ceremoni roles. the king and queen and their offspr live in the palace, wear fabul jewels, drive (or are driven) in fanci car to event like troop the color (excus me, the colour) and swan upping, which sound made up, but isn’t, all while drain the nation’ coffer to the tune of some £82.4 million thi year (per the royal family) or £345 million (per republic, a group that advoc abolit of the monarchy). 

the subject pay the bills, and, in return, the royal live their live in public, enjoy variou rich-peopl pursuits, attend wed in nice cloth and the aforement jewelry, cut ribbons, stand on balconi and waving. they are england’ celebr in chief, the star of one of the world’ longest-run realiti shows. they either serv as expens anachron or use distractions, depend on whom you ask. 

"that’ the thing about the monarchy," say helena bonham carter, play princess margaret on season 3’ final of "the crown." "we paper over the cracks." 

the problem with a real-tim soap opera that draw the entir world’ attent is that veri few peopl are equip to be it stars. recent histori prove the point: the beauti princess becom a desper unhappi young mother who die tragically, tri to escap the paparazzi (rest in peace, princess diana). her husband, the dash prince, caught on tape muse about becom hi mistress’ tampon (really, who’ write thi dialogue?). An uncle, bounc out of the famili busi after consort with a notori pedophile. Is it ani wonder that we now have a princ who want to be written off the show, or, at the veri least, becom a recur guest star, not a seri regular? 

In the unit states, meanwhile, we expect our elect officials, with their unelect spous and children, to serv that public, ceremoni role. which ha meant first children go through adolesc on the world stage, and spous who’v work as lawyer and teacher press into thankless, unsalari and highly-scrutin servic as hostess in chief. 

wouldn’t it make sens to separ those spheres, the way they have in iceland, where there’ an elect presid to handl ceremoni tasks, and a prime minist to govern? we, too, could give the power to an elect offici and keep a differ person around to handl the hosting/ribbon cutting/ros garden tour-leading/gossip lightning-rod stuff. 

We could keep it simpl and give the gig to miss america, who’ alreadi been chosen and alreadi ha a tiara. Or we could have a televis realiti contest (a roy-al contest — see what I did there?) to elect our king and queen. We could recruit the glitter coupl we think would be best suit for the job of repres america on the world stage (beyoncé and jay-z! jennif lopez and a-rod! georg and amal clooney! danni devito and rhea perlman! ina garten and jeffrey!). 

We would put the would-b royal through their pace — can she keep her cool while shake hand in four-inch heel for three hours? can he entertain foreign dignitaries, even if he doesn’t speak their language? can they wrangl a gaggl of corgi or visit colleg footbal champs? Do they look good in funni hats? 

We let peopl vote. We move the winner into the white hous and reloc the presid into some nearby, more modest digs. then, we let the presid govern, while our king and queen cut the ribbon and host state dinners, pardon the thanksgiv turkey and light the christma tree. We give them a salari and strict instruct about the valu they are to uphold (one singl brooch like princess michael of kent’s, and you’r out). and we give them crown and titl becaus symbol have weight and meaning, and becaus fairi tale and hallmark movi have train us to believ that preciou metal headgear and titl confer prestig and desirability. there’ a reason we aren’t all bing a netflix seri call "the basebal cap"; a reason that — no offense, iceland — cinderella and sleep beauti dream of a princ and not a president. 

elect royal coupl would elimin the problem of the unpaid first ladies, shift the burden of be a hostess, a chariti patron and a fashion plate onto the shoulder of someon who ha skill for it, allow the president’ spous to continu on whatev path he or she previous chose — health care administrator, librarian, lawyer, pilates-class frequenter. 

even better, it would erad the possibl of a presid who would rather be a king. ani candid who prefer campaign to governing, who would rather speak at a ralli than sit through a briefing, or who understand the hierarchi of fox new but do not seem to have read the constitut can run to be a royal, not a president. give the power, with no crown, to the hard-working, camera-shi introverts; give a crown, with no power, to the preen spotlight hogs. for all we know, princ charles, who’ been kind of a yawn as a royal, could have been a solid politician, and our disastr presid might have been at least a contain disast as king donald the first. 
