

iv. the spirit wail 

told BY the merchant 

"allah alon can search the heart of men," said the hakeem, slowli and 

reflect repeat the word with which the astrolog had close 

hi tale. He wa a man of vener appearance, with flowing, white 

beard that descend to hi waist. and yet, although hi face wa 

furrow with the line of old age, hi eye were wonder youth 

in their contempl calm. 

"no truer word have been spoken to-night," he continued. "yet must we 

further reflect that, while a man cannot sit in judgment upon hi 

fellows, he can assuredli judg himself, which goe to show that within 

the breast of everi man there dwell the veri spirit of god, the power 

to search hi own heart, whether in condemn or for approval. life 

is a problem, and it requir a full lifetim to solv it. onli as we 

grow older do we come to know our own souls—our strength and our 

weakness, the measur of our true nobil of charact and likewis the 

measur of our inher meanness, the temptat not mere from 

without but from within that assail us, our power to conquer these or 

our miser yield at times, with no one, perhaps, even guess at 

our degrad except the divin spark of[pg 61] conscienc that inexor 

turn a search ray on everi thought and on everi motiv for action." 

"so you would argu that man is god?" queri the rajput. 

"not so, but that the soul of man is of the essenc of god, the proof of 

which is thi veri power of search out our own heart and sit in 

judgment on our own failings: for the judgment seat belong to allah 

alone." 

"A subtl philosophi which I do not presum fulli to understand," 

interpos the merchant from bombay. 

dure the night' entertain he had shown himself to be a man of few 

words, yet an attent listener. He wa of middl age, of a mild 

digniti of mien, and of robust physique, as befit one accustom to 

long journey through region infest with robber or with beast of 

prey. 

"but in my practic experi of life," he proceeded, "I have come to 

realiz that, while I may know myself, no other man can I know. 

therefore, if it be right to be spare of condemn for another, it 

is also wise to be chari of undu commendation. the world too often 

acclaim a deed as nobl when the real motiv prompt it is utterli 

ignoble." 

"A true philosopher, despit your bale of merchandise," murmur the 

hakeem, with a smile nod of approv for the sentiment expressed. 

"well, I suppos that everi one who travel becom a philosopher, more 

or less," assent the[pg 62] trader. "chang of scene and of companionship 

stimul new ideas. now will I relat an actual experi which aptli 

illustr that, in our deal with those around us, we never realli 

penetr their minds. man know himself; he know no one else—friend 

or intimate, the child of hi heart or the veri wife of hi bosom." 

"it is more easi to discov a white crow," mutter the fakir, "than 

know what a woman ha in her heart." 

the merchant paid no heed to the interruption. He went on: 

"each of us is an inscrut mysteri to the other. each soul is veil 

to everi other soul, and is nake to itself alone." 

"O princ of philosoph in pedlar' disguise!" murmur the hakeem. 

"if our soul sat nake for the common gaze," comment the rajput, "if 

we could all read each other' hearts, then inde would life be an 

abomination—an utter misery, with the twin devil of shame and disgust 

seat at our elbow all the time." 

"most true," concur the trader. "for too much knowledg of another' 

inmost thought bring onli disillusion and regret, as my tale will 

show. the stori take us among humbl people, but human natur is the 

same everywhere—th same in the hut of the rayat as in the palac of 

the rajah. 

"onc in everi two year it is my custom to travel from bombay to 

benares, and invari I break[pg 63] the journey at a certain villag some 

six or seven day from my final destination. here dwell an old friend 

and cast brother, formerly, like myself, a merchant in the bombay 

bazaar where silken stuff are sold, but retir now to hi own countri 

with modest save suffici for the rest of hi days. baji lal, as he 

is named, is all the closer to me becaus hi wife devaka is a sister of 

my own wife, and the two are alway eager to have news of each other' 

welfare. 

"at the hous of thi friend I rest for a day or two, enjoy hi 

companionship, the reminisc of old times, and the gossip of the 

hour. so, on my long and fatigu journeyings, I have alway look 

forward to these meet with pleasur anticip and rememb 

them with tranquil satisfaction. 

"but on the occas of one of my period visit judg of my surpris 

when I wa receiv in silenc and with apathi that made no pretenc at 

disguise. devaka did not rise from her cushion on the floor to bid me 

welcome, and her husband, similarli irresponsive, return my customari 

cordial greet with noth better than a look of weari dejection. 

"disturbed, I made inquiry: 

"'baji lal, my friend, what is the matter? are you ailing?' 

"but he onli shook hi head, and turn away. 

"to devaka I then appealed. 

"'what is the mean of this?' I asked. 'sad and silenc where 

everyth use to be joy.' 

"she drew asid the sari that had conceal her face, and I wa shocked[pg 64] 

at it grief-stricken aspect. her trembl lip part to answer me, 

but her husband check her with a sharp word, such as I had never heard 

him use to her before. her eye fill with tears, and I could see the 

big drop roll down her cheek as she silent replac the sari over 

her head, and, bend low, rock herself to and fro. 

"for the moment I imagin that I had intrud on some scene of domest 

unhappi which would be dissip in an hour. so, hide my 

embarrassment, I turn to the door, intim that I would seek some 

other lodg for the night, and return on the morrow, when I hope my 

friend would be in fitter mood to receiv me. 

"at last baji lal spoke, rais hi face but still remain seat on 

the divan we were wont in former time to share. 

"'go thi way, chunda das,' he said. 'the sword of fate ha descend 

upon thi house. come not again to a place accursed.' 

"then did I realiz that the troubl wa serious. 

"'but, my friend and brother,' I protested, 'I cannot depart and leav 

you thus. let me at least understand what calam ha befallen you, so 

that I may help toward it repair.' 

"'noth can be done, so noth need be said,' he answered, in a tone 

and with a look of dignifi resign to the will of god. 'if you 

must have the stori of our misfortune, you have onli to ask the first of 

our neighbour you encounter.' 

"and he, too, cover hi face with hi garment, leav me no choice[pg 65] 

but to withdraw without further attempt at thi manifestli inopportun 

time to probe the mystery. 

"if I wa to be of servic to my friends, however, knowledg of what had 

befallen wa the first essential. So I took the road that would lead me 

to the great pipul tree in the villag square, close to the tank and to 

the temple, where all day long there wa come and going, and where 

therefor I would be most like to glean the inform I desired. By 

a happi chanc I found reclin under the pipul tree the villag 

barber, a loquaci fellow, who count it as part of hi busi to 

know the last detail about other people' affairs. 

"after greetings, and a few remark about the weather and the crop and 

the season' epidemics, I care broach the real purpos of my 

interview, for a prudent man will never divulg hi thought to anoth 

until he know that other' thoughts. 

"'i have just come from the hous of baji lal,' I said, in a seemingli 

casual way. 

"the barber' face instantli lost the smile it had worn. 

"'how did you find him?' he asked. 

"'strang altered,' I replied. 

"'and so doe everi one,' he concurred. 

"'whi so?' I ventured. 

"the barber look at me squarely, and then said: 

"'you and he were veri good friends, chunda das.' 

"'yes, and are still, so far as I am concerned,' I answered.[pg 66] 

"'i thought so. well, I am hi friend likewise. mani year I have known 

him and hi wife, devaka. both are good, kind people, alway will to 

help their neighbours, and readi to give their last bowl of rice to a 

vagrant beggar. perhap you can assist me to clear away the shadow that 

have fallen around them and obscur the sunshin of their home. let me 

tell you the story. A few month ago a stranger came to thi village. He 

wa on hi way to fathpur-sikri, to wit the glori of the court of 

the mighti akbar. but on the road he had fallen ill, and, arriv here, 

wa too sick to proceed. I am asham to say that none of us were 

will to take him in, for sick goe from one person to another. So 

we have to be careful, especi in my calling, where I come into such 

close contact with so many. 

"'there wa quit a littl crowd just here by the tank, discuss the 

situation, the sick man in their midst rest upon the ground, when 

baji lal and hi wife, who happen to be passing, came forward to see 

what the commot wa all about. they listen to the story, and then 

told the stranger he might come with them. He grate accepted, and, 

after whisper some instruct to a servant by whom he wa 

accompanied, he motion to baji lal to lead the way. the littl group 

move off, the servant in the rear, lead the horses, which includ a 

pack anim laden with the traveller' bedding, cook pots, and other 

belongings. 

