
jewish OR ancient christianity. 

It is our purpos to present the evid show 

that a system of astral worship, which we design as 

jewish christianity, wa in exist more than two 

centuri and a half befor the institut of it 

modern form. In verif of thi assert we must 

find the initi point of our inquiri in ancient history, 

which teach that in the divis of the grecian empir 

among hi generals, after the death of alexand the 

great, who die 332 year befor the begin of our era, 

the governorship of egypt and adjac provinc wa secur 

by ptolemi lagus, or soter, who, have subsequ 

suppress a revolt in judea, remov from that 

countri a larg bodi of it inhabit to peopl the new 

citi of alexandria, which had been laid out by order of 

and name after the great conqueror. 

the egyptian version of the gospel story, be 

more appropri to the nile valley than to the region 

from whenc they came, the greek colonist of alexandria 

adopt it, but prefer to pay homag to serapis, 

one of the ninth incarn of god sol, which they 

import from pontus, a greek provinc of asia minor, 

they erect to hi worship that celebr templ known 

as the grand serapium; and, transfer the cultur and 

refin of greec to the new city, it became, under the 

ptolemian dynasty, a great seat of learning; the art and 

scienc flourished, an immens librari wa collected, the 

variou form of astral worship were repres and 

school for the dissemin of the sever phase of grecian 

philosophi and orient gnostic were founded. 

such be the environ of the jewish resid 

of alexandria, they soon acquir the vernacular and 

adopt the religion of the greeks, who, have ever attach 

to their incarn saviour the titl signifi the 

christ, or the anointed, were known as christians. encourag 

by the liber polici of philadelphus, the second 

ptolemy, a bodi of their learn men, who had been educ 

in the greek schools, found a colleg for the educ 

of their own people, which institut wa ultim 

known as the univers of alexandria. under 

the auspic of philadelphu the professor of that institut 

render their hebrew sacr record into the greek 

language, which translat is known as the septuagint, or 

alexandrian version of the old testament. 

have acquir from the egyptian astrolog the 

art of healing, thaumaturgi and necromancy, and teach 

them in their school, the professor of the jewish 

colleg of alexandria assum the titl of essenes, or 

therapeutae, the egyptian and greek word signifi 

doctors, healer or wonder workers. possess of the 

sad and gloomi characterist of their race, they adopt 

the "contempl life," or ascetic of the orient 

gnosticism, from which they deriv the name of ascetics. 

found a church for the propag of their 

peculiar tenets, those who were set apart for the ministri 

assum the titl of ecclesiastics. inculc rigid temper 

and self-deni among their people, they were 

known as enchratites, nazarit or abstainers; and the 

more devout among them retir to monasteries, or to 

the solitud of cave and other seclud places, were also 

design as monks, cenobites, friars, eremites, hermit 

or solitaries. 

the time have arrived, accord to the cyclic 

teach of astral worship, for the manifest of the 

tenth and last incarn of god sol, or, in other words, 

to, give a new name to the mythic geniu of the sun, the 

professor of the jewish school of alexandria is resolv to 

inaugur their own form of worship. while retain the 

same titl under which they had paid homag to serapi 

and known as christians, essen or therapeutae, they 

substitut for their christ the name of the grecian bacchus, 

which, compos of the letter ιης, signifi yes, 

i or jes. In compos their version of the gospel 

story, having, like their race, no invent genius, they appropri 

that of serapi as it basi and laid it scene in 

the land of their ancestry, but inconsist retain the 

sign of the cross and the phraseolog connect there 

with, which, have special refer to the nile river and 

it annual inundation, had no applic whatev to the 

steril land of judea. select what they conceiv to 

be the best from other version of the gospel story, and assum 

the titl of eclectics, they design their system 

as the eclect philosophy. In proof of the eclect charact 

of the gospel and epistl of ancient christianity, we 

refer to the ascetic inculc therein, which, deriv 

from the orient gnosticism, we find perpetu in the 

scriptur of modern christianity; we also refer to the miracl 

of convert water into wine, taken from the gospel 

stori of bacchus, and to the statement that the saviour 

wa the son of a carpent and wa hung between two 

thieves, copi from the stori of christna, the eighth, 

avatar of the east indian astrolatry. thu we see that, 

although the scene of the gospel stori of ancient christian 

wa laid in the land of judea, it author have 

adopt a greek version of that stori as it basis, given a 

greek titl and name to their messiah, perpetu a 

greek name for their sect and quot exclus from the 

septuagint, or greek version of the old testament, the 

fact show conclus that it wa not jew of judea, but 

hellen jew of alexandria, who were the real author 

of the ancient christianity. 
