The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tales of Destiny, by Edmund Mitchell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or

re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included

with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Tales of Destiny

Author: Edmund Mitchell

Release Date: August 10, 2006 [EBook #19017]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES OF DESTINY ***

Produced by R. Cedron, Joseph R. Hauser and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

TALES OF

DESTINY

By

EDMUND MITCHELL

LONDON

CONSTABLE AND COMPANY LTD

1913

COPYRIGHT, 1912,

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

BY

EDMUND MITCHELL

CONTENTS

Introduction

   1

Chap. I.   

The Maid of Jhalnagor. Told by the Rajput Chief

   5

II.   

The Hollow Column. Told by the Tax-Collector

   19

III.   

What the Stars ordained. Told by the Astrologer

   35

IV.   

The Spirit Wail. Told by the Merchant

   60

V.   

The Blue Diamonds. Told by the Fakir

   101

VI.   

The Tiger of the Pathans. Told by the Afghan General

   128

VII.   

Her Mother Love. Told by the Physician

   146

VIII.   

The Sacred Pickaxe. Told by the Magistrate.

   170

TALES OF DESTINY

[Pg 1]

INTRODUCTION

Just without one of the massive bastioned gates of the city of

Fathpur-Sikri there stood in the year 1580 a caravanserai that afforded

accommodation for man and beast. Here would alight travellers drawn by

the calls of homage, by business, or by curiosity to the famous Town of

Victory, built, as the inscription over the gateway told, by "His

Majesty, King of Kings, Heaven of the Court, Shadow of God, Jalal-ad-din

Mohammed Akbar Padishah."

At the time of our story Akbar was at the zenith of his glory. He had

moved his court from Agra, the capital of his predecessors on the throne

of the Moguls, after having raised for himself, on the spot where the

birth of a son had been promised him by a hermit saint, this superb new

city of Fathpur-Sikri, seven miles in circumference, walled and guarded

by strong forts at its seven gateways. Emperor and nobles had vied with

each other in erecting palaces of stately design and exquisite finish of

adornment. A beautiful mosque commemorated the good deeds of the saint,

and provided a place of prayer for those of the Moslem faith. In the

palace of the Emperor was a magnificent audience hall, with marble

columns and stone-carved galleries, in the centre of which stood the

throne of gold sprinkled with rubies, emeralds, and diamonds, surrounded

by a silver rail[Pg 2]ing, and covered by a canopy of rich crimson brocade.

In this audience hall the great and good Akbar was wont to receive not

only his subjects, rich and poor, the former assembled to pay their

court, the latter to lay their grievances before the Imperial judge; but

he also extended welcome to strangers from afar. On the question of

religion his mind was at this period in a state of change, for he had

broken from the strict faith of the Moslem, had publicly announced that

there was good in all beliefs, had overthrown ceremonial rules, whether

of Islam or of Hinduism, and had proclaimed all things lawful except

excess. His thoughts thus drifting toward a new religion, a divine faith

that would bring into one fold the votaries of all religions, he was

glad at his court to give audience to learned doctors from distant lands

as well as from every part of India. All were welcome—Brahmins and

Buddhists, Moslem schoolmen, Hindu fanatics, pantheists, the worshippers

of fire, the Jews whose prophets are Abraham and Moses, even Christian

padres from far-off Europe. It was Akbar's delight to listen to their

expositions and discussions, and to the defence of their varied dogmas.

Thus did the fame of the king for tolerance, benevolence and wisdom

become noised abroad far and wide, so that visitors flocked in

ever-increasing numbers to the beautiful city. At our caravanserai

without the gate there would often, in the cool of an evening, be

gathered together on the shaded veranda a group of travellers

representing diverse races[Pg 3] and classes. Some of the town-dwellers, too,

would be there, resting and refreshing themselves after their walk to

the city walls, while from the near-by camp of the Rajputs, who formed a

portion of the royal bodyguard, there would oftentimes stroll over a few

men-at-arms.

On such occasions it would generally happen that the debates recently

listened to in the Imperial Hall of Assembly would be subjected to

comment. And from discussion of this kind the conversation would quite

frequently change to story-telling, dear to the hearts of all natives of

Hindustan, and by no means to be despised, for in a good story there may

be implanted the kernel of a sound philosophy.

On a summer night in the year named eight men were assembled on the

veranda of the caravanserai. The full moon had just risen above a tope

of tamarind trees, and its silvern radiance revealed every detail of the

scene. A Rajput chief occupied the place of central prominence, cushions

arranged for his convenience, on one of which rested his scimitar, the

emblem of his soldierly profession. Not far from him, in a

half-reclining posture, was a general of the Afghans, also of the

bodyguard of the Emperor. A hakeem, or physician, and an astrologer,

both in the Moslem style of dress, were seated close together, legs

crossed beneath them; while a little apart were two Hindus, as the caste

marks on their foreheads showed, a tax-collector from the country and a

kotwal, or city magistrate. Just above the steps leading on to the

veranda, surrounded by his[Pg 4] bales of merchandise, sat a merchant from

Bombay, a big and stalwart man, attired in spotless white raiment, on

his head a voluminous muslin turban. In striking contrast, squatting on

the ground below the steps, at his feet a wooden begging bowl, was a

fakir, or religious ascetic, a loin cloth his sole covering, his face

bedaubed with ashes, his lean chin resting on his upraised knees while

he listened to the dialogue and watched each speaker's face with eyes of

keen alertness.

There had been some desultory conversation, which finally resulted in

the Rajput chief being begged to relate in detail an experience at which

he had previously hinted. The first story led to another story, and the

third to yet another, and so on, until each member of the company had

contributed to the general entertainment. And these are the tales that

were told by the travellers on the veranda of the caravanserai outside

the walls of Fathpur-Sikri that moonlight night in the days of the

mighty Akbar:

[Pg 5]
