
I. THE MAID OF JHALNAGOR

TOLD BY THE RAJPUT CHIEF

Well, since you would have it so, listen to the story of Rukpur Singh,

hereditary chief of Jhalnagor, mansabdar of five hundred men, captain of

the bodyguard of Akbar the Great, King of Kings, Lord of the Earth.

"This day in the Hall of Assembly, in the presence of the great Padishah

himself, we have listened to the arguments of men of diverse faiths. It

is well. As Akbar, the Most High, himself has said, all religions are

good; each man has the god or gods of his fathers; let there be no

obstacle placed against worshipping the divine power in any manner that

seemeth fit. That is both wisdom and justice. That is why I, a Hindu, a

Rajput, one of the twice born, can serve my lord, the Moslem Emperor

Akbar, with loyalty of heart and of sword that no man may question."

At these words the captain of the bodyguard touched the jewelled hilt of

his scimitar lying on the cushion by his side. He glanced around, as if

to see whether anyone present dared to question the fidelity he had

professed. But there was neither movement nor remark among his

listeners, and with a disdainful little smile of self-complacency he

resumed.

"During to-day's discussion, in the spirit of tolerance that Akbar[Pg 6]

teaches to all of us, we Rajputs have had to harken to severe

upbraiding. We are accused of inhumanity because in our homes a female

child may be done away with at birth, lawfully and without dishonour. Be

it so; the fact itself I shall not dispute. Nor shall I defend the

practice except to point out that a woman more or less in the world does

not matter, that the babe suffers no pain and knows no ill, that had she

lived it might have been to a life of widowhood—if courage were wanting

to choose the suttee—and therefore to long days of shame and sorrow.

"Furthermore, has it to be remembered that the marriage of one of our

daughters costs much money. According to the rules of our caste and the

customs of our race, the ceremony must be worthy of the parents and of

the position they occupy; all of the district must be feasted, and let

the expense be grievous as it may it must be borne. To some who are rich

the money thus spent is of no account. But to others who are poor yet

proud—and all Rajputs are proud—a wedding that is seemly for a

daughter of the house may mean poverty and ruin for the father and

brothers during twenty years to follow. In certain circumstances this

misfortune cannot be thought of. The honour of the race, the very safety

of a whole clan, may depend on rigid economy as a provision against

danger. So it may be both right and wise for an infant daughter to be

put painlessly to her death. Such was the doctrine my father taught me,

and his name is blessed."

The speaker dropped his eyes, folded his hands across his breast, and[Pg 7]

for a full minute remained in silent meditation. When at last he looked

up again, there had come over the usually stern and haughty face a

wonderful glow of kindliness, and his voice took a softer modulation.

"However, know this, my friends, that in my zenana at Jhalnagor there

are little girls—three, and more will be welcome should the divine

Krishna send them. Three little daughters have I, all born of my wife

Lakmibai, the jewel of Jhalnagor. With sons also am I blessed—two brave

little boys, of whom I may well be proud. But I love them not more than

my daughters, nor would I change any one daughter for a son. This do I

say out of the truth of my heart, and in no wise because fortune has

been kind to me and mine, and has given us such prosperity that there is

a fit dower for each daughter without my treasury knowing the loss.

"So when the learned mullah from Stamboul denounced infanticide, I was

one with him in sympathy, for my inclination is to cherish with love and

care every female child the gods send.

"Now would you hear how a Rajput came to this manner of thinking? My

story is that of a little maid. Listen. It happened just five years gone

by.
