
"Under the firm and just rule of our master Akbar there has been peace

for many years in our part of the world. Except when, as now, I come to

Fathpur-Sikri for my yearly month of service in providing[Pg 8] part of the

Emperor's bodyguard, I live quietly among my own people. The soil around

our villages is tilled, our shopkeepers buy and sell, we worship in our

temples, and we are happy, for no enemy comes to disturb the peace of

our beautiful little valley of Jhalnagor embosomed among the hills.

"One day it befell that I had gone on a hunting trip with a party of my

friends. In the early dawn we had descended from the fort on the hill

top which is my home and the rallying-place for my clan—a small clan,

numbering but a few thousands, but nobly born as any tribe in Rajputana,

brave and of honour unsullied, men who have never yet given a daughter

to the harem of a Moslem."

The features of the Rajput flashed with pride. His brother-at-arms, the

Afghan, met the defiant look, and said, with a quiet smile:

"There are many Rajput women wed to Moslem lords."

"Yes, but not Rajput women of Jhalnagor. They would have died

first—many of them did so prefer to die when the Moslem host first

swept over our land. In the hour of defeat, against overwhelming

numbers, within the citadel of Jhalnagor the women of my race, refusing

to accept dishonour, bared their bosoms to the spears of those they

loved, husbands, brothers, and fathers, and so they died."

With hands outstretched and eyes upraised in rapt pride and reverence

for the deeds of his ancestors, again the Rajput fell into momentary

silence.

"The story of the little maid." It was the voice of[Pg 9] the physician

recalling the narrator to his task.

"Yes, the story of the little maid," resumed the Rajput. "As I have

said, we had gone to the hunt one morning—a party of twelve, riding on

three elephants. For we were in pursuit of a tiger, a destroyer of men,

which the villagers had marked down in a patch of jungle by the river

side. Of the hunt I need say nothing; we killed the tiger, and, with the

huge, striped body slung across the neck of my elephant, we were

returning home. It was toward evening, for we had rested in the forest

during the heat of the day.

"We were just entering the narrow gorge that leads to the fort on the

hill, when, right on the pathway before me, I saw the prone figure of a

child. Almost my elephant's feet were upon it before the sage brute

himself stopped and trumpeted a warning to us in the howdah, for, the

tiger's body occupying the place where the mahout was wont to ride, the

latter was walking, and he, too, had not noticed the tiny bundle of

bright yellow clothing lying on the road.

"Glancing down, I beheld a little girl with her forehead touching the

dust. At my calling she arose, and spread her hands across her breast.

"'Listen, O chief, to my warning, listen, O my lord,' she called out in

a shrill tone of supplication. Already had I observed that her face was

one of great beauty, although that of just a little child, but six or

seven years old.

"The other two elephants had halted behind mine,[Pg 10] and some of the party

had descended. But at the approach of these men the maid shrank away,

and, keeping her eyes fixed in my direction, she continued to address

me:

"'Listen to my words, O chief, and be saved from death.'

"In another moment I had sprung to the ground. As I advanced the child

ran toward me, absolutely fearless. Taking her in my arms, I sat me down

by the roadside. Close to my breast she nestled, and, with sobs and

tears now, told me her story.

"A robber band was in the nullah—less than a mile further along—full a

hundred strong, fierce men and murderers. For they had already slain the

father and the mother of the little maid, humble woodcutters. I had

known them well; they were poor, but of mine own people, and instantly

in my heart I vowed that I would be avenged.

"The little girl, Brenda her name, as she told me in her childish way of

confidence, had hidden in the brushwood all day, trembling and afraid.

But at last she divined that the men had come to slay me, for as the

afternoon advanced they disposed themselves among bushes and behind

trees, also in the hut of her dead parents. And even now were the

assassins in waiting for me, for the girl had seen our party ride forth

in the early morning, and she knew that I had not yet returned.

"When, with wonderful intuition for a child so tender in years, the

thought came to her mind that I was to be assailed, she stole down the

gorge, moving[Pg 11] cautiously through the undergrowth, and awaited at the

spot we found her to give me warning.

"The child had described to me the leader of the gang, and I had

immediately recognized Gunesh Tanti, accursed son of a pig, a robber

from across the desert of Sindh, who had more than once ravaged peaceful

villages of Rajputana. He would know that I had treasure in the fort,

and of an instant I could read his wily plan. Moving through the

country, he had doubtless heard a day or two before of this projected

expedition of mine for the killing of the man-eating tiger. So he had

designed to slay me on my homeward way, and, the deed accomplished,

would rely on gaining access to the citadel by loading his ruffians into

the howdahs of my elephants. Once over the drawbridge and within the

portcullised gateway, his murderous scheme might have been easy, for my

score of men-at-arms on duty would have been taken by surprise and so at

a disadvantage.

"But knowing now the danger, I laughed in my beard, for Gunesh Tanti,

this human tiger and slayer of innocent men, just as had been the tiger

now slung across the back of my elephant, was fairly delivered into my

hand. He who had come to trap me was himself entrapped. And thanks all

to this little maid of the glen! At the thought, I patted her soft cheek

with my hand, and in response she smiled up into my eyes with wondrous

trust and winsomeness.

"Our party, as I have said, numbered twelve, this[Pg 12] without counting the

three mahouts, lithe and active men, and brave as any one of us. The

neck of the gorge was narrow, and for a hundred yards on either side

there were steep precipices down which rocks could be tumbled on fleeing

men. By a goat path over the hillside the fort could be reached by one

sure of foot and knowing the way. Such a lad was of our party, a cousin

of my own, who could race with the deer.

"In a few minutes he had girded his loins and was on his mission,

disappearing over the crest of the almost perpendicular crag up which he

had clambered. He was to warn the garrison, turn out every man and boy

fully armed, and bid them to sweep down on the ambushed robbers. The

mothers and the maidens would hold the fort. No other garrison, when

once on the alert, was needed for such an enemy."

Again the Rajput smiled proudly, but the silence of intent listening was

unbroken, and he continued:

"The firing of a matchlock was to be our signal that my men held the

upper end of the pass, and were descending on our enemies. Meanwhile, my

immediate followers prepared the rocks above the narrow neck of the

defile and got them ready for instant rolling down. To this last task

four of our number were deputed. The others abided with me. Our plan was

to block the narrow passage by ranging the elephants abreast of each

other, and, so that the animals themselves might not be stampeded by the

unexpected din of battle, we chained their forelegs,[Pg 13] first each animal

separately, and then the middle one to his comrades on either side.

"At last all our preparations were completed, the huge beasts in line,

my companions mounted into the howdahs. I alone remained on foot, I and

the little woodcutters' daughter, standing by my side, holding

trustfully to my hand, and no longer weeping.

"'You must come with me, my almond-sweet,' I said, as I raised the child

in my arms, and passed her up into the howdah of my own elephant, the

central one. Then I myself clambered aloft. The tiger's corpse had been

flung to the ground, and our three mahouts sat in their proper places,

iron goads in hand, ready to perform their task of keeping the elephants

under control.

"At last, after a tense period of waiting, the welcome report of the

matchlock reverberated from among the hills.

"The fight does not really concern my story," said the Rajput, grimly.

"It is sufficient to say that Gunesh Tanti and all his band perished to

a man—some slain by the swords of my horsemen charging down the pass,

some crushed by the falling rocks, some of the last survivors, who flung

themselves desperately against our living barrier, dying on our

handpikes or being trampled under foot by the elephants. Not one of more

than five score men lived to carry back the tale of death to the robber

haunts whence they had come.

"On our side some lives were lost, seven in all; but this is the penalty

that brave men have to pay in the[Pg 14] doing of righteous deeds. Their

memory is honoured.

"As for the little maid, I had nested her in the best-protected corner

of the howdah, and in the thick of the fray, when a shower of arrows had

fallen upon us, I had covered her tiny form with my shield. But during

the final hand-to-hand fight, when all was din and turmoil with the

shouting of the men and the angry trumpeting of the elephants, I had not

paid her any special heed. From her lips came no sound to attract my

attention—no cry of fear, nor wailing murmur.

"But at the end I looked for the little child, lifting the shield that

had partly guarded her. She met my gaze with a smile. But straightway I

noticed that an arrow, descending almost perpendicularly, had pierced

her soft little arm, and transfixed it to her side. Yet had she not

cried out, nor even now, when I was tending her, did she whimper.

"I drew forth the arrow, breaking it in twain, so as to let the shaft

pass through the arm. Although blood flowed freely, I saw at a glance

that the wound in the body was a mere puncture, and also that on the

limb only a piercing of the flesh. Therefore was her hurt not serious,

although of a certainty painful, and terrifying too for a child so

young. But even now not one word of complaining did she utter. She kept

her sweet smile on me. Brave little maid!

"Tearing a length of cambric from my turban, I had bound both arm and

tender breast, and readjusted the sari of yellow-dyed cotton that formed

her[Pg 15] simple garment. And now she reposed, happy and contented, in my

arms. I remained in the howdah, while my companions cut off the heads of

the robbers, and loaded these trophies of victory on one of the other

elephants, so that a triumphal pile might be made in the courtyard of

the citadel. Then, with the tiger replaced on the neck of my own

elephant, we moved for home, a group of fifty horsemen now forming our

escort. The headless bodies of our enemies were left as fitting spoil

for the jackals and the vultures, the latter of whom, scenting the

carrion, were already beginning to drop down, it might seem, from the

blue vault of heaven.

"By the time we gained the fortress the dusk was gathering. Across the

drawbridge, promptly lowered at the sound of our joyful shouting, I saw

my wife standing beside the big carronade that commanded the roadway up

the hill. The smoking match was in her hand, but at sight of me she

stooped and smothered in the dust the spark that would have dealt out

death to the robbers had they ever gained a near approach. Descending

from my elephant, I greeted her and thanked her for the courage of

herself and all the other women, our loved ones.

"Then my friends above handed down gently into my arms the form of the

little maid. At sight of my wife's sweet and kindly countenance the eyes

of the child were lighted with joyousness. But with a quick motion wife

drew her veil completely over her features. Ere this was done, however,

I had caught a strange look in her face—a look of mingled sur[Pg 16]prise and

terror. At the same moment her old attendant and confidant, Rakaya,

flung herself at my feet, and began to babble for my forgiveness.

"'What means this?' I asked, glancing in profound amazement from the

woman's prostrate form up into my wife's eyes. There again I read the

strangely troubled expression. Puzzled, yet restraining my curiosity

before the others gathered around, I placed the wounded child in my

wife's arms, and, with a gesture to signify that she and Rakaya were to

follow, I led the way to the women's quarters.

"Once within the zenana, I told my story briefly: how the little damsel

of the glen had saved me from certain death, and then, through danger

and through pain, had been brave as the noblest-born Rajput maid could

be. After this recital, I commended the child to my wife's affections,

bidding her love the orphan as she would a daughter.

"Then was the lovely countenance of my wife, the jewel of Jhalnagor,

suffused with great joy. Hugging the child to her motherly bosom, she

exclaimed:
