
V. THE BLUE DIAMONDS

TOLD BY THE FAKIR

"You have certainly improved on the moral of my story," said the

astrologer, addressing the merchant, silent now after the telling of his

tale. "If it is for God alone to pronounce the censure on mankind, then

assuredly it is for God also to award the praise. As the story of Sheikh

Ahmed and his jewelled harp well shows, deeds may be done openly by the

hand, but the motives for their doing lie secretly in the heart. And the

heart is the innermost temple where none but the high priest, the

individual soul, holds communion with his God, the supreme Deity of the

universe."

"So that a man's life is an unsolvable riddle to all but himself,"

concurred the hakeem.

"And not to be solved even by himself," remarked the Afghan with a

laugh, half of bitterness, half of bravado. "We may know in our secret

heart the motive that prompts to a deed, but we cannot tell the

consequences of that deed as affecting even ourselves who wrought it.

Take this very story of the Sheikh; when recovering his precious harp he

was but digging his own grave. So with all of us; we imagine we are

marching bravely to accomplish some preconceived plan, when all the time

we are merely[Pg 102] groping with blinded eyes along the path of destiny,

avoiding the mud holes, it may be, but failing to see the tiger,

crouched for his spring, a few paces further along."

"Shabash!" cried the fakir, in a shrill tone of approval that drew all

eyes to the lean and naked and ash-besprinkled figure seated at the foot

of the veranda steps. "Shabash! shabash!" he cried, again and yet again.

"And your story?" asked the Rajput, with a nod of inquiry and

encouragement.

"Is one that shows how a man may keep on running all his life yet never

reach the goal he has in sight," replied the ascetic. And with the

sturdy independence of his calling he beat a peremptory tattoo with

finger-tips on wooden begging-bowl to command attention to his tale.

"Behold in me a man who possesses nothing in this world excepting a

begging-bowl and a loin cloth. Yet was I at one time the owner of lands

and of cattle, of a home bountifully stored for comfort and for

sustenance, of wives who wore rich jewels, necklets of pearls, armlets

of gold, and bangles of silver, with maid-servants to minister to their

needs and children to play around them. All gone! by my own doing, or

undoing, call it which you will.

"And know, too, that in those days I also was a soldier"—this with a

defiant glance first at the Rajput chief and then at the Afghan general.

"At my side rattled the steel scabbard, and in my belt[Pg 103] was the sharp

poinard, swift messenger of death when it came to hand-to-hand fighting,

and the horse I rode had its rich trappings of gold and silver. It may

all seem strange, to hear me tell those things of the long ago and to

look upon me now"—and the speaker stretched forth his skinny, twisted

fingers and attenuated arms, and for a moment ruefully contemplated

them.

"But I speak the truth," he went on, "for to-night, prompted by the

stories to which I have listened and the thoughts they have engendered,

will I unseal my lips after fifty long years of wandering alone, giving

no man my confidence, seeking no man's confidence, intent only on the

attainment of the one desire deeply seated in my heart, and which, in my

eager striving to achieve, seems to be ever more remote from

accomplishment. To-night will I reveal the story of my life, so that,

perchance, the lesson it teaches will show still more clearly the

impotence of man to constitute himself the avenger of wrongs. For if

judgment belongs to Allah, so does vengeance. And the choice of

instrument, of time and place, of the very manner of the deed—all this

belongs to God alone, as this night, listening to the stories that have

gone before, have I for the first time come fully to comprehend."

The fakir paused to gaze around his audience. The look of interest and

expectancy on each face showed the impression his impulsive flow of

language had made. No interrupting word was spoken, but every eye

remained fastened on the lean, keen face peering[Pg 104] over long slender

shanks and hand-clasped knees. The narrator continued:

"In those days I had twenty retainers at my call, and these men I

commanded when I rode forth to service with a certain Nawab, from whom I

held my lands for the feudal service I thus performed. It was my fate to

take part in many a fight and in many a foray, and to send many a man to

his doom. But God had ordained it so; the fault was not mine.

"Well, it befell that a certain city was given over to sack and carnage,

for the word had gone forth that the only way to break the power of its

Hindu occupants was to demolish their temples, destroy their idols, and

thereby show the impotence of their false gods to protect them."

The Rajput drew himself up proudly, and a flush of resentment stole over

his face. But the Moslem fanatic, unconscious now of anything but his

reminiscences of the past, went on unheeding and unabashed:

"It was toward the hour of sunset when a body of our soldiery broke into

a temple devoted to the worship of Siva the Destroyer. We had battered

in the heavy wooden doors that protected the inner court, and within the

threshold a score or more of priests fell to our swords, and a dozen

dancing girls as well, attendants on the idols—self-slain these women,

for when they saw that there was no quarter for the men they rushed on

us like female panthers and flung themselves on our dripping blades."

The Hindu listeners were visibly disturbed and af[Pg 105]fected by this cold

recital of bloody deeds. The hands of the Rajput clenched and unclenched

themselves nervously, and the merchant gave a deep, guttural groan of

horror as he flung the end of his robe over his face as if to shut out a

vision of sacrilege and shame.

"It was written in the beginning, nay before creation it was written,"

murmured the Moslem astrologer, quoting, in courteous sympathy, the

familiar formula of his faith. "And as your priests themselves say," he

added, addressing himself more particularly to the Rajput, "'The destiny

of each man is irrevocably inscribed on his forehead by the hand of

Brahma himself.'"

The Rajput bowed his head in acquiescent silence, and as the fakir

proceeded with his story the trader also regained his composure and

withdrew the covering from his face.

"When the shadows of night fell, the temple made a bonfire that

illuminated the scenes of pillage going on all around. The big idols of

loathly aspect had been thrown down, broken to pieces, and despoiled of

their jewels and the heavy plates of gold that encumbered them. Our

soldiers had swarmed out of the building, past a tank to the houses of

some priests beyond. Not one single custodian of the temple survived,

and I stood alone in the outer courtyard, watching in idle fashion the

tongues of flame licking the beams and rafters and paint-bedaubed walls

of the wrecked edifice.

"Then did my eyes chance to light on a small idol[Pg 106] in the passage-way

between the two courtyards of the temple, set in a deep niche, on which

account it had escaped the notice of the despoilers. It was the familiar

elephant-headed idol of the Hindus, Ganapati, as I knew they called him,

their god of wisdom and the remover of obstacles according to their

creed.

"Even as I looked, methought that the eyes of the idol twinkled

knowingly and entreatingly at me. After a moment I saw that this fancy

was but due to the play of the flames on jewels, comprehending which, I

said to myself that the little fat man might perchance be of some

considerable value. So I plucked him from his resting-place, not without

difficulty, for the base of the idol was fastened by iron clamps to the

altar, and only just in time before a surge of fire and smoke swept

through the vestibule. Then, without more ado, I carried forth this

Ganapati, wrapped in a cotton cloth I had gathered from one of the slain

priests, and tied it to the saddle-bow of my horse, which had been

standing tethered under a tree close at hand.

"Thus did it come about that, a full month later, I was seated in my

home, in a secret inner chamber that served me as a treasury, and to

which the only access was through the women's quarters. And before me on

a stool rested the cross-legged figure of the four-armed and

elephant-headed god, fat, complacent, smiling, to all appearance

recovered from the fatigues of a journey of near a hundred leagues and

thoroughly contented amidst his new surround[Pg 107]ings. The idol was of

bronze, and the eyes, which at times gave it such life-like semblance,

were clusters of rubies set around with white sapphires.

"And it followed that, day after day, after the siesta hour, I found

myself in the company of this accursed idol—for accursed it came to be,

bringing me misfortunes and ruin, as my story will unfold. No doubt it

was by my own doing that the wrath of Allah was brought down upon my

head. For had not I, a follower of the Prophet, and therefore a despiser

of graven images in every shape or form, come to treat this monstrous

and misshapen creature, half man, half beast, as a sort of familiar,

even greeting him on my entry with the words with which I might have

saluted a living unbeliever, 'May your days be peaceful,' spoken in

goodnatured jest, of course, and without one thought at the time of the

sacrilege of which I was guilty? Yea, I would pat the fat little fellow

on the head, and, when the humour seized me, would show him my hoard of

gold mohurs, even jingle before him a bag of silver rupees, or ask his

opinion on the colour and quality of some gem, speaking words of

foolishness the while, like a child playing with a toy. And when I lay

back on my cushions, sometimes I fancied that the little jewelled eyes

in the elephant head of bronze twinkled at me in merry and friendly

understanding. All which things I have since remembered with bitter

shame.
