

VI. THE TIGER OF THE PATHANS

TOLD BY THE AFGHAN GENERAL

"In my case the philosophy of life is of the simplest," remarked the

Afghan general. "I neither crave the wealth of the prince, nor do I

inflict upon myself the mortifications of the ascetic. For the one rich

robes and the sceptre, for the other a loin cloth and a begging-bowl;

but for me the good sword that commands respect from my enemies,

confidence from my friends, and my due share of the good things of

existence. In this frame of mind I find the full measure of joy in each

day that passes."

He smiled the smile of the man contented with the world and with

himself, but there was the light of proud determination in his eyes that

belied the mere sybarite.

"Then for you the greatest good consists in the happiness you can snatch

from the passing hour," suggested the magistrate.

"That is so," concurred the soldier, "if to the word happiness you give

the right interpretation. To me the performance of one's present duty is

the only real thing that brings contentment. And duty need not always be

stern and forbidding; to laugh and play and be merry may, at the proper

time and in the proper circumstances, be a duty both to ourselves[Pg 129] and

to others. When one lives philosophically for the present, he takes men

in all their moods and life in all its phases. The past is counted as

dead and to be forgotten, except for the experience gained to guide the

doing of the things that lie now to one's hand. The future is unseen,

but is none the less determined by our deeds, words, and thoughts of the

passing moment, each one of which, be it remembered, whether deed or

rash word, or unspoken thought, has consequences that are eternal."

"So for the man whose mind is thus attuned," again interposed the

magistrate, "the present becomes all supreme, shaped by the past,

shaping the future."

"Which means that destiny never degenerates into mere blind and helpless

fatalism," responded the Afghan. "To do the right now suffices to give

absolute trust in God for the hereafter. That is the key of destiny, and

each man holds it in his own keeping."

"A simple religion," smiled the Rajput.

"And therefore the best. It is the religion of Islam freed from all the

controversies of rival sects and over-learned mullahs. It is the

religion of my fathers and the religion of my youth, and in it I abide.

Let me tell you a story of the rough school in which I received my early

training and where such thoughts as these first began to sink deep into

my mind.

"Have you ever heard of Shir Jumla Khan? No? Well, that is doubtless

because he has been dead for a full score of years, and because he held

his sway in a land remote from these plains of Hindustan, up[Pg 130] in the

rugged mountains, where brave tribesmen guard the valleys which their

ancestors tilled, and yield allegiance to no one but their own

hereditary chieftains. Such was my country and my people, for I am proud

that in my veins runs the blood of the man who for a hundred miles

around my boyhood home was known as The Tiger of the Pathans. Behold in

me a grandson of Shir Jumla Khan."

The narrator folded his arms across his breast, in an attitude of quiet

dignity. After just a moment's pause he continued:

"We were all born fighters, the members of my clan, for during hundreds

of years many a swarming host had swept past the gateways of our

territory, Persians, Arabs, Afghans, Moguls, Turkmans, hordes of

fighting men of every race and tongue, sometimes marching south bent on

conquest, at other times returning to their homes laden with rich

spoils, and yet at other times defeated and broken, with enemies

pressing at their heels. And it was the patrimonial right of our tribe

to take toll from all alike, from victors and vanquished, from pursuers

and pursued.

"Sometimes an army would pass through our mountains under safe conduct

from all the tribes, and the price paid in money, horses, camels, and

cattle, cloths and other goods, would be divided among the several

clans. But in this practice there had grown to be more danger for

ourselves than from forays or assaults on passing enemies, because over

the division of the spoils there would be[Pg 131] quarrelling, followed by

fighting, among the tribes. Thus had originated many a blood feud

enduring through many generations.

"In the early days of Shir Jumla Khan it had come about that several

rich caravans had fallen exclusively into his hands. With the money thus

provided by the bountifulness of Allah, he had been enabled to build for

himself a citadel that for vastness and security surpassed those of all

his rivals among the tribal chiefs. Within its wide walls were wells and

water tanks, gardens for the growing of fruits and vegetables,

warehouses for goods, granaries stored with barley, wheat, and dal,

stables for a hundred horses, sheds for the housing of cattle, sheep,

and camels, and dwelling places for a goodly multitude of armed men,

their wives and their children. And all of these things endure until

this day, for the fortress town amid the mountains built by my

grandsire, The Tiger of the Pathans, has ever remained unconquered and

unconquerable.

"But as Shir Jumla Khan grew rich in possessions and in power—for

scores of fighting men from afar were attracted to his service—at the

same time did his position among the tribesmen become one of increasing

isolation. All feared him and envied him, and fear and envy have ever

been breeders of hate. Yet was he a just and a benevolent man, honoured

and beloved by every one within his domain, where his slightest word was

gladly accepted law, not because of the might he wielded but because of

his fairness to all men.

"I was yet a young man when a widely spread plot among the rival[Pg 132]

tribesmen to destroy Shir Jumla Khan's power had come to a head, and had

resulted in a determined and prolonged attack upon his citadel. Numbers

had told, our outlying fields had been devastated, our flocks and herds

driven away, and crowded within the walls of the fortress were refugees

from all the surrounding countryside. We had been cooped up through the

summer, we had lost our annual crops, and without the usual

replenishment granaries and warehouses were beginning to wear an empty

look, with but sorry promise for the winter. But, calm and undismayed,

his proud look and serene smile ever the same, Shir Jumla Khan continued

to feed the hungry host within his gates and now absolutely dependent

upon his protection.

"The coming of winter would mean for us some relief, for the first snows

would scatter the beleaguering hosts, sending them back to their own

valleys, and giving us the chance, in the intervals of the season's

storms, to make a few forays on our own account on neighbouring

communities, which, taken one at a time, would be pretty well at our

mercy. But if we reasoned in this wise so did our enemies; for it was

now toward the close of the month of August and redoubled efforts were

being put forth to accomplish the breaching of our walls, so that The

Tiger of the Pathans might be slain before there was the chance of his

fangs and claws again becoming dangerous.

"The tribesmen, no doubt by capture and enforced service, had secured[Pg 133]

the help of some engineers versed in the methods of sieges and assaults

on fortified places as practised in Hindustan. At that time I had never

before seen a sabat, but now from our fortifications I beheld the

gradual extension, day by day, of a broad covered way, with bull-hide

roof stretched across the trench being dug, and effectually protecting

the labourers below from our guns and muskets and catapults. We had made

several sallies with a view to try and stop this work, but these had

only resulted in losses on our side out of all proportion to the

harassment and delay inflicted on the besiegers. So we could but

impotently watch the subtle and inexorable approach of the skilled men

who would eventually reach our walls, drive mines beneath them, and blow

us to perdition.

"Our one chance lay in the question of time. If the winter began early

we should be saved, but if the snows held off till late in the year it

looked as if our doom must be sealed.

"But quite unexpectedly a ray of hope came from another quarter.

Dissension had broken out in the ranks of our foes!

"The first word was brought to us by a deserter from the besiegers'

camp, who one night had crept up to the gateway of the fort and whined

for admittance, declaring that he had important news to tell and hoped

for a reward.

"I was with my grandfather when, awakened from his sleep, he listened to

the man's story. It told of a[Pg 134] fierce quarrel the preceding evening

between two of the leading chieftains. They had been conversing alone in

one of their tents, when suddenly those without had heard angry words.

Then it would seem that the owner of the tent had sent for one of the

slippers which his visitor had left at the doorway, and with this had

administered five or six strokes over the head, driving his guest forth

insulted and disgraced. Every one in the camp was on the alert for

fighting in the morning.

"With a grim smile Shir Jumla Khan listened to this narrative. But he

made no comment; he merely issued instructions for the informer to be

fed and for the present closely guarded.

"But if there had been any lingering doubt as to the truth of the story,

confirmation came ere the breaking of the dawn. For we were once again

disturbed from our rest, this time by the noise of a great tumult in the

camp of the besiegers, loud shouting followed by the discharge of

muskets, the sounds gradually dying away in the distance as if a fight

and a pursuit had taken place. When day broke such indeed proved to be

the case; we could descry in the camp a row of tents thrown down and

dismantled, also dead or wounded men being brought in from the country

beyond, while away on a distant ridge was a considerable body of

tribesmen retreating toward their homes.

"At this sight joyful huzzas resounded through the fortress, and we did

indeed all feel that Allah, by disrupting the forces of the enemy, was

fighting on[Pg 135] our side. And as I spread my prayer carpet, and prostrated

myself toward Mecca, the pious thought in my heart was one that had many

times been inculcated by my noble grandsire himself: 'Let the wise man

reflect that he can in no way succeed without the help of God Most

High.'

"During the day we took counsel as to the advisability of an attack on

the somewhat attenuated host without the walls. But from our posts of

observation we could see that every one in the camp was under arms and

on the alert, no doubt foreseeing that such an attempt was likely on our

part. So we concluded to let events develop, and contented ourselves

with watching the progress of the sabat. Here there was no relaxation of

endeavour, for the protected trench made a considerable advance ere the

sun once again sank over the western hills.

"Darkness had not long fallen when another bleating voice of a suppliant

for admittance was heard by the sentry at the gateway. Introduced to our

presence, the newcomer, a goatherd by his appearance, and with the signs

of travel on his garments, removed his head dress, untwisted the long

locks of hair bound according to custom around his head, and, producing

a small packet from the midst of his tresses, flung it on the floor. I

picked up the missive, and handed it to our chieftain.

"Shir Jumla Khan untied the packet, and produced therefrom a heavy gold

signet ring. While he was examining this, the seeming goatherd raised

his voice:
