The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astral Worship, by J. H. Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or

re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included

with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Astral Worship

Author: J. H. Hill

Posting Date: April 6, 2014 [EBook #8855]

Release Date: September, 2005

First Posted: August 14, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRAL WORSHIP ***

Produced by David Deley

Astral Worship

BY

J. H. Hill, M. D.

“Now, what I want is—facts.”—Boz.

CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION

5

THE GEOCENTRIC SYSTEM OF NATURE

13

      The Earth

13

      The Firmament

13

      The Planets

14

      The Constellations

15

      The Zodiac

15

THE SACRED NUMBERS 7 AND 12

17

THE TWELVE THOUSAND YEAR CYCLE

18

THE ANCIENT TRIAD

19

GOD SOL

22

THE ANCIENT COSMOGONY

30

FALL AND REDEMPTION OF MAN

31

INCARNATIONS OF GOD SOL

33

FABLE OF THE TWELVE LABORS

36

ANNIVERSARIES OF SOLAR WORSHIP

40

      The Nativity

40

      Epiphany or Twelfth Day

41

      Lent or Lenten Season

42

      Passion Week

44

      Passion Plays

45

      Resurrection and Easter Festival

46

      Annunciation

48

      Ascension

49

      Assumption

49

      The Lord's Supper

50

      Transubstantiation

50

      Autumnal Crucifixion

51

      Michaelmas

56

PERSONIFICATIONS OF THE DIVISIONS OF TIME

57

      The Hours

57

      The Days

57

      The Months

58

      The Seasons

60

      Half Year of Increasing Days

63

      Half Year of Decreasing Days

63

      Last Quarter of the Year

64

ZODIACAL SYMBOLS OF SOLAR WORSHIP

64

      The Sphinx

65

      The Dragon

66

      The Bull

67

      The Ram

68

      The Lamb

68

      The Fish

71

SIGNS OF THE CROSS

72

FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS

74

      The Oriental System

75

      The Occidental System

75

      The Second or General Judgment

77

JEWISH, OR ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY

79

THE PROPHECIES

83

ROMAN OR MODERN CHRISTIANITY

88

FREEMASONRY AND DRUIDISM

109

THE SABBATH

117

PIOUS FRAUDS

121

CONCLUSION

125

INTRODUCTION.

In an article, entitled "Then and Now," published in

the December number, 1890, of "The Arena," its author,

a distinguished Unitarian D.D. of Boston, Mass., says.

"Astronomy has shattered the fallacies of Astrology;"

and people have found out that the stars are minding their

own business instead of meddling with theirs." Now,

while it is true that modern Astronomy has superseded

the ancient system, and people have ceased to believe that

the stars are intervening in mundane affairs, nothing

could be further from the truth than the assertion that

"Astronomy has shattered the fallacies of Astrology;

and those of our readers who will accord to this work an

unprejudiced perusal can hardly fail to be convinced that

a large majority of the people of Christendom are dominated

as much by these fallacies as were our Pagan ancestry—the

only difference being a change of name. The

dogmatic element of religion, which was anciently designated

as Astrology, is now known as Theology.

All the evidences bearing upon the subject indicate

that the founders of the primary form of religion were a

sect of philosophers, known as Magi, or wise men, of the

Aryan race of Central Asia, who, having lived ages before

any conceptions of the supernatural had obtained in the

world, and speculating relative to the "beginnings of

things," were necessarily confined to the contemplation

and study of nature, the elements of which they believed

to be self-existent and endless in duration; but, being

wholly without knowledge of her inherent forces, they

explained her manifold processes by conceiving the idea

that she was animated by a great and inherent soul or

spirit, emanations from which impressed all her parts

with life and motion. Thus, endowing man, and other

animals, with souls emanating alike from the imaginary

great soul of nature, they believed, and taught, that immediately

after death all souls were absorbed into their

source, where, as "the dewdrop slips into the shining

sea," all personal identity was forever lost. Hence we see

that although recognizing the soul as immortal, considering

it, not as an entity existing independent of matter, but

as the spirit of matter itself, the primary religion was the

exponent of the purest form of Materialism.

Being the Astronomers of their day, and mistaking

the apparent for the real, the ancient Magi constructed

that erroneous system of nature known as the Geocentric,

and, in conformity thereto, composed a collection of Astronomical

Allegories, in which the emanations from the

imaginary great soul of nature, by which they believed

all materialities we're impressed with life and motion, were

personified and made to play their respective parts. Basing

the religion they instituted upon their system of Allegorical

Astronomy, and making its personifications the

objects of worship, they thus originated the anthropomorphic

or man-like Gods, and, claiming to have composed

them under the inspiration of these self same divinities,

they designated them as sacred records, or Scriptures,

and taught the ignorant masses that they were literal histories,

and their personifications real personages, who,

having once lived upon earth, and; for the good of mankind,

performed the wondrous works imputed to them,

were then in heaven whence they came.

Thus we see that the primary religion, which is popularly

known as Paganism, was founded in the worship

of personified nature; that, according special homage to

the imaginary genii of the stars, and inculcating supreme

adoration to the divinity supposed to reside in the sun, it

was anciently known by the general name of Astrolatry,

and by the more specific one of solar worship; and that its

founders, arrogating to themselves the title of Astrologers,

gave to its dogmatic element the name of Astrology.

In studying the primitive forms of religion it will be

found that none of them taught anything relative to a

future life, for the simple reason that their founders had

no conceptions of such a state. Hence it follows that the

laws they enacted were intended solely for the regulation

of their social relations, and, to secure their observance,

they were embodied into their sacred records and made

part of their religion. One form of that most ancient

worship was known as Sabaism, or Sabism. Another

form of the same religion was the Ancient Judaism, as

portrayed in the Old Testament, and more especially in

the Pentateuch, or first five books; in the Decalogue of

which the only promise made for the observance of one of

the Commandments is length of days on earth; and, in a

general summing up of the blessings and curses to be

enjoyed or suffered, for the observance or violation of the

laws, as recorded in the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy, it

will be seen they are all of a temporal character only. At

the beginning of the Christian era there were still in existence

a sect of Jews known as Sadducees, who were strict

adherents to the primitive form of worship, and their belief

relative to the state of the dead we find recorded in

Ecclesiastes xii., 7, which reads: "Then shall the dust return

to earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God

who gave it."

For ages the doctrine of soul absorption, immediately

after death, constituted the belief of mankind; but ultimately

recognizing the fact that the temporal punishments

of the existing laws were wholly inadequate to the

prevention of crime, and conceiving the idea that the

ignorant and vicious masses could be governed with a

surer hand by appealing to the sentiments of hope and

fear in relation to the rewards and punishments of an

imaginary future life, the ancient Astrologers resolved to

remodel the dogmatic elements of religion so as to include

that doctrine. But realizing the necessity, of suppressing

the belief in the absorption of all souls, immediately

after death, they ceased to teach it, and ultimately it

was embodied in that secret and unwritten system known

as the Esoteric philosophy, in which the Astrologers

formulated their own private belief, and which for many

centuries was kept from the knowledge of the uninitiated

by their successors in the priestly office. As they were

the sole custodians of the Scriptures, they made do change

in their verbiage, but, adding the doctrine of future rewards

and punishments to that written and openly taught

system of faith known as the Exoteric creed, they made it

the more impressive by instituting a system of imposing

rites and ceremonies, which they designated as Mysteries,

into which they initiated the neophytes, and in which were

portrayed, in the most vivid manner, the rewards and

punishments of the imaginary future life, which they

taught were the awards of the Gods for the observance or

violation of the laws. These teachings were inculcated in

the lesser degrees only, but those who were found worthy

of so great a distinction were also inducted into the higher

degrees, in which was imparted the knowledge of the

Esoteric philosophy. In both the lesser and higher degrees

the initiates received instruction in an oral manner

only; and all were bound by the most fearful oaths not to

reveal the secrets imparted to them.

Thus were the votaries of the ancient Astral worship

divided into two distinct classes, the Esoterics, or Gnostics;

and the Exoterics, or Agnostics; the former comprising

those who knew that the Gods were mythical and

the scriptures allegorical; and the latter, those who were

taught that the Gods were real, and the scriptures historical;

or, in other words, it was philosophy for the cultured

few, and religion for the ignorant multitude. The initiates

into the secrets of these two systems recognized

them as the two Gospels; and Paul must have had reference

to them in his Epistle to the Galatians ii., 2, where he

distinguishes the Gospel which he preached on ordinary

occasions from that Gospel which he preached "privately

to them which were of reputation."

Such was the system of Astrolatry, which, originating

in the Orient, and becoming, after being remodelled

in Egypt, the prototype of all Occidental forms of worship,

was recognized, successively, as the state religion of

the Grecian and Roman Empires; and we propose to describe

the erroneous system of nature upon which it was

based, and to develop the origins of its cycles, dogmas,

ordinances, anniversaries, personifications and symbols,

with the view to proving that it was the very same system

which was ultimately perpetuated under the name of

Christianity. We also propose to present the origins and

abridged histories of its two forms, the Jewish, or ancient,

and the Roman, or modern; and to give an account of the

conflict between the votaries of the latter, and the adherents

to the established form of worship, which culminated

in the fourth century in the substitution of Christianity

as the state religion of the Roman Empire. We furthermore

propose to show the changes to which the creed and

scriptures were subjected during the Middle Ages, and at

the Reformation in the sixteenth century, through which

they assumed the phases as now taught in the theologies,

respectively of Catholicism and Orthodox Protestantism.

We also present an article relative to Freemasonry and

Druidism, for the purpose of showing that, primarily, they

were but different forms of the ancient Astrolatry. We

also devote a few pages to the subjects of the Sabbath, and

to that of "Pious Frauds."

Note.—For the matter published in this work, we are

principally indebted to the writings of Robert Taylor, an erudite

but recusant minister of the church of England, who flourished

about seventy years ago, and who, being too honest to

continue to preach what, after thorough investigation, he did

not believe, began to give expression to his doubts by writing

and lecturing. Not being able to cope with his arguments, the

clergy, under the charge of the impossible crime of blasphemy,

had him imprisoned for more than two years, during which

time he wrote his great work entitled "The Diegesis," which

should be read by all persons who are investigating the claim

of the Christian religion to Divine authenticity.



ROMAN OR MODERN CHRISTIANITY.

Having presented the evidences that the Jewish, or

ancient Christianity, originated at the University of Alexandria,

under Greek rule, we now propose to show that its

modern form emanated from the same source, under Roman

rule; but, before entering upon this investigation, it

is important to become conversant with the sentiments

manifested towards religion by the cultured element of

Roman society in that enlightened era, which, designated

as the golden age of literature, was adorned by such distinguished

orators, philosophers, historians, poets and

naturalists as Cicero, Tacitus, Pliny, Horace and Virgil.

