THE GEOCENTRIC SYSTEM OF NATURE.

In constructing their system of nature, the ancient

Astronomers constituted it of the Earth, the Firmament,

the Planets, the Constellations and the Zodiac, and we

will refer to them in the order named.

The Earth.

Believing that the earth was the only world, that it

was a vast circular plane, and that it was the fixed and

immovable center around which revolved the celestial

luminaries, the ancient Astronomers, in conformity to the

requirement of the doctrine of future rewards and punishments,

as inculcated in the Egyptian Version of the

Exoteric Creed, divided it into an upper and an under,

or nether world, which they connected by a sinuous and

tenebrious passage.

The Firmament.

The azure dome, called the firmament in the book of

Genesis, was believed to be a solid transparency, which

we find described, in the fourth chapter and sixth verse,

of that collection of Astronomical Allegories, called the

Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation, "as a sea of glass like

unto crystal." It was represented as being supported by

four pillars, resting upon the earth, one at each of the cardinal

points, which were designated as "the pillars of

heaven." Conceiving the idea that there were windows

in the firmament, the ancient Astronomers called them

"the windows of heaven" and taught that they were

opened when it rained, and closed when it ceased to rain.

Hence it is evident that the ancient Astronomers did not

refer to these pillars and windows in a figurative sense,

but as real appurtenances to a solid firmament, as will be

seen by reference to Gen. vii. 11, and viii. 2, Job xxvi. 11,

and Malachi iii. 10.

The Planets.

Believing that the stars were but mere flambeaux,

suspended beneath the firmament, and revolving round

the earth, for the sole purpose of giving it light and heat;

and observing that seven of these, answering to the Sun,

Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, had

perceptible movements, in relation to the other luminaries,

the ancient astronomers designated them as planets

or wandering stars.

The Constellations.

Perceiving that the other celestial luminaries maintained

the same relation to each other, and designating

them as fixed stars, the ancient astronomers grouped

those visible to them into forty-eight Constellations; and

giving names to these, they also attached names to the

stars of larger magnitude, which was done for the purpose

of locating and distinguishing them with greater

ease.

The Zodiac.

Through twelve of these Constellations, mostly contained

within a belt of 16 degrees in width, and within

which the planets appeared to revolve, the ancient astronomers

inscribed a central line representing the Ecliptic, or

apparent orbit of the sun, which they divided into 360

degrees; and quartering these to denote the seasons, they

named the cardinal points the Summer and Winter Solstices,

and the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes; the

former referring to the longest and shortest days of the

year; and the latter to the two periods when the days and

nights are equal. An abbreviatory sign having been attached

to each of these constellations, the great celestial

belt containing them was called "the wheel of the signs,"

or "a wheel in the middle of a wheel," as designated by

that old Astrologer, Ezekiel the Prophet, in chap. i. and

16th verse. But for the reason that, with only one exception,

the forms of living things, either real or mythical,

were given to them, this belt, ultimately, wad designated

as the Zodiac; or Circle of living Creatures, see Ezekiel,

chap. i. Constituting the essential feature of the ancient

Astronomy, we present, in our frontispiece, a diagram of

the Zodiac, as anciently represented, to which, as well as

to Burritts' Celestial Atlas, our readers will be necessitated

to make frequent reference.

Recent researches among the ruins of ancient cities

have developed the fact that several centuries before the

beginning of our era the astronomers had invented the

telescope, and discovered the true or heliocentric system

of nature; but for the reason that religion had been based

upon the false, or geocentric system, it was deemed prudent

not to teach it to the masses. Hence, hiding it away

among the other secrets of the Esoteric philosophy, the

knowledge of it was lost during the Middle Ages; and

when rediscovered, the hierarchy of the Church of Rome,

upon the plea that it was contrary to the teachings of

Scripture, resorted to inquisitorial tortures to suppress

its promulgation; but, in spite of all their efforts, it has

been universally accepted; and, in this otherwise enlightened

age, we have presented to us the anomaly of a religion

based upon a false system of Astronomy, while its

votaries believe in the true system.

