SIGNS OP THE CROSS.

Among the numerous symbols of solar worship, besides

those we have already referred to, there are three

to which we will direct attention. Two of these were of

astronomical signification: the one adopted when the

Spring Equinox was in the sign of Taurus and shaped like

the letter T, was the model after which the ancient temples

were built; and the other, shaped like the letter X, in reference

to the angle of 23½ degrees made by the crossing

of the Ecliptic and the Celestial equator, is known as St.

Andrew's Cross. The third, and most important of all the

symbols of solar worship, in its relation to the Christian

religion, which, having no astronomical signification,

originated in Egypt, in reference to the annual inundation

of the river Nile. To mark the height to which the water

should rise to secure an abundant harvest, posts were

planted upon its banks to which cross beams were attached

thus ┼. If the water should rise to the designated

height, it was called "the waters of life," or "river

of life;" and, ultimately, this form of the cross was adopted

as the symbol of the life to come, or eternal life; and the

ancient astrologers had it engraved upon stone, encircled

with a hieroglyphical inscription to that effect, one of

which was discovered in the ruins of the temple erected

at Alexandria, and dedicated to "our Lord and Saviour

Serapis."

But, if the water failed to rise to the required height,

and the horrors of starvation becoming the inevitable result,

it was the custom of the people to nail to these crosses

symbolical personifications of the Demon of Famine. To

indicate the sterility of the domain over which he reigned,

he was represented by the figure of a lean and haggard

man, with a crown of thorns upon his head; a reed cut

from the river's bank was placed in his hands, as his unreal

sceptre; and, considering the inhabitants of Judea as the

most slavish and mean-spirited race in their knowledge,

they placarded this figure with the inscription: "This is

the King of the Jews." Thus, to the ancient Egyptians,

this sign of the cross was blessed or accursed as it was

represented with, or without, this figure suspended

upon it.

When the Roman, or modern, form of Christianity

was instituted, the hieroglyphical inscription signifying

the life to come or eternal life was substituted by a placard

nailed to the cross with the letters I. N. R. I. inscribed

upon it, which are the initials of the Latin words conveying

the same meaning. But if we would learn how the

figure of a man came to be suspended upon this form of

the cross, we must refer to Mediaeval History, which

teaches that in the year 680, under the Pontificate of Agathon,

and during the reign of Constantine Pogonat, at the

sixth council of the church, and third at Constantinople, it

was ordered in Canon 82 that "Instead of a lamb, the figure

of a man nailed to a cross should be the distinguishing

symbol of the Christian religion." Now, as this figure

is represented by that of a lean and haggard man, with a

crown of thorns upon his head, does it not look as if the

old Egyptian Demon of Famine was the model after

which it was constructed?

FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.

In the ancient Astrolatry, two different systems of

future rewards and punishments were inculcated; the

Oriental or East Indian, and the Occidental or Egyptian;

the former, ignoring the resurrection of the body, taught

but one judgment immediately after death, and the latter

inculcated an individual judgment immediately after

death, the resurrection of the body, and a general judgment

at the end of the world, or conclusion of the 12,000

year cycle.

The Oriental System.

Considering perfect happiness to consist in absolute

rest, the Oriental astrologers conceived a state of eternal

and unconscious repose, equivalent to soul absorption,

to which they gave the name of Nirvana, into which they

taught that, by the awards of the gods, the souls of the

righteous, or those who had lived what they called "the

contemplative life," would be permitted to enter immediately

after death. But, for the souls of sinners, they invented

a system of expiatory punishments which, known

as the Metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, taught

that they would be compelled to successively animate the

bodies of beasts, birds, fishes, etc., for a thousand years

before being permitted to enter the Nirvana.

The Occidental System.

In concocting the doctrine of the first judgment the

Egyptian astrologers, ignoring the Nirvana, inculcated

the future sentient existence of the soul; and, while retaining

the Metempsychotial expiations of the Oriental system,

taught that its rewards, and principal punishments,

would be enjoyed or suffered in the under or nether

world, the existence of which they had conceived in constructing

their system of nature. This imaginary region,

known to the Egyptians as the Amenti, to the Greeks as

Hades, and to the Hebrews as Sheol, was divided by an

impassable gulf into the two states of happiness and

misery which were designated in the Grecian mythology

as the Elysium, or Elysian Fields, and the Tartarus. In

the lower part of the latter was located the Phlegethon,

or lake of fire and brimstone, the smoke from which ascended

into an upper apartment.

In this system it was taught that the souls of the

two extremes of society, constituted of the righteous

and the great sinners, would be consigned immediately

after the first judgment, the one to the Elysium, and the

other to the Phlegethon, where they were to remain until

the second or general judgment; while the souls of less

venial sinners, constituting the greater mass of mankind,

before being permitted to enter the Elysium would be

compelled to suffer the expiatory punishments of the

Metempsychosis, or in the upper region, or "smoky row"

of the Tartarus. Such was the Egyptian purgatory, and

its denizens constituted "the spirits in prison" referred to

in I. Peter iii. 19, from which the astrologers claimed to

have the power to release, provided their surviving friends

paid liberally for their propitiatory offices; and, from this

assumption, the clergy of the Catholic church derived the

idea of saying masses for the repose of the soul. These

doctrines were carried by Pythagoras from Egypt to

Greece about 550 years before the beginning of our era;

and passing from thence to Rome, the Greek and Latin

poets vied with each other in portraying Hades and the

joys and terrors of its two states.

The Second or General Judgment.

The Egyptian Astrologers, recognizing the soul as

a material entity, and conceiving the idea that in the

future life it would require a material organization for its

perfect action, taught that at the general judgment it

would be re-united to its resurrected body. In conformity

to this belief, Job is made to say in chapter xix. 25, 26,

"I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand

at the latter day upon the earth; and though worms destroy

this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." The

higher class Egyptians, however, fearing that their existence

would continue to be of the same shadowy and intangible

character after the second judgment, as they believed

it would be in the Amenti, if worms were allowed to

destroy their bodies, hoped to preserve them until that

time by the process of embalming.

The imaginary events to occur in connection with

the second judgment, which, constituting the finale of the

plan of redemption, and inculcated in what are known as

the doctrines of Second Adventism, were to be inaugurated

by an archangel sounding a trumpet summoning

the quick and the dead to appear before the bar of the

gods to receive their final awards. At the second judgment,

designated in the allegories as "the last day," "day

of judgment," "great and terrible day of the Lord," etc.,

it was taught that the tenth and last saviour would make

his second advent by descending upon the clouds, and

after the final awards, the elect being caught up "to meet

the Lord in the air" (I. Thes. iv. 17), the heaven and the

earth would be reduced to chaos through the agency of

fire. In reference to that grand catastrophe we find it

recorded in II. Peter iii. 10, that "the heavens shall pass

away with a great noise and the elements shall melt with

fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein

shall be burned up."

After the organization of a new heaven and a new earth

it was taught that upon the latter would descend a beautiful

city, with pearly gates and golden streets, called the

City of God, the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Heaven

or New Jerusalem, in which the host of the redeemed

would, with their Lord and Saviour, enjoy the Millennium,

or thousand years of happiness unalloyed with evil;

and such was the Kingdom for the speedy coming of

which the votaries of Astral worship were taught to pray

in what is known as the Lord's Prayer.

According to the teachings of the Allegories, there were

to be no sun, moon or stars during the Millennium, their

authors having arranged it so that the light of those luminaries

would not be needed, as we find recorded in Rev.

xxi. 23, and xxii. 5: "The city had no need of the

sun, neither of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of

God did lighten it," and "there shall be no night there;

and they need no candle, neither the light of the sun; for

the Lord God giveth them light." It must be remembered,

when reading the fanciful ideas relative to the City

of God, that they were composed by men who, living in

a very ignorant age, gave free rein to fervid imaginations.
