GOD SOL.

In determining the characteristics of the supreme

divinity of astral worship, it must be borne in mind that

its founders taught that he was evolved or engendered by

the Father, or first person in the sacred Triad, from his

pure substance, which as we have shown was constituted

of chaos or the primeval fire into which they supposed all

things were reduced through the agency of that element

at the conclusion of 12,000 year cycles. Hence, designating

that mythical being as the only begotten of the

Father, they personified him as God the Son, or second

person in the sacred Triad; and recognizing the Sun as the

ruling star, very appropriately made him the presiding

genius of that luminary, under the title of God Sol. According

homage to light as his chief attribute, he is referred

to in the allegories as "The true Light, which lighteth

every man that cometh into the world," John i., 9; and,

although designated as the only begotten of the Father,

his co-existence with him, under the title of the Logos or

Word, is shown in the text which reads, "In the beginning

was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the

Word was God," John i., 1.

Personifying the principles of Good and Evil in God

Sol, the ancient Astrologers consecrated the six divisions

of the 12,000 year cycle, corresponding to the reproductive

months of Spring and Summer, to him as Lord of

Good, and symbolizing him by the constellation of the

Zodiac in which the Vernal Equinox successively occurred,

as explained hereafter, they dedicated the six divisions

of that cycle, corresponding to the destructive

months of Autumn and Winter, to him as Lord of Evil,

and as such, symbolizing him by the serpent, marked the

beginning of his reign by the constellation "Serpens,"

placed in conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox.

Personifying in him the opposing principles of Good and

Evil, he was to the ancients both God and Devil, or the

varied God, who, in relation to the seasons, was described

as beautiful in Spring, powerful in Summer, beneficent in

Autumn and terrible in Winter. Thus under various

names, intended to represent God Sol in relation to the

diversified seasons, we find recorded in the Scriptures, or

solar fables, numerous portrayals of imaginary conflicts,

in which the Evil principle, triumphing during Autumn

and Winter, is conquered at the Vernal Equinox by the

Good principle, who, bringing back equal days and nights,

restores the harmony of nature.

The eternal enmity between the principles of Good

and Evil, as manifested in the diversity of the seasons,

we find portrayed in the Constellations Hercules and

Draco, placed in the northern heavens, in which the heel

of the former, representing one of the most ancient of the

imaginary incarnations of God Sol, to which we will refer

hereafter, is resting upon the head of the latter, as referred

to in Genesis iii., 15, which makes God Sol, or the

Lord God, say to the serpent, "I will put enmity between

thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;

it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel."

The woman alluded to in this text is the Virgo of the

Zodiac, as will be made apparent hereafter.

Of all the divinities of the ancient mythology God

Sol was the only one distinguished by the exalted title of

Lord or Lord God, for the reason that he was made the

organizer of chaos and governor of heaven and earth.

Hence, having constituted him the lord of light and darkness,

as well as good and evil, the ancient astrologers in

composing the solar fables made him say of himself, "I

form the light and create darkness; I make peace and

create evil, I the Lord do all these things," Isaiah xlv., 7.

"Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not

done it?" Amos iii., 6. Besides the title of Lord or

Lord God, the solar divinity is also designated in the

allegories as the Lord of Lords and the King of Kings,

the Invincible, the Mighty God, etc.

Subjecting the mythical genius of the sun, in his apparent

annual revolution round the earth, to the four

stages of human life from infancy to old age, the ancient

Magi fixed the natal day of the young God Sol at the winter

solstice, the Virgo of the Zodiac was made his mother,

and the constellation in conjunction with her, which is

now known as Bootes, but anciently called Arcturus, his

foster father. He is represented as holding in leash two

hunting dogs and driving Ursa Major, or the Great Bear,

around the north pole, thus showing that the original

occupation of the celestial foster father of the young God

Sol was that of a bear driver, and that his sons, referred to

in job xxxviii., 32, are the dogs Asterion and Chara. It

will be observed that Virgo is represented in our illustration

with a child in her arms, for the reason that she is so

represented in the ancient Zodiacs, and the fact will be

readily conceded that she is the only Virgin who could

give birth to a child and be a virgin still.

THE ANCIENT COSMOGONY.

Speculating relative to the order in which chaos had

been organized, the ancient Astrologers constructed a

Cosmogony, which divided the labors of God the Son, or

second person in the Trinity, into six periods of a thousand

years each; and which, answering to the six divisions

of the 12,000 year cycle corresponding to the reproductive

months of Spring and Summer, taught that in the first

period he made the earth; in the second, the firmament;

in the third, vegetation; in the fourth, the Sun and

Moon and "the stars also;" in the fifth, the animals, fishes,

birds, etc., and in the sixth, Man.

That vegetation was made before the Sun was not an

inconsistent idea to the originators of the ancient Cosmogony.

They imagined that the heat and light, emanating

from the elementary fire, were sufficient to stimulate its

growth, after which God the Son gathered it together and

made the Celestial luminaries. In the solar fables this

imaginary element is called the fire-ether, or sacred fire of

the stars.
