FABLE OF THE TWELVE LABORS.

The authors of the original solar fables, having lived

in that remote age in which physical prowess was recognized

as the highest attribute of humanity, conceived the

idea that God Sol, while passing through his apparent

orbit, had to fight his way with the animals of the Zodiac,

and with others in conjunction with them. Hence, designating

him as the Mighty Hunter, and calling his exploits

the twelve labors, they made the incarnate Saviours

the heroes of similar ones on earth, which they taught

were performed for the good of mankind; and that, after

fulfilling their earthly mission, they were exhaled to

heaven through the agency of fire. When these fables

were composed the Summer Solstice was in the sign of

Leo, and making the twelve labors begin in it, the first

consisted in the killing of a lion, and the second, in rescuing

a virgin (Virgo) by the destruction of a Hydra, the

constellation in conjunction with her. Upon one of the

Assyrian marbles on exhibition in the British Museum

these two labors are represented as having been performed

by a saviour by the name of Nimroud. In the constellations

of Taurus, the bull of the Zodiac, and of Orion, originally

known as Horns, in conjunction therewith, we

have groupings of stars representing the latter as one of

the mighty hunters of the ancient Astrolatry, supporting

on his left arm the shield of the lion's skin, the trophy of

the first labor, and holding a club in his uplifted right

hand, is engaged in performing the tenth labor by a conflict

with the former.

The fable of the twelve labors constituted the sacred

records or scriptures of the older forms of Astrolatry, one

version of which, written with the cuneiform character

upon twelve tablets of burnt clay, exhumed from the ruins

of an Assyrian city, and now on exhibition in the British

Museum, is ascribed to Nimroud, the prototype of the

Grecian Hercules, and of Nimrod, the Mighty Hunter of

the Old Testament.

ANNIVERSARIES OF SOLAR WORSHIP.

The Nativity.

Applying the anniversaries inculcated in the worship

of God Sol to his imaginary incarnations, the founders of

the ancient Astrolatry made them refer to the several

stages of human existence from infancy to mature age.

Hence, comparing the first day of infantile life to the

shortest day of the year, it would naturally be expected

that they would have placed the anniversary of the Nativity

exactly at the Winter solstice; but, having conceived

the idea that the sun stood still for the space of three days

at each of the cardinal points, and making it represent the

figurative death of the genius of that luminary, they fixed

the date for its observance three days later, or on the 25th

of December. The Gnostic adherents to the ancient

solar worship, or those who were conversant with the

teachings of the Esoteric philosophy, knowing that the

dramatis personæ of the fable of incarnation were pictured

with stars upon the azure vault, recognized the

woman "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her

feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars," referred

to in Revelations xii. 1, as the Virgo of the Zodiac; they

also knew that she was the true queen of heaven and

mother of God; and that the infant, anciently represented

in her arms, and with whom, in their day, she arose on the

Eastern horizon at midnight on the 24th of December,

was the same of whom the people were taught to sing at

Christmas "Unto us a child is born this day."

With the knowledge of these facts we can readily see

that this is the Virgin and child which constituted the

originals of those exquisite paintings, by the old masters,

known as the Madonna and Child.

Epiphany or Twelfth Day.

In reference to the twelve signs through which the

sun makes his apparent annual revolution, the twelfth

day after Christmas, answering to the 6th of January, was

observed by the votaries of the ancient Astrolatry as the

anniversary of the Epiphany or Twelfth Day. In the

solar fables, it was taught that a star appeared in the

heavens on that day to manifest the birthplace of the

infant Saviour to the Magi or Wise Men of the East, who

came to pay him homage, and to present him with the

gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh, as related in Matthew ii. 11.

The reason for presenting these gifts is explained by

the facts that of the seven metals dedicated to the genii of

the planets, gold was the one consecrated to God Sol; and

frankincense and myrrh were the gums burned in censers

in his worship.

In reading the account of the Magi's visit to the infant

Saviour, we have but to exercise our thinking faculties to

realize that it is allegory instead of literal history.

Lent or Lenten Season.

In the ancient solar fables it was taught that the persecutions

to which the incarnate Saviours were subjected

while passing through the dominion of God Sol as Lord of

Evil, raged with greatest fury during the forty days

preceding the festival of Easter, which period, beginning

when the days were perceptibly lengthening, was called

Lent, or the Lenten season. It was during this season

that the votaries of the ancient religion were taught to

manifest their sympathy for the Saviour in his imaginary

conflict with the Devil by abstaining from all festivities,

and by fasting and prayer; and, as that was the season

in which the flocks and herds were poor in flesh, while the

seas and rivers abounded with fish in good condition, the

ancient priests, making a virtue of necessity, enjoined a

diet principally of fish, and for that reason placed the constellation

Pisces at the point in the Zodiac in which the

Lenten season anciently began; which, without regard to

the day of the week, was always observed on the 15th day

of February, the name of that month having been derived

from the Februa, or feast of purification and expiation of

the old Roman calendar.

At the council of Nice the Lenten season was made

to begin on the fourth day of the week, and in reference to

the ancient custom of the more devout sprinkling ashes

upon their heads at the feast of the Februa, it is called Ash

Wednesday.

Hence we see that all years in which Ash Wednesday

does not come on the 15th of February, the Lenten

season must necessarily contain a greater or lesser number

than the original assignment of forty days.

Passion Week.

The last seven days of Lent is called Passion Week, in

reference to the apparent passage of the sun across the

Celestial equator at the Vernal Equinox or 21st of

March; the ancient astrologers having conceived the idea

that the sun stood still for the space of three days at each

of the cardinal points, and making it represent the figurative

death of the genius of that luminary, it was observed

as the anniversary of the Vernal crucifixion or passion of

the incarnate Saviours; and in commemoration of their

imaginary sufferings and death it was the custom to expose

in the temples during the last three days of Passion

Week figures representing their dead bodies, over which

the votaries of solar worship, especially the women, made

great lamentation. It was in reference to one of these

images, laid out in the temple at Jerusalem, to which the

jealous Jehovah, considering it a great abomination in his

own house, is made to direct the attention of Ezekiel, the

prophet, who, looking, beheld "Women weeping for Tammuz"

as recorded in the eighth chapter. This divinity

was the Phoenician prototype of the Grecian Adonis, to

whom the women of Judea preferred to pay homage.

It was during the last three days of Passion Week

that the votaries of solar worship performed their severest

penance. Besides fasting and prayer, the more devout

flagellated and slashed themselves and others with knives

and thongs, and carried heavy crosses up steep acclivities.

In all ultra-Catholic countries the priests, in imitation of

the ancient custom, expose in the churches figures representing

the dead Saviour, over which the laity, especially

the women, weep and mourn; and the more devout

men cut and slash themselves, and each other, with

knives and thongs; and, in imitation of the imaginary

tramp of Jesus with his cross up Calvary's rugged side,

bear heavy crosses up steep acclivities.

Passion Plays.

Anciently dramas representing the passion of incarnate

saviours, called Passion plays, were enacted upon the

stage. The most celebrated of these divine tragedies,

known as Prometheus Bound, and composed by the

Greek poet Æschylus, was played at Athens 500 years

before the beginning of the Christian era. To show that

this sin-atoning saviour was not chained to a rock, while

vultures preyed upon his vitals, as popularly taught, but

was nailed to a tree; we quote front Potter's translation of

the play, that passage which, readily recognized as the

original of a Christian song, reads as follows:

            "Lo, streaming from the fatal tree,

               His all atoning blood:

            Is this the infinite? 'Tis he—

               Prometheus and a God.

            Well might the sun in darkness hide,

               And veil his glories in,

            When God the great Prometheus died

               For man, the creature's sin."

The veiling of the sun, as represented in these plays,

having reference to the imaginary sympathy expressed by

God Sol for the sufferings of his incarnate son, was shown

upon the stage by shading the lights. The monks of the

Middle Ages enacted plays representing the passion of the

Christian Saviour, and the Bavarian peasantry, perpetuating

this custom, perform the play every tenth year.

Resurrection and Easter Festival.

In conformity to the ancient teachings, the incarnate

saviours, considered as figuratively dead for the space of

three days at the Vernal Equinox, or 21st of March, were

raised to newness of life after the expiration of that time.

Hence, the 25th of March, without regard to the day of

the week, was celebrated as the anniversary of the Vernal

resurrection. On the morning of this day it was the

custom of the astrologers to say to the mourners assembled

in the temples, "Be of good cheer, sacred band of initiates;

your God has risen from the dead, his pains and his

sufferings shall be your salvation." Another form of

this admonition, quoted from an ancient poem in reference

to the Phoenician Tammuz, reads as follows:

            "Trust ye saints, your God restored,

            Trust ye in your risen Lord,

            For the pains which he endured,

            Your salvation hath procured."

Then would begin the festivities of Easter, which

corrupted from Eostre, and derived from the Teutonic

mythology, was one of the many names given to the goddess

of Spring. In the observance of this festival the

temples were adorned with floral offerings; the Hilaries

sang their joyful lays; the fires upon the pyres, or the fire-altars,

were extinguished and rekindled with new fire, or

sacred fire of the stars, which the Astrologers taught was

brought down from heaven by the winged genius Perseus,

the constellation which, anciently, was in conjunction

with the Vernal Equinox; Paschal candles, lit from

the new fire, were distributed to the faithful and the Paschal

feast, Easter feast, or the feast of the passover, was

eaten in commemoration of the passion of the incarnate

saviours, or, in other words, of the passage of the sun

across the celestial equator.

In ultra-Catholic countries the descent of the sacred

fire is represented by some secretly arranged pyrotechny,

and the credulous laity, believing they have witnessed a

miraculous display, eagerly solicit Paschal candles lit

from it; and in imitation of the ancient festivities in honor

of the return of spring, all Catholic churches, and most of

Protestant ones, are adorned with flowers, the bells ring

out their merriest peals, and "Gloria in Excelsis" and

other jubilant songs, similar to the lays of the ancient Hilaries,

are sung.
