PERSONIFICATIONS OF THE DIVISIONS OF TIME.

In the ancient solar fables the several divisions of

time were personified and made to pay homage to the

Triune Deity, supposed to be enthroned above the firmament.

The Hours.

The genii of the hours were designated as Elders, and

we find them described in the 4th chapter of Revelation

as sitting round about the throne upon four and twenty

seats, clothed in white raiment, and crowns of gold upon

their heads.

The Days.

Each day of the year was appropriately personified,

and these genii of the days constitute the saints of the

Christian calendar. Of these we will refer to but one.

According to the ancient belief that the sun stood still

for the space of three days at each of the cardinal points,

the 24th of June was made the first of the decreasing days;

and dedicating it to St. John the Baptist, he is made to say

in reference to his opposite, (the genius of the 25th of

December, and first of the increasing days,) "He must increase,

but I must decrease." This text, found in John

iii. 30, simply means that the days of the one must increase

in length, while the days of the other must decrease.

The Months.

The fable of the twelve labors having been superseded

by others, in which the genii of the twelve signs of the

Zodiac, corresponding to the months, were designated

as angels, and made to minister to God Sol while making

his apparent annual revolution; but, when constituted the

attendants of the incarnate saviours during their imaginary

earth life, they were personified as men and called

Disciples. Of these genii of the months we will refer only

to the first and the last. The first month, dedicated to the

genius known in the mythology as Janus, and from which

was derived the name January, was portrayed with two

faces, the one of an old man looking mournfully backward

over the old year, and the other of a young man looking

joyfully forward to the new year. This personification,

made the opener of the year, and represented as holding

a pair of cross-keys, was called "The carrier of the keys

of the kingdom of heaven." Hence, the Popes of Rome,

claiming apostolic succession from Peter, the Janus of the

Christian twelve, wear cross-keys as the insignia of their

office. Sometimes a crosier, or shepherd's crook, is substituted

for one of the keys, in reference to his arrogated

office of the leader of the sheep! The authority for the

assumption that the Popes are Peter's successors is found

in Matthew xvi. 18, 19; but its fallacy becomes apparent

when we bear in mind that the scriptures are but collections

of astronomical allegories, and that the Peter

referred to in the text was not a man, but the mythical

genius of the month of January.

In reference to the last month, we find that the

authors of the ancient solar fables, ever doubting whether

God Sol, after inaugurating Winter by his supposed retreat

from the earth, would return to revivify nature with

his life-giving rays, gave to the genius of the twelfth

month the title of the Doubter. In the Christian calendar

this personification is known as Thomas, and a more

specific dedication of the shortest day of the year having

been made to him, the 21st day of December is called St.

Thomas day.

The Seasons.

When the cardinal points were in the constellations

Leo, Taurus, Aquarius and Scorpio, the astrologers, objecting

to the signification of the latter, substituted the

constellation in conjunction therewith, which is known

as Aquila (Ak-we-la) or Flying Eagle. In the allegorical

astronomy of that remote period these genii of the seasons

were designated as beasts, and as such we find them

referred to in Revelation iv. 7, which reads as follows:

"And the first beast was like a lion (Leo), and the second

beast like a calf (Taurus, the bull calf), and the third

beast had a face as a man, (Aquarius, the waterman) and

the fourth beast was like a flying eagle (Aquila)." In the

first chapter of Ezekiel, the prophet, the genii of the seasons

are referred to in the same manner.

These genii of the seasons, standing, imaginarily, at

the four corners of the heavens, were called corner-keepers,

and making them witnesses to God Sol in his apparent

annual revolution, the founders of the Astral Worship

designated them as Archangels, Evangelists, God-Spellers

or Gospel-Bearers, and claiming inspiration from

them, composed four different histories of the birth and

earth-life of the incarnate saviour, to each of which they

attached a name, and called these records the Gospel

story. In its Chaldean version, the names of Gabriel,

Michael, Raphael and Uriel were given them; but while

the first two of these are mentioned in the Christian Gospel

story, its authors gave to the Evangelists the names

of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. Thus knowing the

true signification of the Disciples and Evangelists, the

very pertinent question presents itself: If they are not

the genii of the months and the seasons, why are there

just twelve of the one and four of the other?

Half Year of Increasing Days.

In the ancient astrolatry, the half year of increasing

days, extending from the Winter to the Summer Solstice,

was personified by the composite figure representing the

constellations of Taurus and Aquarius, which, constituted

of the winged body of a bull and the head and beard

of a man, was called the Cherubim. This personification

we find portrayed upon the Assyrian marbles on exhibition

in the British Museum.

Half Year of Decreasing Days.

The half year of decreasing days, extending from the

Summer to the Winter Solstice, was personified by the

figure, which, representing the constellations of Leo and

Aquila, and composed of the winged body and limbs of a

lion, with the head of an eagle, was called the Seraphim.

These last two personifications constituted the Archangels

of the ancient Astral Worship.

Last Quarter of the Year.

The last quarter of the year was personified in the

ancient allegories as a decrepit old man, who, stung by

a Scorpion (Scorpio), and fatally wounded by an arrow

from the quiver of an archer (Saggitarius) dies at the

Winter Solstice; and, after lying in the grave for the space

of three days, is brought to life again. Such was the personification

referred to in the Christian Gospel-story as

having been raised from the grave by the mandate, "Come

forth, Lazarus." Thus have we shown that the elders

and the saints; the angels, and the Archangels; the Cherubim

and Seraphim; and also poor old Lazarus, are but

personifications of the several divisions of time.
