
ZODIACAL SYMBOLS OF SOLAR WORSHIP.

Having shown that the founders of the ancient astrolatry

accorded homage to God Sol as Lord of Evil, under

the symbol of the serpent, and marked the beginning of

his reign, as such, by the constellation "Serpens" placed in

conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox; we will now

direct attention to the symbols under which he was worshipped

as Lord of Good, which, corresponding to the

form of the constellation in which occurred the Vernal

Equinox, and which was changed to correspond to the

form of the succeeding constellation as that Cardinal

point passed into it, by that process, known in Astronomy,

as the precession of the Equinoxes, its explanation becomes

essential to a correct understanding of our subject.

After long observation, aided by the telescope, of

which they were undoubtedly the original inventors, the

ancient Astrologers discovered that the Sun, in making

his apparent annual revolution, did not return to the same

point in the heavens, but fell behind that of the preceding

year, at the rate of 50¼ seconds of a degree annually. At

this rate of precession, which modern, calculation has confirmed,

it requires 71 2-3 years for the Cardinal points to

pass through one degree on the Ecliptic, and 2150 years

through thirty degrees, or one sign of the Zodiac. The

knowledge of this process affording an exact chronology,

we are enabled, not only to determine the origin of these

symbols, but to approximate, very nearly, to the respective

dates of their adoption.

The Sphinx.

From the teachings of Astronomy we learn that the

Summer Solstice is now occupying the point between the

signs of Taurus and Gemini, from which we know that

that Cardinal point has passed through three whole signs

since it was between the signs of Leo and Virgo, and we

have but to multiply 2,150 by 3 to determine that it has

been about 6,450 years ago. Hence, the tourist to the

Nile valley, when viewing, near the base of old Cheops,

the great Egyptian pyramid, a colossal head and bust of

a woman, carved in stone, and learns that it is attached

to a body, in the form of a lion in a crouching attitude 146

feet long, hidden beneath the shifting sands of the Libyan

desert; if possessed of the knowledge of the precession

of the Equinoxes, he will be enabled to solve the

riddle of the Sphinx by recognizing in that grotesque

monument the mid-summer symbol of solar worship,

when the Summer Solstice was between the signs of Leo

and Virgo.

The Dragon.

When the Summer Solstice was between the signs

of Leo and Virgo, the Winter Solstice was between those

of Aquarius and Pisces, and the figure composed of the

body of a man with the tail of a fish became the mid-winter

symbol of solar worship. Such was the form of this

symbol to which the ancient Phoenicians paid homage

to the Lord under the name of Dagon.

The Bull.

At the same time the Summer Solstice entered the

sign of Leo, the Vernal Equinox entered that of Taurus,

and the bull becoming the spring symbol of solar worship—the

Lord was designated in the ancient allegories as the

bull of God which taketh away the sin of the world; which,

shorn of its allegorical sense, signifies the sun in Taurus,

or sun of spring, which taketh away the evil of Winter.

Such is the purport of hieroglyphical inscriptions upon

papyrus rolls found in Egypt, and engraved upon obelisks

erected in the Nile valley, one of which has been recently

brought to the City of New York and set up in Central

Park. In the East Indies this symbol was represented by

the figure of a bull with the solar disk between his horns;

and the Egyptians, who were of Hindoo origin, perpetuating

it in their "Apis," it was reproduced in the golden calf

of the ancient Israelites. The Assyrians represented this

symbol by the figure of a winged bull with the face and

beard of a man; the Phoenicians, in their "Baal," by the

figure of a man with a bull's head and horns; and the

small silver bull's heads with golden horns, recently discovered

by Dr. Schliemann in the ruins of Mycenae, were

jewels worn by the women of that ancient city, when the

Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Taurus.

The Ram.

By deducting 2,150 years from 6,450, we determine

that about 4,300 years; ago the Vernal Equinox entered the

sign of Aries, and the spring symbol of solar worship,

changing from the bull to the ram, was represented by

ram-headed figures, two of which, found in Egypt, are on

exhibition in the British Museum. Then the text which

read the bull of God, was changed to the Ram of God

which taketh away the sins of the world.

The Lamb.

Ultimately attaching a meek and lowly disposition

to the imaginary incarnations of the mythical genius of

the sun, the symbol of the ram was changed to that of the

lamb, and the text in the allegories, which read the Ram of

God, was changed to read "The Lamb of God which

taketh away the sin of the World," John i, 29. The explanation

we have given relative to the Zodiacal Symbols

of solar worship makes the assurance doubly sure that the

originals of the New Testament were composed when the

Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Aries, as will be

shown hereafter. Having adopted the symbol of the

lamb, it was represented by several forms of what is

known as Agnus Dei, or Lamb of God, one of which was

in the form of a bleeding lamb with a vase attached into

which blood is flowing, which originated in reference to

the shedding of blood as a vicarious atonement for sin.

But the most comprehensive form of this symbol in its

astronomical signification, was represented by the

figure of a lamb in a standing attitude, supporting the

circle of the Zodiac, divided into quarters to denote the

seasons. At each of the cardinal points there was a small

cross, and the lamb held in its uplifted fore-foot a larger

cross, the long arm of which was made to cut the celestial

equator at the angle of 23½ degrees, the true angle of

obliquity of the Ecliptic. This symbol is still retained in

the Catholic Church.

The Fish.

By deducting 2,150 years from 4,300 we determine

that about 2,150 years ago the Vernal Equinox entered

the sign of Pisces; and although the original version of the

New Testament was founded upon the symbol of the lamb,

it is a historical fact that for centuries after the beginning

of our era, the Christians paid homage to the Lord under

the symbol of the fish; but ultimately going into desuetude,

the lamb was retained as the distinguishing symbol

of the Christian religion until the year 680, at which date

another was substituted, as will be shown under our next

heading.
