
ANDREW LANG.

GUY MANNERING

OR

THE ASTROLOGER

CHAPTER I

He could not deny that, looking round upon the dreary region,

and seeing nothing but bleak fields and naked trees, hills

obscured by fogs, and flats covered with inundations, he did

for some time suffer melancholy to prevail upon him, and

wished himself again safe at home.

--’Travels of Will. Marvel,’ IDLER, No. 49.

It was in the beginning of the month of November 17--when a young English

gentleman, who had just left the university of Oxford, made use of the

liberty afforded him to visit some parts of the north of England; and

curiosity extended his tour into the adjacent frontier of the sister

country. He had visited, on the day that opens our history, some monastic

ruins in the county of Dumfries, and spent much of the day in making

drawings of them from different points, so that, on mounting his horse to

resume his journey, the brief and gloomy twilight of the season had

already commenced. His way lay through a wide tract of black moss,

extending for miles on each side and before him. Little eminences arose

like islands on its surface, bearing here and there patches of corn, which

even at this season was green, and sometimes a hut or farm-house, shaded

by a willow or two and surrounded by large elder-bushes. These insulated

dwellings communicated with each other by winding passages through the

moss, impassable by any but the natives themselves. The public road,

however, was tolerably well made and safe, so that the prospect of being

benighted brought with it no real danger. Still it is uncomfortable to

travel alone and in the dark through an unknown country; and there are few

ordinary occasions upon which Fancy frets herself so much as in a

situation like that of Mannering.

As the light grew faint and more faint, and the morass appeared blacker

and blacker, our traveller questioned more closely each chance passenger

on his distance from the village of Kippletringan, where he proposed to

quarter for the night. His queries were usually answered by a

counter-challenge respecting the place from whence he came. While

sufficient daylight remained to show the dress and appearance of a

gentleman, these cross interrogatories were usually put in the form of a

case supposed, as, ‘Ye’ll hae been at the auld abbey o’ Halycross, sir?

there’s mony English gentlemen gang to see that.’--Or, ‘Your honour will

become frae the house o’ Pouderloupat?’ But when the voice of the querist

alone was distinguishable, the response usually was, ‘Where are ye coming

frae at sic a time o’ night as the like o’ this?’--or, ‘Ye’ll no be o’

this country, freend?’ The answers, when obtained, were neither very

reconcilable to each other nor accurate in the information which they

afforded. Kippletringan was distant at first ‘a gey bit’; then the ‘gey

bit’ was more accurately described as ‘ablins three mile’; then the ‘three

mile’ diminished into ‘like a mile and a bittock’; then extended

themselves into ‘four mile or thereawa’; and, lastly, a female voice,

having hushed a wailing infant which the spokeswoman carried in her arms,

assured Guy Mannering, ‘It was a weary lang gate yet to Kippletringan, and

unco heavy road for foot passengers.’ The poor hack upon which Mannering

was mounted was probably of opinion that it suited him as ill as the

female respondent; for he began to flag very much, answered each

application of the spur with a groan, and stumbled at every stone (and

they were not few) which lay in his road.

Mannering now grew impatient. He was occasionally betrayed into a

deceitful hope that the end of his journey was near by the apparition of a

twinkling light or two; but, as he came up, he was disappointed to find

that the gleams proceeded from some of those farm-houses which

occasionally ornamented the surface of the extensive bog. At length, to

complete his perplexity, he arrived at a place where the road divided into

two. If there had been light to consult the relics of a finger-post which

stood there, it would have been of little avail, as, according to the good

custom of North Britain, the inscription had been defaced shortly after

its erection. Our adventurer was therefore compelled, like a knight-errant

of old, to trust to the sagacity of his horse, which, without any demur,

chose the left-hand path, and seemed to proceed at a somewhat livelier

pace than before, affording thereby a hope that he knew he was drawing

near to his quarters for the evening. This hope, however, was not speedily

accomplished, and Mannering, whose impatience made every furlong seem

three, began to think that Kippletringan was actually retreating before

him in proportion to his advance.

It was now very cloudy, although the stars from time to time shed a

twinkling and uncertain light. Hitherto nothing had broken the silence

around him but the deep cry of the bog-blitter, or bull-of-the-bog, a

large species of bittern, and the sighs of the wind as it passed along the

dreary morass. To these was now joined the distant roar of the ocean,

towards which the traveller seemed to be fast approaching. This was no

circumstance to make his mind easy. Many of the roads in that country lay

along the sea-beach, and were liable to be flooded by the tides, which

rise with great height, and advance with extreme rapidity. Others were

intersected with creeks and small inlets, which it was only safe to pass

at particular times of the tide. Neither circumstance would have suited a

dark night, a fatigued horse, and a traveller ignorant of his road.

Mannering resolved, therefore, definitively to halt for the night at the

first inhabited place, however poor, he might chance to reach, unless he

could procure a guide to this unlucky village of Kippletringan.

A miserable hut gave him an opportunity to execute his purpose. He found

out the door with no small difficulty, and for some time knocked without

producing any other answer than a duet between a female and a cur-dog, the

latter yelping as if he would have barked his heart out, the other

screaming in chorus. By degrees the human tones predominated; but the

angry bark of the cur being at the instant changed into a howl, it is

probable something more than fair strength of lungs had contributed to the

ascendency.

‘Sorrow be in your thrapple then!’ these were the first articulate words,

‘will ye no let me hear what the man wants, wi’ your yaffing?’

‘Am I far from Kippletringan, good dame?’

‘Frae Kippletringan!!!’ in an exalted tone of wonder, which we can but

faintly express by three points of admiration. ‘Ow, man! ye should hae

hadden eassel to Kippletringan; ye maun gae back as far as the whaap, and

baud the whaap till ye come to Ballenloan, and then--’

‘This will never do, good dame! my horse is almost quite knocked up; can

you not give me a night’s lodgings?’

‘Troth can I no; I am a lone woman, for James he’s awa to Drumshourloch

Fair with the year-aulds, and I daurna for my life open the door to ony o’

your gang-there-out sort o’ bodies.’

‘But what must I do then, good dame? for I can’t sleep here upon the road

all night.’

‘Troth, I kenna, unless ye like to gae down and speer for quarters at the

Place. I’se warrant they’ll tak ye in, whether ye be gentle or semple.’

‘Simple enough, to be wandering here at such a time of night,’ thought

Mannering, who was ignorant of the meaning of the phrase; ‘but how shall I

get to the PLACE, as you call it?’

‘Ye maun baud wessel by the end o’ the loan, and take tent o’ the

jaw-hole.’

‘O, if ye get to eassel and wessel again, I am undone! Is there nobody

that could guide me to this Place? I will pay him handsomely.’

The word pay operated like magic. ‘Jock, ye villain,’ exclaimed the voice

from the interior, ‘are ye lying routing there, and a young gentleman

seeking the way to the Place? Get up, ye fause loon, and show him the way

down the muckle loaning. He’ll show you the way, sir, and I’se warrant

ye’ll be weel put up; for they never turn awa naebody frae the door; and

ye ‘ll be come in the canny moment, I’m thinking, for the laird’s

servant--that’s no to say his body-servant, but the helper like--rade

express by this e’en to fetch the houdie, and he just staid the drinking

o’ twa pints o’ tippenny to tell us how my leddy was ta’en wi’ her pains.’

‘Perhaps,’ said Mannering, ‘at such a time a stranger’s arrival might be

inconvenient?’

‘Hout, na, ye needna be blate about that; their house is muckle eneugh,

and decking time’s aye canty time.’

By this time Jock had found his way into all the intricacies of a tattered

doublet and more tattered pair of breeches, and sallied forth, a great

white-headed, bare-legged, lubberly boy of twelve years old, so exhibited

by the glimpse of a rush-light which his half-naked mother held in such a

manner as to get a peep at the stranger without greatly exposing herself

to view in return. Jock moved on westward by the end of the house, leading

Mannering’s horse by the bridle, and piloting with some dexterity along

the little path which bordered the formidable jaw-hole, whose vicinity the

stranger was made sensible of by means of more organs than one. His guide

then dragged the weary hack along a broken and stony cart-track, next over

a ploughed field, then broke down a slap, as he called it, in a drystone

fence, and lugged the unresisting animal through the breach, about a rood

of the simple masonry giving way in the splutter with which he passed.

Finally, he led the way through a wicket into something which had still

the air of an avenue, though many of the trees were felled. The roar of

the ocean was now near and full, and the moon, which began to make her

appearance, gleamed on a turreted and apparently a ruined mansion of

considerable extent. Mannering fixed his eyes upon it with a disconsolate

sensation.
