

CHAPTER IV

Come and see’ trust thine own eyes

A fearful sign stands in the house of life,

An enemy a fiend lurks close behind

The radiance of thy planet O be warned!

COLERIDGE, from SCHILLER

The belief in astrology was almost universal in the middle of the

seventeenth century; it began to waver and become doubtful towards the

close of that period, and in the beginning of the eighteenth the art fell

into general disrepute, and even under general ridicule. Yet it still

retained many partizans even in the seats of learning. Grave and studious

men were loath to relinquish the calculations which had early become the

principal objects of their studies, and felt reluctant to descend from the

predominating height to which a supposed insight into futurity, by the

power of consulting abstract influences and conjunctions, had exalted them

over the rest of mankind.

Among those who cherished this imaginary privilege with undoubting faith

was an old clergyman with whom Mannering was placed during his youth. He

wasted his eyes in observing the stars, and his brains in calculations

upon their various combinations. His pupil, in early youth, naturally

caught some portion of his enthusiasm, and laboured for a time to make

himself master of the technical process of astrological research; so that,

before he became convinced of its absurdity, William Lilly himself would

have allowed him ‘a curious fancy and piercing judgment in resolving a

question of nativity.’

On the present occasion he arose as early in the morning as the shortness

of the day permitted, and proceeded to calculate the nativity of the young

heir of Ellangowan. He undertook the task secundum artem, as well to keep

up appearances as from a sort of curiosity to know whether he yet

remembered, and could practise, the imaginary science. He accordingly

erected his scheme, or figure of heaven, divided into its twelve houses,

placed the planets therein according to the ephemeris, and rectified their

position to the hour and moment of the nativity. Without troubling our

readers with the general prognostications which judicial astrology would

have inferred from these circumstances, in this diagram there was one

significator which pressed remarkably upon our astrologer’s attention.

Mars, having dignity in the cusp of the twelfth house, threatened

captivity or sudden and violent death to the native; and Mannering, having

recourse to those further rules by which diviners pretend to ascertain the

vehemency of this evil direction, observed from the result that three

periods would be particularly hazardous--his fifth, his tenth, his

twenty-first year.

It was somewhat remarkable that Mannering had once before tried a similar

piece of foolery at the instance of Sophia Wellwood, the young lady to

whom he was attached, and that a similar conjunction of planetary

influence threatened her with death or imprisonment in her thirty-ninth

year. She was at this time eighteen; so that, according to the result of

the scheme in both cases, the same year threatened her with the same

misfortune that was presaged to the native or infant whom that night had

introduced into the world. Struck with this coincidence, Mannering

repeated his calculations; and the result approximated the events

predicted, until at length the same month, and day of the month, seemed

assigned as the period of peril to both.

It will be readily believed that, in mentioning this circumstance, we lay

no weight whatever upon the pretended information thus conveyed. But it

often happens, such is our natural love for the marvellous, that we

willingly contribute our own efforts to beguile our better judgments.

Whether the coincidence which I have mentioned was really one of those

singular chances which sometimes happen against all ordinary calculations;

or whether Mannering, bewildered amid the arithmetical labyrinth and

technical jargon of astrology, had insensibly twice followed the same clue

to guide him out of the maze; or whether his imagination, seduced by some

point of apparent resemblance, lent its aid to make the similitude between

the two operations more exactly accurate than it might otherwise have

been, it is impossible to guess; but the impression upon his mind that the

results exactly corresponded was vividly and indelibly strong.

He could not help feeling surprise at a coincidence so singular and

unexpected. ‘Does the devil mingle in the dance, to avenge himself for our

trifling with an art said to be of magical origin? Or is it possible, as

Bacon and Sir Thomas Browne admit, that there is some truth in a sober and

regulated astrology, and that the influence of the stars is not to be

denied, though the due application of it by the knaves who pretend to

practise the art is greatly to be suspected?’ A moment’s consideration of

the subject induced him to dismiss this opinion as fantastical, and only

sanctioned by those learned men either because they durst not at once

shock the universal prejudices of their age, or because they themselves

were not altogether freed from the contagious influence of a prevailing

superstition. Yet the result of his calculations in these two instances

left so unpleasing an impression on his mind that, like Prospero, he

mentally relinquished his art, and resolved, neither in jest nor earnest,

ever again to practise judicial astrology.

He hesitated a good deal what he should say to the Laird of Ellangowan

concerning the horoscope of his first-born; and at length resolved plainly

to tell him the judgment which he had formed, at the same time acquainting

him with the futility of the rules of art on which he had proceeded. With

this resolution he walked out upon the terrace.

If the view of the scene around Ellangowan had been pleasing by moonlight,

it lost none of its beauty by the light of the morning sun. The land, even

in the month of November, smiled under its influence. A steep but regular

ascent led from the terrace to the neighbouring eminence, and conducted

Mannering to the front of the old castle. It consisted of two massive

round towers projecting deeply and darkly at the extreme angles of a

curtain, or flat wall, which united them, and thus protecting the main

entrance, that opened through a lofty arch in the centre of the curtain

into the inner court of the castle. The arms of the family, carved in

freestone, frowned over the gateway, and the portal showed the spaces

arranged by the architect for lowering the portcullis and raising the

drawbridge. A rude farm-gate, made of young fir-trees nailed together, now

formed the only safeguard of this once formidable entrance. The esplanade

in front of the castle commanded a noble prospect.

The dreary scene of desolation through which Mannering’s road had lain on

the preceding evening was excluded from the view by some rising ground,

and the landscape showed a pleasing alternation of hill and dale,

intersected by a river, which was in some places visible, and hidden in

others, where it rolled betwixt deep and wooded banks. The spire of a

church and the appearance of some houses indicated the situation of a

village at the place where the stream had its junction with the ocean. The

vales seemed well cultivated, the little inclosures into which they were

divided skirting the bottom of the hills, and sometimes carrying their

lines of straggling hedgerows a little way up the ascent. Above these were

green pastures, tenanted chiefly by herds of black cattle, then the staple

commodity of the country, whose distant low gave no unpleasing animation

to the landscape. The remoter hills were of a sterner character, and, at

still greater distance, swelled into mountains of dark heath, bordering

the horizon with a screen which gave a defined and limited boundary to the

cultivated country, and added at the same time the pleasing idea that it

was sequestered and solitary. The sea-coast, which Mannering now saw in

its extent, corresponded in variety and beauty with the inland view. In

some places it rose into tall rocks, frequently crowned with the ruins of

old buildings, towers, or beacons, which, according to tradition, were

placed within sight of each other, that, in times of invasion or civil

war, they might communicate by signal for mutual defence and protection.

Ellangowan Castle was by far the most extensive and important of these

ruins, and asserted from size and situation the superiority which its

founders were said once to have possessed among the chiefs and nobles of

the district. In other places the shore was of a more gentle description,

indented with small bays, where the land sloped smoothly down, or sent

into the sea promontories covered with wood.

ENLARGE 

A scene so different from what last night’s journey had presaged produced

a proportional effect upon Mannering. Beneath his eye lay the modern

house--an awkward mansion, indeed, in point of architecture, but well

situated, and with a warm, pleasant exposure. ‘How happily,’ thought our

hero, ‘would life glide on in such a retirement! On the one hand, the

striking remnants of ancient grandeur, with the secret consciousness of

family pride which they inspire; on the other, enough of modern elegance

and comfort to satisfy every moderate wish. Here then, and with thee,

Sophia!’

We shall not pursue a lover’s day-dream any farther. Mannering stood a

minute with his arms folded, and then turned to the ruined castle.

On entering the gateway, he found that the rude magnificence of the inner

court amply corresponded with the grandeur of the exterior. On the one

side ran a range of windows lofty and large, divided by carved mullions of

stone, which had once lighted the great hall of the castle; on the other

were various buildings of different heights and dates, yet so united as to

present to the eye a certain general effect of uniformity of front. The

doors and windows were ornamented with projections exhibiting rude

specimens of sculpture and tracery, partly entire and partly broken down,

partly covered by ivy and trailing plants, which grew luxuriantly among

the ruins. That end of the court which faced the entrance had also been

formerly closed by a range of buildings; but owing, it was said, to its

having been battered by the ships of the Parliament under Deane, during

the long civil war, this part of the castle was much more ruinous than the

rest, and exhibited a great chasm, through which Mannering could observe

the sea, and the little vessel (an armed lugger), which retained her

station in the centre of the bay. [Footnote: The outline of the above

description, as far as the supposed ruins are concerned, will be found

somewhat to resemble the noble remains of Carlaverock Castle, six or seven

miles from Dumfries, and near to Lochar Moss.] While Mannering was gazing

round the ruins, he heard from the interior of an apartment on the left

hand the voice of the gipsy he had seen on the preceding evening. He soon

found an aperture through which he could observe her without being himself

visible; and could not help feeling that her figure, her employment, and

her situation conveyed the exact impression of an ancient sibyl.

She sate upon a broken corner-stone in the angle of a paved apartment,

part of which she had swept clean to afford a smooth space for the

evolutions of her spindle. A strong sunbeam through a lofty and narrow

window fell upon her wild dress and features, and afforded her light for

her occupation; the rest of the apartment was very gloomy. Equipt in a

habit which mingled the national dress of the Scottish common people with

something of an Eastern costume, she spun a thread drawn from wool of

three different colours, black, white, and grey, by assistance of those

ancient implements of housewifery now almost banished from the land, the

distaff and spindle. As she spun, she sung what seemed to be a charm.

Mannering, after in vain attempting to make himself master of the exact

words of her song, afterwards attempted the following paraphrase of what,

from a few intelligible phrases, he concluded to be its purport:--

Twist ye, twine ye! even so

Mingle shades of joy and woe,

Hope, and fear, and peace, and strife,

In the thread of human life.

While the mystic twist is spinning,

And the infant’s life beginning,

Dimly seen through twilight bending,

Lo, what varied shapes attending!

Passions wild, and Follies vain,

Pleasures soon exchanged for pain,

Doubt, and Jealousy, and Fear

In the magic dance appear.

Now they wax, and now they dwindle,

Whirling with the whirling spindle.

Twist ye, twine ye! even so

Mingle human bliss and woe.

Ere our translator, or rather our free imitator, had arranged these

stanzas in his head, and while he was yet hammering out a rhyme for

DWINDLE, the task of the sibyl was accomplished, or her wool was expended.

She took the spindle, now charged with her labours, and, undoing the

thread gradually, measured it by casting it over her elbow and bringing

each loop round between her forefinger and thumb. When she had measured it

out, she muttered to herself--’A hank, but not a haill ane--the full years

o’ three score and ten, but thrice broken, and thrice to OOP (i.e. to

unite); he’ll be a lucky lad an he win through wi’t.’

Our hero was about to speak to the prophetess, when a voice, hoarse as the

waves with which it mingled, hallooed twice, and with increasing

impatience--’Meg, Meg Merrilies! Gipsy--hag--tausend deyvils!’

‘I am coming, I am coming, Captain,’ answered Meg; and in a moment or two

the impatient commander whom she addressed made his appearance from the

broken part of the ruins.




