

CHAPTER IV

You have fed upon my seignories,

Dispark’d my parks, and fell’d my forest woods,

From mine own windows torn my household coat,

Razed out my impress, leaving me no sign,

Save men’s opinions and my living blood,

To show the world I am a gentleman.

Richard II.

When the boat which carried the worthy captain on board his vessel had

accomplished that task, the sails began to ascend, and the ship was got

under way. She fired three guns as a salute to the house of Ellangowan,

and then shot away rapidly before the wind, which blew off shore, under

all the sail she could crowd.

‘Ay, ay,’ said the Laird, who had sought Mannering for some time, and now

joined him, ‘there they go--there go the free-traders--there go Captain

Dirk Hatteraick and the Yungfrauw Hagenslaapen, half Manks, half Dutchman,

half devil! run out the boltsprit, up mainsail, top and top-gallant sails,

royals, and skyscrapers, and away--follow who can! That fellow, Mr.

Mannering, is the terror of all the excise and custom-house cruisers; they

can make nothing of him; he drubs them, or he distances them;--and,

speaking of excise, I come to bring you to breakfast; and you shall have

some tea, that--’

Mannering by this time was aware that one thought linked strangely on to

another in the concatenation of worthy Mr. Bertram’s ideas,

Like orient pearls at random strung;

and therefore, before the current of his associations had drifted farther

from the point he had left, he brought him back by some inquiry about Dirk

Hatteraick.

‘O he’s a--a--gude sort of blackguard fellow eneugh; naebody cares to

trouble him--smuggler, when his guns are in ballast--privateer, or pirate,

faith, when he gets them mounted. He has done more mischief to the revenue

folk than ony rogue that ever came out of Ramsay.’

‘But, my good sir, such being his character, I wonder he has any

protection and encouragement on this coast.’

‘Why, Mr. Mannering, people must have brandy and tea, and there’s none in

the country but what comes this way; and then there’s short accounts, and

maybe a keg or two, or a dozen pounds, left at your stable-door, instead

of a d--d lang account at Christmas from Duncan Robb, the grocer at

Kippletringan, who has aye a sum to make up, and either wants ready money

or a short-dated bill. Now, Hatteraick will take wood, or he’ll take bark,

or he’ll take barley, or he’ll take just what’s convenient at the time.

I’ll tell you a gude story about that. There was ance a laird--that’s

Macfie of Gudgeonford,--he had a great number of kain hens--that’s hens

that the tenant pays to the landlord, like a sort of rent in kind. They

aye feed mine very ill; Luckie Finniston sent up three that were a shame

to be seen only last week, and yet she has twelve bows sowing of victual;

indeed her goodman, Duncan Finniston--that’s him that’s gone--(we must all

die, Mr. Mannering, that’s ower true)--and, speaking of that, let us live

in the meanwhile, for here’s breakfast on the table, and the Dominie ready

to say the grace.’

The Dominie did accordingly pronounce a benediction, that exceeded in

length any speech which Mannering had yet heard him utter. The tea, which

of course belonged to the noble Captain Hatteraick’s trade, was pronounced

excellent. Still Mannering hinted, though with due delicacy, at the risk

of encouraging such desperate characters. ‘Were it but in justice to the

revenue, I should have supposed--’

‘Ah, the revenue lads’--for Mr. Bertram never embraced a general or

abstract idea, and his notion of the revenue was personified in the

commissioners, surveyors, comptrollers, and riding officers whom he

happened to know--’the revenue lads can look sharp eneugh out for

themselves, no ane needs to help them; and they have a’ the soldiers to

assist them besides; and as to justice--you ‘ll be surprised to hear it,

Mr. Mannering, but I am not a justice of peace!’

Mannering assumed the expected look of surprise, but thought within

himself that the worshipful bench suffered no great deprivation from

wanting the assistance of his good-humoured landlord. Mr. Bertram had now

hit upon one of the few subjects on which he felt sore, and went on with

some energy.

‘No, sir, the name of Godfrey Bertram of Ellangowan is not in the last

commission, though there’s scarce a carle in the country that has a

plough-gate of land, but what he must ride to quarter-sessions and write

J.P. after his name. I ken fu’ weel whom I am obliged to--Sir Thomas

Kittlecourt as good as tell’d me he would sit in my skirts if he had not

my interest at the last election; and because I chose to go with my own

blood and third cousin, the Laird of Balruddery, they keepit me off the

roll of freeholders; and now there comes a new nomination of justices, and

I am left out! And whereas they pretend it was because I let David

Mac-Guffog, the constable, draw the warrants, and manage the business his

ain gate, as if I had been a nose o’ wax, it’s a main untruth; for I

granted but seven warrants in my life, and the Dominie wrote every one of

them--and if it had not been that unlucky business of Sandy Mac-Gruthar’s,

that the constables should have keepit twa or three days up yonder at the

auld castle, just till they could get conveniency to send him to the

county jail--and that cost me eneugh o’ siller. But I ken what Sir Thomas

wants very weel--it was just sic and siclike about the seat in the kirk o’

Kilmagirdle--was I not entitled to have the front gallery facing the

minister, rather than Mac-Crosskie of Creochstone, the son of Deacon

Mac-Crosskie, the Dumfries weaver?’

Mannering expressed his acquiescence in the justice of these various

complaints.

‘And then, Mr. Mannering, there was the story about the road and the

fauld-dike. I ken Sir Thomas was behind there, and I said plainly to the

clerk to the trustees that I saw the cloven foot, let them take that as

they like. Would any gentleman, or set of gentlemen, go and drive a road

right through the corner of a fauld-dike and take away, as my agent

observed to them, like twa roods of gude moorland pasture? And there was

the story about choosing the collector of the cess--’

‘Certainly, sir, it is hard you should meet with any neglect in a country

where, to judge from the extent of their residence, your ancestors must

have made a very important figure.’

‘Very true, Mr. Mannering; I am a plain man and do not dwell on these

things, and I must needs say I have little memory for them; but I wish ye

could have heard my father’s stories about the auld fights of the

Mac-Dingawaies--that’s the Bertrams that now is--wi’ the Irish and wi’ the

Highlanders that came here in their berlings from Ilay and Cantire; and

how they went to the Holy Land--that is, to Jerusalem and Jericho, wi’ a’

their clan at their heels--they had better have gaen to Jamaica, like Sir

Thomas Kittlecourt’s uncle--and how they brought hame relics like those

that Catholics have, and a flag that’s up yonder in the garret. If they

had been casks of muscavado and puncheons of rum it would have been better

for the estate at this day; but there’s little comparison between the auld

keep at Kittlecourt and the castle o’ Ellangowan; I doubt if the keep’s

forty feet of front. But ye make no breakfast, Mr. Mannering; ye’re no

eating your meat; allow me to recommend some of the kipper. It was John

Hay that catcht it, Saturday was three weeks, down at the stream below

Hempseed ford,’ etc. etc. etc.

The Laird, whose indignation had for some time kept him pretty steady to

one topic, now launched forth into his usual roving style of conversation,

which gave Mannering ample time to reflect upon the disadvantages

attending the situation which an hour before he had thought worthy of so

much envy. Here was a country gentleman, whose most estimable quality

seemed his perfect good-nature, secretly fretting himself and murmuring

against others for causes which, compared with any real evil in life, must

weigh like dust in the balance. But such is the equal distribution of

Providence. To those who lie out of the road of great afflictions are

assigned petty vexations which answer all the purpose of disturbing their

serenity; and every reader must have observed that neither natural apathy

nor acquired philosophy can render country gentlemen insensible to the

grievances which occur at elections, quarter-sessions, and meetings of

trustees.

Curious to investigate the manners of the country, Mannering took the

advantage of a pause in good Mr. Bertram’s string of stories to inquire

what Captain Hatteraick so earnestly wanted with the gipsy woman.

‘O, to bless his ship, I suppose. You must know, Mr. Mannering, that these

free-traders, whom the law calls smugglers, having no religion, make it

all up in superstition; and they have as many spells and charms and

nonsense--’

‘Vanity and waur!’ said the Dominie;’ it is a trafficking with the Evil

One. Spells, periapts, and charms are of his device--choice arrows out of

Apollyon’s quiver.’

‘Hold your peace, Dominie; ye’re speaking for ever’--by the way, they were

the first words the poor man had uttered that morning, excepting that he

said grace and returned thanks--’Mr. Mannering cannot get in a word for

ye! And so, Mr. Mannering, talking of astronomy and spells and these

matters, have ye been so kind as to consider what we were speaking about

last night?’

‘I begin to think, Mr. Bertram, with your worthy friend here, that I have

been rather jesting with edge-tools; and although neither you nor I, nor

any sensible man, can put faith in the predictions of astrology, yet, as

it has sometimes happened that inquiries into futurity, undertaken in

jest, have in their results produced serious and unpleasant effects both

upon actions and characters, I really wish you would dispense with my

replying to your question.’

It was easy to see that this evasive answer only rendered the Laird’s

curiosity more uncontrollable. Mannering, however, was determined in his

own mind not to expose the infant to the inconveniences which might have

arisen from his being supposed the object of evil prediction. He therefore

delivered the paper into Mr. Bertram’s hand, and requested him to keep it

for five years with the seal unbroken, until the month of November was

expired. After that date had intervened he left him at liberty to examine

the writing, trusting that, the first fatal period being then safely

overpassed, no credit would be paid to its farther contents. This Mr.

Bertram was content to promise, and Mannering, to ensure his fidelity,

hinted at misfortunes which would certainly take place if his injunctions

were neglected. The rest of the day, which Mannering, by Mr. Bertram’s

invitation, spent at Ellangowan, passed over without anything remarkable;

and on the morning of that which followed the traveller mounted his

palfrey, bade a courteous adieu to his hospitable landlord and to his

clerical attendant, repeated his good wishes for the prosperity of the

family, and then, turning his horse’s head towards England, disappeared

from the sight of the inmates of Ellangowan. He must also disappear from

that of our readers, for it is to another and later period of his life

that the present narrative relates.