

CHAPTER VI

Next, the Justice,

In fair round belly with good capon lined,

With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,

Full of wise saws and modern instances--

And so he plays his part

--As You Like It

When Mrs. Bertram of Ellangowan was able to hear the news of what had

passed during her confinement, her apartment rung with all manner of

gossiping respecting the handsome young student from Oxford who had told

such a fortune by the stars to the young Laird, ‘blessings on his dainty

face.’ The form, accent, and manners of the stranger were expatiated upon.

His horse, bridle, saddle, and stirrups did not remain unnoticed. All this

made a great impression upon the mind of Mrs. Bertram, for the good lady

had no small store of superstition.

Her first employment, when she became capable of a little work, was to

make a small velvet bag for the scheme of nativity which she had obtained

from her husband. Her fingers itched to break the seal, but credulity

proved stronger than curiosity; and she had the firmness to inclose it, in

all its integrity, within two slips of parchment, which she sewed round it

to prevent its being chafed. The whole was then put into the velvet bag

aforesaid, and hung as a charm round the neck of the infant, where his

mother resolved it should remain until the period for the legitimate

satisfaction of her curiosity should arrive.

The father also resolved to do his part by the child in securing him a

good education; and, with the view that it should commence with the first

dawnings of reason, Dominie Sampson was easily induced to renounce his

public profession of parish schoolmaster, make his constant residence at

the Place, and, in consideration of a sum not quite equal to the wages of

a footman even at that time, to undertake to communicate to the future

Laird of Ellangowan all the erudition which he had, and all the graces and

accomplishments which--he had not indeed, but which he had never

discovered that he wanted. In this arrangement the Laird found also his

private advantage, securing the constant benefit of a patient auditor, to

whom he told his stories when they were alone, and at whose expense he

could break a sly jest when he had company.

About four years after this time a great commotion took place in the

county where Ellangowan is situated.

Those who watched the signs of the times had long been of opinion that a

change of ministry was about to take place; and at length, after a due

proportion of hopes, fears, and delays, rumours from good authority and

bad authority, and no authority at all; after some clubs had drank Up with

this statesman and others Down with him; after riding, and running, and

posting, and addressing, and counter-addressing, and proffers of lives and

fortunes, the blow was at length struck, the administration of the day was

dissolved, and parliament, as a natural consequence, was dissolved also.

Sir Thomas Kittlecourt, like other members in the same situation, posted

down to his county, and met but an indifferent reception. He was a

partizan of the old administration; and the friends of the new had already

set about an active canvass in behalf of John Featherhead, Esq., who kept

the best hounds and hunters in the shire. Among others who joined the

standard of revolt was Gilbert Glossin, writer in--, agent for the Laird

of Ellangowan. This honest gentleman had either been refused some favour

by the old member, or, what is as probable, he had got all that he had the

most distant pretension to ask, and could only look to the other side for

fresh advancement. Mr. Glossin had a vote upon Ellangowan’s property; and

he was now determined that his patron should have one also, there being no

doubt which side Mr. Bertram would embrace in the contest. He easily

persuaded Ellangowan that it would be creditable to him to take the field

at the head of as strong a party as possible; and immediately went to

work, making votes, as every Scotch lawyer knows how, by splitting and

subdividing the superiorities upon this ancient and once powerful barony.

These were so extensive that, by dint of clipping and paring here, adding

and eking there, and creating over-lords upon all the estate which Bertram

held of the crown, they advanced at the day of contest at the head of ten

as good men of parchment as ever took the oath of trust and possession.

This strong reinforcement turned the dubious day of battle. The principal

and his agent divided the honour; the reward fell to the latter

exclusively. Mr. Gilbert Glossin was made clerk of the peace, and Godfrey

Bertram had his name inserted in a new commission of justices, issued

immediately upon the sitting of the parliament.

This had been the summit of Mr. Bertram’s ambition; not that he liked

either the trouble or the responsibility of the office, but he thought it

was a dignity to which he was well entitled, and that it had been withheld

from him by malice prepense. But there is an old and true Scotch proverb,

‘Fools should not have chapping sticks’; that is, weapons of offence. Mr.

Bertram was no sooner possessed of the judicial authority which he had so

much longed for than he began to exercise it with more severity than

mercy, and totally belied all the opinions which had hitherto been formed

of his inert good-nature. We have read somewhere of a justice of peace

who, on being nominated in the commission, wrote a letter to a bookseller

for the statutes respecting his official duty in the following

orthography--’Please send the ax relating to a gustus pease.’ No doubt,

when this learned gentleman had possessed himself of the axe, he hewed the

laws with it to some purpose. Mr. Bertram was not quite so ignorant of

English grammar as his worshipful predecessor; but Augustus Pease himself

could not have used more indiscriminately the weapon unwarily put into his

hand.

In good earnest, he considered the commission with which he had been

entrusted as a personal mark of favour from his sovereign; forgetting that

he had formerly thought his being deprived of a privilege, or honour,

common to those of his rank was the result of mere party cabal. He

commanded his trusty aid-de-camp, Dominie Sampson, to read aloud the

commission; and at the first words, ‘The King has been pleased to

appoint’--’Pleased!’ he exclaimed in a transport of gratitude; ‘honest

gentleman! I’m sure he cannot be better pleased than I am.’

Accordingly, unwilling to confine his gratitude to mere feelings or verbal

expressions, he gave full current to the new-born zeal of office, and

endeavoured to express his sense of the honour conferred upon him by an

unmitigated activity in the discharge of his duty. New brooms, it is said,

sweep clean; and I myself can bear witness that, on the arrival of a new

housemaid, the ancient, hereditary, and domestic spiders who have spun

their webs over the lower division of my bookshelves (consisting chiefly

of law and divinity) during the peaceful reign of her predecessor, fly at

full speed before the probationary inroads of the new mercenary. Even so

the Laird of Ellangowan ruthlessly commenced his magisterial reform, at

the expense of various established and superannuated pickers and stealers

who had been his neighbours for half a century. He wrought his miracles

like a second Duke Humphrey; and by the influence of the beadle’s rod

caused the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the palsied to labour. He

detected poachers, black-fishers, orchard-breakers, and pigeon-shooters;

had the applause of the bench for his reward, and the public credit of an

active magistrate.

All this good had its rateable proportion of evil. Even an admitted

nuisance of ancient standing should not be abated without some caution.

The zeal of our worthy friend now involved in great distress sundry

personages whose idle and mendicant habits his own lachesse had

contributed to foster, until these habits had become irreclaimable, or

whose real incapacity for exertion rendered them fit objects, in their own

phrase, for the charity of all well-disposed Christians. The

‘long-remembered beggar,’ who for twenty years had made his regular rounds

within the neighbourhood, received rather as an humble friend than as an

object of charity, was sent to the neighbouring workhouse. The decrepit

dame, who travelled round the parish upon a hand-barrow, circulating from

house to house like a bad shilling, which every one is in haste to pass to

his neighbour,--she, who used to call for her bearers as loud, or louder,

than a traveller demands post-horses,--even she shared the same disastrous

fate. The ‘daft Jock,’ who, half knave, half idiot, had been the sport of

each succeeding race of village children for a good part of a century, was

remitted to the county bridewell, where, secluded from free air and

sunshine, the only advantages he was capable of enjoying, he pined and

died in the course of six months. The old sailor, who had so long rejoiced

the smoky rafters of every kitchen in the country by singing ‘Captain

Ward’ and ‘Bold Admiral Benbow,’ was banished from the county for no

better reason than that he was supposed to speak with a strong Irish

accent. Even the annual rounds of the pedlar were abolished by the

Justice, in his hasty zeal for the administration of rural police.

These things did not pass without notice and censure. We are not made of

wood or stone, and the things which connect themselves with our hearts and

habits cannot, like bark or lichen, be rent away without our missing them.

The farmer’s dame lacked her usual share of intelligence, perhaps also the

self-applause which she had felt while distributing the awmous (alms), in

shape of a gowpen (handful) of oatmeal, to the mendicant who brought the

news. The cottage felt inconvenience from interruption of the petty trade

carried on by the itinerant dealers. The children lacked their supply of

sugarplums and toys; the young women wanted pins, ribbons, combs, and

ballads; and the old could no longer barter their eggs for salt, snuff,

and tobacco. All these circumstances brought the busy Laird of Ellangowan

into discredit, which was the more general on account of his former

popularity. Even his lineage was brought up in judgment against him. They

thought ‘naething of what the like of Greenside, or Burnville, or

Viewforth might do, that were strangers in the country; but Ellangowan!

that had been a name amang them since the Mirk Monanday, and lang

before--HIM to be grinding the puir at that rate! They ca’d his

grandfather the Wicked Laird; but, though he was whiles fractious aneuch,

when he got into roving company and had ta’en the drap drink, he would

have scorned to gang on at this gate. Na, na, the muckle chumlay in the

Auld Place reeked like a killogie in his time, and there were as mony puir

folk riving at the banes in the court, and about the door, as there were

gentles in the ha’. And the leddy, on ilka Christmas night as it came

round, gae twelve siller pennies to ilka puir body about, in honour of the

twelve apostles like. They were fond to ca’ it papistrie; but I think our

great folk might take a lesson frae the papists whiles. They gie another

sort o’ help to puir folk than just dinging down a saxpence in the brod on

the Sabbath, and kilting, and scourging, and drumming them a’ the sax days

o’ the week besides.’

Such was the gossip over the good twopenny in every ale-house within three

or four miles of Ellangowan, that being about the diameter of the orbit in

which our friend Godfrey Bertram, Esq., J. P., must be considered as the

principal luminary. Still greater scope was given to evil tongues by the

removal of a colony of gipsies, with one of whom our reader is somewhat

acquainted, and who had for a great many years enjoyed their chief

settlement upon the estate of Ellangowan.