

CHAPTER VIII

So the red Indian, by Ontario’s side,

Nursed hardy on the brindled panther’s hide,

As fades his swarthy race, with anguish sees

The white man’s cottage rise beneath the trees;

He leaves the shelter of his native wood,

He leaves the murmur of Ohio’s flood,

And forward rushing in indignant grief,

Where never foot has trod the fallen leaf,

He bends his course where twilight reigns sublime.

O’er forests silent since the birth of time.

SCENES OF INFANCY.

In tracing the rise and progress of the Scottish Maroon war, we must not

omit to mention that years had rolled on, and that little Harry Bertram,

one of the hardiest and most lively children that ever made a sword and

grenadier’s cap of rushes, now approached his fifth revolving birthday. A

hardihood of disposition, which early developed itself, made him already a

little wanderer; he was well acquainted with every patch of lea ground and

dingle around Ellangowan, and could tell in his broken language upon what

baulks grew the bonniest flowers, and what copse had the ripest nuts. He

repeatedly terrified his attendants by clambering about the ruins of the

old castle, and had more than once made a stolen excursion as far as the

gipsy hamlet.

On these occasions he was generally brought back by Meg Merrilies, who,

though she could not be prevailed upon to enter the Place of Ellangowan

after her nephew had been given up to the press-gang, did not apparently

extend her resentment to the child. On the contrary, she often contrived

to waylay him in his walks, sing him a gipsy song, give him a ride upon

her jackass, and thrust into his pocket a piece of gingerbread or a

red-cheeked apple. This woman’s ancient attachment to the family, repelled

and checked in every other direction, seemed to rejoice in having some

object on which it could yet repose and expand itself. She prophesied a

hundred times, ‘that young Mr. Harry would be the pride o’ the family, and

there hadna been sic a sprout frae the auld aik since the death of Arthur

Mac-Dingawaie, that was killed in the battle o’ the Bloody Bay; as for the

present stick, it was good for nothing but fire-wood.’ On one occasion,

when the child was ill, she lay all night below the window, chanting a

rhyme which she believed sovereign as a febrifuge, and could neither be

prevailed upon to enter the house nor to leave the station she had chosen

till she was informed that the crisis was over.

The affection of this woman became matter of suspicion, not indeed to the

Laird, who was never hasty in suspecting evil, but to his wife, who had

indifferent health and poor spirits. She was now far advanced in a second

pregnancy, and, as she could not walk abroad herself, and the woman who

attended upon Harry was young and thoughtless, she prayed Dominie Sampson

to undertake the task of watching the boy in his rambles, when he should

not be otherwise accompanied. The Dominie loved his young charge, and was

enraptured with his own success in having already brought him so far in

his learning as to spell words of three syllables. The idea of this early

prodigy of erudition being carried off by the gipsies, like a second Adam

Smith,[Footnote: The father of Economical Philosophy was, when a child,

actually carried off by gipsies, and remained some hours in their

possession.] was not to be tolerated; and accordingly, though the charge

was contrary to all his habits of life, he readily undertook it, and might

be seen stalking about with a mathematical problem in his head, and his

eye upon a child of five years old, whose rambles led him into a hundred

awkward situations. Twice was the Dominie chased by a cross-grained cow,

once he fell into the brook crossing at the stepping-stones, and another

time was bogged up to the middle in the slough of Lochend, in attempting

to gather a water-lily for the young Laird. It was the opinion of the

village matrons who relieved Sampson on the latter occasion, ‘that the

Laird might as weel trust the care o’ his bairn to a potatoe bogle’; but

the good Dominie bore all his disasters with gravity and serenity equally

imperturbable. ‘Pro-di-gi-ous!’ was the only ejaculation they ever

extorted from the much-enduring man.

ENLARGE 

The Laird had by this time determined to make root-and-branch work with

the Maroons of Derncleugh. The old servants shook their heads at his

proposal, and even Dominie Sampson ventured upon an indirect remonstrance.

As, however, it was couched in the oracular phrase, ‘Ne moveas Camerinam,’

neither the allusion, nor the language in which it was expressed, were

calculated for Mr. Bertram’s edification, and matters proceeded against

the gipsies in form of law. Every door in the hamlet was chalked by the

ground-officer, in token of a formal warning to remove at next term.

Still, however, they showed no symptoms either of submission or of

compliance. At length the term-day, the fatal Martinmas, arrived, and

violent measures of ejection were resorted to. A strong posse of

peace-officers, sufficient to render all resistance vain, charged the

inhabitants to depart by noon; and, as they did not obey, the officers, in

terms of their warrant, proceeded to unroof the cottages, and pull down

the wretched doors and windows--a summary and effectual mode of ejection

still practised in some remote parts of Scotland when a tenant proves

refractory. The gipsies for a time beheld the work of destruction in

sullen silence and inactivity; then set about saddling and loading their

asses, and making preparations for their departure. These were soon

accomplished, where all had the habits of wandering Tartars; and they set

forth on their journey to seek new settlements, where their patrons should

neither be of the quorum nor custos rotulorum.

Certain qualms of feeling had deterred Ellangowan from attending in person

to see his tenants expelled. He left the executive part of the business to

the officers of the law, under the immediate direction of Frank Kennedy, a

supervisor, or riding-officer, belonging to the excise, who had of late

become intimate at the Place, and of whom we shall have more to say in the

next chapter. Mr. Bertram himself chose that day to make a visit to a

friend at some distance. But it so happened, notwithstanding his

precautions, that he could not avoid meeting his late tenants during their

retreat from his property.

It was in a hollow way, near the top of a steep ascent, upon the verge of

the Ellangowan estate, that Mr. Bertram met the gipsy procession. Four or

five men formed the advanced guard, wrapped in long loose great-coats that

hid their tall slender figures, as the large slouched hats, drawn over

their brows, concealed their wild features, dark eyes, and swarthy faces.

Two of them carried long fowling-pieces, one wore a broadsword without a

sheath, and all had the Highland dirk, though they did not wear that

weapon openly or ostentatiously. Behind them followed the train of laden

asses, and small carts or TUMBLERS, as they were called in that country,

on which were laid the decrepit and the helpless, the aged and infant part

of the exiled community. The women in their red cloaks and straw hats, the

elder children with bare heads and bare feet, and almost naked bodies, had

the immediate care of the little caravan. The road was narrow, running

between two broken banks of sand, and Mr. Bertram’s servant rode forward,

smacking his whip with an air of authority, and motioning to the drivers

to allow free passage to their betters. His signal was unattended to. He

then called to the men who lounged idly on before, ‘Stand to your beasts’

heads, and make room for the Laird to pass.’

‘He shall have his share of the road,’ answered a male gipsy from under

his slouched and large-brimmed hat, and without raising his face, ‘and he

shall have nae mair; the highway is as free to our cuddies as to his

gelding.’

The tone of the man being sulky, and even menacing, Mr. Bertram thought it

best to put his dignity in his pocket, and pass by the procession quietly,

on such space as they chose to leave for his accommodation, which was

narrow enough. To cover with an appearance of indifference his feeling of

the want of respect with which he was treated, he addressed one of the

men, as he passed him without any show of greeting, salute, or

recognition--’Giles Baillie,’ he said, ‘have you heard that your son

Gabriel is well?’ (The question respected the young man who had been

pressed.)

‘If I had heard otherwise,’ said the old man, looking up with a stern and

menacing countenance, ‘you should have heard of it too.’ And he plodded on

his way, tarrying no further question. [Footnote: This anecdote is a

literal fact.] When the Laird had pressed on with difficulty among a crowd

of familiar faces, which had on all former occasions marked his approach

with the reverence due to that of a superior being, but in which he now

only read hatred and contempt, and had got clear of the throng, he could

not help turning his horse, and looking back to mark the progress of their

march. The group would have been an excellent subject for the pencil of

Calotte. The van had already reached a small and stunted thicket, which

was at the bottom of the hill, and which gradually hid the line of march

until the last stragglers disappeared.

His sensations were bitter enough. The race, it is true, which he had thus

summarily dismissed from their ancient place of refuge, was idle and

vicious; but had he endeavoured to render them otherwise? They were not

more irregular characters now than they had been while they were admitted

to consider themselves as a sort of subordinate dependents of his family;

and ought the mere circumstance of his becoming a magistrate to have made

at once such a change in his conduct towards them? Some means of

reformation ought at least to have been tried before sending seven

families at once upon the wide world, and depriving them of a degree of

countenance which withheld them at least from atrocious guilt. There was

also a natural yearning of heart on parting with so many known and

familiar faces; and to this feeling Godfrey Bertram was peculiarly

accessible, from the limited qualities of his mind, which sought its

principal amusements among the petty objects around him. As he was about

to turn his horse’s head to pursue his journey, Meg Merrilies, who had

lagged behind the troop, unexpectedly presented herself.

She was standing upon one of those high precipitous banks which, as we

before noticed, overhung the road, so that she was placed considerably

higher than Ellangowan, even though he was on horseback; and her tall

figure, relieved against the clear blue sky, seemed almost of supernatural

stature. We have noticed that there was in her general attire, or rather

in her mode of adjusting it, somewhat of a foreign costume, artfully

adopted perhaps for the purpose of adding to the effect of her spells and

predictions, or perhaps from some traditional notions respecting the dress

of her ancestors. On this occasion she had a large piece of red cotton

cloth rolled about her head in the form of a turban, from beneath which

her dark eyes flashed with uncommon lustre. Her long and tangled black

hair fell in elf-locks from the folds of this singular head-gear. Her

attitude was that of a sibyl in frenzy, and she stretched out in her right

hand a sapling bough which seemed just pulled.

‘I’ll be d--d,’ said the groom, ‘if she has not been cutting the young

ashes in the dukit park!’ The Laird made no answer, but continued to look

at the figure which was thus perched above his path.

‘Ride your ways,’ said the gipsy, ‘ride your ways, Laird of Ellangowan;

ride your ways, Godfrey Bertram! This day have ye quenched seven smoking

hearths; see if the fire in your ain parlour burn the blyther for that. Ye

have riven the thack off seven cottar houses; look if your ain roof-tree

stand the faster. Ye may stable your stirks in the shealings at

Derncleugh; see that the hare does not couch on the hearthstane at

Ellangowan. Ride your ways, Godfrey Bertram; what do ye glower after our

folk for? There’s thirty hearts there that wad hae wanted bread ere ye had

wanted sunkets, and spent their life-blood ere ye had scratched your

finger. Yes; there’s thirty yonder, from the auld wife of an hundred to

the babe that was born last week, that ye have turned out o’ their bits o’

bields, to sleep with the tod and the blackcock in the muirs! Ride your

ways, Ellangowan. Our bairns are hinging at our weary backs; look that

your braw cradle at hame be the fairer spread up; not that I am wishing

ill to little Harry, or to the babe that’s yet to be born--God forbid--and

make them kind to the poor, and better folk than their father! And now,

ride e’en your ways; for these are the last words ye’ll ever hear Meg

Merrilies speak, and this is the last reise that I’ll ever cut in the

bonny woods of Ellangowan.’

So saying, she broke the sapling she held in her hand, and flung it into

the road. Margaret of Anjou, bestowing on her triumphant foes her

keen-edged malediction, could not have turned from them with a gesture

more proudly contemptuous. The Laird was clearing his voice to speak, and

thrusting his hand in his pocket to find a half-crown; the gipsy waited

neither for his reply nor his donation, but strode down the hill to

overtake the caravan.

Ellangowan rode pensively home; and it was remarkable that he did not

mention this interview to any of his family. The groom was not so

reserved; he told the story at great length to a full audience in the

kitchen, and concluded by swearing, that ‘if ever the devil spoke by the

mouth of a woman, he had spoken by that of Meg Merrilies that blessed

day.’