

CHAPTER IX

Paint Scotland greeting ower her thrissle,

Her mutchkin stoup as toom’s a whistle,

And d--n’d excisemen in a bustle,

Seizing a stell,

Triumphant crushin’t like a mussel,

Or lampit shell

BURNS.

During the period of Mr. Bertram’s active magistracy, he did not forget

the affairs of the revenue. Smuggling, for which the Isle of Man then

afforded peculiar facilities, was general, or rather universal, all along

the southwestern coast of Scotland. Almost all the common people were

engaged in these practices; the gentry connived at them, and the officers

of the revenue were frequently discountenanced in the exercise of their

duty by those who should have protected them.

There was at this period, employed as a riding-officer or supervisor, in

that part of the country a certain Francis Kennedy, already named in our

narrative--a stout, resolute, and active man, who had made seizures to a

great amount, and was proportionally hated by those who had an interest in

the fair trade, as they called the pursuit of these contraband

adventurers. This person was natural son to a gentleman of good family,

owing to which circumstance, and to his being of a jolly, convivial

disposition, and singing a good song, he was admitted to the occasional

society of the gentlemen of the country, and was a member of several of

their clubs for practising athletic games, at which he was particularly

expert.

At Ellangowan Kennedy was a frequent and always an acceptable guest. His

vivacity relieved Mr. Bertram of the trouble of thought, and the labour

which it cost him to support a detailed communication of ideas; while the

daring and dangerous exploits which he had undertaken in the discharge of

his office formed excellent conversation. To all these revenue adventures

did the Laird of Ellangowan seriously incline, and the amusement which he

derived from Kennedy’s society formed an excellent reason for

countenancing and assisting the narrator in the execution of his invidious

and hazardous duty.

‘Frank Kennedy,’ he said, ‘was a gentleman, though on the wrang side of

the blanket; he was connected with the family of Ellangowan through the

house of Glengubble. The last Laird of Glengubble would have brought the

estate into the Ellangowan line; but, happening to go to Harrigate, he

there met with Miss Jean Hadaway--by the by, the Green Dragon at Harrigate

is the best house of the twa--but for Frank Kennedy, he’s in one sense a

gentleman born, and it’s a shame not to support him against these

blackguard smugglers.’

After this league had taken place between judgment and execution, it

chanced that Captain Dirk Hatteraick had landed a cargo of spirits and

other contraband goods upon the beach not far from Ellangowan, and,

confiding in the indifference with which the Laird had formerly regarded

similar infractions of the law, he was neither very anxious to conceal nor

to expedite the transaction. The consequence was that Mr. Frank Kennedy,

armed with a warrant from Ellangowan, and supported by some of the Laird’s

people who knew the country, and by a party of military, poured down upon

the kegs, bales, and bags, and after a desperate affray, in which severe

wounds were given and received, succeeded in clapping the broad arrow upon

the articles, and bearing them off in triumph to the next custom-house.

Dirk Hatteraick vowed, in Dutch, German, and English, a deep and full

revenge, both against the gauger and his abettors; and all who knew him

thought it likely he would keep his word.

A few days after the departure of the gipsy tribe, Mr. Bertram asked his

lady one morning at breakfast whether this was not little Harry’s

birthday.

‘Five years auld exactly, this blessed day,’ answered the lady; ‘so we may

look into the English gentleman’s paper.’

Mr. Bertram liked to show his authority in trifles. ‘No, my dear, not till

to-morrow. The last time I was at quarter-sessions the sheriff told us

that DIES--that dies inceptus--in short, you don’t understand Latin, but

it means that a term-day is not begun till it’s ended.’

‘That sounds like nonsense, my dear.’

‘May be so, my dear; but it may be very good law for all that. I am sure,

speaking of term-days, I wish, as Frank Kennedy says, that Whitsunday

would kill Martinmas and be hanged for the murder; for there I have got a

letter about that interest of Jenny Cairns’s, and deil a tenant’s been at

the Place yet wi’ a boddle of rent, nor will not till Candlemas. But,

speaking of Frank Kennedy, I daresay he’ll be here the day, for he was

away round to Wigton to warn a king’s ship that’s lying in the bay about

Dirk Hatteraick’s lugger being on the coast again, and he’ll be back this

day; so we’ll have a bottle of claret and drink little Harry’s health.’

‘I wish,’ replied the lady, ‘Frank Kennedy would let Dirk Hatteraick

alane. What needs he make himself mair busy than other folk? Cannot he

sing his sang, and take his drink, and draw his salary, like Collector

Snail, honest man, that never fashes ony body? And I wonder at you, Laird,

for meddling and making. Did we ever want to send for tea or brandy frae

the borough-town when Dirk Hatteraick used to come quietly into the bay?’

‘Mrs. Bertram, you know nothing of these matters. Do you think it becomes

a magistrate to let his own house be made a receptacle for smuggled goods?

Frank Kennedy will show you the penalties in the act, and ye ken yoursell

they used to put their run goods into the Auld Place of Ellangowan up by

there.’

‘Oh dear, Mr. Bertram, and what the waur were the wa’s and the vault o’

the auld castle for having a whin kegs o’ brandy in them at an orra time?

I am sure ye were not obliged to ken ony thing about it; and what the waur

was the King that the lairds here got a soup o’ drink and the ladies their

drap o’ tea at a reasonable rate?--it’s a shame to them to pit such taxes

on them!--and was na I much the better of these Flanders head and pinners

that Dirk Hatteraick sent me a’ the way from Antwerp? It will be lang or

the King sends me ony thing, or Frank Kennedy either. And then ye would

quarrel with these gipsies too! I expect every day to hear the barnyard’s

in a low.’

‘I tell you once more, my dear, you don’t understand these things--and

there’s Frank Kennedy coming galloping up the avenue.’

‘Aweel! aweel! Ellangowan,’ said the lady, raising her voice as the Laird

left the room, ‘I wish ye may understand them yoursell, that’s a’!’

From this nuptial dialogue the Laird joyfully escaped to meet his faithful

friend, Mr. Kennedy, who arrived in high spirits. ‘For the love of life,

Ellangowan,’ he said, ‘get up to the castle! you’ll see that old fox Dirk

Hatteraick, and his Majesty’s hounds in full cry after him.’ So saying, he

flung his horse’s bridle to a boy, and ran up the ascent to the old

castle, followed by the Laird, and indeed by several others of the family,

alarmed by the sound of guns from the sea, now distinctly heard.

On gaining that part of the ruins which commanded the most extensive

outlook, they saw a lugger, with all her canvass crowded, standing across

the bay, closely pursued by a sloop of war, that kept firing upon the

chase from her bows, which the lugger returned with her stern-chasers.

‘They’re but at long bowls yet,’ cried Kennedy, in great exultation, ‘but

they will be closer by and by. D--n him, he’s starting his cargo! I see

the good Nantz pitching overboard, keg after keg! That’s a d--d ungenteel

thing of Mr. Hatteraick, as I shall let him know by and by. Now, now!

they’ve got the wind of him! that’s it, that’s it! Hark to him! hark to

him! Now, my dogs! now, my dogs! Hark to Ranger, hark!’

‘I think,’ said the old gardener to one of the maids, ‘the ganger’s fie,’

by which word the common people express those violent spirits which they

think a presage of death.

Meantime the chase continued. The lugger, being piloted with great

ability, and using every nautical shift to make her escape, had now

reached, and was about to double, the headland which formed the extreme

point of land on the left side of the bay, when a ball having hit the yard

in the slings, the mainsail fell upon the deck. The consequence of this

accident appeared inevitable, but could not be seen by the spectators; for

the vessel, which had just doubled the headland, lost steerage, and fell

out of their sight behind the promontory. The sloop of war crowded all

sail to pursue, but she had stood too close upon the cape, so that they

were obliged to wear the vessel for fear of going ashore, and to make a

large tack back into the bay, in order to recover sea-room enough to

double the headland.

‘They ‘ll lose her, by--, cargo and lugger, one or both,’ said Kennedy; ‘I

must gallop away to the Point of Warroch (this was the headland so often

mentioned), and make them a signal where she has drifted to on the other

side. Good-bye for an hour, Ellangowan; get out the gallon punch-bowl and

plenty of lemons. I’ll stand for the French article by the time I come

back, and we’ll drink the young Laird’s health in a bowl that would swim

the collector’s yawl.’ So saying, he mounted his horse and galloped off.

About a mile from the house, and upon the verge of the woods, which, as we

have said, covered a promontory terminating in the cape called the Point

of Warroch, Kennedy met young Harry Bertram, attended by his tutor,

Dominie Sampson. He had often promised the child a ride upon his galloway;

and, from singing, dancing, and playing Punch for his amusement, was a

particular favourite. He no sooner came scampering up the path, than the

boy loudly claimed his promise; and Kennedy, who saw no risk, in indulging

him, and wished to tease the Dominie, in whose visage he read a

remonstrance, caught up Harry from the ground, placed him before him, and

continued his route; Sampson’s ‘Peradventure, Master Kennedy-’ being lost

in the clatter of his horse’s feet. The pedagogue hesitated a moment

whether he should go after them; but Kennedy being a person in full

confidence of the family, and with whom he himself had no delight in

associating, ‘being that he was addicted unto profane and scurrilous

jests,’ he continued his own walk at his own pace, till he reached the

Place of Ellangowan.

The spectators from the ruined walls of the castle were still watching the

sloop of war, which at length, but not without the loss of considerable

time, recovered sea-room enough to weather the Point of Warroch, and was

lost to their sight behind that wooded promontory. Some time afterwards

the discharges of several cannon were heard at a distance, and, after an

interval, a still louder explosion, as of a vessel blown up, and a cloud

of smoke rose above the trees and mingled with the blue sky. All then

separated on their different occasions, auguring variously upon the fate

of the smuggler, but the majority insisting that her capture was

inevitable, if she had not already gone to the bottom.

‘It is near our dinner-time, my dear,’ said Mrs. Bertram to her husband;

‘will it be lang before Mr. Kennedy comes back?’

‘I expect him every moment, my dear,’ said the Laird; ‘perhaps he is

bringing some of the officers of the sloop with him.’

‘My stars, Mr. Bertram! why did not ye tell me this before, that we might

have had the large round table? And then, they’re a’ tired o’ saut meat,

and, to tell you the plain truth, a rump o’ beef is the best part of your

dinner. And then I wad have put on another gown, and ye wadna have been

the waur o’ a clean neck-cloth yoursell. But ye delight in surprising and

hurrying one. I am sure I am no to baud out for ever against this sort of

going on; but when folk’s missed, then they are moaned.’

‘Pshaw, pshaw! deuce take the beef, and the gown, and table, and the

neck-cloth! we shall do all very well. Where’s the Dominie, John? (to a

servant who was busy about the table) where’s the Dominie and little

Harry?’

‘Mr. Sampson’s been at hame these twa hours and mair, but I dinna think

Mr. Harry cam hame wi’ him.’

‘Not come hame wi’ him?’ said the lady; ‘desire Mr. Sampson to step this

way directly.’

‘Mr. Sampson,’ said she, upon his entrance, ‘is it not the most

extraordinary thing in this world wide, that you, that have free

up-putting--bed, board, and washing--and twelve pounds sterling a year,

just to look after that boy, should let him out of your sight for twa or

three hours?’

Sampson made a bow of humble acknowledgment at each pause which the angry

lady made in her enumeration of the advantages of his situation, in order

to give more weight to her remonstrance, and then, in words which we will

not do him the injustice to imitate, told how Mr. Francis Kennedy ‘had

assumed spontaneously the charge of Master Harry, in despite of his

remonstrances in the contrary.’

‘I am very little obliged to Mr. Francis Kennedy for his pains,’ said the

lady, peevishly; ‘suppose he lets the boy drop from his horse, and lames

him? or suppose one of the cannons comes ashore and kills him? or

suppose--’

‘Or suppose, my dear,’ said Ellangowan, ‘what is much more likely than

anything else, that they have gone aboard the sloop or the prize, and are

to come round the Point with the tide?’

‘And then they may be drowned,’ said the lady.

‘Verily,’ said Sampson, ‘I thought Mr. Kennedy had returned an hour since.

Of a surety I deemed I heard his horse’s feet.’

‘That,’ said John, with a broad grin, ‘was Grizzel chasing the humble-cow

out of the close.’

Sampson coloured up to the eyes, not at the implied taunt, which he would

never have discovered, or resented if he had, but at some idea which

crossed his own mind. ‘I have been in an error,’ he said; ‘of a surety I

should have tarried for the babe.’ So saying, he snatched his bone-headed

cane and hat, and hurried away towards Warroch wood faster than he was

ever known to walk before or after.

The Laird lingered some time, debating the point with the lady. At length

he saw the sloop of war again make her appearance; but, without

approaching the shore, she stood away to the westward with all her sails

set, and was soon out of sight. The lady’s state of timorous and fretful

apprehension was so habitual that her fears went for nothing with her lord

and master; but an appearance of disturbance and anxiety among the

servants now excited his alarm, especially when he was called out of the

room, and told in private that Mr. Kennedy’s horse had come to the stable

door alone, with the saddle turned round below its belly and the reins of

the bridle broken; and that a farmer had informed them in passing that

there was a smuggling lugger burning like a furnace on the other side of

the Point of Warroch, and that, though he had come through the wood, he

had seen or heard nothing of Kennedy or the young Laird, ‘only there was

Dominie Sampson gaun rampauging about like mad, seeking for them.’

All was now bustle at Ellangowan. The Laird and his servants, male and

female, hastened to the wood of Warroch. The tenants and cottagers in the

neighbourhood lent their assistance, partly out of zeal, partly from

curiosity. Boats were manned to search the sea-shore, which, on the other

side of the Point, rose into high and indented rocks. A vague suspicion

was entertained, though too horrible to be expressed, that the child might

have fallen from one of these cliffs.

The evening had begun to close when the parties entered the wood, and

dispersed different ways in quest of the boy and his companion. The

darkening of the atmosphere, and the hoarse sighs of the November wind

through the naked trees, the rustling of the withered leaves which strewed

the glades, the repeated halloos of the different parties, which often

drew them together in expectation of meeting the objects of their search,

gave a cast of dismal sublimity to the scene.

At length, after a minute and fruitless investigation through the wood,

the searchers began to draw together into one body, and to compare notes.

The agony of the father grew beyond concealment, yet it scarcely equalled

the anguish of the tutor. ‘Would to God I had died for him!’ the

affectionate creature repeated, in notes of the deepest distress. Those

who were less interested rushed into a tumultuary discussion of chances

and possibilities. Each gave his opinion, and each was alternately swayed

by that of the others. Some thought the objects of their search had gone

aboard the sloop; some that they had gone to a village at three miles’

distance; some whispered they might have been on board the lugger, a few

planks and beams of which the tide now drifted ashore.

At this instant a shout was heard from the beach, so loud, so shrill, so

piercing, so different from every sound which the woods that day had rung

to, that nobody hesitated a moment to believe that it conveyed tidings,

and tidings of dreadful import. All hurried to the place, and, venturing

without scruple upon paths which at another time they would have shuddered

to look at, descended towards a cleft of the rock, where one boat’s crew

was already landed. ‘Here, sirs, here! this way, for God’s sake! this way!

this way!’ was the reiterated cry. Ellangowan broke through the throng

which had already assembled at the fatal spot, and beheld the object of

their terror. It was the dead body of Kennedy. At first sight he seemed to

have perished by a fall from the rocks, which rose above the spot on which

he lay in a perpendicular precipice of a hundred feet above the beach. The

corpse was lying half in, half out of the water; the advancing tide,

raising the arm and stirring the clothes, had given it at some distance

the appearance of motion, so that those who first discovered the body

thought that life remained. But every spark had been long extinguished.

‘My bairn! my bairn!’ cried the distracted father, ‘where can he be?’ A

dozen mouths were opened to communicate hopes which no one felt. Some one

at length mentioned--the gipsies! In a moment Ellangowan had reascended

the cliffs, flung himself upon the first horse he met, and rode furiously

to the huts at Derncleugh. All was there dark and desolate; and, as he

dismounted to make more minute search, he stumbled over fragments of

furniture which had been thrown out of the cottages, and the broken wood

and thatch which had been pulled down by his orders. At that moment the

prophecy, or anathema, of Meg Merrilies fell heavy on his mind. ‘You have

stripped the thatch from seven cottages; see that the roof-tree of your

own house stand the surer!’







