

CHAPTER XII

Reputation! that’s man’s idol

Set up against God, the Maker of all laws,

Who hath commanded us we should not kill,

And yet we say we must, for Reputation!

What honest man can either fear his own,

Or else will hurt another’s reputation?

Fear to do base unworthy things is valour;

If they be done to us, to suffer them

Is valour too.

BEN JONSON.

The Colonel was walking pensively up and down the parlour when the

officious landlady reentered to take his commands. Having given them in

the manner he thought would be most acceptable ‘for the good of the

house,’ he begged to detain her a moment.

‘I think,’ he said, ‘madam, if I understood the good people right, Mr.

Bertram lost his son in his fifth year?’

‘O ay, sir, there’s nae doubt o’ that, though there are mony idle clashes

about the way and manner, for it’s an auld story now, and everybody tells

it, as we were doing, their ain way by the ingleside. But lost the bairn

was in his fifth year, as your honour says, Colonel; and the news being

rashly tell’d to the leddy, then great with child, cost her her life that

samyn night; and the Laird never throve after that day, but was just

careless of everything, though, when his daughter Miss Lucy grew up, she

tried to keep order within doors; but what could she do, poor thing? So

now they’re out of house and hauld.’

‘Can you recollect, madam, about what time of the year the child was

lost?’ The landlady, after a pause and some recollection, answered, ‘she

was positive it was about this season’; and added some local recollections

that fixed the date in her memory as occurring about the beginning of

November 17--.

The stranger took two or three turns round the room in silence, but signed

to Mrs. Mac-Candlish not to leave it.

‘Did I rightly apprehend,’ he said, ‘that the estate of Ellangowan is in

the market?’

‘In the market? It will be sell’d the morn to the highest bidder--that’s

no the morn, Lord help me! which is the Sabbath, but on Monday, the first

free day; and the furniture and stocking is to be roupit at the same time

on the ground. It’s the opinion of the haill country that the sale has

been shamefully forced on at this time, when there’s sae little money

stirring in Scotland wi’ this weary American war, that somebody may get

the land a bargain. Deil be in them, that I should say sae!’--the good

lady’s wrath rising at the supposed injustice.

‘And where will the sale take place?’

‘On the premises, as the advertisement says; that’s at the house of

Ellangowan, your honour, as I understand it.’

‘And who exhibits the title-deeds, rent-roll, and plan?’

‘A very decent man, sir; the sheriff-substitute of the county, who has

authority from the Court of Session. He’s in the town just now, if your

honour would like to see him; and he can tell you mair about the loss of

the bairn than ony body, for the sheriff-depute (that’s his principal,

like) took much pains to come at the truth o’ that matter, as I have

heard.’

‘And this gentleman’s name is--’

‘Mac-Morlan, sir; he’s a man o’ character, and weel spoken o’.’

‘Send my compliments--Colonel Mannering’s compliments to him, and I would

be glad he would do me the pleasure of supping with me, and bring these

papers with him; and I beg, good madam, you will say nothing of this to

any one else.’

‘Me, sir? ne’er a word shall I say. I wish your honour (a courtesy), or

ony honourable gentleman that’s fought for his country (another courtesy),

had the land, since the auld family maun quit (a sigh), rather than that

wily scoundrel Glossin, that’s risen on the ruin of the best friend he

ever had. And now I think on’t, I’ll slip on my hood and pattens, and gang

to Mr. Mac-Morlan mysell, he’s at hame e’en now; it’s hardly a step.’

‘Do so, my good landlady, and many thanks; and bid my servant step here

with my portfolio in the meantime.’

In a minute or two Colonel Mannering was quietly seated with his writing

materials before him. We have the privilege of looking over his shoulder

as he writes, and we willingly communicate its substance to our readers.

The letter was addressed to Arthur Mervyn, Esq., of Mervyn Hall,

Llanbraithwaite, Westmoreland. It contained some account of the writer’s

previous journey since parting with him, and then proceeded as follows:--

‘And now, why will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, Mervyn? Do you

think, after the lapse of twenty-five years, battles, wounds,

imprisonment, misfortunes of every description, I can be still the same

lively, unbroken Guy Mannering who climbed Skiddaw with you, or shot

grouse upon Crossfell? That you, who have remained in the bosom of

domestic happiness, experience little change, that your step is as light

and your fancy as full of sunshine, is a blessed effect of health and

temperament, cooperating with content and a smooth current down the course

of life. But MY career has been one of difficulties and doubts and errors.

From my infancy I have been the sport of accident, and, though the wind

has often borne me into harbour, it has seldom been into that which the

pilot destined. Let me recall to you--but the task must be brief--the odd

and wayward fates of my youth, and the misfortunes of my manhood.

‘The former, you will say, had nothing very appalling. All was not for the

best; but all was tolerable. My father, the eldest son of an ancient but

reduced family, left me with little, save the name of the head of the

house, to the protection of his more fortunate brothers. They were so fond

of me that they almost quarrelled about me. My uncle, the bishop, would

have had me in orders, and offered me a living; my uncle, the merchant,

would have put me into a counting-house, and proposed to give me a share

in the thriving concern of Mannering and Marshall, in Lombard Street. So,

between these two stools, or rather these two soft, easy, well-stuffed

chairs of divinity and commerce, my unfortunate person slipped down, and

pitched upon a dragoon saddle. Again, the bishop wished me to marry the

niece and heiress of the Dean of Lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman,

proposed to me the only daughter of old Sloethorn, the great

wine-merchant, rich enough to play at span-counter with moidores and make

thread-papers of bank-notes; and somehow I slipped my neck out of both

nooses, and married--poor, poor Sophia Wellwood.

‘You will say, my military career in India, when I followed my regiment

there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assuredly has.

You will remind me also, that if I disappointed the hopes of my guardians,

I did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at his death,

bequeathed me his blessing, his manuscript sermons, and a curious

portfolio containing the heads of eminent divines of the church of

England; and that my uncle, Sir Paul Mannering, left me sole heir and

executor to his large fortune. Yet this availeth me nothing; I told you I

had that upon my mind which I should carry to my grave with me, a

perpetual aloes in the draught of existence. I will tell you the cause

more in detail than I had the heart to do while under your hospitable

roof. You will often hear it mentioned, and perhaps with different and

unfounded circumstances. I will therefore speak it out; and then let the

event itself, and the sentiments of melancholy with which it has impressed

me, never again be subject of discussion between us.

‘Sophia, as you well know, followed me to India. She was as innocent as

gay; but, unfortunately for us both, as gay as innocent. My own manners

were partly formed by studies I had forsaken, and habits of seclusion not

quite consistent with my situation as commandant of a regiment in a

country where universal hospitality is offered and expected by every

settler claiming the rank of a gentleman. In a moment of peculiar pressure

(you know how hard we were sometimes run to obtain white faces to

countenance our line-of-battle), a young man named Brown joined our

regiment as a volunteer, and, finding the military duty more to his fancy

than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remained with us as a cadet.

Let me do my unhappy victim justice: he behaved with such gallantry on

every occasion that offered that the first vacant commission was

considered as his due. I was absent for some weeks upon a distant

expedition; when I returned I found this young fellow established quite as

the friend of the house, and habitual attendant of my wife and daughter.

It was an arrangement which displeased me in many particulars, though no

objection could be made to his manners or character. Yet I might have been

reconciled to his familiarity in my family, but for the suggestions of

another. If you read over--what I never dare open--the play of “Othello,”

you will have some idea of what followed--I mean of my motives; my

actions, thank God! were less reprehensible. There was another cadet

ambitious of the vacant situation. He called my attention to what he led

me to term coquetry between my wife and this young man. Sophia was

virtuous, but proud of her virtue; and, irritated by my jealousy, she was

so imprudent as to press and encourage an intimacy which she saw I

disapproved and regarded with suspicion. Between Brown and me there

existed a sort of internal dislike. He made an effort or two to overcome

my prejudice; but, prepossessed as I was, I placed them to a wrong motive.

Feeling himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he was

without family and friends, he was naturally more watchful of the

deportment of one who had both.

‘It is odd with what torture I write this letter. I feel inclined,

nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my doing so could put

off the catastrophe which has so long embittered my life. But--it must be

told, and it shall be told briefly.
