

CHAPTER XV

My gold is gone, my money is spent,

My land now take it unto thee.

Give me thy gold, good John o’ the Scales,

And thine for aye my land shall be.

Then John he did him to record draw.

And John he caste him a gods-pennie;

But for every pounde that John agreed,

The land, I wis, was well worth three.

HEIR OF LINNE.

The Galwegian John o’ the Scales was a more clever fellow than his

prototype. He contrived to make himself heir of Linne without the

disagreeable ceremony of ‘telling down the good red gold.’ Miss Bertram no

sooner heard this painful, and of late unexpected, intelligence than she

proceeded in the preparations she had already made for leaving the

mansion-house immediately. Mr. Mac-Morlan assisted her in these

arrangements, and pressed upon her so kindly the hospitality and

protection of his roof, until she should receive an answer from her

cousin, or be enabled to adopt some settled plan of life, that she felt

there would be unkindness in refusing an invitation urged with such

earnestness. Mrs. Mac-Morlan was a ladylike person, and well qualified by

birth and manners to receive the visit, and to make her house agreeable to

Miss Bertram. A home, therefore, and an hospitable reception were secured

to her, and she went on with better heart to pay the wages and receive the

adieus of the few domestics of her father’s family.

Where there are estimable qualities on either side, this task is always

affecting; the present circumstances rendered it doubly so. All received

their due, and even a trifle more, and with thanks and good wishes, to

which some added tears, took farewell of their young mistress. There

remained in the parlour only Mr. Mac-Morlan, who came to attend his guest

to his house, Dominie Sampson, and Miss Bertram. ‘And now,’ said the poor

girl, ‘I must bid farewell to one of my oldest and kindest friends. God

bless you, Mr. Sampson, and requite to you all the kindness of your

instructions to your poor pupil, and your friendship to him that is gone.

I hope I shall often hear from you.’ She slid into his hand a paper

containing some pieces of gold, and rose, as if to leave the room.

Dominie Sampson also rose; but it was to stand aghast with utter

astonishment. The idea of parting from Miss Lucy, go where she might, had

never once occurred to the simplicity of his understanding. He laid the

money on the table. ‘It is certainly inadequate,’ said Mac-Morlan,

mistaking his meaning, ‘but the circumstances--’

Mr. Sampson waved his hand impatiently.--’It is not the lucre, it is not

the lucre; but that I, that have ate of her father’s loaf, and drank of

his cup, for twenty years and more--to think that I am going to leave her,

and to leave her in distress and dolour! No, Miss Lucy, you need never

think it! You would not consent to put forth your father’s poor dog, and

would you use me waur than a messan? No, Miss Lucy Bertram, while I live I

will not separate from you. I’ll be no burden; I have thought how to

prevent that. But, as Ruth said unto Naomi, “Entreat me not to leave thee,

nor to depart from thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou

dwellest I will dwell; thy people shall be my people, and thy God shall be

my God. Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried. The Lord

do so to me, and more also, if aught but death do part thee and me.”’

During this speech, the longest ever Dominie Sampson was known to utter,

the affectionate creature’s eyes streamed with tears, and neither Lucy nor

Mac-Morlan could refrain from sympathising with this unexpected burst of

feeling and attachment. ‘Mr. Sampson,’ said Mac-Morlan, after having had

recourse to his snuff-box and handkerchief alternately, ‘my house is large

enough, and if you will accept of a bed there while Miss Bertram honours

us with her residence, I shall think myself very happy, and my roof much

favoured, by receiving a man of your worth and fidelity.’ And then, with a

delicacy which was meant to remove any objection on Miss Bertram’s part to

bringing with her this unexpected satellite, he added, ‘My business

requires my frequently having occasion for a better accountant than any of

my present clerks, and I should be glad to have recourse to your

assistance in that way now and then.’

‘Of a surety, of a surety,’ said Sampson eagerly; ‘I understand

book-keeping by double entry and the Italian method.’

Our postilion had thrust himself into the room to announce his chaise and

horses; he tarried, unobserved, during this extraordinary scene, and

assured Mrs. Mac-Candlish it was the most moving thing he ever saw; ‘the

death of the grey mare, puir hizzie, was naething till’t.’ This trifling

circumstance afterwards had consequences of greater moment to the Dominie.

The visitors were hospitably welcomed by Mrs. Mac-Morlan, to whom, as well

as to others, her husband intimated that he had engaged Dominie Sampson’s

assistance to disentangle some perplexed accounts, during which occupation

he would, for convenience sake, reside with the family. Mr. Mac-Morlan’s

knowledge of the world induced him to put this colour upon the matter,

aware that, however honourable the fidelity of the Dominie’s attachment

might be both to his own heart and to the family of Ellangowan, his

exterior ill qualified him to be a’squire of dames,’ and rendered him,

upon the whole, rather a ridiculous appendage to a beautiful young woman

of seventeen.

Dominie Sampson achieved with great zeal such tasks as Mr. Mac-Morlan

chose to entrust him with; but it was speedily observed that at a certain

hour after breakfast he regularly disappeared, and returned again about

dinner-time. The evening he occupied in the labour of the office. On

Saturday he appeared before Mac-Morlan with a look of great triumph, and

laid on the table two pieces of gold. ‘What is this for, Dominie?’ said

Mac-Morlan.

‘First to indemnify you of your charges in my behalf, worthy sir; and the

balance for the use of Miss Lucy Bertram.’

‘But, Mr. Sampson, your labour in the office much more than recompenses

me; I am your debtor, my good friend.’

‘Then be it all,’ said the Dominie, waving his hand, ‘for Miss Lucy

Bertram’s behoof.’

‘Well, but, Dominie, this money-’

‘It is honestly come by, Mr. Mac-Morlan; it is the bountiful reward of a

young gentleman to whom I am teaching the tongues; reading with him three

hours daily.’

A few more questions extracted from the Dominie that this liberal pupil

was young Hazlewood, and that he met his preceptor daily at the house of

Mrs. Mac-Candlish, whose proclamation of Sampson’s disinterested

attachment to the young lady had procured him this indefatigable and

bounteous scholar.

Mac-Morlan was much struck with what he heard. Dominie Sampson was

doubtless a very good scholar, and an excellent man, and the classics were

unquestionably very well worth reading; yet that a young man of twenty

should ride seven miles and back again each day in the week, to hold this

sort of TETE-A-TETE of three hours, was a zeal for literature to which he

was not prepared to give entire credit. Little art was necessary to sift

the Dominie, for the honest man’s head never admitted any but the most

direct and simple ideas. ‘Does Miss Bertram know how your time is engaged,

my good friend?’

‘Surely not as yet. Mr. Charles recommended it should be concealed from

her, lest she should scruple to accept of the small assistance arising

from it; but,’ he added, ‘it would not be possible to conceal it long,

since Mr. Charles proposed taking his lessons occasionally in this house.’

‘O, he does!’ said Mac-Morlan.’ Yes, yes, I can understand that better.

And pray, Mr. Sampson, are these three hours entirely spent inconstruing

and translating?’

‘Doubtless, no; we have also colloquial intercourse to sweeten study:

neque semper arcum tendit apollo.’

The querist proceeded to elicit from this Galloway Phoebus what their

discourse chiefly turned upon.

‘Upon our past meetings at Ellangowan; and, truly, I think very often we

discourse concerning Miss Lucy, for Mr. Charles Hazlewood in that

particular resembleth me, Mr. Mac-Morlan. When I begin to speak of her I

never know when to stop; and, as I say (jocularly), she cheats us out of

half our lessons.’

‘O ho!’ thought Mac-Morlan, ‘sits the wind in that quarter? I’ve heard

something like this before.’

He then began to consider what conduct was safest for his protegee, and

even for himself; for the senior Mr. Hazlewood was powerful, wealthy,

ambitious, and vindictive, and looked for both fortune and title in any

connexion which his son might form. At length, having the highest opinion

of his guest’s good sense and penetration, he determined to take an

opportunity, when they should happen to be alone, to communicate the

matter to her as a simple piece of intelligence. He did so in as natural a

manner as he could. ‘I wish you joy of your friend Mr. Sampson’s good

fortune, Miss Bertram; he has got a pupil who pays him two guineas for

twelve lessons of Greek and Latin.’

‘Indeed! I am equally happy and surprised. Who can be so liberal? is

Colonel Mannering returned?’

‘No, no, not Colonel Mannering; but what do you think of your

acquaintance, Mr. Charles Hazlewood? He talks of taking his lessons here;

I wish we may have accommodation for him.’

Lucy blushed deeply. ‘For Heaven’s sake, no, Mr. Mac-Morlan, do not let

that be; Charles Hazlewood has had enough of mischief about that already.’

‘About the classics, my dear young lady?’ wilfully seeming to

misunderstand her; ‘most young gentlemen have so at one period or another,

sure enough; but his present studies are voluntary.’

Miss Bertram let the conversation drop, and her host made no effort to

renew it, as she seemed to pause upon the intelligence in order to form

some internal resolution.

The next day Miss Bertram took an opportunity of conversing with Mr.

Sampson. Expressing in the kindest manner her grateful thanks for his

disinterested attachment, and her joy that he had got such a provision,

she hinted to him that his present mode of superintending Charles

Hazlewood’s studies must be so inconvenient to his pupil that, while that

engagement lasted, he had better consent to a temporary separation, and

reside either with his scholar or as near him as might be. Sampson

refused, as indeed she had expected, to listen a moment to this

proposition; he would not quit her to be made preceptor to the Prince of

Wales. ‘But I see,’ he added, ‘you are too proud to share my pittance; and

peradventure I grow wearisome unto you.’

‘No indeed; you were my father’s ancient, almost his only, friend. I am

not proud; God knows, I have no reason to be so. You shall do what you

judge best in other matters; but oblige me by telling Mr. Charles

Hazlewood that you had some conversation with me concerning his studies,

and that I was of opinion that his carrying them on in this house was

altogether impracticable, and not to be thought of.’

Dominie Sampson left her presence altogether crest-fallen, and, as he shut

the door, could not help muttering the ‘varium et mutabile’ of Virgil.

Next day he appeared with a very rueful visage, and tendered Miss Bertram

a letter. ‘Mr. Hazlewood,’ he said, ‘was to discontinue his lessons,

though he had generously made up the pecuniary loss. But how will he make

up the loss to himself of the knowledge he might have acquired under my

instruction? Even in that one article of writing,--he was an hour before

he could write that brief note, and destroyed many scrolls, four quills,

and some good white paper. I would have taught him in three weeks a firm,

current, clear, and legible hand; he should have been a calligrapher,--but

God’s will be done.’

The letter contained but a few lines, deeply regretting and murmuring

against Miss Bertram’s cruelty, who not only refused to see him, but to

permit him in the most indirect manner to hear of her health and

contribute to her service. But it concluded with assurances that her

severity was vain, and that nothing could shake the attachment of Charles

Hazlewood.

Under the active patronage of Mrs. Mac-Candlish, Sampson picked up some

other scholars--very different indeed from Charles Hazlewood in rank, and

whose lessons were proportionally unproductive. Still, however, he gained

something, and it was the glory of his heart to carry it to Mr. Mac-Morlan

weekly, a slight peculium only subtracted to supply his snuff-box and

tobacco-pouch.

And here we must leave Kippletringan to look after our hero, lest our

readers should fear they are to lose sight of him for another quarter of a

century.