

CHAPTER XVI

Our Polly is a sad slut, nor heeds what we have taught her,

I wonder any man alive will ever rear a daughter,

For when she’s drest with care and cost, all tempting, fine,

and gay,

As men should serve a cucumber, she flings herself away.

Beggar’s Opera.

After the death of Mr. Bertram, Mannering had set out upon a short tour,

proposing to return to the neighbourhood of Ellangowan before the sale of

that property should take place. He went, accordingly, to Edinburgh and

elsewhere, and it was in his return towards the south-western district of

Scotland, in which our scene lies, that, at a post-town about a hundred

miles from Kippletringan, to which he had requested his friend, Mr.

Mervyn, to address his letters, he received one from that gentleman which

contained rather unpleasing intelligence. We have assumed already the

privilege of acting a secretis to this gentleman, and therefore shall

present the reader with an extract from this epistle.

‘I beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for the pain I have given you in

forcing you to open wounds so festering as those your letter referred to.

I have always heard, though erroneously perhaps, that the attentions of

Mr. Brown were intended for Miss Mannering. But, however that were, it

could not be supposed that in your situation his boldness should escape

notice and chastisement. Wise men say that we resign to civil society our

natural rights of self-defence only on condition that the ordinances of

law should protect us. Where the price cannot be paid, the resignation

becomes void. For instance, no one supposes that I am not entitled to

defend my purse and person against a highwayman, as much as if I were a

wild Indian, who owns neither law nor magistracy. The question of

resistance or submission must be determined by my means and situation. But

if, armed and equal in force, I submit to injustice and violence from any

man, high or low, I presume it will hardly be attributed to religious or

moral feeling in me, or in any one but a Quaker. An aggression on my

honour seems to me much the same. The insult, however trifling in itself,

is one of much deeper consequence to all views in life than any wrong

which can be inflicted by a depredator on the highway, and to redress the

injured party is much less in the power of public jurisprudence, or rather

it is entirely beyond its reach. If any man chooses to rob Arthur Mervyn

of the contents of his purse, supposing the said Arthur has not means of

defence, or the skill and courage to use them, the assizes at Lancaster or

Carlisle will do him justice by tucking up the robber; yet who will say I

am bound to wait for this justice, and submit to being plundered in the

first instance, if I have myself the means and spirit to protect my own

property? But if an affront is offered to me, submission under which is to

tarnish my character for ever with men of honour, and for which the twelve

judges of England, with the chancellor to boot, can afford me no redress,

by what rule of law or reason am I to be deterred from protecting what

ought to be, and is, so infinitely dearer to every man of honour than his

whole fortune? Of the religious views of the matter I shall say nothing,

until I find a reverend divine who shall condemn self-defence in the

article of life and property. If its propriety in that case be generally

admitted, I suppose little distinction can be drawn between defence of

person and goods and protection of reputation. That the latter is liable

to be assailed by persons of a different rank in life, untainted perhaps

in morals, and fair in character, cannot affect my legal right of

self-defence. I may be sorry that circumstances have engaged me in

personal strife with such an individual; but I should feel the same sorrow

for a generous enemy who fell under my sword in a national quarrel. I

shall leave the question with the casuists, however; only observing, that

what I have written will not avail either the professed duellist or him

who is the aggressor in a dispute of honour. I only presume to exculpate

him who is dragged into the field by such an offence as, submitted to in

patience, would forfeit for ever his rank and estimation in society.

‘I am sorry you have thoughts of settling in Scotland, and yet glad that

you will still be at no immeasurable distance, and that the latitude is

all in our favour. To move to Westmoreland from Devonshire might make an

East-Indian shudder; but to come to us from Galloway or Dumfries-shire is

a step, though a short one, nearer the sun. Besides, if, as I suspect, the

estate in view be connected with the old haunted castle in which you

played the astrologer in your northern tour some twenty years since, I

have heard you too often describe the scene with comic unction to hope you

will be deterred from making the purchase. I trust, however, the

hospitable gossiping Laird has not run himself upon the shallows, and that

his chaplain, whom you so often made us laugh at, is still in rerum

natura.

‘And here, dear Mannering, I wish I could stop, for I have incredible pain

in telling the rest of my story; although I am sure I can warn you against

any intentional impropriety on the part of my temporary ward, Julia

Mannering. But I must still earn my college nickname of Downright

Dunstable. In one word, then, here is the matter.

‘Your daughter has much of the romantic turn of your disposition, with a

little of that love of admiration which all pretty women share less or

more. She will besides, apparently, be your heiress; a trifling

circumstance to those who view Julia with my eyes, but a prevailing bait

to the specious, artful, and worthless. You know how I have jested with

her about her soft melancholy, and lonely walks at morning before any one

is up, and in the moonlight when all should be gone to bed, or set down to

cards, which is the same thing. The incident which follows may not be

beyond the bounds of a joke, but I had rather the jest upon it came from

you than me.

‘Two or three times during the last fortnight I heard, at a late hour in

the night or very early in the morning, a flageolet play the little Hindu

tune to which your daughter is so partial. I thought for some time that

some tuneful domestic, whose taste for music was laid under constraint

during the day, chose that silent hour to imitate the strains which he had

caught up by the ear during his attendance in the drawing-room. But last

night I sat late in my study, which is immediately under Miss Mannering’s

apartment, and to my surprise I not only heard the flageolet distinctly,

but satisfied myself that it came from the lake under the window. Curious

to know who serenaded us at that unusual hour, I stole softly to the

window of my apartment. But there were other watchers than me. You may

remember, Miss Mannering preferred that apartment on account of a balcony

which opened from her window upon the lake. Well, sir, I heard the sash of

her window thrown up, the shutters opened, and her own voice in

conversation with some person who answered from below. This is not “Much

ado about nothing”; I could not be mistaken in her voice, and such tones,

so soft, so insinuating; and, to say the truth, the accents from below

were in passion’s tenderest cadence too,--but of the sense I can say

nothing. I raised the sash of my own window that I might hear something

more than the mere murmur of this Spanish rendezvous; but, though I used

every precaution, the noise alarmed the speakers; down slid the young

lady’s casement, and the shutters were barred in an instant. The dash of a

pair of oars in the water announced the retreat of the male person of the

dialogue. Indeed, I saw his boat, which he rowed with great swiftness and

dexterity, fly across the lake like a twelve-oared barge. Next morning I

examined some of my domestics, as if by accident, and I found the

gamekeeper, when making his rounds, had twice seen that boat beneath the

house, with a single person, and had heard the flageolet. I did not care

to press any farther questions, for fear of implicating Julia in the

opinions of those of whom they might be asked. Next morning, at breakfast,

I dropped a casual hint about the serenade of the evening before, and I

promise you Miss Mannering looked red and pale alternately. I immediately

gave the circumstance such a turn as might lead her to suppose that my

observation was merely casual. I have since caused a watch-light to be

burnt in my library, and have left the shutters open, to deter the

approach of our nocturnal guest; and I have stated the severity of

approaching winter, and the rawness of the fogs, as an objection to

solitary walks. Miss Mannering acquiesced with a passiveness which is no

part of her character, and which, to tell you the plain truth, is a

feature about the business which I like least of all. Julia has too much

of her own dear papa’s disposition to be curbed in any of her humours,

were there not some little lurking consciousness that it may be as prudent

to avoid debate.

‘Now my story is told, and you will judge what you ought to do. I have not

mentioned the matter to my good woman, who, a faithful secretary to her

sex’s foibles, would certainly remonstrate against your being made

acquainted with these particulars, and might, instead, take it into her

head to exercise her own eloquence on Miss Mannering; a faculty which,

however powerful when directed against me, its legitimate object, might, I

fear, do more harm than good in the case supposed. Perhaps even you

yourself will find it most prudent to act without remonstrating, or

appearing to be aware of this little anecdote. Julia is very like a

certain friend of mine; she has a quick and lively imagination, and keen

feelings, which are apt to exaggerate both the good and evil they find in

life. She is a charming girl, however, as generous and spirited as she is

lovely. I paid her the kiss you sent her with all my heart, and she rapped

my ringers for my reward with all hers. Pray return as soon as you can.

Meantime rely upon the care of, yours faithfully, ‘ARTHUR MERVYN.

‘P.S.--You will naturally wish to know if I have the least guess

concerning the person of the serenader. In truth, I have none. There is no

young gentleman of these parts, who might be in rank or fortune a match

for Miss Julia, that I think at all likely to play such a character. But

on the other side of the lake, nearly opposite to Mervyn Hall, is a d--d

cake-house, the resort of walking gentlemen of all descriptions--poets,

players, painters, musicians--who come to rave, and recite, and madden

about this picturesque land of ours. It is paying some penalty for its

beauties, that they are the means of drawing this swarm of coxcombs

together. But were Julia my daughter, it is one of those sort of fellows

that I should fear on her account. She is generous and romantic, and

writes six sheets a week to a female correspondent; and it’s a sad thing

to lack a subject in such a case, either for exercise of the feelings or

of the pen. Adieu, once more. Were I to treat this matter more seriously

than I have done, I should do injustice to your feelings; were I

altogether to overlook it, I should discredit my own.’

The consequence of this letter was, that, having first despatched the

faithless messenger with the necessary powers to Mr. Mac-Morlan for

purchasing the estate of Ellangowan, Colonel Mannering turned his horse’s

head in a more southerly direction, and neither ‘stinted nor staid’ until

he arrived at the mansion of his friend Mr. Mervyn, upon the banks of one

of the lakes of Westmoreland.