

CHAPTER XVII

Heaven first, in its mercy, taught mortals their letters,

For ladies in limbo, and lovers in fetters,

Or some author, who, placing his persons before ye,

Ungallantly leaves them to write their own story.

POPE, imitated.

When Mannering returned to England, his first object had been to place his

daughter in a seminary for female education, of established character.

Not, however, finding her progress in the accomplishments which he wished

her to acquire so rapid as his impatience expected, he had withdrawn Miss

Mannering from the school at the end of the first quarter. So she had only

time to form an eternal friendship with Miss Matilda Marchmont, a young

lady about her own age, which was nearly eighteen. To her faithful eye

were addressed those formidable quires which issued forth from Mervyn Hall

on the wings of the post while Miss Mannering was a guest there. The

perusal of a few short extracts from these may be necessary to render our

story intelligible.

FIRST EXTRACT

‘Alas! my dearest Matilda, what a tale is mine to tell! Misfortune from

the cradle has set her seal upon your unhappy friend. That we should be

severed for so slight a cause--an ungrammatical phrase in my Italian

exercise, and three false notes in one of Paisiello’s sonatas! But it is a

part of my father’s character, of whom it is impossible to say whether I

love, admire, or fear him the most. His success in life and in war, his

habit of making every obstacle yield before the energy of his exertions,

even where they seemed insurmountable--all these have given a hasty and

peremptory cast to his character, which can neither endure contradiction

nor make allowance for deficiencies. Then he is himself so very

accomplished. Do you know, there was a murmur, half confirmed too by some

mysterious words which dropped from my poor mother, that he possesses

other sciences, now lost to the world, which enable the possessor to

summon up before him the dark and shadowy forms of future events! Does not

the very idea of such a power, or even of the high talent and commanding

intellect which the world may mistake for it,--does it not, dear Matilda,

throw a mysterious grandeur about its possessor? You will call this

romantic; but consider I was born in the land of talisman and spell, and

my childhood lulled by tales which you can only enjoy through the gauzy

frippery of a French translation. O, Matilda, I wish you could have seen

the dusky visages of my Indian attendants, bending in earnest devotion

round the magic narrative, that flowed, half poetry, half prose, from the

lips of the tale-teller! No wonder that European fiction sounds cold and

meagre, after the wonderful effects which I have seen the romances of the

East produce upon their hearers.’

SECOND EXTRACT

‘You are possessed, my dear Matilda, of my bosom-secret, in those

sentiments with which I regard Brown. I will not say his memory; I am

convinced he lives, and is faithful. His addresses to me were countenanced

by my deceased parent, imprudently countenanced perhaps, considering the

prejudices of my father in favour of birth and rank. But I, then almost a

girl, could not be expected surely to be wiser than her under whose charge

nature had placed me. My father, constantly engaged in military duty, I

saw but at rare intervals, and was taught to look up to him with more awe

than confidence. Would to Heaven it had been otherwise! It might have been

better for us all at this day!’

THIRD EXTRACT

‘You ask me why I do not make known to my father that Brown yet lives, at

least that he survived the wound he received in that unhappy duel, and had

written to my mother expressing his entire convalescence, and his hope of

speedily escaping from captivity. A soldier, that “in the trade of war has

oft slain men,” feels probably no uneasiness at reflecting upon the

supposed catastrophe which almost turned me into stone. And should I show

him that letter, does it not follow that Brown, alive and maintaining with

pertinacity the pretensions to the affections of your poor friend for

which my father formerly sought his life, would be a more formidable

disturber of Colonel Mannering’s peace of mind than in his supposed grave?

If he escapes from the hands of these marauders, I am convinced he will

soon be in England, and it will be then time to consider how his existence

is to be disclosed to my father. But if, alas! my earnest and confident

hope should betray me, what would it avail to tear open a mystery fraught

with so many painful recollections? My dear mother had such dread of its

being known, that I think she even suffered my father to suspect that

Brown’s attentions were directed towards herself, rather than permit him

to discover their real object; and O, Matilda, whatever respect I owe to

the memory of a deceased parent, let me do justice to a living one. I

cannot but condemn the dubious policy which she adopted, as unjust to my

father, and highly perilous to herself and me. But peace be with her

ashes! her actions were guided by the heart rather than the head; and

shall her daughter, who inherits all her weakness, be the first to

withdraw the veil from her defects?’

FOURTH EXTRACT ‘MERVYN HALL.

‘If India be the land of magic, this, my dearest Matilda, is the country

of romance. The scenery is such as nature brings together in her sublimest

moods-sounding cataracts--hills which rear their scathed heads to the

sky--lakes that, winding up the shadowy valleys, lead at every turn to yet

more romantic recesses--rocks which catch the clouds of heaven. All the

wildness of Salvator here, and there the fairy scenes of Claude. I am

happy too in finding at least one object upon which my father can share my

enthusiasm. An admirer of nature, both as an artist and a poet, I have

experienced the utmost pleasure from the observations by which he explains

the character and the effect of these brilliant specimens of her power. I

wish he would settle in this enchanting land. But his views lie still

farther north, and he is at present absent on a tour in Scotland, looking,

I believe, for some purchase of land which may suit him as a residence. He

is partial, from early recollections, to that country. So, my dearest

Matilda, I must be yet farther removed from you before I am established in

a home. And O how delighted shall I be when I can say, Come, Matilda, and

be the guest of your faithful Julia!

‘I am at present the inmate of Mr. and Mrs. Mervyn, old friends of my

father. The latter is precisely a good sort of woman, ladylike and

housewifely; but for accomplishments or fancy--good lack, my dearest

Matilda, your friend might as well seek sympathy from Mrs. Teach’em;--you

see I have not forgot school nicknames. Mervyn is a different--quite a

different being from my father, yet he amuses and endures me. He is fat

and good-natured, gifted with strong shrewd sense and some powers of

humour; but having been handsome, I suppose, in his youth, has still some

pretension to be a beau garcon, as well as an enthusiastic agriculturist.

I delight to make him scramble to the tops of eminences and to the foot of

waterfalls, and am obliged in turn to admire his turnips, his lucerne, and

his timothy grass. He thinks me, I fancy, a simple romantic Miss, with

some--the word will be out--beauty and some good-nature; and I hold that

the gentleman has good taste for the female outside, and do not expect he

should comprehend my sentiments farther. So he rallies, hands, and hobbles

(for the dear creature has got the gout too), and tells old stories of

high life, of which he has seen a great deal; and I listen, and smile, and

look as pretty, as pleasant, and as simple as I can, and we do very well.

‘But, alas! my dearest Matilda, how would time pass away, even in this

paradise of romance, tenanted as it is by a pair assorting so ill with the

scenes around them, were it not for your fidelity in replying to my

uninteresting details? Pray do not fail to write three times a week at

least; you can be at no loss what to say.’

FIFTH EXTRACT

‘How shall I communicate what I have now to tell! My hand and heart still

flutter so much, that the task of writing is almost impossible! Did I not

say that he lived? did I not say I would not despair? How could you

suggest, my dear Matilda, that my feelings, considering I had parted from

him so young, rather arose from the warmth of my imagination than of my

heart? O I was sure that they were genuine, deceitful as the dictates of

our bosom so frequently are. But to my tale--let it be, my friend, the

most sacred, as it is the most sincere, pledge of our friendship.

‘Our hours here are early--earlier than my heart, with its load of care,

can compose itself to rest. I therefore usually take a book for an hour or

two after retiring to my own room, which I think I have told you opens to

a small balcony, looking down upon that beautiful lake of which I

attempted to give you a slight sketch. Mervyn Hall, being partly an

ancient building, and constructed with a view to defence, is situated on

the verge of the lake. A stone dropped from the projecting balcony plunges

into water deep enough to float a skiff. I had left my window partly

unbarred, that, before I went to bed, I might, according to my custom,

look out and see the moonlight shining upon the lake. I was deeply engaged

with that beautiful scene in the “Merchant of Venice” where two lovers,

describing the stillness of a summer night, enhance on each other its

charms, and was lost in the associations of story and of feeling which it

awakens, when I heard upon the lake the sound of a flageolet. I have told

you it was Brown’s favourite instrument. Who could touch it in a night

which, though still and serene, was too cold, and too late in the year, to

invite forth any wanderer for mere pleasure? I drew yet nearer the window,

and hearkened with breathless attention; the sounds paused a space, were

then resumed, paused again, and again reached my ear, ever coming nearer

and nearer. At length I distinguished plainly that little Hindu air which

you called my favourite. I have told you by whom it was taught me; the

instrument, the tones, were his own! Was it earthly music, or notes

passing on the wind, to warn me of his death?

‘It was some time ere I could summon courage to step on the balcony;

nothing could have emboldened me to do so but the strong conviction of my

mind that he was still alive, and that we should again meet; but that

conviction did embolden me, and I ventured, though with a throbbing heart.

There was a small skiff with a single person. O, Matilda, it was himself!

I knew his appearance after so long an absence, and through the shadow of

the night, as perfectly as if we had parted yesterday, and met again in

the broad sunshine! He guided his boat under the balcony, and spoke to me;

I hardly knew what he said, or what I replied. Indeed, I could scarcely

speak for weeping, but they were joyful tears. We were disturbed by the

barking of a dog at some distance, and parted, but not before he had

conjured me to prepare to meet him at the same place and hour this

evening.

‘But where and to what is all this tending? Can I answer this question? I

cannot. Heaven, that saved him from death and delivered him from

captivity, that saved my father, too, from shedding the blood of one who

would not have blemished a hair of his head, that Heaven must guide me out

of this labyrinth. Enough for me the firm resolution that Matilda shall

not blush for her friend, my father for his daughter, nor my lover for her

on whom he has fixed his affection.’