The Project Gutenberg EBook of Everybody's Book of Luck, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most

other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions

whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of

the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at

www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have

to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Everybody's Book of Luck

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 10, 2017 [EBook #55082]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYBODY'S BOOK OF LUCK ***

Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright, and the

Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

(This file was produced from images generously made

available by The Internet Archive)

Everybody's

BOOKOF

LUCK

WHITMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY

RACINE, WIS.         POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y.

PRINTED IN U.S.A.

CONTENTS

CHAP.

 

PAGE.

I.

THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK AND BAD LUCK

3

II.

HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?

6

III.

HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING

12

IV.

PALMISTRY—WHAT MAY BE LEARNED FROM HANDS

13

V.

YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS YOUR CHARACTER

32

VI.

YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE

40

VII.

WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?

46

VIII.

HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY

49

IX.

YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED BY THE STARS

55

X.

WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?

59

XI.

WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?

60

XII.

YOUR LUCKY COLOR

65

XIII.

WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?

67

XIV.

DREAMS—WHAT THEY MEAN

72

XV.

TEACUP FORTUNETELLING

83

XVI.

LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS

91

XVII.

THE LUCK OF FLOWERS

99

XVIII.

SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS

104

XIX.

CRYSTAL GAZING

107

XX.

THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS

111

XXI.

FORTUNETELLING BY MEANS OF PLAYING CARDS

113

XXII.

FORTUNETELLING GAMES

137

XXIII.

THE LUCK OF WEDDINGS AND MARRIAGES

151

XXIV.

FOLKLORE AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE MONTHS

159

XXV.

A CALENDAR FOR LOVERS

173

XXVI.

MAKING USEFUL MASCOTS

191

[3]

THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK

AND BAD LUCK

Ask a dozen people whether they have any superstitions, and the majority

will tell you, without hesitation, that they have not the slightest

belief in such things. If the truth is told there are very few of us who do not

cherish some little weaknesses in this direction. One person may believe in

a number of superstitions; another has, perhaps, only a few that are observed;

but he or she that has none at all is a remarkably rare individual.

As a matter of fact, most superstitions are based on reason and sound

common sense, and the man or woman who pays heed to them is acting

intelligently, whether he or she knows it or not. Take, for instance, the

belief that it is unlucky to walk under a ladder. True, the old assertion is

that it is unlucky to do so because Jesus Christ was taken down from the

Cross by means of a ladder. But the more practical reason is that painters

and other men on ladders are very likely to drop things and, if you happen

to be passing at the time, the paintpot or the tools will fall on you.

Of course, the reasons for all superstitions are not so evident as this one

about walking under a ladder: nevertheless, there is a germ of reason in them

all, whether or not we know the reason. Thus, the man or woman who

observes the common superstitions of everyday life is acting wisely. Not

only will he or she avoid a good deal of trouble, but his actions will

provide him with a sense of well-being, and the effect it will have on his

mind, the psychological effect as it is called, is all to the good.

It is not proposed to explain why this or that superstition is worthy of

being observed; in many cases, the reason is obscure; but here we will give

some of the beliefs which are current at the present time.

First of all, you should never pass anybody on the stairs of a private house,

and, while talking of stairs, it may be said that many people believe that,

for someone to fall up a step, is a sign of an approaching wedding.

Never light three cigarettes with the same match unless you are prepared

for a spell of ill-fortune. This superstition gained currency during the War,

probably because a match held long enough to light three cigarettes would

give the enemy a clue to your position, especially at night-time.

If the cord of a picture frame snaps and the picture falls to the ground,

it is an omen that somebody is going to die. If the picture is a portrait

of a living person, then that person's life is the one likely to be terminated.

This omen may be considered a remarkably silly one, with not a shred of

sense to recommend it. Yet how many people can point to instances when

the prophecy has come true!

Of salt, there are several omens. The chief one tells you not to help anybody

to salt; in other words, it is unwise to put some on a person's plate.

Helping them to salt is helping them to sorrow. Another superstition says[4]

that if you spill salt you will be unlucky unless you throw a pinch of it

over your left shoulder.

To break a mirror is known by all as a serious matter. The reason why

it is unlucky, we are told, doubtless finds its origin in a mere association

of ideas. The mirror being broken, the image of the person looking into

it is destroyed: therefore, bad luck in some form must be the fate of the

careless one. What exactly is the penalty one must pay for breaking a

mirror is not definite. Some people speak of seven years of misfortune,

while others claim that it means seven years of celibacy.

To take certain things into the house is the height of folly, if you believe

in superstitions. May or hawthorn blossom is one, though the berries of

this flower seem to have no ill-potency. Peacock's feathers are another.

Somewhat similar is the contention that it is very unlucky to open an

umbrella indoors.

While sitting at the meal-table, there are several things that must not be

done. Helping a friend to salt has been already mentioned, but you must not

allow the knives or forks to become crossed. Quarrels with your friends will

result if you do. Of course, you must not sit down, thirteen of you, around

the table. As is well known, this belief has its origin in the Last Supper,

when our Lord sat at meat with his twelve apostles. On the other hand,

should you taste a fruit for the first time in that season, you have only to

frame a wish and it will be granted. Much the same applies to mince-pies.

You will be awarded with a whole happy month for each pie that you eat at

Christmas-time which is made in a different house. Of course, it is highly

unwise for two people to pour tea out of the same pot at the same meal.

To give a friend an edged tool is sure to cut the friendship, whether it be

a knife, a pair of scissors, a razor or a chisel. When such a gift is to be

made, the usual plan is to sell it to your friend for a penny.

You should never put a shoe on a table, and, to see a pin lying on the

floor and leave it there, is an omen that you will want before you die. As

the jingle runs:

See a pin and let it lie, you're sure to want before you die.

See a pin and pick it up, then you're sure to have good luck.

Elsewhere, a good deal is said about dreams. Here it will be sufficient

to mention one or two items of interest. It is decidedly unlucky to dream

of a baby, yet to dream of a funeral is lucky. The following is worth bearing

in mind:

Friday dream and Saturday told;

Sure to come true, if ever so old.

And here it will be appropriate to recall the fact that it is an unwise

thing to get out of bed on the wrong side. The devil will be with you all the

day, if you do.

You should avoid looking at the new moon through glass; but if you have

a wish that you want fulfilled, you have only to count seven stars on seven

nights in succession. Let it be said, however, that to count seven stars for

this space of time is not as simple as it appears.

[5]

It is unlucky to treasure locks of people's hair, and, should you drop a

glove, it is to your advantage if someone else picks it up for you. If the

fire refuses to light properly in the morning, anticipate a whole day with

the devil.

Everybody knows that one of the luckiest things that can be done is to

pick up a horse-shoe. But it is not generally known that the more nails left

in it, the better. Nor is it sufficiently well recognized that a shoe, hung up,

should have the tips pointing upwards. If they are turned down, the luck

will run out of them.

Naturally, you will never start anything fresh on a Friday, and you

will not cut your fingernails on a Sunday. Regarding fingernails, a poet,

of sorts, has said:

Cut them on Monday, you cut them for news.

Cut them on Tuesday, a new pair of shoes.

Cut them on Wednesday, you cut them for health.

Cut them on Thursday, you cut them for wealth.

Cut them on Friday, a sweetheart you'll know.

Cut them on Saturday, a journey you'll go.

Cut them on Sunday, you cut them for evil:

For all the next week, you'll be ruled by the devil.

Of course, bad luck has not a monopoly on your superstitions, for good

luck has something to say also. To see a piebald horse is fortunate; to find

white heather, four-leaved clover or four-leaved shamrock is even more fortunate.

To open a pea-pod and find ten peas in it is particularly lucky.

For a black cat to come into your house is worth much. To come across a

nickel with a hole in it is not without its merits, but the best thing of

all is to put on some article of clothing inside out, and to wear it all day

long, without being aware of it until bed-time.

[6]