

HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING

Hundreds of dollars are paid each week to professional fortunetellers

by people in all walks of life, in order that they may gain a peep into

the future. These people belong to every class of society; they are of all ages

and they consult the mediums on almost every matter connected with human

existence. There is the industrial magnate, the society girl, and the hard-working

shop assistant, all anxious to peer into the coming months.

Accordingly, the teller of fortunes and the writer of horoscopes is doing

an excellent business. The dollars and the cents are pouring in at a remarkable

rate, and those who read the future, as a profession, are having the

time of their lives.

This state of things is one calculated to make you stop and think for a

moment. Why should not you learn the rudiments of fortunetelling yourself?

Why should not you find out how to read the signs of your own

future and the future of your friends? The subject is interesting; it is not

a difficult one and all you need to know is set out in this book.

Your course of study may well begin with the chapter on Palmistry.

Having mastered that, turn to the one on Handwriting, and follow with

"What do your Bumps Mean?" These three sections will give you a very

useful start and then you might continue with "How Astrology Decides Your

Destiny" and "Your Face is Your Fortune."

The five chapters named will enable you to read people with a great

deal of success, and it should not be long before your friends compliment you

on your accuracy. Probably this will spur you to further efforts, and you

will study the passages on lucky numbers, dreams, tea-cup readings, lucky

colors, etc. These will add a polish to your preliminary knowledge.

Very soon you will gain a reputation as a seer and it will add not a little to

your vanity when people come to you and ask you to read their futures.

In doing so, you will be advised to follow a few rules. Never jump to hasty

conclusions. Weigh all the facts and strike a balance. If the hand says

"yes" and the face says "no," the conclusion is that "it may be." When

disappointing things are noted, be charitable and let the applicant off lightly.

In cases where dire illnesses are portended, suppress the facts or state them

in such a way that the applicant has a chance of avoiding the trouble, if he

or she takes suitable measures. But, whatever happens, never make a statement

for which you have not "chapter and verse."

And this brings me to my last point. Hands, faces, heads and other

characteristics give their readings, but none of these readings should be taken

as absolutely final. The power is within us to fight against our failings and

to better our good qualities. We may even allow our best ones to deteriorate.

That is why two people born at the same time and in the same town need

not grow up exactly alike. And it is also why a small percentage of horoscopes

and fortunes are bound to miss the mark.

[13]

PALMISTRY—WHAT MAY BE LEARNED

FROM HANDS

"There are more things in Heaven and Earth...."

People who can see as far as the ends of their noses and then only

through a fog, declare (with a superior sniff) that Palmistry is nothing but

a trap to catch fools; they call it quackery, or declare perhaps that it is

merely a fake or blind guesswork.

Now, while we would be the first to deny that Palmistry is an exact and

infallible science, yet we just as strongly affirm that it is undoubtedly a most

fascinating and interesting recreation; as to its truth, each one must decide

that question for himself.

For the few who have a wish to take up this study seriously, there are

many now who will naturally wish to know just sufficient to be able to

"tell fortunes." Fortunetellers are always popular at some jolly party or

quiet friendly gathering of an evening.

In this book they will find all the simple information required; on the

other hand the student will find a sincere delight in reading and sifting

thoroughly the numerous books that probe the depths of the subject.

Quite apart from any markings which may be upon the hand, a general

indication of the habits and temperament of the individual in question can

readily be gained by a careful examination of the texture or quality of

the skin.

It were as well to note here that the impressions gained must never be

taken by themselves, but only in conjunction with other confirming signs.

Especially is this so when judging the character of a friend or acquaintance.

TEXTURE OF SKIN.—The skin may, of course, be smooth or rough.

To judge this you should turn the hand in question back upwards; now get

the feel of the skin by actual touch; a smooth, fine-textured skin denotes

a refined nature, and vice versa. This is a very strong indication indeed,

insomuch that should there be other tendencies pointing to coarseness of

nature, this texture of the hand would have a refining effect upon the whole.

ELASTICITY OF THE HAND.—This is best tested by actual grip (as

in shaking hands). All hands naturally present some feeling of elasticity;

this is a matter of comparison, but it is very easy to tell the quick, virile

grip of an elastic hand to the dead fish feeling which a flabby hand gives

us when we grasp it.

A FLEXIBLE HAND denotes an active and energetic person, one who

will be readily adaptable to new conditions. He will always rise to the

occasion, and manfully withstands the buffets of ill-fortune. This type is

always trustworthy and a good friend.

[14]

No. 6.—Beware of these Hands.—A shows a weak, flattened thumb; B a curved little

finger and C a coarse, short thumb. Each has other defects as well.

[15]

A FLABBY HAND—one that does not respond to your grip or responds

but sluggishly—is the hand of an idle man, untrustworthy and inconsistent,

a man of weak and negative character; but be sure to search well for other

confirming signs of this weakness.

THE SHAPE OF THE HAND

A fairly accurate guide to character is certainly contained in the shape

of the hand. Hands may be roughly divided into two classes—broad and

long. A person having a long hand you may judge to have great capacity

for mental effort and matters of detail.

The broad-handed person you may expect to be a strong man physically;

his culture will be bodily rather than mental. He could with advantage

improve his culture by reading, and by enjoying the best music.

THE SHAPE OF THE FINGERS

When an individual is found with square finger-tips, he should make

a good marriage partner; he will be practical—a man of method and

reason. He is punctual, but should cultivate imagination.

POINTED FINGER tips will be found on the hand of the musician,

the painter, and, in fact, anyone who is of artistic temperament.

Persons with these fingers should curb their imagination with reason,

and cultivate the power of doing things, not only dreaming them, though

dreaming is well enough in its way.

TAPERING fingers indicate people of extremes. "Ice and fire" are these

people—impulsive and generous to a fault. They should guard against

undue and morbid sensitiveness, and should cultivate a sane philosophical

outlook upon life. They are capable of the highest, but are frequently their

own worst enemies.

SPATULATE FINGERS.—These are the sportsmen of the world. They

are not worried much by the opinions of others, while they love a busy,

healthy life; a sound mind in a sound body.

GENERAL SHAPE AND FORMATION OF THE HAND

If the hands are knotted with the joints swollen, powers of analysis,

calculation and reflection are shown; philosophers have this type of hand.

SMOOTH fingers and hands indicate the artistic temperament. These

people are frequently inspired, and have curious intuitions concerning coming

events. Musicians, spiritualists, and martyrs are of this type, together

with many folk who are square pegs in round holes; maybe doing work

which is uncongenial to them.

[16]

THE THUMB has also in it certain very marked indications of character.

The three bones (or Phalanges) in the thumb each have their interpretation.

Beginning at the top these should be judged by length as follows:—

1. Will. (The pushing type of man.)

2. Reasoning power. (The thinker or philosopher.)

3. Love.

Thus a long first or top phalange indicates great will power; or if it is

not a certain indication, it points to a definite likelihood of the will being

strong.

THE MOUNTS

Take your subject's hand and examine it closely; a strong magnifying

glass should form part of the equipment of every wise palmist. It will be

seen that there are certain portions of the hands which are raised above

the surface. These are known as "mounts." As will be noticed in the

accompanying picture, we call these mounts by astrological names, a method

adopted from the very earliest times. They are eight in number, named:

Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Apollo, Luna and Mars (of which there

are two).

