

YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS

YOUR CHARACTER

Your handwriting is you; disguise it as you will, it still reveals your character.

As a matter of fact, it is a sheer impossibility for an ordinary person

to alter his or her writing completely. The natural hand and the purposely-changed

hand will bear several resemblances, however hard the individual

may try to make them dissimilar. This is due to the fact that the same

character lies behind both efforts. Not only is your handwriting you, but

the handwriting of your friend is "him or her." This being so, you will

find it a simple matter to arrive at his or her qualities by analyzing a few

lines of the person's handwriting. To become sufficiently expert for this,

you will not need more than half-an-hour's study.

FIRST of all we must attend to the direction of the lines of writing, as,

should these be level, a normal and calm state of mind is shown, generally

reliable, and not subject to change.

When the lines slope toward the right, much energy is indicated; when

the lines slope downward, a lack of energy is shown, usually from depression

which may result from ill health.

If the writing slopes upward with excess, it shows recklessness; if downwards,

with a very sloping inclination, it shows mental depression verging

almost on loss of reason.

If the signature slopes upwards, then we may expect to find personal

ambition, but if downwards, some physical weakness. If instead of the

whole line ascending only words here and there will ascend, this indicates

"hope," but if scattered words ascend and descend in the same line, we may

read a lack of tenacity in emotions.

SECONDLY.—The lines forming the letters may appear:—

(A) Practically upright; or

(B) Sloping slightly to the right.

(C) Sloping very much to the right as if each letter were falling

over the rest.

(D) Sloping to the left, and lastly,

(E) "Back-hand writing."

Between A and B might be called normal.

A Shows pluck and self-possession, and, if pointed, mathematics.

B Tenderness, but should the writing be pointed, a quick, acute mind,

with no sympathy with sentiment.

C Shows indolence; if with pointed letters, mental power, but should

the letters be rounded, mental and physical indolence.

[33]

D Shows a love of ease, while

E Looks peculiar and indicates self-consciousness, and, as a rule, hidden

sentimentality.

THIRDLY.—The writing small and pointed, we get curiosity; if medium

in size, and gradually increasing towards the end of the line, it shows an

outspoken nature; should the writing diminish towards the end of the line

we read tact.

If it is fine and threadlike in appearance, it shows a sensitive mind, diplomacy.

Large writing shows promptness, but if the strokes are very fine, we see

appreciation of other people's work—a connoisseur.

Small, clear writing shows love of the abstruse, and if the lines are very

delicate, a feeling for the mystic. If the writing is extremely small, it shows

pettiness of nature, fussiness over unimportant details.

Letters of different sizes show unreliability of nature, exaggerating trifles

and ignoring more important things.

Light and fine writing means delicacy of feeling, but if carried to excess

it shows fastidiousness.

FOURTHLY.—The connections of the letters with each other must be

judged. If the connecting stroke is long, it shows some facility in talking

and expression, the power of using words well, not talkativeness.

Letters ingeniously connected show constructiveness, but should they be

separate, we get perception and intuition.

Any eccentricity indicates that the person's career has not been ordinary.

Marked originality, especially of capitals, shows unusual taste. Tremulous

tendency resulting neither from illness nor old age—Irritability. Highly

restrained, small—Refractory disposition, difficult to live with. Regular and

well-placed lines, followed by those careless and irregular—A mind quick

to embark on an enterprise, but lacking perseverance. Back-handed less

susceptible than inclined—The head ruling the heart.

Generally the body of the letter or specimen gives the present character,

the signature the past.

CROTCHETS.—Egotism, self-satisfaction (a return upon self.)

HARPOONS (HOOKS).—Tenacity, united perhaps with weak will.

DASHES.—Perfectly straight—Persistence.

Undulating.—Art, levity.

Undulating, beginning or finishing with a crotchet or ungraceful flourish.—Lack

of taste, slight vulgarity.

Light.—Writer attaches little idea to things expressed.

Ending Thickly.—Resolution, desires ideas to carry weight.

Curved Ascendingly.—Versatility; slight inconsistency; speaks without

thought.

[34]

Tremulous.—Timidity, hesitation.

Placed at end of line or paragraph.—Lack of self-assertion.

Ending abruptly, thick and hard.—Distrust, reserve.

Sharply elongated.—Impulsive nature; prudence taught by experience.

Used instead of "full stops."—Cultivated caution.

CAPITAL LETTERS.—Large and well-formed.—Pride.

Print-like in shape.—Dignity.

Thin strokes.—Boasting.

Exaggerated in height.—Love of ceremonial.

The angle very pointed.—Acuteness, penetrative, leadership.

Large and badly-formed.—Egomania.

Large upper hall.—Self-assertion.

Large bases.—Self-confidence.

The capital letter of Christian names larger than that of surname.—Love

of home.

The capital letter of surname larger.—Love of position.

Small capitals.—Lack of self-assertion.

Capital letters made like small ones.—Said to show poetic feeling, love of

Nature.

Print-like in form.—Originality.

Eccentric in any way.—Pose or whim.

Widely spaced.—Love of open air.

Curving far below the line, and almost encircling the word.—Protective

love of animals.

Letters incorrectly used.—Small detail made over-important.

Tendency to replace by print.—Sense of form, artistic and poetic.

SPECIAL LETTERS.—A.M.N.H., G.O., R.U.W.—Normal width.—Well-poised

mind.

Too wide.—Self-contentment, satisfaction.

Nearly touching.—Timidity, want of knowledge of the world.

First leg slightly raised.—Aristocratic tastes.

Second leg exaggerated.—Pose, affectation.

Unconnected, ending with crotchet rentrant.—Egotistical, selfish.

The letters begun and ended with a small crotchet rentrant.—Avarice,

meanness.

Letters and words connected.—Power of assimilating ideas, but lack of

originality; logic.

Letters disconnected even with their parts.—Creative power, want of logic.

Equally connected or disconnected.—Balanced intuition and deduction.

[35]

Last letter increasing in size.—Lack of power of concealment. Decreasing.—Finesse.

Handwriting does not invariably show sex, as the qualities indicated are

common to both men and women.

The writing develops as the soul develops, and imitation comes before

originality.

QUALITIES SHOWN IN HANDWRITING ALPHABETICALLY

ARRANGED

ABILITY.—Small writing, angular, clear, decided capitals.

ACCURACY.—Neat, well-placed lines and words, punctuation correct.

AFFECTION.—Softly sloping writing, rounded, fairly thick.

AMIABILITY.—Rounded letters, often unfinished, medium capitals.

AMBITION.—Large first stroke of capital "M's" ascending lines of writing.

Imposing signature.

ANALYTICAL.—Small-pointed, clear writing, letters divided, decided

capitals.

ARGUMENT.—Words connected, giving logic, and occasional extra long

connecting strokes, small writing. (See A.2.)

AUTHORITY.—Large capitals, especially the letter "I" and first letter of

surname, level crossing to t's.

BOASTFUL.—Large writing, exaggerated capital, flying cross bar to t's.

(See A.1.)

BOLD.—Large well-formed capitals, clear rounded, but not pointed writing.

BROAD-MINDED.—Well-spaced words, clear capitals, O's and A's wide

and rounded.

CANDOUR.—O's and A's open at the top.

CAPRICE.—Eccentric letters, irregular writing, no punctuation.

CARE.—See Accuracy.

CARELESSNESS.—Ill-formed letters, open O's, no punctuation.

CAUTION.—Dashes used instead of full stops.

CEREMONIOUS.—Capitals important, all large above the line, some added

flourishes.

CHANGEABLE.—Letters differently formed, eccentric capitals, variability

of line.
