

YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE

Everybody sums up the faces of his friends and of the people he meets.

It is a habit we all have. But most of us are apt to classify these faces into

groups according to whether the possessors are good-looking, ordinary or

supremely ugly. We say to ourselves, "Isn't So-and-so charming," or alternatively,

"How positively plain is So-and-so."

As a matter of fact, the degree of beauty expressed in an individual's face

ought to count for very little. What ought to count is the character which

his or her features reveal. Let it be said quite definitely that faces indicate

character more accurately than any other physical property of an individual.

A person can change his voice and he can check his actions, but he cannot

alter his features for more than a second at a time, and then only superficially.

Thus it comes about that faces are definite indications of character, and

these indications are fairly easy to read, once the rules are learned. Of

course, all such things as accidental blemishes, such as scars and broken

noses, must be ignored at the outset.

First, let us take the general shape of the face.

No. 12.

THE SHAPE OF THE FACE.—There can be thousands of different

shapes, but the normal is shown by Fig. 1, where the width across

the forehead is more than across the chin. The forehead, the nose and the

rest of the face should be about equal in length.

Add to the width across the forehead and you have a brainy person, a

clear thinker, a person whose opinions are worth considering. Of course,

an excess of width in this place suggests some mental instability.

Fig. 2 shows an entirely different type. It may belong to a jolly person[41]

who is excellent company; but do not go to him for sound advice. There

is not enough length of forehead, nor width of forehead, to house a superabundance

of brains.

Fig. 3 introduces us to a ponderous type, slow-thinking, fond of food, and

with animal instincts lurking in the background of his make-up.

Fig. 4 reveals a long face, narrow for its width. This belongs to a person

who is limited in vision, and who can be very awkward at times. Such an

individual will find it very hard to agree with others, especially in business

matters. He may be deep and more often than not, he is a rather sad

companion.

No. 13.

THE NOSE.—Fig. 1 shows the normal nose, betokening an average

character.

Fig. 2 is too rounded at the tip. Force of character is lacking.

Fig. 3 reveals a drooping line between the tip of the nose and the upper

lip. This stands for a character that loves amusements and is apt to neglect

the real things of life.

Fig. 4 gives a pronounced, fleshy curl where the nose joins the face. This

is a sign that the possessor is a clear thinker, a leader of others, an intelligent

person.

Fig. 5 shows a thin, pointed nose. The possessor is, probably, of a refined

nature, but he or she is apt to be lacking in sympathy, even cruel.

Fig. 6 depicts a curved ridge. This is the nose of a person who lacks a

refined nature. He may be jolly and humorous, but certainly not actuated

by the highest ideals. Many noses of this shape are the result of an accident,

which, of course, does not count.

A long nose indicates cautiousness, watchfulness, and often timidity.

A prominent nose that stands well out from the face shows a desire to

observe and examine things, without the interference of others.

A fleshy tip to the nose displays a kindly nature, and a love of ease.

A short, small nose tells of conceit and a lack of sympathy for others.

[42]

A turned-up nose means that the possessor is a busybody, one who cannot

keep a secret, but may be kind and generous.

THE EYES.—Large eyes denote love of talking and the ability to learn

languages.

Small eyes denote secrecy and close-mindedness.

Full, dark eyes denote love of the opposite sex.

Truthful eyes are set straight in the head.

Untruthful eyes slope towards the nose.

Eyes that slope downwards from the nose are cruel and deceitful.

Eyes set widely apart denote breadth of mind.

Eyes set close together denote narrow-mindedness.

THE CHEEKS.—Full, rounded cheeks denote sociability and a love of

friends.

Thin cheeks denote those who prefer their own company.

Fullness in lower part of cheek denotes love of eating and drinking.

A moderate fullness denotes hospitality.

High cheekbones show that the possessor is very methodical. He or she

is likely to interfere in other people's business.

THE FOREHEAD.—Prominent brows denote a practical disposition.

Fullness in center of forehead denotes a good memory for dates and events.

A broad forehead denotes a humorous disposition.

A rounded forehead denotes musical ability; this is usually accompanied

by curved eyebrows and wavy hair.

THE MOUTH AND LIPS.—When upper lip is deeply grooved down

the center, it denotes modesty and refinement.

A plain upper lip, boldness and forwardness.

A long upper lip denotes self-esteem and self-control.

Redness and fullness in center of lip, love and passion for opposite sex.

Fullness at either side shows love of children and animals.

A mouth that displays the teeth when smiling denotes love of approbation

and attention.

A full, red, well-developed lower lip denotes a kindly, sympathetic disposition.

Thin lips denote a hard, selfish, and unsympathetic nature. The same

with straight lips.

No. 14.

THE CHIN.—A receding chin, as shown in Fig. 1, p. 43, denotes a lack

of firmness. It belongs to a person who has insufficient will of his own.

A chin shaped as Fig. 2 or 3, or midway between these, provides a very

acceptable character. There is determination and grit, without an excess of

these qualities. Fig. 2 may be taken as the normal type.

[43]

Broad, bony structures of the chin denotes conscientiousness and straightforwardness.

Length and projection of chin denotes firmness, stability, and perseverance.

An extremely long and projecting chin denotes stubbornness and obstinacy.

(Fig. 4.)

A full ridge of fat under the chin denotes economy.

WRINKLES.—A wrinkle commencing in the lower cheek and extending

right under the chin, from side to side, is caused from constant talking.

A wrinkle running from the side of the nose, downwards upon the lower

cheek, to the outer corners of the mouth, is a sign of love of approbation.

Whenever in laughter three parallel circular lines are formed in the cheeks

there is a fund of folly in the character.

Wrinkles lying horizontally across the root of the nose denote ability to

command.

Several perpendicular wrinkles between the eyebrows denote a plodding,

persevering disposition.

DIMPLES.—A round dimple in the chin denotes love of the beautiful in

the opposite sex.

Dimples at the outer corners of the mouth are another sign of mirthfulness.

Dimples in the center of cheeks are another sign of approbation.

When a little cleft is seen at the tip of the nose it denotes the natural

critic.

Close attention should always be given to texture and quality of the hair,

eyes, and skin; this is most important, as the coarseness or refinement of

character is shown very plainly to those who take the trouble to notice these

things.

Color of hair, eyes, and skin is also very important; the depth of the feelings

and passions is shown here; poorly colored people are much less passionate

than their deeper colored fellow-creatures.

Thus from dark individuals of coarse quality we expect coarse passions,

and from dark fine-quality individuals deep, refined emotions.

No. 15.

THE EYEBROWS.—Fig. 2 is intended for the eyebrows of a normal

individual. Such a person goes about his duties in an ordinary, intelligent

manner and does his best to make the world a little better place for having

him in it.

[44]

In Fig. 1, the eyebrows have insufficient shape. They belong to an

individual of extremes; he or she is either too determined or devoid of

kindness.

In Fig. 3, the eyebrows are too curved, forming a full semi-circle. This is

a sign of shallowness; they belong to a person who is not going to put himself

out for somebody else.

In Fig. 4, the eyebrows are higher at the outer than at the inner ends.

Such are difficult to diagnose. They may belong to a very jolly, funny person;

but they may also belong to someone absolutely untrustworthy, a foxy

individual, in fact. They should be read in company with other facial signs.

In Fig. 5, the eyebrows meet on the nose. Hesitate before trusting a

person so provided. He may be perfectly reliable, but make sure first.

Nos. 1 to 5 show eyebrows of fine or medium thickness, but Figs. 6 and

7 are coarser and heavier. Those that are neither too fine or too thick are

best, since they are more likely to belong to a well-balanced person. Fine

pencil streaks show a finniky, perhaps unkind nature. Heavy, bushy eyebrows

point to an austere, querulous nature.

In Fig. 7, the upstanding hairs suggest a nature that may derive pleasure

from posing.

A FINAL HINT.—In checking the "points" of a face, it is often found

that one feature may contradict another. This does not prove that the explanations

given above are incorrect. It goes to show that the character of

the individual is not definitely set in one direction. He may vary at times or

he may have the aptitude for fighting against one characteristic in favor

of another. The only sound plan is to assess the character by striking a

balance of all the "points" at issue.

[45]

HAVE YOU A MOLE?

Many people do not like these little marks, but let them be comforted,

for in olden times, according to the wise men of the day,

great reliance was placed on them. Just what a mole means depends

on where it is to be found. The following may describe a

mole of your own:—

RIGHT EYE (above).—Wealth and a happy marriage.

LEFT EYE (above).—You have a great liking for the opposite

sex and you will, thereby, gain much happiness.

TEMPLE.—As above.

NOSE.—You will succeed in business.

CHEEK.—You will be happy, but not be blessed with fame and

fortune.

CHIN.—Fortunate in your choice of friends.

EAR (either).—A contented nature.

ARMS.—A happy nature, but with something of the "don't care"

spirit.

SHOULDERS.—Will face difficulties with fortitude.

HANDS.—A practical nature. Able to take care of yourself.

LEGS.—Strong willed.

NECK.—You have a great deal of patience.

[46]