

WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?

Just feel the shape of your own head, and then ask a friend to let you do

the same thing to him or her. Most likely you will be very surprised at the

difference between the two. You may have bumps in certain places while

your friend has them in totally different parts.

The science of phrenology, which is the reading of bumps, has discovered

that bumps in certain places point to certain characteristics; if you have them,

you must have the characteristics, and, if you have not them, you cannot have

those qualities. In fact, the reading of character through the medium of

bumps is a very definite science, and it is a science that can be easily learned

and applied by almost anyone. Of course, there is much to learn, but there

is no need to know a great deal if you merely want to assess a person's

character in general terms.

A chart is supplied on p. 47, and on it is marked out just enough to

enable you to read a head with ease. Only certain areas are mapped out; the

rest of the head may be the location of bumps, but it does not present the

bumps which are likely to interest us just now.

The areas are as follows:—

1.—Lying at the top of the head, in the center and coming a little way

towards the forehead. If this area is well developed, it shows that the individual

has a benevolent nature. He is generous and kind; he will work

for the good of others and not think only of himself.

If the area is over-developed, the individual will be inclined to favor others

at the expense of his own safety; if it is under-developed, he will be cruel

and selfish.

2.—Situated above but a little behind the eye; usually the place is just

covered by hair. When this area is well developed, it shows that the individual

possesses plenty of happiness and a store of wit and mirth. He is a

pleasant person, smiles on adversity and is excellent company.

If the area is over-developed, the individual is one who can never be

taken seriously, who pokes fun at everything; if it is under-developed, he is the

type of person who is never known to smile.

3.—In the middle of the head, where it curves down towards the back of

the neck. In cases where this area is well developed, the person is one who

has strength of mind; he is firm in his actions; he cannot be persuaded against

his own judgment; and he likes his own way.

If this area is over-developed, the person is obstinate and stubborn; if it

is under-developed, he is easily led, apt to waver and has not a mind of his

own.

[47]

No. 16.—Chart of Phrenology.

1—Benevolence, generosity, kindness.

2—Happiness, Wit, Mirth.

3—Firmness, Strength of Mind.

4—Self-Esteem, Dignity, Pride.

5—Conscientiousness, Sense of Duty.

6—Love.

7—Courage.

8—Desire for Marriage.

9—Love of Children.

[48]

4.—In the middle of the head, lower down at the back than No. 3. When

this area is found in a well-developed condition, the possessor is a person

who has dignity, self-esteem and proper pride. He is one who lives an

upright life because he puts a high price on these qualities.

If this area is over-developed, the individual is over-confident, he thinks

too much of himself and is haughty; if it lacks development, he is too humble

and suffers from an inferiority complex.

5.—Lying beside Nos. 3 and 4. To find this area well developed is a sure

sign that the possessor is a conscientious individual; it shows that he has a

high sense of duty, and his life will center around actions that are based on

what he thinks is right.

If this area is over-developed, the possessor will never progress far because

he will be always stopping and wondering whether what he proposes to

do is right; if under-developed, the possessor is one who does not care

whether what he does is wrong or right, so long as it brings him pleasure

and gain.

6.—At the base of the skull, at the back, where it joins the backbone. If

this area is well developed, it shows that the individual has the power of loving

somebody of the opposite sex in a proper manner. He or she will fall

in love when a suitable occasion arises and will make an excellent partner.

If this area is over-developed, the individual will be too passionate, will fall

in love with little or slight provocation, and will give himself or herself a

great deal of unhappiness; if under-developed, he or she will be too cold to

be moved by the thoughts of love.

7.—A slight distance away from the back of the ear. When this area is

well developed, the individual may be counted on to be courageously inclined.

He will not know the meaning of fear, and will not hold back because

troubles may be brewing.

If this area is over-developed, we have a quarrelsome person and if under-developed,

one who is afraid of his skin.

8.—Beside No. 7, but more in the center of the back of the head. Whenever

this area is properly developed, it shows that the possessor would make

an admirable husband or wife. He or she would be devoted, loyal and

attentive.

If the area is over-developed, the possessor has a jealous disposition; if

under-developed, he or she is fickle and apt to flirt with others.

9.—Beside No. 8, in the center of the back of the head, low down. Should

this area be well developed, it shows that the possessor has a proper love and

regard for children and that he thinks no person has experienced the fullest

joys of life who has not become a parent.

If this area is over-developed, the possessor thinks so much of children

that he spoils them; if it is under-developed, he is of the type that "cannot

stand them at any price."

[49]