

HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY

Astrology is one of the oldest sciences in the world. It is said to have

originated with the Egyptians, almost at the very beginning of time. Indeed,

it is almost impossible to trace a period when this science was not practiced.

There is nothing new under the sun, and its close followers will scarcely

allow any errors in its deductions. They go so far as to declare it to be an

exact science, a term which means that everything can be reasoned out and

proved; nothing is left to guesswork.

Such sciences are Mathematics, Algebra, and Geometry. We need not

believe that Astrology is all this, but certainly some very startling and accurate

predictions have been made by astrologers.

However, as in all other methods of fortunetelling attempted by us mortals,

it is far from infallible. So long as we do not take it to be exact and sure,

we shall get plenty of amusement and interest from its study, with the exciting

feeling all the time at the back of our minds that "it might come true."

Here is a list giving you the names and meanings given to planets by

astrologers.

Name.

Approximate meaning given by Astrologers.

Mars. 

Strength.

Venus. 

Beauty.

Mercury.

Capacity for adapting oneself.

Uranus. 

Improvement.

Sun. 

Life.

Jupiter.

Freedom and growth.

Saturn. 

Diminished—shrinking—lack of growth.

Neptune.

Able to receive—receptive.

Earth. 

Physical—not spiritual.

The Moon.

Feeling.

The main idea at the back of astrology is that the planets (or starry

bodies which revolve round the sun) each have a strong and varying influence

upon the minds of human beings.

THE ZODIAC.—Of course when the planets revolve round the sun they

travel through a course or path. The Zodiac is the name given by astronomers

to the boundary which encloses this course or path in the sky.

The signs of the Zodiac are the spaces into which the Zodiac is divided.

[50]

Here are the signs of the Zodiac arranged in order to show which signs are

opposite to each other.

Aries.

facing

Libra.

Taurus.

 

Scorpio.

Gemini.

 

Sagittarius.

Cancer.

 

Capricorn.

Leo.

 

Aquarius.

Virgo.

 

Pisces.

Now each sign has a planet which is said to rule it; this is called the ruling

planet. It is from the nature of this planet that the probable character

and fate of the individual are told. It is not necessary to know the whys and

wherefores of this, if you have not studied astronomy it will only serve to

muddle you, and if, on the other hand, you do understand astronomy you will

not need any explanation. We will just say what does happen, and that

will tell you all you need in these first steps.

Well, we all know that the earth revolves upon its axis once in every 24

hours. Now, according to astronomers, this causes one of the Zodiac signs

to appear in the eastern sky, where it remains for two hours. We have said

that each sign has a planet ruling it, so the sign that appears on the sky at

the time of birth decides what planet that person is born under or is influenced

by.

Let us suppose for a moment that you were born when the sign Libra

was rising, as the saying is. The planet which rules Libra is Venus, so the

person born at that time would be a Venus type, i.e., a person having the

influence of Venus upon him.

In addition to the main ruling planet, astrologers will tell you that there

are other "neighboring" planets—we will call them neighboring because it is

a simple term—which also have their effect upon us. Astrologers call this one

planet being "in aspect" with another. For instance, you might have the

planet Mars in aspect with (or influenced by) the planet Saturn; you would

then be dealing with a very strong character.

The qualities of Mars which give the fighter and the pushing type, or in

excess the bully, will be well steadied by the qualities of Saturn, which by

themselves give coldness and, in excess, lack of feeling. The two together

result in a character remarkable for its steadiness combined with its never-wearying

energy and good balance.

So you see, we seldom find pure types (i.e., qualities of Mars, or other

planets by themselves), and it is very fortunate that this is so; we should get

a very one-sided world if we did.

Now we come to that part of Astrology which really interests most people;

here will be shown the birth-dates for each month in the year and the

probable characters of persons born at that special time. You may ask why

the characters are given and why not the fate or future of the person concerned.

The reason is this: you can be pretty sure that what you read of an

individual's character will give you a sound idea of what in all probability

his future will be.

[51]

After all, the carving out of our lives is in our own hands. We are the

masters of our fate, or as the song has it, "Captain of our Soul."

However, if we believe astrologers, there is a way to tell the times of our

lives when matters should go smoothly or the reverse. The most favorable

times for speculating with money, starting in business, in fact, the most

and least favorable periods of our lives can, according to astrology, be

worked out by what is known as the Horoscope.

Now this Horoscope is in reality a chart of your life. The rocky waters

are shown, and the barrier reefs which each of us must avoid through our

life, so you will see a use in the study of astrology. It would seem to be

Nature's warning to us all of the necessity for effort, effort and again effort.

Here are the birth dates and characteristics of persons born between the

dates mentioned. Since astrology is not infallible, do not take all these

characteristics too seriously.

You will notice that each date is taken from about the 20th of one month

to the 20th of the next month.

WHEN WERE YOU BORN?

Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th.

People born during this period have considerable mental ability and a keen

business instinct. They are fond of the imaginative arts. They are proud;

they like their own way and they see that they get it. Generally speaking,

they are better fitted to lead than to follow others.

However, they do not take kindly to changes of any kind, and are

annoyed by newfangled ideas. They do not want the advice of other

people and often resent it. They do not strike out in new directions and

they avoid taking risks. They lack "push."

To these people, we say:

Don't wait for opportunities—make them.

Don't let your pride persuade you to keep on the wrong road rather than

turn back.

Don't be afraid of admitting and correcting a mistake.

Don't run away from trouble; meet it with a bold front.

Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th.

People born during this period have a strong sense of duty. They have a

kindly disposition and are inclined to be affectionate. They refuse to think

ill of anyone until the bad qualities are proved. Being straightforward themselves,

they imagine everyone else is the same and, on this account, they

are likely to suffer some bitter experiences.

However, they lack a proper regard for their own welfare. They are a

little too confiding and they are not adaptable. Once they make up their

minds on a matter, it is almost impossible to persuade them to change it.

To these people we say:

Don't brood over troubles. Face the facts, fight them out, and then, forget

all about them.

[52]
