

YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED

BY THE STARS

It is a well-known fact that every human being is considerably influenced,

as far as character and capabilities are concerned, by the time of the year in

which he or she was born. That being so, it follows that the occupation best

suited to any particular individual is, in a measure, related to his or her

birth-date.

Parents who are anxious to do the best for their children should take note

of these conditions; they may be helpful in keeping round pegs out of square

holes. Below, we offer suggestions which have proved of use in thousands

of cases, where doubt had previously existed. The information may be used

in this way: Suppose a child is about to leave school and is ready to make his

or her entry into the world of work. In a number of cases, the child has

a very definite idea of what he or she wants to do. If the work is reasonably

suited to the child's temperament, station in life, and so on, it is much the

best plan to allow him or her to follow the particular bent. It is just as

well to note whether the chosen occupation fits in with the work which we

list below for his or her individual birth-date. If it approximates to some

occupation which we mention, well and good. Let the child go ahead,

there is every chance of success. But, if it is quite alien to anything which

is given in the list, caution is needed. We do not say that the child's ambition

should be checked and that he or she should be put to a job of our selection,

but we do say that caution ought to be exercised. We are perfectly ready to

admit that the stars and the birth-date are not the only factors which count.

Environment, upbringing, the father's occupation, and other things must influence

the child. All these influences should be weighed and carefully

considered.

But where astrology and the stars can give most help is in the case of a

boy or girl who has no formulated idea as to what he or she wants to

become. Thousands of children reach the school-leaving age without showing

the slightest inkling for any particular job. To the parents of such children,

we say, consult the lists set out below, seeing that they are based on astrological

teachings. Go over the selected occupations carefully, discuss them with the

child, explain what they offer in terms of money, work, hours, etc., and watch

the effect they have on the child. In this way, it will soon be possible to

gain an idea as to what occupation should be eventually decided on.

Here are the occupations suitable for each person:

CAPRICORN BORN (Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th).—Since people born in

this period have considerable mental ability, it follows that they do well in

most of the professions, since they can pass the necessary examinations and

become well qualified. Thus, they ought to do satisfactorily in medicine,[56]

the law, dentistry, the scholastic profession and similar occupations. The

fact that they do not care to take risks unfits them for many business openings,

but where aspirations are not high, they do well as clerks and in filling

posts which consist of routine work. Girls, especially, should seek work which

is connected with the imaginative arts.

AQUARIAN BORN (Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th).—Boys display a good deal

of interest in occupations which require the use of their hands. This makes

them capable in many engineering posts, in wireless, in cabinet-making and

similar jobs. They are not good at creating or inventing in connection with

these industries, however. There is the roving disposition implanted in

these boys and many of them think that the pilot's job on an air liner could

not be equalled.

Girls are, also, interested in working with their hands: thus they are fitted

for dressmaking, the millinery trade, for dealing with arts and crafts supplies,

etc. A certain number are eminently suited to secretarial work.

PISCEAN BORN (Feb. 20th to March 20th).—Children born in this

period have a love for the sea and, therefore, the boys find congenial work as

ship's mates, stewards, marine engineers, etc., while girls are suitable for

stewardesses and other jobs filled by women on ocean-going vessels.

In addition boys and girls are both fitted to all kinds of work in shops,

chain stores, etc., but they are not at their best when managing their

own businesses. They require authority behind them.

A few Pisceans have artistic ability which should lead them to do splendidly

as authors, painters, musicians, etc.

ARIES BORN (March 21st to April 19th).—The Aries child is often a

problem, for certain of them have a rooted objection to anything in the

nature of routine work. They chafe at going and coming at the same hour

each day, and of doing the same work year after year. It is not that they

are lazy, but that their nature refuses to be driven by set rules. With such

children, it is wisest to interest them in whatever they fancy, until the time

comes when they launch out on some brilliant scheme of their own. Aries

men are the ones that fill unusual, out-of-the-way posts.

Where this rooted objection does not exist, the children are good in almost

any position which permits of movement, as travellers, for instance.

TAURIAN BORN (April 20th to May 20th).—As a rule, children who

are Taurians are very successful. They do not mind hard work and they

have a "flair" for doing the right thing, without knowing why. They have

a head for figures and money, and thus do well in banks and stockbroker's

offices. They take kindly to long training, which enables them to succeed

in law and medicine.

Both boys and girls are good with their hands. This makes them successful

in a large number of occupations, as widely diverse as engineering and

tailoring, or hairdressing and piano playing.

[57]

GEMINI BORN (May 21st to June 21st).—Gemini children show a

good deal of ambition, and their chief fault is that they object to beginning

at the bottom of the ladder. Perhaps this is useful, in a way, as it goads

them on to climbing upwards. They have a good deal of vision. Thus

they make excellent newspaper men and women. They do well in new

trades, notably in radio and the motor world. Also, they ought to make a

success in certain branches of aviation. Their eloquence fits them admirably

for travellers, and they would make their mark in any business which,

eventually, gave them work of an imaginative nature. In a general way,

they find interest in theatrical work, in literary activities and in architecture.

All Gemini people have a streak in their natures which causes them to

seek unnecessary changes.

CANCER BORN (June 22nd to July 22nd).—Children born during this

period are usually "workers." They will plod, they do not mind long hours,

and they will set themselves to difficult jobs, if told to get on with them.

As a rule, they should be set to something which enables them to work

"on their own." They much prefer this to being a small peg in a large

machine. They are suited to small businesses and agencies. A mail-order

business might fit in with their requirements. Girls would do well as private

teachers, running small schools of their own. They are, also, suited to the

drapery trade.

LEO BORN (July 23rd to August 21st).—Those who are born during

this period succeed best in what might be called "clean" occupations. The

boys do not want to put on overalls and become grimy, and the girls prefer

work that enables them to be always neat and tidy. Both of them show

aptitude in marketing such things as jewelry, drugs, books and clothes,

but they do not want to be concerned with making them. They are not so

much interested in vending the necessaries of life as the luxuries. Thus,

motor cars, victrolas, cameras, sports requisites, etc., attract them.

They are not much suited to clerical work, but a good number find an

outlet for their ambitions in the theatrical and literary world, while a few

make good dentists, radiologists and medical practitioners.

VIRGO BORN (Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd).—These children are capable,

but their great failing is that, once they find a fairly suitable post, they will

not look for anything better. They prefer to hold on to a moderate certainty

than to risk a little for a great success. Consequently, Virgo-born are found

living on salaries just sufficient to keep them from want.

They are eminently suited to clerical work of the higher types, such as

in banks, insurance companies, stockbrokers' offices, etc. They make good

company secretaries, excellent journalists, fairly good actors and actresses,

and the girls do well as teachers.

LIBRA BORN (Sept. 23rd to October 23rd).—Children of this period

do not mind hard work, but they hate monotony, especially if it is at all

sordid. They have good judgment, a quality which fits them for such[58]

diverse occupations as medicine and the drama, the law and dressmaking.

No special trades or professions can be singled out for them; but, as long as

they are set to work in a direction which provides them with an outlet for

a nicely balanced judgment and a capacity for what might be termed the

detective instinct, they should succeed admirably.

SCORPIO BORN (Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd).—There is an abundance of

ambition in these children, and they seek position rather than money. Thus,

the boys do well in the Navy and the Army, and, in a less degree, in the

Air Force. The Church holds out good openings for many of them, and

the Mercantile Marine interest not a few. Medicine attracts both boys and

girls, and so does the stage. Anything to do with chemicals seems to influence

many of the boys. Scorpio-born children are often heard to say that they

want to make a name for themselves.

SAGITTARIAN BORN (Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st).—Children of this

period are fond of animals; thus they are suited to become veterinary surgeons,

horse-dealers, farmers and even jockeys. One section of them, having excessive

will power and plenty of self-reliance, makes a type of individual who

seeks publicity in the political world. All are capable in business, especially

in the executive branches. Not a few men become company promoters,

chairmen and directors. The girls make excellent teachers and welfare

workers.

[59]