

DREAMS—WHAT THEY MEAN

A

ABROAD.—(Dreamer going or gone) An early journey.

ACCIDENT.—(being the victim of one) Business deal impending requires

great caution.

ACCIDENT.—(to a friend or relative) A letter from him or her conveying

good news.

ANCHOR.—A voyage across the sea: (in water) a disappointment: (if a

girl dreams) a sailor will fall in love with her.

ANGER.—To dream of being angry with anyone means that that person

is a true friend.

ANIMALS.—As a rule, luck; (domestic animals) speedy return of absent

friends, family reconciliation: (wild animals) secret enemies.

APPLES.—Long life: (to a woman) many years and many children.

ARROW.—A letter has been written which will cause regret.

AXE.—A way will present itself soon to attain a much desired end.

B

BALL.—(Game) Money coming soon. (Rolling ball) an unexpected gift

of money which will be soon spent.

BALLROOM.—(Dancing with a dear friend) Marriage to him or her.

BANANAS.—A piece of good luck coming.

BAND.—(Musical) A lucky speculation or business deal.

BAREFOOT.—A successful speculation or bargain.

BARREL.—(Full) Money coming quickly.

BATH.—Health and long life: (if dreamer is a young girl) early marriage

to present lover.

BATTLE.—(By girl) Will shortly fall in love; (by a soldier) promotion.

BEAR.—(Chasing the dreamer) Victory of an enemy: (bear running from

dreamer) victory over an enemy.

BEES.—Steady pursuit of object in view will bring success.

BEGGARS.—To dream of beggars is a fortunate sign to lovers and business

people.

BLIND.—To dream of being blind is a very lucky sign; to see a blind

person is a warning of danger.

[73]

BLOOD.—To see blood means great riches, an inheritance.

BOAT.—The arrival of a dear friend.

BOUQUET.—To receive one means much pleasure; to give one, constancy

of a lover or friend.

BRACELET.—Good luck and fortune coming.

BROTHER.—Seeing dead brothers or sisters in a dream is a sign of long

life.

BULLDOG.—A good omen in love or business.

BURIAL.—To dream of being buried means that wealth is coming—"as

much wealth as earth laid over you."

BURNING.—(Houses, etc.) Riches and prosperity.

BUYING.—Happiness and contentment, a legacy.

C

CAGE.—(Birds in) Early fortunate marriage; (empty) friends or lovers

will go away.

CAKES.—To dream of any kind of cakes is a good omen.

CANARY.—(Singing) Marriage and a charming house.

CARDS.—(Playing at) Speedy marriage.

CATHEDRAL.—Prosperity and fortune.

CEMETERY.—An omen of prosperity.

CHAIR.—An increase in the family.

CHERRIES.—Good news, pleasure and enjoyment.

CHILDREN.—Lucky omen: increase in wealth.

CHIMNEY.—Good luck, the higher the better.

CHRISTENING.—Good fortune approaching.

COCK CROWING.—Great prosperity.

COINS.—(Copper) Good fortune; (silver) worry; (gold) commercial

troubles.

COLD.—Friends will be kind to you.

CORNFIELD.—Health, wealth and pleasant times.

COWS.—Prosperity, the more the better.

D

DAFFODILS.—Pleasure and amusement in abundance.

DAGGER.—A friend will confer a favor.

[74]

DEAD.—To dream of oneself as dead is a good and auspicious sign of

long life and success.

DEATH OF A FRIEND.—Arrival of good news.

DIGGING.—Good luck with perseverance.

DOCKS.—Good news from abroad.

DOG.—As a rule, a favorable sign; (Dog barking) somebody is trying to

do you an ill turn; (Dogs fighting) serious quarrel between two friends of

the dreamer.

DONKEY.—Lucky omen, usually a legacy.

DOVES.—Success, especially to lovers. To the married, they denote a

pleasure in store.

DROWNING.—(Either the dreamer or another person.) Success, joy,

prosperity.

DUCKS.—Increased prosperity and happiness.

E

EAGLE.—Success in a new place.

EARS.—A pleasant letter from a friend.

EATING.—(Dreamer eating) ill luck; (seeing others eat) good luck.

ECHO.—Sickness either of dreamer or relations.

EGGS.—Good luck, money, success; (eggs broken) failure and loss.

ELM TREE.—A good turn offered by a male relative.

ELOPEMENT.—Sign of a speedy marriage.

EMERALD.—A sign of good luck and happiness.

EMPTINESS.—Always a bad sign in a dream.

ENGAGEMENT.—(To dream of being engaged to a handsome person)

Great pleasure in store; (to a plain person) worry and trouble.

EYES.—In general a sign of good luck, and the prettier the eyes the better.

To dream of someone with a defect of the eyes signifies minor misfortunes.

F

FACES.—(Smiling) Happy times with friends; (pale and gloomy) trouble

and poverty; (changing faces) a removal; (washing own face) repentance

for sin; (own face in glass) long-cherished secret plan will fail.

FAIRY.—All dreams of fairies are good omens—success and riches.

FALLING.—Indicates some misfortune.

FAN.—Quarrels, a rival in love.

[75]

FARMYARD.—Good fortune coming; comfort and happiness.

FEATHERS.—(White) Success and riches; (black) loss and failure.

FENCE.—(Climbing) A sudden rise in life.

FIELDS.—(Green) Prosperity, a happy marriage, handsome children;

(clover, barley, wheat, etc.) great prosperity and happiness.

FIGS.—A good dream, joy and pleasure; (if a woman dreams) happy

marriage and many children.

FLEET.—(At sea) Realization of cherished hopes.

FLOATING.—To dream of floating on water is a good and lucky sign.

FLOODS.—Success after triumphing over difficulties.

FLOUR.—Death of a relative bringing a legacy.

FLOWERS.—Prosperity.

FLY.—(Swarm of flies) Rivals and jealous persons are spreading scandal.

FLYING.—(Without wings) Success in love and business; (if ended by

a fall) failure in attaining object; (with wings) bad omen—frustrated ambition.

FOG.—Bad dream—business losses.

FOREIGN.—(Country) Success and prosperity at home.

FOREST.—Trouble and losses through rivals.

FORK.—A warning of imminent danger.

FOUNTAIN.—(Playing) Good luck, happy times and laughter.

FOX.—Trouble through secret enemy; (killing one) good luck.

FRIENDS.—(Absence of) Speedy return; (death of) good news; (illness)

bad news; (in good health) their prosperity.

FROGS.—Beware of flatterers and pessimists.

FROST.—Success through aid of friends.

FRUIT.—Usually a good dream, according to kind of fruit; (dreamer

eating or throwing away fruit) bad sign.

FUNERAL.—A legacy or a rich marriage.

G

GAS.—Minor discomforts and annoyances.

GATE.—An obstacle to success will suddenly disappear.

GEESE.—Happiness, success; (to hear geese cackling) a profitable business

deal will be quickly concluded.

GEMS.—Usually an unfortunate omen.

[76]

GHOSTS.—To dream of ghosts is invariably the presage of misfortune.

GIANT.—Good fortune, success in business or love.

GIFTS.—(Receiving) Good fortune coming.

GYPSIES.—A profitless voyage to many strange countries.

GLASS.—To dream of anything made of glass refers to women; (receiving

glass of water) birth in the family.

GLOVES.—Usually bad luck; (gloves on hands) honor and safety; (losing

gloves) loss in business.

GOAT.—Bad luck, some misfortune, especially unlucky to sailors; (white

goat) a profitable venture; (many goats) an inheritance.

GOD.—A good dream—health and happiness.

GOLD.—Omen of loss and bad luck: (dreamer finding gold) a sign that

he will be robbed; (dreamer paying out gold) a sign that he will increase

the number of his friends.

GOOSEBERRIES.—Time and trouble spent only for the benefit of others.

H

HAIR.—Riches and fine clothes; (hair falling over face) a coming event

will cause displeasure; (having hair cut) losses in business; (becoming bald)

great danger.

HAMMER.—Triumph over difficulties.

HAMMOCK.—Loss of something that is prized.

HAPPINESS.—A presage of doubt and difficulty.

HARE.—(Alive) Friendship: (dead) good luck: (hare running) a lengthy

journey.

HARVEST.—Hopes will not come to fruition.

HAT.—(New) A small success: (blown off or damaged) losses.

HATCHET.—A solution near to existing difficulties.

HAWK.—A happy omen—success in life.

HAY.—Good luck: (dreamer cutting hay) troubles and sorrow.

HAZEL NUT.—(Eating) Troubles and discord.

HEAD.—Good omen—health and money.

HORSESHOE.—(Seeing one) A journey: (finding one) great good lock.

HOSPITAL.—Misery, poverty, wounds.

HOUSE.—Good luck: (dreamer building house) unlucky dream, signifying

loss and sickness.

HUNCHBACK.—A troubled life, with many ups and downs.

[83]