

                                            SECTION I
THE ALPHABET OF THE HEAVENS
                                             CHAPTER I
                       THE PLANETS, THEIR NATURES AND TYPES


The luminaries and planets are known to astronomers under the following names and symbols:—
The Sun ☉, Moon ☽, Neptune ♆, Uranus ♅, Saturn ♄, Jupiter ♃, Mars ♂, Venus ♀, and Mercury ☿.
Neptune revolves around the Sun in its distant orbit once in about 165 years. Uranus completes its orbital
revolution in 84 years, Jupiter in 12 years, Mars in about 15 months, Venus in 11 months, and Mercury in 18
weeks. If you imagine these bodies to be revolving in a plane around the Sun and yourself to be standing within
the Sun, the motions of these bodies will appear almost uniform and always in one direction. Were the orbits of
the planets circular and the Sun holding the centre of the circle, their motions would be constant, that is to say,
always in the same direction and at the same rate. But the orbits are elliptical, and the Sun holds a position in
one of the foci of each ellipse. Consequently the planets are at times further from the Sun than at others, and        [Pg 18]

they are then said to be in their aphelion, the opposite point of the orbit where they are nearest to the Sun being
called the perihelion. When at aphelion the planets move slower, and when at perihelion they move quicker
than at the mean distance. Astronomers employ an imaginary circular orbit for the planets, in which they move
at an uniform rate of velocity, which is called the mean motion. This is subject to an equation depending on the
position of the planet in its orbit, and it determines the diﬀerence between the imaginary planet and the true
planet. The equation itself depends on the eccentricity of the orbit, that is to say, its relation to a circle drawn
around the same focal centre. The Earth follows the same laws as all other bodies of the same system.
But if we imagine the Earth to be stationary in space and the centre around which the planets revolve, their
motions present several irregularities. Mercury and Venus will then appear to revolve around the Sun while the
Sun revolves around the Earth, sometimes being between the Earth and the Sun, which is called an Inferior
conjunction, sometimes on the further side of the Sun away from the Earth, as at their Superior conjunction; and
again, at other times to the right or left of the Sun, in East or West elongation. The other planets, having orbits
greater than that of the Earth, will appear to revolve around it at constantly varying distances and velocities. At
certain points in their orbits they will appear to remain stationary in the same part of the Zodiac. The annexed
illustration will assist the lay reader perhaps. The body M is Mercury when at Inferior conjunction with the Sun,      [Pg 19]

as seen from the Earth. The letter V is the planet Venus at Superior conjunction with the Sun. The points W and
E are the points of greatest elongation West and East, and the letter S shows the points in the orbit at which
those bodies appear to be stationary when viewed from the Earth, at G. As seen from the Earth, Venus would
appear to be direct and Mercury retrograde.




Astrologically we regard the Earth as the passive subject of planetary inﬂuence, and we have therefore to
regard it as the centre of the ﬁeld of activity. If we were making a horoscope for an inhabitant of the planet Mars,
we should make Mars the centre of the system. The planets’ positions are therefore taken as from the centre of
the Earth (Geocentric), and not as from the centre of the Sun (Heliocentric). An astrological Ephemeris of the         [Pg 20]

planets’ motions is employed for this purpose (see Sect. II., chap, i.), and there are 480,000 of these sold to
astrologers or students of astrology every year, from which fact it is possible to draw one’s own conclusions as
to the state of Astrology in the West. These ﬁgures, of course, do not include the millions of almanac readers
nor the Oriental students, who prepare their own ephemerides.
Knowing the simple natures of the several planets we are able to arrive at an estimate of their eﬀects when
acting in combination.
Neptune acts upon the mind of man to produce a highly-strung nervous temperament, often allied to either
insanity or genius; neurosis, aphasia, &c. It produces complications in business and an involved state of aﬀairs
generally. Disposes to fraud, double-dealing, and irresponsible actions. In the body it produces waste of tissue
and a consumptive habit.
Uranus gives an eccentric mind, waywardness, originality, inventiveness. Acting on the aﬀairs of business, it
produces sudden and unexpected developments, irregularities, rapid rise and fall, instability, unexpected turns
of good and bad fortune. In the body it has relation to the nervous system, and its diseases are those of
paralysis, lesion, and nervous derangement.
Saturn produces a thoughtful, sober, ponderable mind; steadfastness, patience, and endurance; disposition to
routine and habit, method. In ﬁnancial aﬀairs it gives steady results commensurate with labour, success that is
slow but sure, durance, hardships, privations. In the body it is related to the osseous system, and its eﬀects are          [Pg 21]

brought about by obstructions, chills, and inhibition of function.
Jupiter gives joviality, optimism, bountifulness, generosity, a rich and fruitful mind. It renders the subject
fortunate in his aﬀairs, giving success and frequently opulence. With this planet strong in the horoscope a
person never “goes under.” In the body it has relation to the arterial process, and its diseases are those which
arise from surfeit, congestion, and plethora.
Mars confers a sense of freedom, much ambition and executive ability, frankness, truthfulness, and scorn of
consequence. It renders the mind forceful and militant, stimulates to new projects and enterprises, and in the
body of man has relation to the muscular system. Its diseases are those which arise from inﬂammatory action in
the tissues.
Venus confers poesy, good taste, ﬁne feeling, artistic powers, gentleness, docility, dalliance, and love of
pleasure. It renders the aﬀairs pleasant and prosperous, giving proﬁt from both artistic and rustic pursuits. Next
to Jupiter it is the most beneﬁc of the planets in its action on mankind. In the body it has relation to the venous
system, and its diseases are those which arise from impurities of the blood, scorbutic and zymotic diseases,
eczema, smallpox, measles, &c.
Mercury renders its subjects active, versatile, apt and business-like, disposed to much commerce, whether of
the mind or the market, and eager in the pursuit of knowledge; alert, and well-informed. Its inﬂuence on aﬀairs of
life is variable, for it always translates the nature of that planet to which at birth it is in nearest aspect (Sect. I.,
chap. iv.). In the body it is related to the sensorium, the centres of sensation, and reﬂexly controls the nerves of        [Pg 22]

action.
The Moon gives gracefulness of manner and suavity of speech, softness and adaptability of nature,
variableness, love of change, romance, and adventure; disposed to exploration and voyaging. In the body it
corresponds to the glandular system, and its diseases are those incidental to the lymphatic glands and vascular
tissue.
The Sun renders its subjects magnanimous, noble, proud, despising all mean and sordid actions; loyal, truthful,
and fearless. It produces honours and the favour of dignitaries, and renders the subject fortunate in the control
of his affairs. In the body it controls the vital principle.
The types of persons produced by the various planets are very distinct, the chief features of each being as
follows:—
Neptune—Thin, nervous-looking people, blue eyes, soft, silky hair, thin and usually long faces, frequently
wearing a strained or startled look. Uranus—Tall, wiry, and energetic ﬁgures, alert, muscular, spasmodic, and
with some touch of eccentricity. Saturn—Dark and lean people, small, deep-set eyes, heavy brows, long noses,
thin lips, and sallow complexions. Jupiter—Full bodied, robust men, large and expressive blue or brown eyes,
arched brows, high foreheads, oval faces, and rich brown hair. Mars—Strong, muscular, and athletic bodies,
ruddy complexion, grey eyes, prominent brows, sloping forehead, and usually some mark or scar in the face.
Sun—Fresh, clear complexion, blue or grey eyes, round head, broad shoulders, strong jaws, upright and
digniﬁed carriage. Venus—Elegant, well-groomed, and often dainty-looking people, with blue or soft brown                    [Pg 23]

eyes, brown hair, ﬁne teeth and ﬁnger-nails, small feet and short ﬂeshy hands. Mercury—Thin, tall, and active
bodies, alert appearance, small and usually dark eyes; wide, thin lips, long arms and slender hands. Frequently
great talkers and quick walkers. Moon—Rather short and ﬂeshy people, with pale face, soft limpid eyes, sad
brown or medium coloured hair, ﬁne teeth, broad chest, and a tendency to a squat fulness of body. The
forehead is usually high and broad.
Look at the people as they pass you in the street. Bring them if possible under one or other of these types.
Consider what has been said of the planets’ natures, and you have a ready key to something of their character
and destiny.




        