                                                                                                                    [Pg 24]
                                             CHAPTER II
                                    THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC


The Zodiac is an imaginary belt of the Heavens through which the Sun and planets move in their apparent
revolutions round the Earth. It extends from 23° 27′ above the plane of the Equator to the same distance below
it, being bounded by the Tropic of Cancer on the North and by that of Capricorn on the South. The Ecliptic is a
circle transecting this belt at an angle of 23° 27′ to the plane of the Equator. The points where it cuts the
Equator are called the Equinoxes.
The Ecliptic is divided into twelve equal sections, counting from the Vernal Equinox. These are called the Signs
of the Zodiac. Each sign occupies 30 degrees of the circle.
Their names and symbols are as follows:—
                            1. Aries, the Ram ♈          7. Libra, the Balance ♎
                            2. Taurus, the Bull ♉        8. Scorpio, the Scorpion ♏
                            3. Gemini, the Twins
                                                         9. Sagittarius, the Hunter ♐
                            ♊
                            4. Cancer, the Crab ♋        10. Capricornus, the Goat ♑
                                                         11. Aquarius, the Waterman
                            5. Leo, the Lion ♌
                                                         ♒
                            6. Virgo, the Virgin ♍       12. Pisces, the Fishes ♓


For Astrological purposes they are grouped according to the element and the constitution which they represent,          [Pg 25]

thus:—
                                                   ELEMENTS.
                                        Fire—Aries, Leo, Sagittarius.
                                        Earth—Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus.
                                        Air—Gemini, Libra, Aquarius.
                                        Water—Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.


                                               C ONSTITUTIONS.
                                   Movable—Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus.
                                   Fixed—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius.
                                   Flexed—Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces.


Every alternate sign, beginning with Aries, is male and the rest are female. Aries, male; Taurus, female; Gemini,
male; Cancer, female, &c. The signs Aries, Leo, Capricornus are called barren, while Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio,
and Pisces are fruitful. Aries governs the East, Cancer the North, Libra the West, and Capricornus the South.
The Double-bodied signs are Gemini, Sagittarius, and Pisces. It is important that all these classiﬁcations should
be learned, as they form an essential part of the doctrine of Astrology, and are frequently employed in the
reading of a Horoscope.
The types of people under the various signs should also be known as intimately as possible. A person is said to
be “under” a sign—that is to say, under its inﬂuence, when that sign is rising in the East at the moment of birth.      [Pg 26]

You will recognise these types among your friends and associates:—
Aries produces a person of lean body, long neck, high cheek-bones, grey eyes, sandy or sad brown hair, which
is either wiry and straight or crisp and curling. The front teeth are usually large and prominent.
Taurus gives a full, thick-set body, strong neck and shoulders, full brown eyes, dark curling hair, full lips, rather
wide mouth, and round, bullet-shaped head. The hands and feet are short and fleshy.
Gemini produces a tall, active, and upright body, long arms and legs, wide, thin lips, straight and oftenretroussé
nose, lank, straight black hair, rather wide shoulders, and thin body.
Cancer denotes a rather short, squat ﬁgure, full lymphatic body, pale complexion, round face, broad forehead,
sad brown hair, large aqueous eyes, full chest, short, fleshy hands and feet.
Leo renders its subjects tall, broad shouldered, ﬁne and manly ﬁgures, small round head, fair complexion, blue
or grey eyes, flaxen or fair brown hair, upright and fearless carriage.
Virgo renders the body thin and active, the head well developed, the forehead broad, hair light brown and
waving off the forehead, eyes blue, shoulders broad, the type being of an intellectual or artistic form.
Libra gives an elegant body, well-developed limbs, ﬁne oval face, straight nose, ﬁne blue eyes (sometimes deep
brown), ﬂaxen or chestnut hair, beautiful complexion. The highest types of beauty are to be found under this
sign.
Scorpio gives a short, thick-set, and powerful ﬁgure, broad, deep chest, dusky or sallow complexion, dark               [Pg 27]

curling or crisp hair, strong and rather bowed legs. This is a very virile and robust type.
Sagittarius gives a tall person, well-made ﬁgure, elegant limbs, oval and rather long face, brown or chestnut hair
growing oﬀ the forehead, ﬁne expressive eyes, rather prominent and of a dark brown or blue colour, long nose,
slightly aquiline.
Capricornus produces a slight and rather ill-formed person, long and scraggy neck, prominent features, narrow
chin, weak and frequently decrepit limbs, weak chest and sloping shoulders. Frequently the ﬁgure is wiry and
suggestive of considerable powers of endurance. The brows are prominent, the nose long, and the face thin and
hard-set.
Aquarius contributes the ﬁnest types of beauty next to Libra. The Saxon type is dominant. A tall ﬁgure, well
formed and rounded, fair complexion and blue eyes, ﬂaxen hair, straight features, well-developed chin, and ﬁne,
clear forehead.
Pisces produces one of rather short stature, short limbs, lymphatic body, pale complexion, limpid blue eyes,
black or brown eyes, short nose, full lips, round face, small hands and feet.
The short signs are Taurus, Cancer, Capricornus, and Pisces. The tall signs are Gemini, Leo, Sagittarius, and
Aquarius. The others are of medium height.
The planets rising in each sign will always alter the type by impressing their own characteristics on the subject.
Each sign has a Ruler, and the position of the ruler of the rising sign has much to do with the physical
conformation, as if Taurus be rising and Venus, its ruler, be in Leo, the person will be taller and fairer than      [Pg 28]

indicated by Taurus alone. Pure types are very uncommon.
The rulership of the planets in the signs is as follows:—

    Saturn governs Aquarius and Capricornus.
    Jupiter governs Pisces and Sagittarius.
    Mars governs Aries and Scorpio.
    Venus governs Taurus and Libra.
    Mercury governs Gemini and Virgo.
    The Moon governs Cancer, and Leo is governed by the Sun.

When a planet is found in a sign over which it is said to govern it acts more strongly than usual, and when in the
opposite signs to those it governs it is said to be in its “fall,” when it is weaker than usual.
Planets governing opposite signs to one another are said to be “enemies.” Such do not produce harmonious
and favourable results when acting in conjunction.




   