                                             CHAPTER V
                                       FINANCIAL PROSPECTS


Look to the planets which are in the 2nd House, and the aspects to them. If any planet be therein, and well
aspected by others, the ﬁnancial condition will be competent. If a beneﬁc (Jupiter or Venus) be therein, and free
from evil aspects, the same eﬀect will accrue. But if the beneﬁc in the 2nd should have good aspects from other
planets, then there will be considerable wealth.
Any planet in the 2nd House, badly aspected, will produce diﬃculty in acquiring money, and if it be a maleﬁc
planet which occupies the 2nd House under these conditions, there will be times of stress and even poverty.
Continual hardship and poverty is shown by maleﬁc planets in the 2nd House, in evil aspect to the Moon or Sun;
while at the same time the planets in the 2nd House will be severely afflicted by others.
Saturn in the Midheaven aﬄicting the Sun or Moon is an indication of reversal of fortune, and such persons
usually attain considerable position in the world and are then depleted of everything.
Jupiter or Venus in the 10th House, and near the meridian, are signs of good fortune and success in life, and           [Pg 65]

the same results are due to their rising at birth.
In a general manner the aspects to the Moon in a male horoscope or the Sun in a female horoscope should be
consulted, and the planets in good aspect thereto will show the means of good fortune, while those in evil
aspect will indicate the sources of loss and hurt, according to the Houses the aﬄicting or assisting planets
occupy. Thus Jupiter in good aspect to the Moon from the 11th House shows gain by friends, advisers, and co-
operative measures, because the 11th House rules these relationships and Jupiter is the index of increase.
Similarly, Uranus in the 7th House would show gain by the marriage partner if in good aspect to the Moon, or
loss thereby if in evil aspect.
Mars in the 2nd House shows good earning capacity, because Mars is an ambitious and industrious planet i(.e.,
it produces such eﬀects in the person), and the 2nd House is the domain of ﬁnance. But at the same time it
shows extravagance and inability to save money, for Mars is impulsive and lacking thrift.
The 6th House well occupied shows faithful and advantageous servants and employés, such as will augment
the fortunes and do good work for the Subject.
Neptune in the 2nd shows complications and an involved state of ﬁnance, and frequently it shows loss by fraud
and imposition; though in good aspect to other planets it shows gain by such nefarious means. Uranus indicates
many ups and downs of fortune, sudden and unexpected rises and falls.
Thus each planet is judged according to its nature and the aspect it throws to the Moon or Sun, while the               [Pg 66]

planets in the 2nd House are judged by their own natures and the aspects which they receive.
Inheritance is shown by a beneﬁc planet in the 5th or 11th House in good aspect to Saturn; but indirect
inheritance can be the result of Saturn in good aspect to Jupiter from any part of the figure.
Legacies are shown by good planets, or planets well aspected, in the 8th House; or by Jupiter in good aspect to
Uranus from any part of the heavens.
Gain by marriage is shown by beneﬁc planets in the 8th House, because the 8th is 2nd from the 7th, and the 7th
House rules over the partner.
The potential of each horoscope is capable of being increased by due attention to the sources of gain, as shown
by the position and aspects of the planets in various parts of the heavens; but chieﬂy by associating oneself
with persons whose horoscopes are in harmony with one’s own. Thus it happens that individuals are lifted to
position and aﬄuence through their association with persons whose horoscopes are in sympathy with theirs.
(See Chap. XI. of this Section.)
The Sun and Moon being in good aspect to one another will prevent disaster, or will always provide a means of
restoration of fortunes, because it is an index of general good fortune and continual support. Such persons as
have this aspect in their horoscopes need never fear misfortune, for if they should fall into disasters in one
place, they will always turn up in another with a complete adjustment of their position. But when the Sun and
Moon are in evil aspect, and particularly when the maleﬁc planets are in elevation in the heavens, continual
misfortune dogs the footsteps, and though there be spells of good fortune, they are brief and attended with             [Pg 67]

troubles.
The beneﬁc planets, Jupiter, Venus, and Sun, being well elevated in the heavens, that is to say, in the 10th or
11th Houses, it is a sign of preponderating good fortune. But when the maleﬁcs are in elevation the reverse
results happen.

                                        The Line of Least Resistance.
It is a law in Nature that the line of least resistance is that of greatest progress. The lightning ﬂash does not
come straight to earth, but zigzag by the line of least resistance. The great rivers do not come by a direct course
to the ocean, but by many turns and backward reaches, because they follow the path of least resistance. When
one comes to take account of the years of human life that are spent in the vain endeavour to achieve the
impossible, the lessons of Nature are worth reciting. But what is impossible to one man is facile to another, and
the greatest economy of eﬀort is therefore to be secured by proper regard to suitability of occupation and
direction of effort.
The principles of Astrology enable us to determine the line of action which at all times will be the most fruitful of
results, and in the matter of money-making the matter is decided in the following manner: That planet which has
a trine or sextile aspect of the Moon, and is at the same time elevated above the maleﬁc planets, especially if it
be itself assisted by the good aspects of other planets, receives ﬁrst consideration. The House it is in will
indicate the source of beneﬁt, but the Sign it is in will show the means through which it will come. Thus if Uranus      [Pg 68]

should be in the Midheaven, in trine aspect to the Moon, and itself receiving a good aspect from either the Sun,
Jupiter, or Venus, it will indicate gain through governmental bodies, authorities, and persons of high rank. If
Uranus should be in the sign Cancer, it would point to matters associated with the ocean, marine aﬀairs, or
those in which water is the element in chief employ; as in marine engineering, shipping, dock building, &c. But if
Uranus had been in the 11th House, and in the sign Scorpio, then the source of gain would be by means of
companies, syndicates, and associations of a collective nature, and the sign Scorpio would show it to be
connected with naval defence (because Scorpio is a martial and watery sign) or the utilisation of waste
materials, inﬂammable oils, &c., or by systems of drainage, which represent the excretory system of a town. By
looking chieﬂy to the nature of the planet concerned, and that of the sign it occupies, a good artist will readily
describe the particular line which is to be pursued.
But here, as in every other matter upon which judgment is made, attention must be paid to the character and
disposition of the Subject, his aptitudes and qualiﬁcations, for it is obviously of little use recommending literature
or the law to one whose sole capabilities lie in unintellectual directions. Natural aptitude, supplemented by the
necessary training, are the first considerations, for without these success in any direction is but ill assured.




                                                                                                                         [Pg 69]
                                           CHAPTER VI
                                        THE POSITION IN LIFE


This is to be judged from the position of the majority of the planets, but principally from the Midheaven, the
planets therein and its aspects. Thus, if you ﬁnd the majority of the planets rising, that is to say, in the 10th,
11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Houses the Subject will be a candidate for responsibility, ambitious of honours and
position, and generally independent. If these or the majority of them be well aspected he will become a man of
position, employing others; or, if a woman, will hold an important position in her sphere of life, and be esteemed
in the social world.
If the degree on the Midheaven receives good aspects from the major planets, the position will be honourable
and secure.
Venus or Jupiter, or the Sun well aspected, in the Midheaven, denotes a superior position, honours, and
distinction. The same will result if these be rising.
When the majority of the planets are above the horizon, even though they be not rising, the Subject will have
responsibilities thrust upon him, even though he should not desire them. If the majority of these planets be well      [Pg 70]

aspected, he will acquit himself creditably and attain to honours.
It is always fortunate for the position that there should be planets exactly on the cusps of either the 2nd, 3rd,
6th, 8th, or 12th Houses, for then there will be every opportunity of securing fame and advancement in life.
But when any of the maleﬁc planets are found exactly on or nearest to the meridian, whether above or below
the horizon, there will be loss of position, reversal, a sinister fame, or disgrace.
The 10th House represents the fame and honour of a person, and the 4th House represents the end of life and
that which militates against the fame and honour. Therefore when there are good planets in these places, the
Subject will meet with rewards and honours commensurate with his eﬀorts; but when evil planets occupy the
meridian, he will at best sustain his position in life with great difficulty.
It is futile for any one to suppose that the position of a beneﬁc planet in the meridian of the horoscope will bring
him to fame and elevate him in the world irrespective of his own endeavours. The planets operate on human
aﬀairs in terms of human thought and action, and that by ﬁxed laws; never adventitiously. That “the Gods help
those who help themselves” to the extent that natural laws permit, is a truth which astrology fully provides for.
Fitness and fortune are as cause and effect to one another in respect of planetary action in human life.
Many planets in cardinal signs will dispose a man to seek fame, and when the Midheaven of the horoscope is
well aspected or there be fortunate planets therein, he will attain it. Cardinal signs on the angles of the            [Pg 71]

horoscope (the meridian and horizon), produce fame outlasting death. The same if either of the luminaries be
exactly on the equinoxes.
Venus in the Midheaven gives social elevation and lifts a person above the sphere of birth. Good planets in the
11th show patronage.
But when the luminaries are heavily aﬄicted there will be an inconstant fortune and many reverses, so that
position gained will be lost again.
Most of the planets under the horizon shows success and position in the latter part of life, while if they be
between the 4th and 7th cusps, there will be advantages after marriage, or by means of partnerships.
In judging of the means by which the position will be sustained, respect must be had to the positions of those
planets which are in good aspect to the Midheaven, or to beneﬁc planets in the Midheaven, and if none be so
situated, then those which hold beneﬁc aspect to either the Sun or Moon at birth must be taken, and judgment
made according to the nature of the planet and the sign it occupies. Preference should always be given to that
planet which has the strongest aspect for good. Thus if two planets were in trine, that which is in elevation
should be preferred, especially if it be strengthened by the good aspects of other planets.




                                                                                                                       [Pg 72]
                                           CHAPTER VII
                                  THE CHOICE OF OCCUPATION


The enormous waste of force and time entailed by the experimental trip upon which most young men embark at
the outset of their career in life, might be greatly reduced by a proper knowledge of individual aptitude in relation
to circumstances. The average boy cannot readily make up his mind as to what occupation he will follow,
because he does not know either enough of his own powers or of the world in which he is called upon to use
them. Parents are in the same diﬃculty. They must needs wait to see how a boy will shape out. They study his
inclinations to the best of their ability, but without coming to a deﬁnite conclusion any sooner than the boy
himself. Given a fair education, such as may ﬁt him for almost anything, but which specialises him for nothing in
particular, he is put to some desk or bench and there left to his own resources. By a fortunate chance, he may
ﬁnd himself suited to his post. More frequently he is several years in ﬁnding out that he has missed his vocation,
that his inclinations and his work are not in accord, that he has misapplied his energies for some time, and that
he has made a false start. Fortunately circumstanced at birth he may have been equipped by higher education             [Pg 73]

for some distinctive profession, to which he gains access after the payment of large fees or premiums. The man
has a strong dramatic faculty and the stage claims him after all. Here is both waste of time and money.
Astrology, as a reliable key to character and inclination, deserves some recognition on the grounds of social
economy.
The inclinations of the Subject are judged from the position of the majority of the planets, for if they should be
found in the aerial signs, Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius, the inclination will be towards mental occupations,
especially science and literature. In ﬁery signs there is a predisposition to a more robust and active life, such as
is aﬀorded by military service, travelling, prospecting, exploring, &c. In earthy signs the aptitude lies in the
direction of agriculture, experimental science, surveying, dealing in real estate, broking, &c. In watery signs
there is special inclination to pursuits connected with the water, such as sailors, watermen, and others; but
frequently to other occupation in which ﬂuids are predominant, such as publicans, wine and spirit merchants,
chemists, and oil merchants.
Each sign has its special tendency, and the exact occupation can often be decided thereby, when regard is had
to the planet in closest aspect to the Sun or Moon and the sign it occupies. Thus Aries denotes soldiers and
pioneers of movements; Taurus shows dealers in real estate, house agents and brokers; Gemini, literary men
and writers of all sorts; Cancer, sailors and publicans; Leo, actors and artists; Virgo, clothes dealers and sellers
of confectionery and bread; Libra, valuers, assayers, money-changers, and pawnbrokers; Scorpio, naval sailors,          [Pg 74]

chemists, dealers in oils and spirits; Sagittarius, explorers, divines, lawyers; Capricornus, political agents and
ministers of the State; Aquarius, electricians, company promoters, syndics, and scientiﬁc researchers; Pisces,
dealers in ﬁsh and sea produce, warders, and those connected with places of conﬁnement, such as prisons and
hospitals.
Taking, therefore, the dominant planet and the signs that hold the majority of the planets, the line along which
the Subject will make the most progress in the world and acquit himself most successfully, may be readily
determined.
No person will make a good soldier who has not Mars as a dominant planet, nor will he succeed with the public
if the Moon be not elevated and well aspected, nor become a successful artist, musician, or poet if Venus be not
conspicuous in the horoscope.
Generally the inclination is derived from a consideration of the dominant planet, and the degree of success
attendant upon the occupation is judged from the aspect which that planet throws to the Sun or Moon, and there
can be no great advantage from following an inclination which does not promise some measure of success, as
is the case when the dominant planet is in evil aspect to the luminaries. Thus it happens that some men follow
unproﬁtable callings, their judgment being dominated by an inclination adverse to their natural welfare. Yet
never was good work done in the world without a strong inclination and considerable enthusiasm, and Heaven
makes its own slaves, its martyrs, and its scapegoats. And always, the following of an inclination means the            [Pg 75]

sacriﬁce of some of the beneﬁts of life. “Take what thou wilt, but pay the price!” is the Divine mandate,
according to Emerson.
But unquestionably, the science which enables a man to choose the line of least resistance, which prevents a
youth of intellectual tendencies from wasting the best years of his life in drudgery at the desk or bench, is worth
a little study. “Hitch your waggon to a star,” is good advice if only we hitch it to the right one.




                            