

                                                                                                                         [Pg 94]

                                          SECTION IV
                          THE STARS IN THEIR COURSES
                                             CHAPTER I
                                          THE TIME-MEASURE


The planets, in their motions after birth, come into certain relations with the planets in the horoscope of birth,
and also form aspects among themselves owing to the diversities of their motions in the Zodiac. In Astrological
science there are two separate means of calculating the time of events, but both methods consist of bringing
the body of one planet to the body or aspect of another, which process is called “Directing,” and the arc
described by the moving body is called an “Arc of Direction.”
The ﬁrst of these methods is the discovery of Claudius Ptolemy, the famous mathematician and geographer,
the author of the Syntaxis, as set forth in his work the Tetrabiblos, or Four Books on the inﬂuence of the Stars.
This method had the support and conﬁrmation of the great Kepler. It has respect to the rising, setting, and             [Pg 95]

meridian passage of the planets after birth, whereby they are brought to the places or aspects of the planets in
the Radix (the Root), which is the horoscope of birth.
The limits and nature of this work do not permit of a thorough exposition of this method, which entails some little
knowledge of spherical trigonometry, but the reader who desires to perfect himself therein is referred to the
author’s work, entitled “Prognostic Astronomy.” A facile application of the method is here given, by which any
one may, by the aid of the Tables of Houses, make certain of the more important calculations by rule of thumb,
and predict thence the times of remarkable events.
The principle involved is this: The number of degrees which pass over the meridian between the moment of
birth and the rising or culminating of a planet, will equal the number of years which must elapse from birth until
the influence of that planet becomes dominant.
Thus, if Jupiter at birth is coming to the meridian, that is to say, if it be in the 10th, 11th, or 12th House, count
the number of degrees between the meridian and Jupiter, and in so many years from the time of birth there will
be an access of good fortune. Similarly, if Saturn or other of the maleﬁc planets be coming to the meridian, the
number of degrees between it and the Midheaven will indicate the age at which troubles will abound.
Also, when the planets have passed the meridian, the measure is made in the same way, by bringing the
Midheaven to the place of the planet, counting the degrees between the planet and Midheaven for the number
of years at which it will operate.
But the same and other planets may be directed to the horizon, by taking the Table of Houses for the latitude of        [Pg 96]

the birthplace (Sect. I., chap. iii.) and ﬁnding therein under the column marked “Ascen.” (Ascendant) the
longitude held by any of the planets. Observe then what degree is on the Midheaven in the column marked 10
(10th House), and count the number of degrees between this Midheaven and the Midheaven at birth. The result
will give the age at which the effects of such planets will be experienced.
Thus, for a person born in or near Liverpool or in the same latitude, suppose the Midheaven at birth to be in
Scorpio 0, and Saturn to be in the 2nd House in Aquarius 8 degrees. I wish to bring Saturn to the horizon. In the
Table of Houses I ﬁnd that Aquarius 8 is on the Ascendant when Sagittarius 9 is on the Midheaven, and I
therefore count from Scorpio 0 to Sagittarius 9. This gives the age of 39 years, and as Saturn is in the 2nd
House at birth, I say that at 39 years of age the Subject would experience ﬁnancial disaster, and because
Saturn comes then to the Ascendant, I also say there would be serious illness and depression of spirits.
When planets are setting at birth they are brought to the opposition of the Ascendant in a similar manner, only
the opposite point of the zodiac must be found in the Tables under the Ascendant. Thus, if Mars were in the 7th
House at birth in the 11th degree of Cancer, I ﬁnd the opposite point (Capricornus 11) under the column of the
Ascendant, and I note that Scorpio 19 is then on the Midheaven, so that from Scorpio 0 to Scorpio 19 gives 19
years, at which age the Subject would have a serious illness due to inﬂammatory action in the stomach and               [Pg 97]

probably produced by overwork and worry, as indicated by the sign Cancer and the planet Mars, or if there be
indications of an accident, then an accident by scalding with hot water or acids would be predicted.
Planets are brought to the opposition of the Midheaven by counting the degrees which intervene between the
longitude on the lower meridian at birth and that held by the planet.
In all such directions the conjunctions of beneﬁc planets are advantageous when directed to the Midheaven or
Ascendant, and the conjunctions of the maleﬁcs are indicated of periods of bad fortune. The oppositions are
uniformly evil, whether the planet involved in the direction be a benefic or malefic. (Sect. I., chap. iv.)
These are the directions of the planets to the two Signiﬁcators, the Midheaven and Ascendant. The Midheaven
appertains to honours and credit, while the Ascendant has relation to the personal and bodily welfare and the
general fortunes.
To direct the Midheaven or Ascendant to the other aspects of the planets, such as the sextile, trine, semisquare
or square, it is only necessary to note the degrees in which these aspects fall and bring them to the Midheaven
or Ascendant as if the body of the planet were itself there, and in the manner already indicated.
The Sun is directed after birth by its motion in the zodiac, which can be found in the Ephemeris for the year of
birth, and the aspects it forms to the planets in the horoscope and in the daily progress should be tabulated. In
most Ephemerides they are already calculated, so that the labour is considerably lightened. Each day after birth        [Pg 98]

will represent one year of life, the mean motion of the Sun being about 1 degree per day. All that is necessary,
therefore, is to count the number of days from birth to the date when the Sun forms an aspect, and that will give
the age at which the planet aspected will produce its effects.
As the Sun goes through the zodiac the other bodies make progress along with it, in which course they form
aspects to the Midheaven, Ascendant, the Sun and Moon in the horoscope of birth. These are called
“Secondary” directions, and in connection with the Sun’s aspects after birth, constituted the system in use
among the Arabian astrologers.
Minor periods of good and bad fortune, subsidiary to the above periodic inﬂuences, are taken from the Moon’s
progress after birth, in which one day equals one year of life, and two hours equal one month. These directions
of the Moon aﬀord a monthly prognosis of the course of events, and are useful in the conduct of minor aﬀairs in
life. When they are contrary to the general trend and import of the periodic directions made to the Midheaven,
Ascendant and Sun, they act indiﬀerently, and frequently produce only passing beneﬁts or annoyances; but
when they are in agreement with the Primary Directions cited above, then they accentuate and deﬁne the
nature and time of events. As if the Primaries be good and the Lunar directions evil, then there will be a
predominance of good fortune with some current disturbances; but both being good there will be abundant
success and satisfaction; while if the Primaries be evil and the Lunar directions good, the latter will serve only to   [Pg 99]

moderate the effects for the time being of the Primary evil indications.
An intelligent apercu of the principles of directing will greatly enhance the value of any prognostications made
from the horoscope of birth, as it will enable the student to select those periods in the life when the eﬀects due
to any planet are most likely to eventuate. Thus, if Saturn be in the 2nd House at birth, it may be said that there
would follow some periods of great ﬁnancial stress, and the rising of Saturn by direction after birth would show
the time when one, at all events, of such periods would be experienced.
And here is the great fact upon which astrologers the world over are prepared to stand or fall. If the planets
have no eﬀect in the lives of men, their directions to the angles of the horoscope can have no eﬀect; but never
was it found that a man had evil fortunes at the period when the planet Jupiter was directed to the Midheaven or
Ascendant, or anything but bad fortune when Saturn was similarly directed. The fact is there, and we cannot get
away from it. The only question is as to how far we can intelligently carry our investigations beyond that point,
and intelligibly convey our discoveries to the world by their application to the aﬀairs of daily life. The reader may
judge for himself from a perusal of these pages.
The directions being calculated and tabulated in order of their occurrence, the time and general nature of the
inﬂuences operating in successive periods of the life will stand revealed. The particular nature of the events
indicated by the several directions may be known from (a) the House in which the directed planet is situated; (b)       [Pg 100]

the Sign it occupies; and (c) the aspect it forms, considered in relation to the nature of the planet. For example:
If Uranus at birth were in the 9th House and the sign Gemini, its direction to the Midheaven would be the index
of litigation in connection with writings, publications, or means of transit; because the 9th House, among other
things, has relation to litigation and legal aﬀairs, and Gemini (the 3rd House sign) to communications, writings,
&c., while Uranus denotes sudden and unexpected events, ruptures, alienations, and complexities.
So if Saturn were in the 6th House in the sign Aquarius, its direction to the opposition of the Ascendant would
indicate chills to the blood, anemia, &c., constituting a serious illness with probability of low fever; because the
6th House rules sickness, and Aquarius rules the blood, while Saturn is the cause of chills, paucity, and
impediments.
Thus the time and nature of events may be known with great certainty.




                                                                                                                        [Pg 101]
                                             CHAPTER II
                                    THE EFFECTS OF TRANSITS


Among the number of important indicators to which Astrologers refer in making a forecast of concurrent events,
there are the transits of the planets over the places of the Signiﬁcators at birth, the positions of Eclipses, and
those of the lunations.
The ﬁrst of these chronocrators depends upon the revolutions of the planets in their orbits. Each planet has a
period in which it completes its revolution in the heavens, in the course of which it passes the places of the Sun,
Moon, Midheaven, and Ascendant of the horoscope. This passage over the radical Signiﬁcators is technically
termed its “transit,” and it will be found that such transits aﬀord a very precise and reliable source of
prognostication, for the time of a planet’s transit is known in advance of its occurrence (see Sect. II., chap. iv.),
and the eﬀects of such transit are in exact terms of the nature of the planet concerned. It is only necessary to
add that the Midheaven and the Sun have relation to the position and honour of the Subject, while the Moon
and Ascendant have relation to the personal health and general fortunes. The Sun and Midheaven also signify              [Pg 102]

the father, and the Moon has general signiﬁcation of the mother. Venus signiﬁes domestic and love aﬀairs, the
aﬀections and sentiments; while Mercury signiﬁes the mental disposition. So Uranus in transit over the place of
Venus will give a love aﬀair, a romantic attachment. Mars over the place of Venus will engender passionate
love. Saturn over Venus will give disappointment or bereavement; and Neptune thereover will bring
entanglements and complications, with danger of being led astray. Saturn over Mercury will produce melancholy
and many errors of judgment. Mars over the same planet will excite the mind and dispose to impulse and
unreasoning anger, quarrels and disputation. Uranus over Mercury will render the mind wayward and
headstrong, disposed to erratic courses and egotistic methods. Neptune passing the place of Mercury produces
deceits, treacheries, and apprehension of impending evil, a sense of espionage and ambush. It involves the
mind in tortuous and complicated schemes, and disposes to secrecy and wariness.
The transits of the major planets are of chief signiﬁcance, and their eﬀects are rendered more weighty and
lasting when at the time of transit they are retrograde in the zodiac; while their stationary positions on the
places of the Significators have almost the same power as Primary Directions.

                                                   Of Eclipses.
An Eclipse of the Sun or Moon falling on the place of any Signiﬁcator in the horoscope of birth is of a sinister
import, and cannot be too seriously considered. Falling on the Ascendant or the Moon they aﬀect the health and           [Pg 103]

general fortunes very seriously, and only a series of subsequent good directions can avail to restore the Subject
to his normal condition. On the Midheaven or the Sun, the honour and fortunes may both be aﬀected, and in the
same serious degree. The Eclipses falling on the places of the other planets will produce eﬀects in accord with
the nature of those planets and the Houses they occupy. To have any appreciable eﬀect, the Eclipses must be
within two degrees of any of the radical positions, or of their opposition aspects.

                                                  Of Lunations.
The Lunations recur in the same part of the Ecliptic every nineteen years. Considered in relation to the current
indications they aﬀord the means of a monthly forecast of events. Thus, if the lunation for the month falls on the
place of Jupiter in the horoscope of birth, it will produce good eﬀects in that department of life which is governed
by the House in which Jupiter is situated; as if in the 11th, through friends; in the 4th, through property or rental;
in the 6th, through servants and health; in the 8th, through a financial colleague, &c.
The eﬀects of Lunations are subsidiary to the current Lunar directions, and these in turn are subsidiary to the
transits, and the transits to the Primary Directions. By this it is not meant that they are inoperative, nor that they
fail to indicate the events of the month, but their power and degree of inﬂuence is subject to the greater
inﬂuence of superior causes. And as a general observation it may be aﬃrmed that the less frequently any
celestial position occurs in a horoscope, the greater is its inﬂuence. This fact gives to primary directions their       [Pg 104]

great inﬂuence in the life, for they can only occur once in a lifetime; and for the same reason Eclipses have a
major signiﬁcance, for the same Eclipse only recurs after an interval of 649 years. The transits of Neptune, of
Uranus, of Saturn and Jupiter and Mars follow in their order of frequency. Neptune has a revolution of about 165
years, Uranus 84 years, Saturn 30 years, Jupiter 12 years, and Mars 1¼ years.
Major eﬀects must not therefore be referred to inferior causes, and minor eﬀects must not be referred to
superior causes. In universal or even national cataclysms, individual fortunes are submerged.




                                                                                                                         [Pg 105]
                                              CHAPTER III
                             HOW TO SUMMARISE A HOROSCOPE


Before leaving the exposition of this subject, it may be of advantage to the reader if I give some idea of the
method to be pursued in the complete handling of a horoscope.
First, then, erect the ﬁgure of birth, taking care to use the Ephemeris of the year of birth, and also the correct
Table of Houses for the latitude of the place of birth.
Next proceed to attempt a description of the chief personal traits of the Subject, following in succession with a
well-considered judgment on the constitution, hereditary tendencies, the health and pathological
predispositions, the mental traits and disposition, considering these latter in relation to the state of health
indicated. Then pass to a consideration of the environing conditions of life; the ﬁnancial condition and outlook;
the position in life; the occupation; prospects and conditions of marriage; of progeny. Judge next concerning
voyages and journeys. Finish with a statement regarding the predominance of friends or enemies, and select
dates by Solar positions, as already instructed. In cases where it is not objected to, an approximation may be              [Pg 106]

made to the time and nature of death.
Throughout the whole of this judgment, the periods when these predicted eﬀects will come into force should be
made by reference to the rising, setting, and meridian passage of the planets, the solar aspects, and transits.
Care should be taken to weigh justly and impartially the evidence set before you in the ﬁgure of the heavens for
birth. Major importance should be given to those planets which are in angles, and those which are in elevation,
for the nearer a planet may be to the Midheaven, the greater is its inﬂuence for good or ill, according to its
nature and aspect.
Read what you see, not what you imagine should be the destiny of an individual. If you are in complete
ignorance of his person, position, and environment, so much the better. If you follow carefully the various rules
which are contained in this book, you may at ﬁrst make some errors of judgment, but as you become familiar
with the task, even these errors will become few and far between, and in the end the language of the horoscope
will become so intelligible and clear that it will interpret itself, and the whole trend and potentiality for good or ill
of any birth-ﬁgure will force itself upon you in just the same way as when a man walks into your presence with
his character clearly stamped upon his face, so that you have only to look and know.
Having become proﬁcient in the judgment of birth-ﬁgures, you will do well to proceed to a closer study of the
mathematics of astrology, making yourself proﬁcient in the various methods of directing, so that you may at any             [Pg 107]

time refine upon your general prognostics, and make predictions which are clear, sharp, and to the point.
Undoubtedly there is a modicum of intuitive perception at work in the judgment of any horoscope, which will
enable you to seize upon the small details and exact pointing of any matter, and this perhaps constitutes the
whole diﬀerence between the rule of thumb worker and the inspirational reasoning of the intuitive worker. The
one exhausts the books and the other embellishes them. It is so with science in every department. The books
will take you up to a certain point of proﬁciency, and a strict regard for the formulæ will keep you within the
bounds of safety. But if you are ever to make a discovery or become a recognised exponent of any science, you
must be naturally gifted with what is called the “scientiﬁc imagination,” another name for intuition. But at no point
does true intuition part company with exact reasoning. There is no lesion. The one is an extension of the other.
It is the higher reason, which argues from the known to the unknown. And the Astrologer is in this respect as the
poet, “born, not made.” But a moment’s reﬂection will suﬃce to convince you that the more facile you may
become with the book-learning and technique of Astrology, the more you will leave the intuition free to act.
When a lad is struggling with his multiplication tables, his appreciation of the binomial theorem or the diﬀerential
calculus cannot be said to amount to much. And, in the same way, a person who is stuﬃng down the Alphabet
of Astrology cannot be expected to intuit anything concerning the potential of the Sun’s direction to the
quadrature of Saturn.




                          