The Project Gutenberg EBook of Astrology, by Sepharial

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.


Title: Astrology
     How to Make and Read Your Own Horoscope

Author: Sepharial

Release Date: September 25, 2014 [EBook #46963]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTROLOGY ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Peter Vachuska, donovan,
Reiner Ruf, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net
                               ASTROLOGY:
                                      HOW TO MAKE AND READ
                                      YOUR OWN HOROSCOPE


                                                         By
                                                SEPHARIAL
                  EDITOR OF “MOORE’S” AND “OLD MOORE’S” ALMANACS AUTHOR OF “THE
                  MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY,” “PROGNOSTIC ASTRONOMY,” “THE BIRTHDAY
                         BOOK OF DESTINY,” “THE CRYSTAL AND THE SEER,” ETC.



                                              ILLUSTRATED

                               ADVANCED THOUGHT PUB. CO.


                                         216 WEST AUSTIN AVE.
                                             CHICAGO, ILL.



                                                Copyright, 1920
                                                 Chicago, Ill.



                                                                                                                         [Pg 5]

Preface to the Revised and Enlarged Edition

Since the publication of this small manual of practical Astrology, two editions of which have been exhausted, the
attention given to the subject has so far extended as to create an increased demand for a concise work of this
nature, designed for the initial use of students and oﬀered at a price that is within the means of all. It is believed
that the revision and enlargement of the present work will render it even more popular than hitherto with
beginners.
The practical uses of Astrology are daily more and more recognized and appreciated, and although some of the
higher and later developments of Astrology in its relation to every-day problems have necessarily been withheld
from these pages, yet it is to be hoped that so much as is here presented of an abstruse and recondite science
will enable the student to pursue the subject with increasing assurance and satisfaction, in which case doubtless
he will readily discover for himself, and without any special pointing on my part, that Astrology is primarily and
finally a practical and useful study.
There are, of course, many aspects of this fascinating subject which ﬁnd no place in this small work, which
deals solely with Genethliacal Astrology, or the doctrine of Nativities. Yet if it be true, as I think to be the case,
that “the proper study for mankind is man,” then undoubtedly we are right in selecting this phase of Astrological
Science as that to which the student should first devote himself.
When we have thoroughly arrived at an understanding of the complex nature of human character and the
primary causes of variety in expression, when we have seen for ourselves how the many-coloured dome of Life              [Pg 6]

overarches us of this sublunary world with its kaleidoscopic interplay of forces, we shall be to some extent better
equipped not only to deal with character as we ﬁnd it, but also to direct the forces of the human mind along
channels which lead to the preservation of our social economy, and that not by any restrictive measures or
harmful suppression of natural passions and powers, but by conversion of them into forms that are conservative
and useful.
To apply oneself to the specialization of inherent faculty, to ﬁnd the line of least resistance, and to discover the
measure of one’s own soul in the universe and the limit to which ambition can safely aspire, these are things
necessary to be known and things that Astrology makes clear to the mind in the very earliest stages of our
study.
And apart from the scientiﬁc verities to which the science of planetary inﬂuence directs us, there are other not
less important and fascinating truths of a purely philosophic nature to which it inevitably impels the mind and
which cannot fail to exercise a tremendous inﬂuence in the shaping of our thought in regard to the purpose of
life. It places the thoughtful student in an entirely new position with regard to many of the deeper problems of
existence, and it is certainly the fact that to those who newly come to its study, Astrology is a revelation, an
enlightenment, and a conviction from which there is no possible or desirable escape.
                                                                                              SEPHARIAL.
                                                                                                                         [Pg 7]

                                            Astrology

                                                                                                                         [Pg 9]

                                           Introduction

From the earliest ages of the world’s history the subject of Astrology has excited the interest of, and exercised a
great inﬂuence over, the minds of a certain order of thinking men. The science has never been universal in its
acceptance, though it is safe to say that, with its countless adherents in the East and the ever-increasing
number of its advocates in the West, there is no faith which has a more universal application than the belief in
the inﬂuence of the heavenly bodies over the destinies of human beings. It is not possible within the limits of a
small handbook such as this to adequately consider the philosophic paradox which makes of Freewill in man a
“necessity in play”; but it is obvious that the concept is not altogether unscientiﬁc, seeing that it is customary to
speak of the “free path of vibration” in chemical atoms while at the same time it is known that these atoms have
their restricted characteristics, modes of motion, &c., and are all subject to the general laws controlling the
bodies of which they form integral parts. Let it suﬃce that if we can trace an actual connectedness between the
disposition of the heavenly bodies at the moment of a birth and the known life and character of the individual           [Pg 10]

then born, and an exact correspondence between the course of events in that life with the changes occurring in
the heavens subsequent to the moment of birth, we shall do well to accept the fact for what it is worth, and
arrange our philosophic notions accordingly.
As far back as the year B.C. 2154, we ﬁnd mention of the great importance attaching to the celestial phenomena
in the minds of Chinese rulers. It is recorded in the Historical Classic of China that at that time the astrologers Hi
and Ho neglected their duties so that when, on the 10th of October, there was a great eclipse of the Sun at
Peking between seven and nine o’clock in the morning, the people were wholly unprepared for it, and “ran about
here and there in the utmost consternation.” For this oﬀence Hi and Ho were deprived of their oﬃces, their
estates were conﬁscated and they were driven from the kingdom. Among the Hindus we have the classical
writers Garga, Parashara, and Mihira, together with their legions of commentators. The Assyrian records are full
of astrological allusions regarding the inﬂuence of planetary conjunctions and stellar positions. The Greek
mythology is nothing but a vast system of cosmographical astrology, and there is no other history in it than what
you may read in the constellations of the heavens and the corresponding evolution of the human race. Aristotle
made it a part of his philosophy. Hipparchus, Hippocrates, Thales, Galenius, and others subscribed an
intelligent belief in its principles. To Claudius Ptolemy, however, we are indebted for the ﬁrst concise and
scientiﬁc statement of its principles and practice, so far as Europe is concerned. He wrote the Tetrabiblos, or          [Pg 11]

Four Books, and laid the foundations of a true astrological science. Julius Firmicus conﬁrmed Ptolemy and
enlarged upon his observations. The subsequent discovery of the planets Uranus and Neptune by Herschel and
Adams, widened the ﬁeld of research and gave to later astrologers the clue to much that hitherto had been
imperfectly understood. Not that these discoveries overturned the whole system of astrology, as some have
imagined and foolishly stated, or that they negatived the conclusions drawn from the observed eﬀects of the
seven anciently known bodies of the solar system, but it became possible after a lapse of time to ﬁll in the blank
spaces and to account for certain events which had not been traced to the action of any of the already known
planets. The discovery of argon did not destroy our conclusions regarding the nature and characteristics of
oxygen or hydrogen or nitrogen, nor give an entirely new meaning to the word “atmosphere.” If even so many
as seven new planets should be discovered, there would yet not be a single paragraph of this book which would
need revising. What is known regarding planetary action in human life is known with great certainty, and the
eﬀects of one planet can never be confounded with those of another. Incomplete as it must needs be, it is yet a
veritable science both as to its principles and practice. It claims for itself a place among the sciences for the sole
reason that it is capable of mathematical demonstration, and deals only with the observed positions and motions
of the heavenly bodies; and the man who holds to the principia of Newton, the solidarity of the solar system, the
interaction of the planetary bodies and their consequent electrostatic eﬀects upon the Earth, cannot, while              [Pg 12]

subject to the air he breathes, deny the foundation principles of astrology. The application of these principles to
the facts of everyday life is solely a matter of prolonged research and tabulation upon an elaborate scale which
has been going on for thousands of years in all parts of the world, so that all the reader has to do is to make his
own horoscope and put the science to the test of true or false. The present writer is in a position to know that
the study of astrology at the present day is no less sincere than widely spread, but few care to let their studies
be known, for, as Prof. F. Max Müller recently said, “So great is the ignorance which confounds a science
requiring the highest education, with that of the ordinary gipsy fortune-teller.” That to which the great Kepler was
compelled “by his unfailing experience of the course of events in harmony with the changes taking place in the
heavens,” to subscribe “an unwilling belief,” the science which was practised and advocated by Tycho Brahe
under all assaults of fortune and adverse opinion, the art that arrested the attention of the young Newton and
set him pondering upon the problems of force and matter, which fascinated the minds of such men as Francis
Bacon, Archbishop Usher, Haley, Sir George Witchell, Flamstead, and a host of others, is to-day the favourite
theme of thousands of intelligent minds and bids fair to become a subject of popular inquiry.
It is believed that the present work will be of considerable assistance to those who seriously contemplate an
initial study of the science of horoscopy, and although it by no means exhausts what is known on the subject,
yet it will be found accurate and reliable as far as it goes, and will enable any one of ordinary intelligence to test   [Pg 13]

the claims of Astrology for himself. This is as much as can be expected in the limits of a small handbook. The
literature of the subject is considerable, and the present writer only takes credit to himself so far as his own wide
experience and practice have enabled him to present the subject in a simple and brief manner.





                                                                                                                         [Pg 15]

                                               Contents

                                          SECTION I
                                 THE ALPHABET OF THE HEAVENS
                       CHAP.                                                            PAGE
                            I. THE PLANETS, THEIR NATURES AND TYPES                       17
                           II. THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC                                    24
                          III. THE CELESTIAL HOUSES                                       29
                          IV. THE ASTRONOMICAL ASPECTS                                    31

                                       SECTION II
                            THE CONSTRUCTION OF A HOROSCOPE
                             I. THE EPHEMERIS AND ITS USES                                  34
                            II. TO ERECT A FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS                            36
                           III. THE TABLES OF HOUSES                                        39
                           IV. PLANETARY TRANSITS                                           43
                            V. TABLE OF ECLIPSES                                            47

                                         SECTION III
                                 HOW TO READ THE HOROSCOPE
                             I. THE PLANETS IN THE HOUSES                                   51
                            II. THE CONSTITUTION                                            54
                           III. HEALTH AND SICKNESS                                         56
                           IV. HOW TO READ CHARACTER AND DISPOSITION                        59
                            V. FINANCIAL PROSPECTS                                          64
                           VI. THE POSITION IN LIFE                                         69
                          VII. THE CHOICE OF OCCUPATION                                     72
                          VIII. MARRIAGE CIRCUMSTANCES                                      76
                           IX. INDICATIONS OF PROGENY                                       81
                            X. VOYAGES AND JOURNEYS                                         84
                           XI. OF FRIENDS AND ENEMIES                                       87
                          XII. THE END OF LIFE                                              91

                                          SECTION IV
                                  THE STARS IN THEIR COURSES
                             I. THE TIME-MEASURE                                           94
                            II. THE EFFECTS OF TRANSITS                                   101
                           III. HOW TO SUMMARISE A HOROSCOPE                              105
                                HOW TO BECOME A SUCCESSFUL
                          IV.                                                             108
                                ASTROLOGER
                            V. A POPULAR ILLUSTRATION                                     114
                          VI. PLANETARY PERIODS, ETC.                                     127
                          VII. REVOLUTIONS, ECLIPSES, INGRESSES, ETC.                     137




                                                                                                                         [Pg 17]