                                                                                                  [Pg 108]
                                             CHAPTER IV
                    HOW TO BECOME A SUCCESSFUL ASTROLOGER


I take it that nobody nowadays can aﬀord to fritter away time in the study of subjects which are not likely to
become a source of beneﬁt to himself and others. If there be such people among my readers, which I consider
unlikely, I may dismiss them oﬀhand with the remark that they will never become successful astrologers, for the
ﬁrst word of practical astrology is Utility. If the science had not its practical application to the aﬀairs of everyday
life, if its principles contained no word of assurance and hope for the myriad toilers of this world, no word of
admonition for the self-indulgent parasites of modern social life, if, in short, it did not make for the betterment of
human life and thought, it would never have attracted the attention of Aristotle, Cicero, Galen, Claudius
Ptolemy, Thales, and others of the old world, and such men as Bacon, Cardan, Archbishop Usher, Naibod,
Mercator, Ashmole, Kenelm Digby, Sir Christopher Heydon, Dryden, Dr. John Butler, Sir George Wharton,
Vincent Wing, George Witchel, Tycho Brahe, Kepler, and Flamstead of more recent biography. Indeed, in
whatever age or country we may elect to make our inquiries concerning Astrology, there are to be found a host             [Pg 109]

of intelligent and even illustrious advocates in every department of life and learning. Suﬃce it to say that the
modern student of this most ancient of all sciences is at all times in very good company.
Let it ﬁrst be understood that there is an object to be attained in the study of Astrology, and that the pursuit of it
in the gratiﬁcation of an idle curiosity alone will inevitably entail the waste of time which invariably attaches to
idleness of all descriptions, and we may then proﬁtably consider whether or not the subject is worth the labour
which it will demand from the man who has something to do in the world and little enough time in which to do it.
These are stressful times, and we have to be economical in our eﬀorts. We have strength enough to carry us
through, but neither strength enough to thresh the wind nor time enough to fish in puddles.
What, then, does Astrology offer to the patient worker, the man who would become a successful Astrologer?
First and foremost it will enable him to gain an insight into individual motive and character which no other
science can possibly aﬀord. It will enable him to know himself, his own strength and weakness, and so ﬁt him to
deal harmoniously and justly with others. It will enhance his opportunities to the extent that he is able to foresee
and make use of all beneﬁc inﬂuences operating through his own environment. It will give him timely warning of
his approach to the quicksands and pitfalls which occur in his passage through life. He will discern his special          [Pg 110]

physical weaknesses, and the times of his predisposition to sickness, the nature thereof, and the precautions
which are necessary. He will know whom to cultivate and whom to avoid, and in selecting a partner in business
or a wife for his home, he will be guided by a foreknowledge of evils to be avoided and of good things to be
gained. He will choose his path in life with the conﬁdence that it is for him the line of least resistance and
therefore that of greatest progress. He will not become obsessed by ambitions beyond his power to achieve. He
will learn the power of adaptation to environment, and thereby eﬀect his work in the world with the least possible
friction and waste of force. He will know when to make provision against sickness, accident, and death. He will
not invest capital where interest is not to be gained. He will see the end from the beginning. It may not make
him a brilliant success in the world, but it will assuredly save him from being a failure. He will ﬁnd causes for
inexplicable things, and his mind will rest content in the knowledge hat while he is working out the highest
potentialities of his own horoscope, the major problems and intricacies of life are not of his making or needful of
his solving. And ﬁnally, when his time comes to “shuﬄe oﬀ this mortal coil,” he will be prepared, and will know
that it is the will of Heaven, expressed and determined from the moment of his birth. Rightly employed,
Astrology cannot fail to improve the man who makes of it a serious study, ﬁtting him to be of greater use to
others and of higher service to the race at large.
But to become a successful Astrologer he must study patiently for several years, testing each statement that is           [Pg 111]

made in the books by reference to his own and several other horoscopes. He must be able to erect a ﬁgure of
the Heavens with mathematical accuracy for any given time and place, work out directions by the use of the
sphere or trigonometrical tables, and have a competent knowledge of the motions and periods of the various
planetary bodies. When thus satisﬁed in his own mind that Astrology is a dependable science, and that he is
capable of demonstrating it under test conditions, he must be generous in the use of it. Here and there he will
ﬁnd one who is opposed to the belief that the stars have any inﬂuence in human aﬀairs. Let him not waste logic
with such a man, but go straight to the task of convincing him by an appeal to facts.
For preference, select a period when the directional inﬂuences are such as seem likely to hit the sceptic with
considerable force, deﬁne the event, make a careful calculation of the time of its fulﬁlment, and put them on
paper, which, being yet unread by the man of Common-sense, should be placed under cover, sealed, and
endorsed to be opened only after a certain date.
Now a man who has been hammered rather severely and in quite an unexpected manner, is usually open to
conviction of truth when he ﬁnds that the nature and date of his disaster have been accurately foretold. Being a
man of “common-sense” and not of intuition, he will probably think that the Astrologer might even have saved
him from the consequences of his own lack of foresight. So indeed might the Astrologer have done had he
taken the management of aﬀairs from the beginning; but to step in half-way to arrest causes which are already
in operation and charged with inevitable effects, is requiring too much of any man short of a Prime Minister!             [Pg 112]

There are certain things which even the most astute deductive reasoner cannot foresee, and these are the
points that should be utilised by the Astrologer who seeks to convince others of the truth of his science. A man
cannot reason from his doorstep to a street accident. If he could he would avoid it. All men are not subject to
accidents, however. But almost all are subject to bereavements, losses, sicknesses, and changes of fortune.
Those are the points which the Astrologer intent on proselytising, usually makes use of. But events need not be
in futurity to carry conviction. If it can be shown that by mathematical calculations the events of the past can be
recited with precision and exactness, it is evident to the meanest intellect that nothing hinders from an extension
of such calculations into the future. And once convinced of the reliability of such claims to foreknowledge, the
practical man of the world is not slow to avail himself of its uses.
But Astrology is not exhausted in the study of individual horoscopes, for there are other departments of this
extensive science. The inﬂuence of the planets upon the weather, as embodied in Astro-meteorology; the rise
and fall of Empires, political changes, the outbreak of wars, of revolutions, of epidemics, as deﬁned by State
Astrology so much in repute among the Oriental rulers; the occurrence of tidal waves, earthquakes, and other
seismic phenomena, all form a part of the complete equipment of the practical Astrologer.
It would be superﬂuous to recite here the numerous and strikingly accurate forecasts which have been madeby           [Pg 113]

modern exponents of the science, but it is only right to say that they reﬂect considerable credit upon their
authors, for the above-mentioned departments of astrological learning are by no means in the same eﬃcient
state as Genethliacal Astrology, to an outline of which this work is devoted. Anciently it was otherwise, and even
in the East at this day they hold some secrets of traditional knowledge, concerning which they are unduly
mysterious and of which we have only the evidence afforded by more exact prediction upon certain points.
Prejudice and Ignorance are the twin giants which bar the path of the world’s progress to-day, even as they
have ever done. Step by step they have been beaten back, baﬄed by the light of Reason, harassed by the
arrows of Truth. The world is redeeming its ancient heritage. All that is now required to establish the paramount
truth of Astrology as a science is an impartial and thorough investigation, preferably at the hands of scientiﬁc
men, of its methods and principles. Not that the truth is to be ratiﬁed at the hands of modern scientists, seeing
that their own teaching constitutes a mere shifting orthodoxy, liable at any moment to undergo a fundamental
change in theory by the discovery of a single new fact—but that to such men rightly belongs the duty of
disproving the claims of Astrology to be considered as a science, for it is a fact to be regretted that certain
members of their body have written against the subject in a spirit of prejudice and without adducing any data in
support of their contention, which ill becomes any man of scientiﬁc pretensions and is above all things
detrimental to the cause of Truth.




                                                                                                                      [Pg 114]
                                            CHAPTER V
                                    A POPULAR ILLUSTRATION


In order to summarise and illustrate the principles which have been enunciated in the course of this work, I shall
avail myself of the horoscope of Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, who was born on the 8th of July, 1836, at Highbury,
the time of birth being stated to have been at about 2.30 in the morning. Calculations have since enabled us to
ﬁx the exact time of birth as at 2 h. 36 m. a.m. I subjoin the horoscopical ﬁgure for that time, the calculation of
which is as follows:—

                                                                            H.   M.   S.
                             Midheaven in R.A. at
                                                       7th July, 1836… 7 1 58
                             Noon
                             Add time elapsed since        …      … … 14 36 0
                                     Equation for 14h. 33m. at 10 secs.   2 25
                             Midheaven in Right Ascension at Birth … 21 40 23


                                               The Constitution.
Born under the sign Gemini, with Mercury rising in the sign Cancer, the Sun near the conjunction with Jupiter
and in close sextile to the Moon, there is little doubt that the late Colonial Secretary is by nature gifted with an   [Pg 115]
                                                                                                                       [Pg 116]
excellent constitution. The sextile of the luminaries is a powerful co-ordinator, and whenever sickness
supervenes there will be a speedy recovery. The semisquare aspect of Mars, while disposing to gouty aﬀections
of the hands and feet, will contribute vital energy and power to throw oﬀ diseases, while at the same time
predisposing to accidents and wounds to the right shoulder or clavicle.




The rising sign gives nervous energy and enormous capacity for work, which is due to high nervous tension
supported by a sound vitality. The only hereditary predisposition is that indicated by Mars, which induces to
fevers, and gouty affections due to acidity.

                                                   The Health.
The Moon is strong in the sign Taurus, but not particularly well placed in the 12th House. It has, moreover, the
square aspects of Neptune and Venus from ﬁxed signs. These indications point to functional disorders of the
heart, throat and excretory system. On the other hand, there are the good aspects of the Sun, Jupiter and
Uranus to counteract these adverse tendencies, and it is certain that strong recuperative powers together with a
normally good co-ordination of functions would induce a speedy recovery from any illness to which he may be
liable. Considerable immunity from sickness of all sorts may therefore be predicated.

                                          Character and Disposition.
The majority of the planets being in Cardinal signs, with three planets (including the Moon) in Fixed signs,           [Pg 117]

indicates a character that is energetic, ambitious, active, sharp, ingenious, lively, and persevering; capable of
cutting out a line in life for himself and making headway against obstacles; disposed to ride roughshod over the
weaknesses and prejudices of those who oppose him; gifted with a pioneer spirit, incisive manner, and
disposed at times to eﬀect his ends regardless of the feelings and opinions of others. At the same time there is
suﬃcient patience, method, caution, and watchfulness to make this extreme deﬁnition of purpose very eﬀective.
Laborious, ﬁrm (at times obstinate), systematic, and self-reliant, he is capable of waiting for opportunities. But
finally he carries his purpose with a tour de force.
That which he lacks is adaptability, suavity, and ability to enter into the feelings of others. He is too ambitious to
be self-centred, but yet too intent to be sympathetic.
The rising of Mercury in trine aspect to Saturn and Uranus gives considerable mental capacity, a wide grasp of
facts, a well-informed, apt and business-like mind; some originality, constructiveness, and power of marshalling
facts and ﬁgures; patience, caution, and secrecy. There is not much imagination, and the sympathies are not
wide. His methods and actions are governed by literal fact and mathematical certainty. He is an omnivorous
devourer of the accessible. He takes the small ﬁsh by the handful and makes a meal of them; but he leaves the
ponderous whales for those of greater imagination and more leisurely habit.
The quadrature of Mars to Uranus will induce momentary outbursts of temper and some irritability of nature, but
the character I am delineating is not such as can easily be played upon, for it is remarkably lacking in emotional       [Pg 118]

susceptibility. Nevertheless, the inspirational faculty is by no means absent, and the presence of Neptune in the
9th House in trine to the rising Mercury, is an index of considerable inventive genius, extreme range of mental
perception, and telescopic discernment of future events. Venus in the 3rd House shows some artistic tastes and
fancies, considerable appreciation of art and culture, a fondness for ﬂowers, bright lights, &c. But dominant
above all are the two angular inﬂuences of Uranus and Mercury, which render the mind mathematical and
precise, commercial, apt, business-like, energetic, and eminently magnetic.

                                                     Finance.
The position of the Sun in conjunction with Jupiter in the sign Cancer, in sextile to the Moon, is the index of a
high fortune and means exceeding a competence. It is here worthy of note that Cancer, which in this horoscope
holds the Sun, Jupiter, and Mercury, is the ruling sign of South Africa, with which Colony Mr. Chamberlain’s
fortunes have been for a long time so intimately associated. It is also worthy of note that both Cecil Rhodes and
Barney Barnato were born on the same day of the year, the 5th of July, with the Sun in the 14th degree of
Cancer. In the former case the Sun was conjoined with Moon and Venus, in sextile to Uranus and trine to
Neptune, while in the latter case the Sun was in trine to Jupiter. In regard to Mr. Chamberlain’s horoscope, it
will be observed that Jupiter, which holds such eﬀective power for increase in the 2nd House, is also the ruler of
the 7th, and it is to be remembered that all partnerships, commercial or social, which he has contracted have so         [Pg 119]

far proved highly satisfactory from a merely monetary point of view. Further, the Moon is aﬀected with the good
aspect of the Sun in the 2nd House, which is a further indication that on a purely ﬁnancial basis Mr.
Chamberlain is a man worth going into partnership with.





   
