

CHAPTER III.

CONCERNING THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC

The zodiac is a band or belt, measuring about 14 degrees in breadth,

but, as Venus sometimes appears to have more than her real latitude, it

is more correctly considered to be 18 degrees in breadth. The

ecliptic, or path of the Sun, passes exactly through the centre

of the zodiac, longitudinally.

The ancients divided the zodiac into ten signs—Libra being

omitted altogether, Virgo and Scorpio being merged into one, thus:

Virgo-Scorpio. This accounts for the similarity of their symbols,

.

Ptolemy divides the zodiac into twelve equal parts, of 30 degrees each.

He says: "The beginning of the whole zodiacal circle (which in its

nature as a circle can have no other beginning or end capable of being

determined) is, therefore, assumed to be the sign Aries, which

commences at the vernal equinox in March."

One of the many objections urged against Ptolemy's system of astrology

is that the signs are continually moving from their positions; but

Ptolemy seems to have been aware of this motion of the signs, and has

met this objection by what he says in the twenty-fifth chapter of the

first book of the Tetra-biblos, where he makes it clear that the

respective influences he ascribes to the twelve signs were considered

by him to belong rather to the places they occupied in the

ambient than to the stars of which they are composed; and he especially

speaks of the ambient as producing the effects attributed to the

respective signs of the zodiac when in the ascendant in a nativity;

thus his astrology is just as applicable to modern astronomy as it was

to his own.

The signs have been divided into four triplicities, thus:

fiery , , ; earthy, , ,

; airy, , , ; and watery,

, , .

The bicorporal, or double-bodied, signs are , , and

the first half of . The fruitful signs are ,

, ; the barren signs are , , and .

These descriptions are useful in showing the modifications brought to

bear (by the sign ascending) on the planet's influence. But, when no

planets are in or near the ascendant at birth, the following

descriptions of the temperament and form of body produced by each sign

ascending at birth should be used.

Aries () is a hot and fiery sign and produces a lean body,

spare and strong, large bones, grey eyes, with a quick glance and sandy

or red-coloured hair. The temper is violent. It governs the head and

face; its colour is white.

Taurus () differs greatly, in its effects, from the preceding

sign; it is cold and dry, and gives a broad brow and thick lips. A

person born under it is melancholy and slow to anger but, when roused,

furious and difficult to be appeased. It governs the neck and throat;

its colour is red.

Gemini () is in nature hot and moist and produces a person of

straight, tall body, sanguine complexion, brilliant eyes and light

brown hair. The temperament of those born under Gemini is lively and

the understanding good. This sign governs the arms and shoulders; its

colours are red and white.

Cancer () is by nature cold and moist; it produces a native

fair and pale, short in stature, with a round face, sand-coloured brown

hair and grey eyes. Those born under it are phlegmatic, indolent and

gentle tempered. Women born under this sign generally have many

children. It governs the breast and stomach; its colours are green and

russet-brown.

Leo () is a fiery, hot and dry sign. When it rises at birth

without any planet being near the ascendant, the native will be of tall

stature, with yellow hair, ruddy complexion and oval face, and he will

have a quick glance and a strong voice. It governs the heart, the back

and the neck; its colours are red and green.

Virgo () is an earthy, cold, barren, feminine sign. When it

ascends, it shows a well-formed body, slender and tall, straight,

dark-brown hair and a round face. The mind of the native is ingenious,

but rather inconstant. It governs the belly; its colour is black

speckled with blue.

Libra () is an aërial, sanguine, masculine, hot and moist sign.

Rising at birth it produces a well-made body, with long limbs, an oval

and beautiful face, sanguine complexion, straight flaxen hair and grey

eyes. Those born under it are courteous, just and honourable. It

governs the loins; and the colours under its rule are black, crimson

and tawny.

Scorpio () is a moist, phlegmatic, feminine sign. It gives a

strong, corpulent body, low stature, thick legs, hair growing low on

the forehead and heavy eyebrows. Those born under this sign are

reserved, thoughtful, subtle and malicious. It governs the lower parts

of the body; the colour under its rule is brown.

Sagittarius () is a fiery, masculine sign. The person born

under its rule is handsome, with a rather long face and features,

chestnut hair, inclined to baldness and ruddy complexion; the body

strong and active. Those born under this sign are fond of field sports,

are good riders, and are lovers of animals. They are kindly, generous

and careless of danger. This sign governs the thighs and hips, and

rules yellow and green.

Capricorn () is an earthy, cold, dry, feminine sign. It

produces a person of slender stature, with a long neck, narrow chest

and dark hair. The mind is quick, witty and subtle. It governs the

knees and hams and, in colours, it rules black or dark brown.

Aquarius () is an airy, moist, masculine sign. In a nativity

where no planets are in or near the ascendant, it would produce a

person of a well-set, strong body, long face and delicate complexion,

with brown hair. It governs the legs and ankles and rules the

sky-colour or blue.

Pisces () is a watery, cold and feminine sign. It produces a

person of short stature and fleshy body, with a rather stooping gait.

Those born under its influence are indolent and phlegmatic. It governs

the feet and toes and presides over the pure white colour. It is

needful to remember the colours belonging to the signs, as they are

especially useful in horary questions.

 