

CHAPTER V.

OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS

The planet Saturn is the most remote of the seven planetary orbs

recognised by the ancient writers on astrology. He is of a pale ash

colour, slow in motion, only finishing his course through the twelve

signs of the zodiac in 29 years and about 157 days. His greatest north

latitude from the ecliptic is 2 degrees 48 minutes; his south latitude

is 2 degrees 49 minutes.

Those born with this planet well-dignified

[4] are studious, grave,

economical, prudent, patient and in all their actions sober and

somewhat austere. They are not much given to the love of women, but

they are persons of much depth of feeling, and, when they do love, they

are very constant. They are given to the study of occult matters,

[5]

and are of a melancholic, suspicious and jealous temperament. In person

when well-dignified Saturn gives a rather tall stature and long

limbs. The hair is dark, the eyebrows much marked and generally meeting

between the eyes, which are dark brown, deep set and close together.

The nose is long and generally somewhat bent over the lips and the

under jaw slightly protrudes. The complexion is sallow, the ears large

and the hands and feet are generally long, but not fleshy.

Those born under the potent aspect of Saturn are generally slow of

speech and their voices are harsh; when Saturn rises in a horoscope

devoid of dignities, the native is envious, covetous, malicious,

subtle, untruthful and of a discontented disposition. In person

frequently deformed, with long and irregular features, the eyes and

hair dark and the skin yellow and harsh.

In man's body this planet rules the spleen, the right ear, the lips and

the teeth. In illness he gives ague, palsy, ruptures (especially should

he rule in the sign of Scorpio), jaundice, toothache and all affections

of the sight, of the ear, of the teeth and jaws and of the legs.

The herbs he governs are the hemlock, hellebore, burdock, sage,

henbane, rue, nightshade and mandrake.

The trees under his rule are the willow, the yew, the cypress, the

box-tree and the pine.

The beasts he governs are the elephant, the wolf, the bear, the dog,[6]

the basilisk, the crocodile, the scorpion, the serpent, the rat, the

mouse and all manner of creeping things; among birds, the crow, the

cuckoo, the raven, the owl and the bat.

Of fish he rules the eel, the tortoise and all shell fish.

The minerals he governs are lead and the dross of all metals.

His stones are jet, onyx and all dark stones which are incapable of

polish. The colour he rules is black.

He rules Saturday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth hour of

the same day. His number is 55. In gathering the herbs under his rule

the ancients were particular to do so in his hours, as this rendered

the medicament more powerful. This is to be observed regarding the

herbs ruled by all the planets.

Saturn's orb is nine degrees before and after any aspect; that is, his

influence begins to operate when either he applies to any planet or it

applies to him within nine degrees of his perfect aspect, and his

influence continues in force until he is separated nine degrees from

the aspect. His angel is Cassiel. His friends are Jupiter, Venus,

Mercury and the Moon; his enemies are Mars and the Sun.

Jupiter is the next planet below Saturn and is of a bright, clear,

azure colour. He much exceeds Saturn in motion, as he finishes his

course through the twelve signs in twelve years. His greatest north

latitude is 1 degree 38 minutes, and his greatest south latitude 1

degree 40 minutes. When he rises at birth well-dignified he gives an

erect, tall stature, sanguine complexion, oval face, large grey eyes,

thick brown hair, full lips and good teeth. In temperament those born

under the good influence of this planet are honourable, generous and

hospitable, but loving material pleasures, kind and affectionate to

wife and family, charitable, desiring to be well thought of and hating

all mean and sordid actions. The voices of those born under Jupiter are

clear and sonorous. When this planet rises devoid of dignities

the native will be gluttonous, profligate, vain, and boastful, of mean

abilities and shallow understanding, easily seduced to extravagance and

a tyrant to those of his family and household.

In man's body he rules the lungs and the blood, and of diseases he

gives apoplexy, gout, inflammation of the lungs, pleurisy and all

illnesses proceeding from corruption of the blood.

The herbs he governs are cloves, mace, nutmeg, gilliflower, marjoram,

mint, borage and saffron.

Of trees, he rules the mulberry, the olive, the vine, the fig, the

beech and the pear-tree.

Of beasts, the sheep, the hart, the ox and all those animals that are

useful to man.

Of birds, the stork, the snipe, the lark, the eagle, the pheasant, the

partridge and the peacock.

Of fishes, the whale, the dolphin and the sword-fish.

His metal is tin.

His stones are the sapphire, the amethyst and the emerald.

Of colours he rules red mixed with green.

His day is Thursday and he rules the first hour after sunrise and the

eighth hour. His number is 78.

His orb is 9 degrees before and after any aspect.

All the planets except Mars are his friends.

His angel is Zadkiel.

Mars in order succeeds Jupiter. He appears of a red colour, and

finishes his course through the zodiac in 1 year 321 days. His greatest

north latitude is 4 degrees 31 minutes. His south latitude is 6 degrees

47 minutes. When he is well-dignified in a horoscope, the native is

courageous, confident, loving war and all that belongs to it, jealous

of honour, hot-tempered and a great lover of field-sports. In person he

will be of middle stature, broad-shouldered and with big bones; the

complexion of a red fairness; the hair is crisp or curly and also red,

but this varies slightly according to the sign rising at birth; in

watery signs the hair is not so red, and in earthy signs it is more

chestnut; the eyes are grey and have a bold, fixed glance like that of

a hawk.

When he is ill-dignified at birth, the native is turbulent, cruel,

boastful, a promoter of sedition, ungracious in manners and

unscrupulous in his actions, with no fear of either God or man. He

rules the head and face, the gall, the throat and intestines; and the

diseases he gives are fevers, carbuncles, smallpox, all throat

affections, all hurts to the head and face (especially by iron), and

all diseases which arise from too much heat of blood; also accidents

from four-footed beasts.

The herbs over which he rules are the nettle, the thistle, onions,

scammony, garlic, horehound, cardamons, mustard and all herbs giving

heat.

Of trees, all those which are of a prickly nature, such as the holly,

the thorn and the chestnut.

Of beasts, all fierce animals—the tiger, the panther, the wolf, the

horse, the leopard, the wild ass and the bear.

The dog is sometimes assigned to Mars on account of its courage and

combativeness. This delightful animal is probably ruled by both Saturn

and Mars; the former giving it the quality of fidelity which it

possesses in a degree beyond all other creatures.

Of fish, the pike, the barbel and the sword-fish.

Of birds, the hawk, the vulture, the kite, the eagle, the magpie and

the cock, all of which are combative.

The metal he rules is iron. The colour he rules is red.

The stones, the carbuncle, the ruby and the blood-stone.

His orb is 7 degrees before and after any aspect.

He governs Tuesday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth. His

number is 39.

His friend among the planets is Venus, all the others are his enemies.

His angel is Samael.

The Sun passes through all the twelve signs of the zodiac in one year

and a few hours over the 365 days which constitute the year. He has no

latitude.

When the Sun rises at a birth well-dignified, the native is of an

honourable disposition, but always desiring to rule, loving pomp, yet

affable, speaking with gravity and without too many words and

possessing much self-reliance and dignity of manner. In person he will

be tall, well made, with golden hair, yellowish skin, large and

piercing eyes and long, straight and well-formed features.

When ill-aspected the native is arrogant, boastful, a spendthrift,

proud, yet in poverty hanging on other men's charity, very loquacious,

restless and without judgment.

He governs the heart, the brain, the right eye and the arms; and the

diseases he causes are all illnesses of the heart, such as swoons,

palpitations, cramps, also diseases of the mouth, the brain, and the

eyes.

Of colours he rules the yellow and orange colour.

 