

CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS

This was formerly termed a horoscope, but is now more generally

called a figure of the heavens. It is simply a scheme, or plan,

representing an accurate picture of the heavens—that is, of the

positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets, and, in some instances, of the

fixed stars also, for the moment at which a child is born. In horary

questions the figure is drawn for the required time, which may be the

moment of the propounding of a question to an astrologer, or of the

occurrence of any event of the result of which astrological information

is desired.

This map, which contains the twelve divisions already described as the

twelve houses of heaven, may be drawn in either a square or circular

form. Lilly and other mediæval writers use both forms indiscriminately;

but as the latter is more easily understood, the diagram (plate 2) is

drawn up in that manner. It will be seen that it is formed of three

circles. In the centre space the date, time and place of the event of a

horary question are entered, and in a nativity the name, sex and moment

of birth of the native. The next space (divided into twelve equal parts

for the houses) is reserved for the planets and in the outer space are

placed the signs of the zodiac, with the number of their degrees, on

the cusp of each house. The cusps of the Houses are represented by that

line between each house. Having obtained an Ephemeris, or astrological

almanack

[7] for the year required, we must find the Sidereal Time for

the day and month of the birth, or question; then, if the time of the

event be before noon we must deduct the difference

between the given time and noon from the Sidereal Time of the day; for

example, on the day of the event (the 9th January, 1889), the Sidereal

Time at noon is shown by the Ephemeris to be 19 hours 16 minutes 51

seconds, if the birth had been at 9 a.m. The difference between 9 a.m.

and noon is 3 hours. We should, therefore, have to deduct 3

hours from 19 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, which gives 16 hours 16

minutes 51 seconds, the Sidereal Time required.

As the event is supposed to happen at 3 in the afternoon, we

must add the difference between noon and the time given to the

Sidereal Time of the day. The difference between noon and 3 p.m. is 3

hours, and, as the Sidereal Time on the 9th January, 1889, is 19 hours

16 minutes 51 seconds, we add 3 hours to this amount, which

gives 22 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, the Sidereal Time required.

We must now proceed to place the signs for 3 p.m. on the 9th January,

1889, which is thus done: We turn to the "Table of Houses" (which will

be found at the end of the Ephemeris), and having found (under the

column headed "Sidereal Time") the nearest time to 22 hours 16 minutes

51 seconds, which in this case is 22 hours 16 minutes 48 seconds for the

latitude of London, we see in the next column (headed 10) the sign

(Pisces), and the number 3° opposite our Sidereal Time,

showing that the third degree of Pisces is on the cusp of the 10th

house, In the next column (headed 11) we see , and the number

7°; we therefore place 7° on the cusp of the 11th

house, next 24° on the 12th; then 7° 5′ on the

Ascendant (or first house), 23° on the 2nd and 10°

on the 3rd; for the remaining houses we place the signs in

order opposite to those already given, keeping the same number of

degrees to each corresponding house and sign. The opposite house to the

10th is the 4th, and the opposite sign to is ; we

therefore place 3° on the cusp of the 4th house, and so on

of the rest. It will, however, now be seen that the two signs 

and are missing; these signs are "intercepted," which means that

they lie between two houses without occupying the cusp of either; they

must, therefore, be placed in their order between the cusps of

the houses. This is, of course, not always the case, and some horoscopes

will have no intercepted signs.

HOW TO PLACE THE PLANETS.

In the Ephemeris the longitudes of the planets are given daily for mean

noon; so, to find the exact place of a planet for a given time,

we must note the difference of longitude between the previous noon and

noon of the day for drawing the map for a.m. and for p.m., the

difference between noon of the day and noon of the day after. This

difference is the motion of the planet in 24 hours, which we

must work thus: As 24 hours are to—hours (i.e., the difference

between the given time and noon), so is the daily motion to the motion

required. For example, the at noon on the 6th January is

(omitting seconds) in 19° 29′ , and on the 10th January at

noon he is in 20° 30′ , which gives a daily motion

of 59 minutes. We must find his place for 3 p.m. on the 9th January. As

24 hours are to 3 hours, so are 59 minutes to the time required; this

equals about 7 minutes, which we add to the 's longitude at noon

on the 9th. If the event had been for a.m. this amount would have been

deducted from the 's longitude at noon on the day

of the event. We must proceed in the same way for the other planets and

place them in the map according to their positions in respect to the

degrees on the cusps of the houses. The will be in 19°

36′ , or about the middle of the 7th house. And note

that the number of degrees of a sign on the cusp of any house shows

that that sign commenced in the previous house. Supposing the

had been 1° of , we should then have

placed it in the 6th house, a little below the cusp of the 7th. When a

planet is Retrograde (shown in the Ephemeris thus, R.),

we add the amount to the longitude when the event is before noon

or a.m., and deduct it from the longitude when the event is

after noon or p.m. The mode of giving the judgment on a horoscope will

be shown farther on.

 