

CHAPTER XI.

ON FORMING A GENERAL JUDGMENT ON A NATIVITY

Respecting the distribution of the doctrine of nativities, we are to

consider first the parents, then the duration of life; the shape

and figure of the body; after these the quality of the mind; then as to

fortune in regard to honours as well as wealth. In succession to these

the character of the employment; the questions relative to marriage,

children, and friendships; then that concerning travel; and lastly,

that concerning the kind of death which awaits the native from

the configuration of the heavens at his birth.

The Parents.—In conformity with nature, says Ptolemy, the Sun

and Saturn are allotted to the person of the father, and the Moon and

Venus to that of the mother; and the mode in which these luminaries and

planets may be found posited, with reference to each other as well as

to other planets and stars, will intimate the situation of affairs

affecting the parents.

If Mars should be in bad aspect to the Sun, the father will receive

some injury to the face or die suddenly; but a long life is presaged if

Jupiter or Venus be in any mode whatever configurated with either the

Sun or Saturn.

If Mars be succedent to the Moon or Venus, or in quartile or opposition

to them, or if Saturn be similarly aspected to the Moon only, and both

of them be void of course or retrograde, or cadent, adverse accidents

and disease will attend the mother; should they, on the other hand, be

swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend that her life will

be short or grievously afflicted.

Should the Sun be configurated, in any mode whatever, with the Moon or

Venus, or should Venus herself be harmoniously configurated with the

Moon, either by the sextile, the trine, or the conjunction, the mother

will live long.

Concerning the duration of the native's own life, the Hylegliacal[9]

places are, according to Ptolemy, the sign on the angle of the

ascendant from the fifth degree above the horizon to the twenty-fifth

degree below it; the thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto

constituting the eleventh house; also the thirty degrees in dexter

quartile forming the Mid-heaven above the earth; those in dexter trine

making the ninth house; and, lastly, those in opposition belonging to

the angle of the west.

Among these places, the degrees which constitute the Mid-heaven are

entitled to preference, as being of a more potent influence; the

degrees in the Ascendant are next in virtue; then the degrees in the

eleventh house, succedent to the Mid-heaven; then those in the angle of

the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house, which precedes the

Mid-heaven.

He also holds that "the Sun, the Moon, and the Ascendant to be

considered as the four principally liable to be elected to the office

of prorogator"—or Hyleg.

These views are not adopted by the modern astrologers, but as this is a

book setting forth the ancient methods it is needless to discuss

the various objections made by them to this, as to some other of the

theories laid down by Ptolemy.

Among the four prorogators already given, the Sun by day is to be

preferred, provided he is placed in one of the Hylegliacal places, and

if not, the Moon; but if the Moon also should not be so posited that

planet is to be elected as Hyleg which may have most claims to dominion

in reference to the Sun, the Moon and the Ascendant, which means that

the planet should have dominion, in any one of the places where these

are situated, by at least three dignities. If, however, no planet

should be so circumstanced the Ascendant is then to be taken as Hyleg.

By night the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, provided, in like

manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the

Sun; if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which

may have most right of dominion in reference to the Moon, and the

antecedent full Moon, and the Part of Fortune. But if there be no

planet claiming dominion in the mode prescribed the Ascendant must be

taken; in case a new Moon had last preceded the birth; but if a full

Moon, the Part of Fortune.

If the two luminaries and also some ruling planet of appropriate

condition should be each posited in a prorogatory place, then, provided

one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important and

influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen; but should

the ruling planet occupy the stronger place, and have prerogatives of

dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the planet must

then be preferred to either of them.

When the Hyleg has been determined by the foregoing rules, then note

whether it is supported by benevolent planets in good aspects towards

it and free from affliction—that is, from evil aspects from evil

planets—if so, the life is likely to continue and the constitution to

be strong; but if the Hyleg, whether it be the Sun, the Moon, or the

Ascendant, be afflicted with evil planets and there be no assistance

from good planets, the child will die in infancy: if there be some

assistance from good planets, but yet the evil aspects exceed the good,

the constitution will be weak and the first train of evil directions

will destroy the life.

Concerning the disposition and quality of the mind, we must look

principally to the planets in the Ascendant, the influences of which

over mind and body have already been given in the chapter on the seven

planets. We must, however, always bear in mind that Mercury has chief

dominion over the mental faculties, whilst the sentient passions are

governed by the Moon and the planet in the ascendant. The Moon

well-aspected, that is, in trine, sextile, or conjunction to Mercury at

birth, will give to the native excellent abilities, ingenuity,

versatility and wit. Even the evil aspects of the square and opposition

are better than no aspects at all, though these sometimes produce a

cynical and obstinate nature.

The abilities of those born when Mercury is in "cazimi" (that is,

within seventeen minutes of the Sun's centre) are of the highest order.

Mercury in conjunction with Saturn at birth gives clear judgment and a

love of occult subjects.

Venus in good aspect with Mercury gives love of music and an artistic

nature.

If Mercury and the Moon throw no aspect to each other and are afflicted

by Mars and Saturn, the native will be liable to become insane.[10]

The fortune of wealth is determined by the Sun and the Moon; if they

are in good position, that is, angular and well-aspected by the two

luminaries, the native will be rich. If the Sun and the Moon are well

placed, and if there be benefic stars in the Mid-heaven, the native

will rank high in the world. If the contrary, the native never rises

above mediocrity; and if Saturn afflicts the Mid-heaven, he meets

disgrace. If Mars is strong and in good aspect to the Sun and Moon, he

will gain military glory. Jupiter on the Mid-heaven and the Sun and

Moon in trine to each other, the Moon, having the trine of Jupiter, is

one of the best positions for rising in the world. Jupiter in the tenth

house will cause the native to do fairly well in the world; but Saturn

in that house, if not extremely well-aspected, will bring him to shame

and beggary.

Concerning the nature of employment, the dominion of the employment is

claimed by the Sun and by the planet on the Mid-heaven. If Mercury

should rule alone he produces writers, teachers of science, merchants

and bankers; also, if well-aspected to Saturn and the Moon, astrologers

and students of all occult matters; if Jupiter is in conjunction, then

the native will be an orator, actor, or painter and his pursuits will

lead him into the society of persons of rank.

Venus ruling makes wine-merchants, dealers in colours, dyes, perfumes,

drugs, garments or apparel, &c.; if connected with Saturn, she makes

persons have to do with amusement, players, jugglers, &c.; if with

Jupiter, persons attending exhibitions and priests who have much

personal decoration such as Catholic priests, bishops, &c. and they

will gain by women. Mars ruling alone makes martial men and, if in

Scorpio, Cancer, or Pisces, naval men.[11] The Sun joined with him,

being near the Mid-heaven, or in aspect, makes persons dealing with

fire or metals, the latter especially if in Taurus or Leo. If Mars be

separated from the Sun, he makes shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists,

stonemasons and carpenters.

If Saturn bear testimony in addition to Mars, persons become mariners,

workers in mines, wells, vaults, &c., underground, keepers of cattle,

cooks, butchers. If Jupiter join with Mars, they will be soldiers,

innkeepers, tax-gatherers, mechanics. If Mercury and Venus become joint

arbiters of employment, they produce musicians, dancers, poets, weavers

and painters, &c. Jupiter in connection with them makes magistrates and

senators and also teachers of youth. Mercury with Mars makes surgeons,

statuaries, boxers. If Mercury be more powerful, they will be

scientific; and if Mars be stronger, they will be more violent and

cruel in their practices.[12] If Saturn join these two, they will be

thieves (especially if the Moon be in ill aspect to Mercury); if

be in ill aspect to , they will be robbers

or assassins. If Jupiter join and ,

they engage in honourable warfare and are industrious. If Venus and

Mars rule together, persons will be dyers, workers in tin, lead, gold,

silver and medical drugs.

The Moon regulating the employment and, separating from the Sun and

forming an aspect with Mercury, inclines to the pursuit of astrology,

spiritualism and magic.

Concerning Marriage, Ptolemy has laid down some very clear

rules. He advises persons about to marry to have a care that the

luminaries—that is, the Sun and Moon in their respective

nativities—are in concord. It is of happy augury if the Moon in the

bridegroom's nativity is in good aspect—that is, in trine or sextile

to the Sun in the bride's nativity. The Square or Opposition aspects

formed between the luminaries in the two nativities indicate discord

and separation, and very evil effects follow if the malefic planets,

Saturn and Mars, have a bad aspect to the Sun and Moon in both

nativities. If Venus be with them the separation will be caused by

adultery. Good planets, such as Jupiter and Venus, placed between the

luminaries in both nativities, show much happiness.

In men's nativities the Moon must be chiefly considered in regard to

marriage. Should she be in her first or third quarter at birth, the man

will marry under thirty, or if older his wife will be a very young

woman.

If the Moon be configurated with Saturn, she entirely denies marriage.

If she should be in a sign of single form, such as Libra or Taurus, the

native will marry only once, but if she should be placed in a

double-bodied sign, such as Pisces or Sagittarius, the man will marry

more than once.

If the Moon make application to the benefics, the wives will be good

and true; but if she make application to evil planets, the wives will

prove either bad or of a quarrelsome disposition. For example: If

Saturn receives the Moon's application the wife will prove troublesome

and morose, yet constant and industrious; if Jupiter receive it, the

wife will be decorous, good and economical; if Mars, bold and

refractory; if Venus, cheerful, handsome and agreeable; if Mercury,

sensible, prudent and clever.

Women in whose nativities Venus is configurated with Jupiter or Mercury

are virtuous and well-conducted; but, when Venus is with Mars and no

other planet is there, women born under such aspects are liable to

become licentious. Mars in square to Venus shows adultery.

For women the Sun is to be chiefly regarded in estimating their chances

of marriage and happiness. If the Sun be oriental (i.e., between

the Ascendant and Mid-heaven, or between the Descendant and Nadir) the

native will marry in her youth; or when old, to a young man. If the Sun

be occidental, the native will marry late in life; or when young, to an

old man. If the Sun be in a sign of single form, she will marry but

once; if in a double-bodied sign, or configurated with several oriental

planets (in one sign) she will marry more than once. If Saturn be

configurated with the Sun, the husband will be steadfast, prosperous

and industrious.

Jupiter configurated with the Sun gives a good, benevolent and

honourable husband. "Mars," says Ptolemy, "gives a severe husband, void

of affection and intractable." Venus gives an amiable husband of

handsome appearance. Mercury gives one who is provident and expert in

business and of a lively and cheerful temperament.

If Mars be separated from Venus and Saturn, yet have the assistance of

Jupiter, men will lead virtuous lives. If Mars be configurated with

Venus only men are of a licentious temperament.

Saturn, when in the 7th house of a nativity, brings either unhappiness

in marriage or early death of one or other of the married people. The

Sun badly aspected by Saturn in the nativity of a woman and the Moon

afflicted by the same planet in the nativity of a man, will bring

trouble in love and marriage.

Description of the wife or husband.—The planet with the sign in

which it is placed, which is posited near the cusp of the 7th house,

must be taken to describe the person. If no planet should happen to be

so placed, then we must go by the sign alone. Benefic planets in the

8th house show that the wife or husband will be rich; unfortunate

planets show the reverse.

Children.—As regards the probability of having children, the

10th and 11th houses must be consulted and, should there be no planets

in them, then the opposite, the 4th and 5th houses, must be considered.

The Moon, Jupiter and Venus are said to be givers of children; the Sun,

Mars and Saturn deny children, or give very few and those either die

early, or are a source of trouble to their parents. Mercury either

gives or denies according to the planets with which he may happen to be

posited.

If the Sun and malefics be in barren signs or in masculine signs and in

the before-named houses, there will be no children; but if they be in

fruitful or feminine, or common signs, there may be children, but they

will be delicate and short-lived.

If Jupiter, the Moon and Venus, are well-dignified in the 10th and 11th

houses, the children born will attain rank and distinction in the

world.

Friends and Enemies.—Persons born under the same sign of the

zodiac are likely to be sympathetic; so also if the planet in the

ascendant of one person's nativity is one which is friendly to that

which rises in the ascendant in the other's. Thus, a person whose

ruling planet is Venus would be attracted by one in whose ascendant

Mars is dominant and a person whose ruling planet is the Moon rarely

contracts a warm friendship with one who has Mars in the ascendant of

his nativity and vice versâ. The friendships and enmities of the

planets have already been given in the chapter on the influences of the

seven planets.

Mars in bad aspect to the Sun or Moon in the 7th house causes quarrels

in married life.

Travelling.—The position of the Moon and Mars are here to be

considered. If they should be in a cadent position the native will

travel a great deal. The Moon in a watery sign causes much travelling

by water. Ptolemy tells us that Mars in square or opposition to the Sun

or Moon will cause much travelling in foreign countries. If the

benefics are conjoined with the Moon, the journeys will be safe and

pleasant; if with the malefics they will produce mischances and

ill-health in travelling. Mercury ascending at birth, in a

double-bodied or moveable sign, shows a great disposition to travel. If

a malefic affecting the Moon should be in the watery signs of Cancer,

Scorpio, or Pisces, shipwreck and even death by drowning may ensue

during travelling.

Of the Manner of Death.—If the Hyleg and Ascendant should be

well-aspected and if either Jupiter, Venus, Mercury or the Moon

well-dignified should appear in the eighth house the native will die a

natural death. If either the Sun or Moon should be badly aspected by

Mars or Saturn in the eighth house it is significant of a violent or

remarkable death. Saturn causes lingering deaths and Mars those which

are sudden.

Saturn indicates death by chronic diseases, rheumatism, ague and

paralysis.
