
 

CHAPTER XII.

CONCERNING DIRECTIONS AND HORARY QUESTIONS

We have seen in the chapter on the judgment of a nativity that by the

consideration of the position of the planets and of the Sun and Moon in

the twelve houses, what the general fortune of the native will

be in the whole course of his life; but the art of Direction measures

out the time into years, months, weeks and days and thus informs us

when we may expect in particular what is generally

promised us in the nativity.

Directions are of two kinds, primary and secondary, and

are based upon arithmetical calculations of the time of the events

caused by the aspects of the significators (that is, of the Sun or the

Moon), with the places of the planets. They are founded upon the

familiarities of the stars amongst each other in the zodiac (after

the nativity), and show, by calculations, the distance of the place

of a significator at the moment of the nativity from the place it must

reach before it can join the aspect, which distance is called the

Arc of Direction. Some astrologers consider what are called

"Mundane Directions," which are distances in the world measured

by the semi-arc, and are wholly independent of the zodiac. These were

invented by Placidus, but as Ptolemy does not treat of them they will

not be considered here.

It must always be remembered that—in directions—the place of a

planet, at the time of the nativity, is called the planet itself,

although it may not be there when the significator arrives; thus, if we

wish to direct the Sun to the conjunction of Jupiter, we must do so to

the position which that planet occupied at the moment of the

nativity. When the Arc of Direction is found the Sun's right ascension

must be added to it, and the Sun will be the right ascension (without

latitude) of that place in the zodiac at which, when the Sun arrives,

the direction will be completed. For every day of the Sun's approach to

this point a year must be added, and thus the time when the event is

likely to happen is pointed out: these primary directions, however,

cannot be depended upon to produce an event of great importance unless

the secondary directions agree; but where the nativity is weak the

primary direction alone is powerful enough to kill (especially if it

should be opposed to the Hyleg), and misfortune will always happen if

the positions of the planets, at the moment of birth, are unfortunate,

without the coincidence of any secondary direction.

Secondary Directions are those daily aspects to the luminaries

which happen after birth, every day of which is reckoned for a year,

two hours for a month, thirty minutes for a week, and four minutes for

a day.[13] Thus, whatever aspects take place in the first day of

the native's life will develop their effects in the first year and

those of the second day in the second year, so that, should the native

live fifty years, his secondary direction for his fiftieth year will

arise from the aspects which took place on the fiftieth day after his

birth. The ancient astrologers—particularly the Egyptians—used to

predict the events of a nativity wholly from these secondary

directions,[14] in which the Moon should be chiefly considered; for in

those days on which she comes to an evil aspect with the malefics,

Saturn or Mars, the years corresponding to those days will be

peculiarly unfortunate and dangerous to the native; and where, on the

contrary, the Moon is well-aspected to the benefics, the years

corresponding to those days will be very fortunate: a good direction

gives prosperity in that matter which the significator indicates; thus

we direct the Sun to signify the native's preferment or disgrace, his

good or bad health, and the favour or disesteem of great personages.

The direction of the Moon refers to the nature of the native's

journeys, whether prosperous or the reverse, his marriage, his wife,

his women friends and kinsfolk.

The direction of Saturn signifies the native's inheritance, buildings,

possessions, and also his fears, jealousies and mistrusts.

Jupiter is directed as regards glory, renown, riches, children and

religion.

Mars is directed for the native's law-suits, animosities and victories;

he also shows the estates of brethren.

Venus is directed for marriage, love and pleasure and all matters in

connection with women.

Mercury is directed for a knowledge of the amount of wit,

understanding, trade, industry, and journeys of the native; also for

distinction in scholarship and all intellectual pursuits.

The Horoscope or Ascendant is directed to signify the life, affections

and manners of the native.

The Mid-heaven's direction affects the position and career of the

native.

If the directions are to good aspects of benevolent planets, they

signify prosperity both of mind and body, cheerfulness and all manner

of earthly happiness; but if the horoscope should have directions to

the ill aspects of the malefics, Mars or Saturn, then evil is to be

expected of the nature given by the malevolent star. If directed to the

good aspects, such as the trine or sextile of these evil planets, the

misfortune is not so great, and even in some instances good may be

predicted. As, for example, the horoscope directed to the trine or

sextile of Mars gives preferment by arms; the same aspects towards

Saturn would indicate success in building or in mines, or some calling

connected with metals.

The occasional differences in the life, tastes, health, marriage and

pecuniary affairs of twins, born within ten or twenty minutes of each

other, are accounted for by the fact that at the birth of the first

child the last degree of a sign may ascend with planets therein, or a

planet in the 2nd house at 5 p.m. may be in the 1st at 5.15 p.m. and

the early degrees of another sign may be exactly on the ascendant at

the birth of the second child.

A planet may reach the M.C., or any other of the four cardinal points

at, say, 10 p.m. and ten minutes later have passed off, when its powers

would have greatly diminished. Though the signs rise and set at the

rate of 15° per hour, in our latitude from 50° to 60° North, it often happens that 30° will ascend in fifty-two minutes.

Horary questions are questions asked at a certain time when a person

feels anxious concerning any undertaking or impending event. A figure

or map of the heavens, like that erected for a nativity, is drawn out

for the minute in which the question is asked; and, if the astrologer

be skilful, and the querist sincere—that is, not putting the question

from frivolous motives—the answer will, in general, be true, for the

whole is the effect of that sympathy which pervades all nature and

which is the keynote of all divination under whatsoever form it is

practised.

In horary questions the sign ascending and its lord represent the

querent, and to these the Moon is added and must be considered with the

lord of the ascendant.

The house to which the thing belongs—about which enquiry is made—is

the significator of that person and thing, and every other house and

its lord are to be considered according to their respective

significations, so as to indicate the means and persons by which the

event, about which the enquiries are made, will be accelerated or

retarded.

The dates of events are regulated by the signs and angles. For example,

should the significator of the event be in a movable sign and an angle

the event will come to pass in the same number of days as there are

degrees between the significator's aspect and the star to which it is

directed if the aspect be by application; if by

separation, the thing will not take place at all. In one

of the succedent houses movable signs give months, common signs years

and fixed signs bring about the event, after much delay, and when all

hopes of it are past.

Significators in any of the cadent houses seldom do anything and,

should they bring about an event at all, they do so after much waiting

and with much trouble and vexation.

The matter of horary questions is very well treated in Lilly's

Grammar of Astrology, published in 1647, and, by way of

explaining the manner in which this branch of astrology is worked, we

give a fac-simile of a map of a horary question to be found in

this book, with (verbatim) Lilly's method of dealing with that

particular question.

Judgment of the Figure given in Plate.—"Living in London, where

we have few or no small cattle as in the country, I cannot give example

of such creatures, but I once set the figure preceding concerning a

Dogge (which is in the nature of small beasts), which dogge was

missing. The question to me was what part of the city they should

search and if he should ever be recovered.

"The querent was signified by the sign ascending and the lord thereof,

for, in his person, he was Saturnine and vitiated (according to the

Dragon's Tail in the ascendant) in his nature, mind and

understanding—that is, he was deformed in body and of a covetous

disposition. The sign of the sixth house and his lord signifies the

dogge, for that sign stands for sheep, hogs and small cattle.

"The sign of Gemini is west, and by south the quarter of the heaven is

west; Mercury (the significator of the dogge) is in Libra, a western

sign, but southern quarter of heaven, tending towards the west; the

Moon is in Virgo, a south-west sign, and verging towards the western

angle. The strength of the testimonies being thus examined I found the

plurality to signify the west, and therefore I judged that the dogge

ought to be westward from the place where the owner lived, which was at

Temple Bar, wherefore I judged that the dogge was about Long Acre, or

the upper part of Drury Lane. In regard that Mercury (the significator

of the beast) was in a sign of the same triplicity as Gemini the

ascendant, which signifies London, and applied to a trine aspect of the

cusp of the sixth house, I judged that the dogge was not out of the

lines of communication, but was in the same quarter, of which I was

more confirmed by the trine of the Sun and Saturn. The sign in which

Mercury appeared was Libra—an airy sign; therefore I judged that the

dogge was in some chamber or upper room, and kept privately, or in

great secrecy, because the Moon was under the beams of the Sun; and

Mercury, the Moon and the Sun were in the eighth house: and because the

Sun on the Monday following would apply by trine to Saturn, the lord of

the ascendant, and the Moon to trine of Mars having exaltation in the

ascendant, I intimated to the owner of the beast that, in my opinion,

he should have his dogge again, or news of his dogge or small beast,

upon the Monday following, or near that time, which was true; for a

gentleman of the querent's acquaintance sent home the dogge the very

same day, about ten in the morning, who, by accident, coming to see a

friend in Long Acre, found the dogge chained up under a table, and,

knowing the dogge to be the querent's, sent him home as above said, to

my very great credit," and no doubt also to the great satisfaction of

"the dogge" himself.

 