

CHAPTER XIV.

APHORISMS CULLED FROM THE WORKS OF PTOLEMY AND OTHER ANCIENT

ASTROLOGERS

Whosoever may be adapted to any particular event or pursuit will

assuredly have the star indicative thereof very potent in his nativity.

If Virgo or Pisces be on the ascendant the native will create his own

dignity; but if Aries or Libra be there he will cause his own death.

Venus gives pleasure to the native in that part of the body which may

be ruled by the sign she occupies. It is the same with other stars.

Should a disease begin when the Moon may be in a sign occupied at the

birth by some malefic, or in quartile or opposition to any such sign,

such disease will be most severe; and if the malefic also behold the

said sign, it will be dangerous. On the other hand, there will be no

danger if the Moon be in a place held at the time of birth by some

benefic.

In all horary questions remember that there is no affliction to the

Moon so great as when she is in conjunction with the Sun; the ill

aspects for the malefics must affect her, but no evil aspect is so

powerful as her conjunction.

Mercury in trine or sextile to the Moon gives the capacity for

acquiring foreign languages. In bad aspect to the Moon makes the native

envious, sarcastic, ill-natured, given to lying and thieving.

Saturn in trine or sextile to Venus shows much power of attachment to

wife and family. In a woman's nativity this is very good, as it

indicates purity.

Those born near noon are generally successful in life, owing to the

Sun's influence being then most powerful. Those born near midnight are

by no means so fortunate as those born at midday, and it is a singular

peculiarity in such nativities that the most remarkable events of their

lives take place after their thirtieth year, and they are also

certain of some kind of a name after death, meritorious or otherwise,

according to what their horoscope declares. Persons born near midnight

are very imaginative, and subject to see visions, dream dreams, and to

be believers in the unseen world.

In all travels the Moon is to be considered, for she is a general

signifier of journeys, whether by sea or land.

When the moon is besieged between Mars and the Sun in a nativity, it

argues a short life to the native.

Mercury, if posited in one of the houses of Saturn, in trine or sextile

to that planet, gives excellent understanding; and if the moon be also

well-dignified, the native is much given to the study of occult

science, and will have much renown in that particular.

Those born with the Moon powerful in their horoscopes would do well to

be guided by her aspects in their daily avocations. If she should be in

trine or sextile to Jupiter, it is a good day to seek favours of the

great, or to make arrangements with employers. When she is in trine or

sextile to Mercury, all intellectual matters taken in hand will be

likely to prosper. When she is so aspected to Venus, matters undertaken

with reference to love, marriage, or friendship will have a happy

issue. When she is in square or opposition she would have, of course,

the contrary effects.

The Sun and Moon in conjunction with Mercury give to the native great

intellectual abilities.

Those who have the benevolent planets, Jupiter and Venus, well posited

in either the ascendant or the mid-heaven at birth will always be much

beloved during the whole course of their lives.

He who is born with the sun in trine to Jupiter is fond of rule, and

very famous in his generation.

Venus in square to Saturn at a birth causes the native to be sensual

and given to unnatural vices.

All the planets, or most of them above the earth, make the native

eminent and famous, and if all should be well-dignified, he will—like

a comet—outshine all others in the world's esteem. If, on the

contrary, all the planets are under the earth at a birth, the native

will be of a falling fame and fortune, or if they promise by their

natures honour, dignity and fortune (that is, if they appear

essentially dignified in nocturnal genitures), these good things will

only come in the latter part of the native's life.

Jupiter in conjunction with the Moon in a watery sign gives

drunkenness.

Venus in conjunction, trine or sextile to the Moon, gives happy

marriage, but in square to the Moon, prodigality, indolence and

drunkenness.

Saturn in square to Mars means a malicious and murderous temperament,

and liability to imprisonment.

It is advantageous to make choice of days and hours at a time well

constituted by the nativity. Should the time be adverse, the choice

will in no respect avail, however favourable an issue it may chance to

promise.

A sagacious mind improves the operation of the heavens, as a skilful

farmer by cultivation improves nature.

Part II.

CHIROMANCY

"God has placed signs in the hands of all men, that every man may

know his work."—Job xxxvii. 7 (St. Hierom's Translation).

 