
     Psychological astrology involves four fundamental claims. The first two
are common to other h d s of astrology, namely, that there is a correlation
between celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and that everything in the birth
chart affects everything else in the birth. The third and fourth claims are the
unusual ones, namely, that the birth chart indicates not behavior or events
but changes in consciousness, and that astrology should be viewed in the
perspective of a magical, organic world-view. A look at these four claims can
now be taken one by one.
     1. Relationships Postulated by Astrologers Between Celestial Phenomena
and Terrestrial Phenomena Are Only Correlational.
     Traditional astrology usually adopted the notion that the relationship
between celestial and terrestrial affairs was some h d of causal one. As
Placidus said in 1657, "It is impossible for the efficient heavenly causes (as
being so very far distant from things below) to influence sublunary bodes,
unless by some rnedum or instrumental virtue. . . the instrumental cause of
the stars is light," and "the stars, where they do not rise, are inactive," so
astrologers should "reject a secret influence as superfluous, nay, even im-
possible" (p. 1, 3 ) . Most modern astrologers reject this causal approach. Per-
ry (1994) tells us that the relations between people and their birth charts are
not causal but correlational. The astronomical bodes reflect human life expe-
riences rather hke a mirroring reflecting a landscape which has to be inter-
preted. But there is much disagreement over the kinds of celestial configura-
tions that are relevant and how they are to be interpreted. In fact, no matter
what an astrologer may claim, a search of the literature VJLU invariably find a
conflicting claim. This dsagreement exists even at the most fundamental lev-
el for entire populations of astrologers, for example, Western astrologers dis-
agree with Eastern astrologers on which zodiac to use and how many planets
to use. This lack of agreement is widespread within Western astrology itself:
Ln horary astrology (Answering questions, e.g., Should I marry X?) the
moon's north node is a point of ill-fortune, but in humanistic astrology it is
the direction of personal growth (Jones, 1996). Such systems are mutually
incompatible, yet are seen as completely vahd by their users.


tern as true, and reject attacks to avoid cognitive dissonance. The sequence from 1 to 4 is not
unreasonable. Students of astrolo y are not told to accept astrolo without question, they are
told ro try thin s out for themsefves, so at first sight, what c o u l ~ b efairer? The roblem, of
course, is that [ley are nor made aware of all the pidalls of personal valtdation (ancfthe conEir-
mation bias), nor are they told how to make controlled tests or to design research that actually
tests astrological hy otheses and not auxiliary hypotheses. Nor are they presented the vast body
of criticism oE astro?ogical tenets, as is, for example, found in h i s artic e and references. Once
they reach (4) then any internal inconsistencies and disagreements can lo ically be accomrno-
dated as minor hiccu s due to the complexities of astrology or inevitable fuman fallibility (see
Dean, Mather, & ~ e f 1996).~ ,
1044                                     I. W . KELLY

     Astrologers' meanlngs of astrological signs and houses are not very clear-
cut and there are no agreed upon rules for weighing their effects. For exam-
ple, as the astrologer Prudence Jones (1996, p. 282) says,
[The zodiac signs] rest on shaky foundations from the modern point of view. How in heaven
do twelve 30' sectors of the ecliptic, measured from the vernal equinox but named after now-
far-distant constellations, impart any qualities at all to the planets, houses, parts and nodes
which we view against their backgrounds? Do they do so in fact, or is this wishful thinking?
Some astrologers justdy the signs (taking, u s u d y without explanation, the sun in the signs as
their exemplar) as shorthand For seasonal characteristics. But this implies that their order
should be reversed in the southern hemisphere, which seldom happens. And what, in any case
of horoscopes for equatorial latitudes where seasonal change is minimal, but where, of course,
astrology was invented?

The meanings of signs depend upon which zodiac is used and the meanings
of houses depend on which house system is used. House systems differ with
regard to number, sequence, method of division, and interpretation (Mar-
tens & Trachet, 1995). Western astrologers also dlffer in how many planets
should be used, some use undiscovered hypothetical planets, others use as-
teroids (Dean & Mather, 1977). This dversity in fundamentals gives us
grou!lds to be sceptical of claims that astrologers are speakmg about some-
thir-;<they have actually apprehended.
      2. The horoscope is a whole syslem in which every part is influenced by
every other part.
      Astrological factors cannot be examined in isolation; the whole birth
chart is needed. So the golden rule is that "only the whole chart should be
considered, for any astrological purpose whatever" (Dwyer, 1985, p. 1). As
Perry pointed out ". . . no one part of a horoscope can be isolated. . . since
everything influences everything else" and ". . . you cannot empirically ob-
serve a pure [astrological factor] isolated from other factors in the chart"
(Perry, 1993, p. 6). But astrologers disagree over which individual factors are
important, so they dsagree over what the whole chart consists; they just
agree that whatever it is, it is important to keep it in mind when doing as-
trology. As the psychologist Jan Van Rooij (1994) asked:
Where does the whole chart end? With ten planets, rwelve signs, twelve houses, midpoints, Ar-
abic points, nodes, aspects and whatever other astrological concepts may be used, it is simply
impossible to interpret a "whole chart." When astrologers claim that they use the whole chart,
they only refer to the fact that they use more factors than just one. Nevertheless, no matter how
many factors they may use, they always use a restricted nzrrmber of factors, and therefore only a
part of the horoscope. They neuer use the whole chart. But then the question becomes how many
factors would be considered, and which Factors?. . . Suppose that I consider as many as 20 fac-
tors, then undoubtedly an astrologer will come up who claims that I should use 21 factors (p.
56 italics mine).
    The "whole chart" therefore has a different meaning to different
schools of astrology. Some astrologers use asteroids in birth charts. As Hand
                      MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                          1045

(1981) pointed out, size of an astronomical body is unrelated to astrological
effectiveness, therefore "[tlhe lsaster is that there are thousands of aster-
oids and other minor bodes orbiting the sun, and using present-day astro-
logical techniques there is no way of accounting for all of them in a chart"
(p. 93). Other astrologers use hypothetical planets such as Vulcan that have
not been detected by astronomers (Hand, 1981, p. 95). There is no evidence
that astrologers using asteroids or hypothetical planets are more insightful or
more successful counsellors than those using "incomplete charts," or nonas-
trologically oriented psychotherapists or even lay therapists (Dean, 1985; Mc-
Grew & McFall, 1992).
      How can dlfferent sets of parts give the same meaningful whole? This
problem would seem to be exacerbated when we remember that conflicting
Western astrologies uthze different factors, and even when the same factors
are used, they are often weighted differently. If different schools of astrology
use different astrological factors and hence operate with ddferent notions of
the "whole chart," then any reference to the supposed commonality of the
"whole chart" is less than meaningful. Perry stated "every planet and every
sign of the z o l a c is influenced by the whole in which it is embedded"
(1995, p. 34). But if my whole chart and your whole chart involve factors
that are ddferent in type or number, the end result must (according to Per-
ry) be open to question. It is as if we thought we were taking about the
same thing, but upon investigation found that I meant Volkswagens, while
you were referring to Cadillacs.
      So when we are told by astrologers that "astrology works," we are not
sure what to make of it. It is like being told that you will survive your de-
mise in some form by ddferent rehgions and have little idea how this wdl be
accomplished. (WLLIyou be a disembodied spirit, a resurrected body, an as-
tral body, or even come back as a mosquito, etc?)