
                 THED T V E R SOFI ~ASTROLOGICAL WORLD   VIEWS
     Societies that did possess what we would recognize as a form of astrol-
ogy were associated with world-views that differed radcally in their concep-
tions regardmg the nature of ultimate reality, their basic hierarchical struc-
tures, the modes of divine activity (and whether the divine nature was per-
sonal or nonpersonal), the nature of the self, the destiny of human beings,
and so on. Likewise, the associated astrologies often differed from each oth-
er along essential dimensions. For example, the circumpolar stars, the pole
star, and the quadrant &visions of the sky uthzed in Chinese astrology are
used differently in Western astrology. The circle of 12 animals in Chinese as-
trology bear little resemblance to the Western zodiac. The ascendant is irn-
portant in Western astrology but not in Chinese astrology, and so on (Cul-
ver & lama, 1988, p. 25; Dean, Mather, & Kelly, 1996, pp. 56-57).
     In Lndia there are also a number of astrological systems which conhct
both with each other and with Western approaches [see Premanand, Bhatty,
& Risbud (1993) for an overview and critique of I n l a n astrology]. In the
Dasha-paddhati system the names of the planets are written in a sequence
that is not only arbitrary from a Western astrological perspective but is also
not related to any physical characteristics of the planets or their lstance
from the earth. Each planet is alleged to have a certain period of influence
over the destiny of people. These periods vary from 6 years to 20 years.
Each planet takes control over a person's destiny in the order specified by
the system and the duration assigned to them. The sequence of the planets
is the same for all people provided you are following the Vinshotiari 120-
year system. On the other hand, if an astrologer uses the Ashtottari dasha
system, the last four planets appear in a reversed order and together have a
1058                                    I. W. KELLY

different duration of 108 years. During one's life-time, the same planet can-
not take charge of your destiny again, unless you live for more than 120
years (or 108 years). Both of these mutually exclusive systems are satisfying
to the astrologers themselves and to their clients.
     When we turn to the Mayans of the Americas, other fundamental dif-
ferences in world-view, along with astrological differences, emerge. In terms
of hierarchical structures and ahed astrology, the Mayan cosmology was
quite different from the orbital-themed earthbr sun-centered ideas of other
cultures. For a start, Mayan astrology assigned a very central role for Venus.
Ln addtion, the position of Venus relative to the horizon was, contrary to
Western astrology, more important for the Mayans than its movement. They
also associated the morning and evening appearances of Venus with lunar
phasing and eclipses which have no counterparts in other astrological sys-
tems. Finally, astrology in Mayan Me was closer to the astrology of In&a and
traditional Western astrology than Perry's vision in that the central focus
was divination and prophecy (Aveni, 1992; Danien & Sharer, 1992).
                ASTROLOGICAL   SYMBOLISM    IS MAGICAL   THINKING
     While the astronomical and mathematical bases of the cosmologies and
astrologies developed by the Mesopotanian, Chinese, Mayan, and 1ndian cul-
tures were sophisticated, the meaning or quality ascribed to planetary con-
junctions and movements were dependent on the religious and mythological
beliefs of the particular societies in question. This explains why many of the
physical characteristics of the celestial bodies (size, distance, etc.) are consid-
-   ~




ered irrelevant with regard to their effects or meaning, or even whether a
planetary body actually exists (e.g., Vulcan) because what matters is the sym-
bolism or mythology attached to the body's name. The influences, effects, or
correlations attributed to the planetary configurations are based on a prior1
endemic "magical correspondences," relying on superficial sidarities and
analogies. For example, the medieval astrologer-physician William of En-
gland appealed to the magical doctrine of " k e affects k e , " as have astrolo-
gers of all periods. Hence, he argued, ". . . the sun and Mars affect red bile
(because all three are hot) and the moon and Venus affect phlegm (because
they are cold)" and "Should the hot and dry Mars be causing a disturbance
of the blood, then when Mars moves into a house that has a dsturbance of
the chest, the patient d spit blood" (French, 1996, p. 478). " The modern
astrologer Davidson (1963) stated, "Without the sun there would be no life.


"Venus was widely believed at the time to be a cold planet, whereas Mars was characterized as
hot and dry. Hot(h), cold(c), wet(w), and dry(d) were the four ¶ualities underlyin the four ele-
ments considered by Greek philosophers to be the basic constituenrs of the p!ysical      world,
namely, earth=cd, air=hw, fire= hd, water=cw. ELements with common quahties were able to
change inro each other, e.g., water= cw could change into earth = cd because both included the
                          MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                  1059

It is the driving force behind the whole solar system. It represenrs Will
Power, Vitality, Leadership, Creativity . . ." (p. 29) and "The rings of Saturn
symbolize the hitations imposed by Saturnian action that operate as a
harsh external disciphe until we have learnt to disciphe ourselves" (p. 32).
      The practice of present day astrologers gives add~tionalgrounds for the
independence of their symbolism from any observational or testable theory
base. Whenever a newly discovered astronomical body is found, the attribu-
tion of its earthly connections is not based on the results of published inves-
tigations with extensive public discussion to establish its relationships with
worldly affairs. Rather, if the name can be identified, e.g., by looking it up
in dictionaries of mythology, and could be plausibly related to existing plan-
etary mythology (not difficult), then the result will be long articles in astrol-
ogy~journalsby authors surfing the mythology wave, where readers will be
moved to tears or to outrage by the beauty and insight of the connections.
When Pluto was discovered in 1939 and Chiron in 1977 (a minor planet or
moon between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus), astrologers did not publish
research to establish their relationships with human and worldly affairs. Plu-
to is given, as one might expect from mythology, a malefic influence on hu-
man Me. As Davidson (1963) stated, "The planet named after the God of
Hades represents the Underworld of man's consciousness, those elements in
his nature that have not been redeemed . . ." (p. 33). Could it be otherwise?
It is difficult to imagine that astrologers would ever inform us that a planet
named "Pluto" would be associated with love of Me and fellow human be-
ings, sensitivity and lea sure (Ilke Venus)! Similarly, Hand (1981) remarked
"(Chiron) is believed by many to have a connection with conscious-expand-
ing teachings and with initiation into higher consciousness" (p. 94). In the
case of Chiron, as with Pluto, these relationships are those we would expect
astrologers to attribute to them if they were based entirely on mythology
(Cdver & Ianna, 1988).
      Similarly, as the astrologer Press (1993) said about asteroids, ". . . the
particular mythology, whether Greek, Roman, Egyptian, etc., is relevant to
the expression of the asteroid in the [birth] chart" (p. 178). What happens
here is that, having determ~ned the asteroid's mythology, the astrologer
looks at the asteroid's posit~on(e.g., by sign, by house, by aspect) in various
peoples' charts to see if there 1s anything in the personality or case history
that could match the interpretation of that position. For example, "The as-
teroid Icarus represents flying too close to the sun. The position (house,


       of coldness. Most Greek scholars, of course, considered science (as we know it roda )
ro be an insignificant part of philosophy, which meant that their world view was based m a d y
on hilosophical ideals rather than empirical observations. So hot and cold, etc. do not neces-
sarfy correspond to what we today call hor and cold, etc.
1060                                        I. W. KELLY

sign, numerical) and exact aspects of Icarus w d show where a person wlll
take risks" (p. 197). Whenever possible, some astrologers will add physical
symbolism to the mythological symbolism. For example,
The orbit of Icarus is between the sun and Jupiter. This containment surrounds Icarus with the
irradiation of the Sun and the expansiveness of Jupiter. Icarus' orbit is in and crosses the orbits
of Mercury, Venus, the Earth and Mars. Being in those orbits gives Icarus a smattering of the
restlessness of Mercury, the sensuousness of Venus, the earthiness of the Earth and the self-as-
sertiveness of Mars" (Press, 1993, p. 1961.'"

What happens if the new astronomical bodies are named after modern indi-
viduals? Startup (1981) said,
A popular modern astrological doctrine maintains that newly discovered planets are inevitably
given appropriate names [from which the correct terrestrial relationships can be inferred], even
though the names are bestowed by astronomers nowadays. This is usually taken as one more
example of synchronicity (p. 33).

Asteroids without classical names have a special lund of importance, again
based purely on symbolic considerations. Here we enter the realm of
"personal name asteroids." Press (1993, p. 212) concluded (after much un-
controlled research), that if an asteroid has your name, or something close to
it, then its position in your horoscope describes your relationship to yourself
(whatever that means). If an asteroid has the name of another person (e.g.,
asteroid 3085 is called Donna), then its position in your horoscope (birth
chart) describes your relationship to that person. This would seem to imply
that your relationships to all the Donnas in the world would have much in
common.
      Along the same lines, magical or unknown influences are appealed to
whenever astrology is in ddficulty. Earlier in this article (p. 1044) the prob-
lem of includmg all the asteroids in the birth chart or horoscope was de-
scribed. Hand (1981) pointed out that astrologer Eleanor Bach 'solved' the
problem by using just the first four asteroids to be discovered. Hand (1981)
justified this arbitrary choice by informing us that:
One way of defending the use of the first four to be discovered (rather than the four largest) is
to say that the effect of celestial bodies is in some way related to human consciousness of them
rather chan to their physical properties. As the first to be discovered, they no doubt made a
greater impact chan the thousands later to be discovered (p. 93).




 "The diversity of symbolisms used b astrologers with ap arently no rules about being consis-
rent is noteworthy. Davidson (1963) Lased his a s t r o ~ o ~ i c a mbolism
                                                                      fs      variously on physical at-
tributes of the planets and on attributes of che G r e e k g d s . !he a ~ t m l o P~ yr s (1993). on the
other hand, uthzed other mythologies and adds ano er d m e n s ~ o no physical characteristics
to her symbolism such as a celestial body's proximity to other celestial bodies. Which particular
magical correspondences are perceived as relevant are in the eye of the beholder, and there are
many dfierent astrologer beholders.
                           MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                   1061

     Such speculations have the great advantage of requiring no argument
and the disadvantage of saying nothing. We are left in the dark as to what
the "some way related" and "greater impact" are intended to mean here.
What about people who have never heard of the first four asteroids? Does
this mean the asteroids cannot be used in constructing their charts, or does
the awareness of academics of their existence cover for the rest of us? No
doubt another set of "special rules" can be devised by astrologers to 'solve'
this problem.
     Some of the grave ddficulties of magical correspondences as explana-
tions were described by Dean, Loptson, and Kelly (1996):
First, magical correspondences are arguments from analogy, which can be expressed in the
form object X has properties A and B, object Y has property A, therefore Y also has B. John
Smith is tall, therefore John Brown is tall.. . The inference is vivid and quick, and therefore
(as in astrology) agreeably seductive, but our changes of its being correct are not good. . . No
longer do midwives open the door to ease a painful labour. No longer do alchemical ideas ap-
pear in chemistry courses. In fact, magical correspondences have been so spectacularly unsuc-
cessful that in Western education today the doctrine survives only as an example of fallacious
thinlung. Second, it is impossible to spec& any nvo things, no matter how dissimilar, that do
not show some kind of correspondence. A raven is like a writing desk because both begin with
the 'r' sound, both cast shadows, both contain quds. A speck of sand is like the Empire State
Building because h e y have the same color, both contain shca, and have the same number of
atoms as bricks.. . . The point is, how can we distinguish a magical correspondence from other
correspondences? The books do not td us. Third, we have no immediate way of choosing be-
tween opposing magical correspondences. Black cats were lucky ro ancient Egyptians but un-
lucky to medieval Europeans. The moon was male to the Babylonians but female to the Greeks
. . . . Is Mars unfortunate because red=blood (war), or fortunate because red=blood (life)?
Who can believe any magical correspondence when it is so easily denied by another? (pp.
28-29).

Other criticisms of magical thlnking can be found from a philosophical view-
point by Thagard (1980) and from a psychological perspective by Zusne and
Jones (1989).
Conclusion
     The arguments given in this article show that accounts put forward by
astrologers for the origin and justification of postulated celestial relationships
with outward behavior or activities of human beings (traditional astrology),
or inner structures of consciousness (modern psychological astrology) are
problematic and implausible in the extreme.
     We can conclude that astrology, as presently practiced, is not a source
of information or knowledge about ourselves. Anomalies and problems do
not result in constructive attempts to revise the conceptual basis of astrology
or extend it in ways that would allow astrologers to learn from failures as
they do in orthodox disciplines (Mayo, 1996). Rather, they are dealt with by
the use of metaphors that lead nowhere and constantly shking ad hoc hy-
1062                                    I. W. KELLY

potheses that are not independently testable. Confirmations are readily
attributed as support, but failures can be hidden in the complexity of astrol-
ogy and never need confront any specific astrological hypotheses. Hence, the
general indifference of astrologers to negative evidence (Mayo, 1996, pp.
280-282; Kelly, 1997). But astrological rhetoric, hyperbole, and bluff are not
adequate grounds for claims of knowledge (see Dean & Loptson, 1996 for
other conceptual criticisms of astrology).
       The failure of physical models to provide an underpinning for astrologi-
cal tenets has resulted in a shift to more animistic, magical worldviews.
While astrology is more "plausible" within such worldviews, it is so only in
the banal sense that such frameworks provide fewer constraints on what may
be postulated than modern scientific formulations of the world. The appeal
to magical world-views allows astrologers' postulations to override or side-
step any physical laws that may conbct (Evans, 1994). Astrologers who
advocate such worldviews do not provide articulated positions capable of
constructive evaluation and improvement, but rather, couch their 'frame-
work' in terms of a hodgepodge of spiritualloccult expressions, along with
passing references to modern physics and &ed disciphes to appear con-
temporary and fashionable. These occult convolutions, e.g., 'animating spir-
its,' 'sympathies,'
        . -          'pure consciousness,' 'resonant bonds of vibratory frequen-
cies,' 'psychic anatomy,' etc., are not ascribed properties to be of any useful
explanatory value. We are left with a &sparate set of ideas taken out of con-
text from various, often incompatible, ancient worldviews, juxtaposed
without any coherent, interlocking metaphysics.
       Astrology, as currently practiced, does not have any plausible observa-
tional or theoretical basis for the groundmg of its particular claims (Dean,
Loptson, & Kelly, 1996). There is little agreement on what astrological fac-
tors should be considered in a birth chart (that is, what factors can be ig-
nored) and how they should be combined, or even consensus regarding how
to collect relevant data to resolve even the most basic astrological dlsputes
(Dean & Mather, 1996). Astrology consequently does not have the concep-
tual resources to deal with its own anomalies or to benefit from, or contrib-
ute to, findings in other fields such as psychology or biology in any way
other than by arbitrary means and sophistry. The basis and structure of as-
trology is entirely based on culturally specific mythology and symbolism in a
magical context. Astrology is part of our past, but astrologers have given no
plausible reason why it should have a role in our future.
