Project Gutenberg's Astronomical Lore in Chaucer, by Florence M. Grimm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with

almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or

re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included

with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Astronomical Lore in Chaucer

Author: Florence M. Grimm

Release Date: October 11, 2011 [EBook #37711]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER ***

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at

http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images

generously made available by The Internet Archive.)

UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA

STUDIES INLANGUAGE, LITERATURE AND CRITICISM

Number 2

   

ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER

 

BY

FLORENCE M. GRIMM, A. M.Assistant in the University ofNebraska Library

   

EDITORIAL COMMITTEE

Louise Pound, Ph. D., Department of EnglishH. B. Alexander, Ph. D., Department of PhilosophyF. W. Sanford, A. B., Department of Latin.

 

LINCOLN1919

   

[Pg 2]

CONTENTS

I.

Astronomy in the Middle Ages

 3

II.

Chaucer’s Scientific Knowledge

9

III.

Chaucer’s Cosmology

12

IV.

Chaucer’s Astronomy

27

V.

Astrological Lore in Chaucer

51

 

Appendix

79

   

[Pg 3]

ASTRONOMICAL LORE IN CHAUCER

 

I

Astronomy in the Middle Ages

The conspicuousness of astronomical lore in the poetry of Chaucer is due

to its importance in the life of his century. In the mediaeval period,

astronomy (or ‘astrology,’ for the two names were used indifferently to

cover the same subject) was one of the vital interests of men. The

ordinary man of the Middle Ages knew much more than do most men to-day

about the phenomena of the heavens; conveniences such as clocks, almanacs,

and charts representing celestial phenomena were rare, and direct

observations of the apparent movements and the relative positions of the

heavenly bodies were necessary for the regulation of man’s daily

occupations. Furthermore, the belief in a geocentric system of the

universe, which in Chaucer’s century was almost universally accepted, was

of vast significance in man’s way of thinking. Accepting this view, all

the heavenly bodies seemed to have been created for the sole benefit of

man, inhabiting the central position in the universe; their movements,

always with reference to the earth as a center, brought to man light,

heat, changes of season—all the conditions that made human life possible

on the earth.

Not only did the man of the Middle Ages see in the regular movements of

the celestial spheres the instruments by which God granted him physical

existence, but in the various aspects of heavenly phenomena he saw the

governing principles of his moral life. The arrangement of the heavenly

bodies with regard to one another at various times was supposed to exert

undoubted power over the course of terrestrial events. Each planet was

thought to have special attributes and a special influence over men’s[Pg 4]

lives. Venus was the planet of love, Mars, of war and hostility, the sun,

of power and honor, and so forth. Each was mysteriously connected with a

certain color, with a metal, too, the alchemists said, and each had

special power over some organ of the human body. The planet’s influence

was believed to vary greatly according to its position in the heavens, so

that to determine a man’s destiny accurately it was necessary to consider

the aspect of the whole heavens, especially at the moment of his birth,

but also at other times. This was called “casting the horoscope” and was

regarded as of great importance in enabling a man to guard against

threatening perils or bad tendencies, and to make the best use of

favorable opportunities.

It is not astonishing, then, that the great monuments of literature in the

mediaeval period and even much later are filled with astronomical and

astrological allusions; for these are but reflections of vital human

interests of the times. The greatest poetical work of the Middle Ages,

Dante’s Divina Commedia, is rich in astronomical lore, and its dramatic

action is projected against a cosmographical background reflecting the

view of Dante’s contemporaries as to the structure of the world. Milton,

writing in the seventeenth century, bases the cosmology of his Paradise

Lost in the main on the Ptolemaic system, but makes Adam and the

archangel Raphael discuss the relative merits of this system and the

heliocentric view of the universe. The latter had been brought forth by

Copernicus a century earlier, but even in Milton’s day had not yet

succeeded in supplanting the old geocentric cosmology.

The view of the universe which we find reflected in Chaucer’s poetry is

chiefly based on the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, though it shows traces

of very much more primitive cosmological ideas. The Ptolemaic system owes

its name to the famous Alexandrian astronomer of the second century A. D.,

Claudius Ptolemy, but is based largely on the works and discoveries of the

earlier Greek philosophers and astronomers, especially Eudoxus,

Hipparchus, and Aristarchus, whose investigations Ptolemy compiled[Pg 5] and,

along some lines, extended. Ptolemaic astronomy was a purely geometrical

or mathematical system which represented the observed movements and

relative positions of the heavenly bodies so accurately that calculations

as to their positions at any given time could be based upon it. Ptolemy

agreed with his contemporaries in the opinion that to assign causes for

the celestial movements was outside the sphere of the astronomer. This was

a proper field of philosophy; and the decisions of philosophers,

especially those of Aristotle, were regarded as final, and their teaching

as the basis upon which observed phenomena should be described.

According to the Ptolemaic system the earth is a motionless sphere fixed

at the center of the universe. It can have no motion, for there must be

some fixed point in the universe to which all the motions of the heavenly

bodies may be referred; if the earth had motion, it was argued, this would

be proportionate to the great mass of the earth and would cause objects

and animals to fly off into the air and be left behind. Ptolemy believed

this reason sufficient to make untenable the idea of a rotatory motion of

the earth, although he was fully aware that to suppose such a motion of

the earth would simplify exceedingly the representations of the celestial

movements. It did not occur to him that to suppose the earth’s atmosphere

to participate in its motion would obviate this difficulty. The earth was

but a point in comparison with the immense sphere to which the stars were

attached and which revolved about the earth once in every twenty-four

hours, imparting its motion to sun, moon, and planets, thus causing day

and night and the rising and setting of the heavenly bodies. The irregular

motions of the planets were accounted for by supposing them to move on

circles of small spheres called ‘epicycles’, the centres of which moved

around the ‘deferents’, or circles of large spheres which carried the

planets in courses concentric to the star sphere. By giving each of the

planets an epicycle and deferent of the proper relative size and velocity

the varied oscillations of the planets, as far as they could be followed

by means of the simple instruments then in use, were almost perfectly

accounted for.

[Pg 6]Though it was a purely mathematical system which only attempted to give a

basis for computing celestial motions, Ptolemaic astronomy is of great

importance historically as it remained the foundation of theoretical

astronomy for more than 1400 years. Throughout the long dark centuries of

the Middle Ages it survived in the studies of the retired students of the

monasteries and of the few exceptionally enlightened men who still had

some regard for pagan learning in the days when many of the Church Fathers

denounced it as heretical.

Ptolemy was the last of the great original Greek astronomers. The

Alexandrian school produced, after him, only copyists and commentators,

and the theoretical astronomy of the Greeks, so highly perfected in

Ptolemy’s Almagest, was for many centuries almost entirely neglected.

The Roman State gave no encouragement to the study of theoretical

astronomy and produced no new school of astronomy. Although it was the

fashion for a Roman to have a smattering of Greek astronomy, and famous

Latin authors like Cicero, Seneca, Strabo and Pliny wrote on astronomy,

yet the Romans cared little for original investigations and contributed

nothing new to the science. The Romans, however, appreciated the value of

astronomy in measuring time, and applied to the Alexandrian school to

satisfy their practical need for a calendar. What Julius Caesar obtained

from the Alexandrian Sosigenes, he greatly improved and gave to the

Empire, as the calendar which, with the exception of the slight change

made by Gregory XIII, we still use.

The pseudo-astronomical science of astrology, or the so-called ‘judicial

astronomy’ was pursued during the Roman Empire and throughout the Middle

Ages with much greater zeal than theoretical astronomy. The interest in

astrology, to be sure, encouraged the study of observational astronomy to

a certain extent; for the casting of horoscopes to foretell destinies

required that the heavenly bodies be observed and methods of calculating

their positions at any time or place be known. But there was no desire to

inquire into the underlying laws of the celestial motions or to

investigate the real nature of the heavenly phenomena.

[Pg 7]If the Roman State did not encourage astronomy, the Roman Church

positively discouraged it. The Bible became and long remained the sole

authority recognized by the Church Fathers as to the constitution of the

universe. By many of the Patristics Ptolemaic astronomy was despised; not

because it did not describe accurately the observed phenomena of the

heavens, for it did this in a way that could scarcely have been improved

upon with the facilities for observation then available; and not because

it was founded upon the false assumption that the earth is the motionless

center of the universe about which all heavenly bodies revolve; but

because there was no authority in Scripture for such a system, and it

could not possibly be made consistent with the cosmology of Genesis.

Allegorical descriptions of the universe based on the Scriptures held

almost complete sway over the mediaeval mind. The whole universe was

represented allegorically by the tabernacle and its furniture. The earth

was flat and rectangular like the table of shew bread, and surrounded on

all four sides by the ocean. The walls of heaven beyond this supported the

firmament shaped like a half-cylinder. Angels moved the sun, moon, and

stars across the firmament and let down rain through its windows from the

expanse of water above.


