
III

Chaucer’s Cosmology

Chaucer wrote no poetical work having a cosmographical background as

completely set forth as is that in Dante’s Divine Comedy or that in

Milton’s Paradise Lost. Although his cosmological references are often

incidental they are not introduced in a pedantic manner. Whenever they are

not parts of interpolations from other writers his use of them is due to

their intimate relation to the life his poetry portrays or to his

appreciation of their poetic value. When Chaucer says, for example, that

the sun has grown old and shines in Capricorn with a paler light than is

his wont, he is not using a merely conventional device for showing that

winter has come, but is expressing this fact in truly poetic manner and in

words quite comprehensible to the men of his day, who were accustomed to

think of time relations in terms of heavenly phenomena.

Popular and scientific views of the universe in Chaucer’s century were by

no means the same. The untaught man doubtless still thought of the earth

as being flat, as it appears to be, as bounded by the waters of the ocean,

and as covered by a dome-like material firmament through which the waters

above sometimes came as rain;[Pg 13] while, as we have seen, by the fourteenth

century among scholars the geocentric system of astronomy was firmly

established and the spheres and epicycles of Ptolemy were becoming more

widely known. It is the view held by the educated men of his century that

Chaucer’s poetry chiefly reflects.

 

1. The Celestial Spheres and their Movements

When we read Chaucer we are transported into a world in which the heavenly

bodies and their movements seem to bear a more intimate relation to human

life than they do in the world in which we live. The thought of the

revolving spheres carrying sun, moon, and planets, regulating light and

heat on the earth, and exercising a mysterious influence over terrestrial

events and human destiny was a sublime conception and one that naturally

appealed to the imagination of a poet. Chaucer was impressed alike by the

vastness of the revolving spheres in comparison to the earth’s smallness,

by their orderly arrangement, and by the unceasing regularity of their

appearance which seemed to show that they should eternally abide. In the

Parlement of Foules he interpolates a passage from Cicero’s Somnium

Scipionis in which Africanus appears to the sleeping Scipio, points out

to him the insignificance of our little earth when compared with the

vastness of the heavens and then admonishes him to regard the things of

this world as of little importance when compared with the joys of the

heavenly life to come.[9]

“Than shewed he him the litel erthe, that heer is,

At regard of the hevenes quantite;

And after shewed he him the nyne speres.”

The regular arrangement of the planetary spheres clings often to the

poet’s fancy and he makes many allusions to their order in the heavens. He

speaks of Mars as “the thridde hevenes lord above”[10] and of Venus as

presiding over[Pg 14] the “fifte cercle.”[11] In Troilus and Criseyde the poet

invokes Venus as the adorning light of the third heaven.[12]

“O blisful light, of which the bemes clere

Adorneth al the thridde hevene faire!”[13]

Mediaeval astronomers as we have seen, imagined nine spheres, each of the

seven innermost carrying with it one of the planets in the order mentioned

below; the eighth sphere was that of the fixed stars, and to account for

the precession of the equinoxes, men supposed it to have a slow motion

from west to east, round the axis of the zodiac; the ninth or outermost

sphere they called the primum mobile, or the sphere of first motion, and

supposed it to revolve daily from east to west, carrying all the other

spheres with it. The thought of the two outer spheres, the primum

mobile, whirling along with it all the inner spheres, and the firmament,

bearing hosts of bright stars, seems to have appealed strongly to the

poet’s imagination. In the Tale of the Man of Lawe the primum mobile

is described as crowding and hurling in diurnal revolution from east to

west all the spheres that would naturally follow the slow course of the

zodiac from west to east.[14] Elsewhere the primum mobile is called the

“whele that bereth the sterres” and is said to turn the heavens with a

“ravisshing sweigh:”

“O thou maker of the whele that bereth the sterres, which that art

y-fastned to thy perdurable chayer, and[Pg 15] tornest the hevene with a

ravisshing sweigh, and constreinest the sterres to suffren thy lawe;”[15]

The firmament, which in Chaucer is not restricted to the eighth sphere but

generally refers to the whole expanse of the heavens, is many times

mentioned by Chaucer; and its appearance on clear or cloudy nights, its

changing aspects before an impending storm or with the coming of dawn,

beautifully described.[16]

 

2. The Harmony of the Spheres

Some of the cosmological ideas reflected in Chaucer’s writings can be

traced back to systems older than the Ptolemaic. The beautiful fancy that

the universe is governed by harmony had its origin in the philosophy of

the Pythagoreans in the fourth century B. C., and continued to appeal to

men’s imagination until the end of the Middle Ages. It was thought that

the distances of the planetary spheres from one another correspond to the

intervals of a musical scale and that each sphere as it revolves sounds

one note of the scale. When asked why men could not hear the celestial

harmony, the Pythagoreans said: A blacksmith is deaf to the continuous,

regular beat of the hammers in his shop; so we are deaf to the music which

the spheres have been sending forth from eternity.

In ancient and mediaeval cosmology it was only the seven spheres of the

planets that were generally supposed to participate in this celestial

music; but the poets have[Pg 16] taken liberties with this idea and have given

it to us in forms suiting their own fancies. Milton bids all the celestial

spheres join in the heavenly melody:

“Ring out, ye crystal spheres,

Once bless our human ears,If ye have power to touch our senses so;

And let your silver chime

Move in melodious time,And let the base of heaven’s deep organ blow;

And with your ninefold harmony,

Make up full consort to the angelic symphony.”[17]

Shakespeare lets every orb of the heavens send forth its note as it moves:

“There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st

But in his motion like an angel sings,

Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;”[18]

Chaucer, too, makes all nine spheres participate:

“And after that the melodye herde he

That cometh of thilke speres thryes three,

That welle is of musyke and melodye

In this world heer, and cause of armonye.”[19]

Only in unusual circumstances can the music of the spheres be heard by

mortal ears. In the lines just quoted the celestial melody is heard during

a dream or vision. In Troilus and Criseyde, after Troilus’ death his

spirit is borne aloft to heaven whence he beholds the celestial orbs and

hears the melody sent forth as they revolve:

[Pg 17]

“And ther he saugh, with ful avysement,

The erratik sterres, herkeninge armonye

With sownes fulle of hevenish melodye.”[20]

 

3. The Cardinal Points and the Regions of the World

More primitive in origin than the harmony of the spheres are references to

the four elements, to the divisions of the world, and to the cardinal

points or quarters of the earth. Of these, probably the most primitive is

the last. The idea of four cardinal points, the “before,” the “behind,”

the “right,” and the “left,” later given the names North, South, East, and

West, appears among peoples in their very earliest stages of civilization,

and because of its great usefulness has remained and probably will remain

throughout the history of the human race. Only one of Chaucer’s many

references to the cardinal points need be mentioned. In the Man of Lawes

Tale (B.491ff.) the cardinal points are first suggested by an allusion to

the four ‘spirits of tempest,’ which were supposed to have their

respective abodes in the four quarters of earth, and then specifically

named in the lines following:

“Who bad the foure spirits of tempest,

That power han tanoyen land and see,

‘Bothe north and south, and also west and est,

Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree?’”

Of almost equal antiquity are ideas of the universe as a threefold world

having heaven above, earth below, and a region of darkness and gloom

beneath the earth. Chaucer usually speaks of the threefold world, the

“tryne compas,” as comprising heaven, earth and sea. Thus in the Knightes

Tale:[21]

“‘O chaste goddesse of the wodes grene,

To whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene,

Quene of the regne of Pluto derk and lowe,’”

[Pg 18]Fame’s palace is said to stand midway between heaven, earth and sea:

“Hir paleys stant, as I shal seye,

Right even in middes of the weye

Betwixen hevene, erthe, and see;”[22]

Again in The Seconde Nonnes Tale, the name ‘tryne compas’ is used of the

threefold world and the three regions are mentioned:

“That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is,

Whom erthe and see and heven, out of relees,

Ay herien;”[23]

 

4. Heaven, Hell and Purgatory

In mediaeval cosmology ideas of heaven, hell, and purgatory, as more or

less definitely located regions where the spirits of the dead were either

rewarded or punished eternally, or were purged of their earthly sins in

hope of future blessedness, play an important part. According to Dante’s

poetic conception hell was a conical shaped pit whose apex reached to the

center of the earth, purgatory was a mountain on the earth’s surface on

the summit of which was located the garden of Eden or the earthly

paradise, and heaven was a motionless region beyond space and time, the

motionless sphere outside of the primum mobile, called the Empyrean.

Chaucer’s allusions to heaven, hell and purgatory are frequent but chiefly

incidental and give no such definite idea of their location as we find in

the Divine Comedy. The nearest Chaucer comes to indicating the place of

heaven is in The Parlement of Foules, 55-6, where Africanus speaks of

heaven and then points to the galaxy:

“And rightful folk shal go, after they dye,

To heven; and shewed him the galaxye.”

[Pg 19]Chaucer describes heaven as “swift and round and burning”, thus to some

extent departing from the conception of it usually held in his time:

“And right so as thise philosophres wryte

That heven is swift and round and eek brenninge,

Right so was fayre Cecilie the whyte.”[24]

In using the terms “swift and round” Chaucer must have been thinking of

the primum mobile which, as we have seen, was thought to have a swift

diurnal motion from east to west. His use of the epithet “burning” is in

conformity with the mediaeval conception of the Empyrean, or heaven of

pure light as it is described by Dante.

Chaucer does not describe the form and location of hell as definitely as

does Dante, but the idea which he presents of it by incidental allusions,

whether or not this was the view of it he himself held, is practically the

one commonly held in his day. That hell is located somewhere within the

depths of the earth is suggested in the Knightes Tale;[25]—

“His felawe wente and soghte him down in helle;”

and in the Man of Lawes Tale;[26]

“O serpent under femininitee,

Lyk to the serpent depe in helle y-bounde,”

In the Persones Tale hell is described as a horrible pit to which no

natural light penetrates, filled with smoking flames and presided over by

devils who await an opportunity to draw sinful souls to their

punishment.[27] Elsewhere in the same tale the parson describes hell as a

region of disorder, the only place in the world not subject to the

universal laws of nature, and attributes this idea of it to Job:

[Pg 20]“And eek Iob seith: that ‘in helle is noon ordre of rule.’ And

al-be-it so that god hath creat alle thinges in right ordre, and

no-thing with-outen ordre, but alle thinges been ordeyned and nombred;

yet nathelees they that been dampned been no-thing in ordre, ne holden

noon ordre.”[28]

The word purgatory seldom occurs in a literal sense in Chaucer’s poetry,

but the figurative use of it is frequent. When the Wife of Bath is

relating her experiences in married life she tells us that she was her

fourth husband’s purgatory.[29] The old man, Ianuarie[30], contemplating

marriage, fears that he may lose hope of heaven hereafter, because he will

have his heaven here on earth in the joys of wedded life. His friend

Iustinus sarcastically tells him that perhaps his wife will be his

purgatory, God’s instrument of punishment, so that when he dies his soul

will skip to heaven quicker than an arrow from the bow. To Arcite,

released from prison on condition that he never again enter Theseus’

lands, banishment will be a worse fate than the purgatory of life

imprisonment, for then even the sight of Emelye will be denied him:

“He seyde, ‘Allas that day that I was born!

Now is my prison worse than biforn;

Now is me shape eternally to dwelle

Noght in purgatorie, but in helle.’”[31]

The idea of purgatory, not as a place definitely located like Dante’s

Mount of Purgatory, but rather as a period of punishment and probation, is

expressed in these lines from The Parlement of Foules (78-84):

[Pg 21]

“‘But brekers of the lawe, soth to seyne,

And lecherous folk, after that they be dede,

Shul alwey whirle aboute therthe in peyne,

Til many a world be passed, out of drede,

And than, for-yeven alle hir wikked dede,

Than shul they come unto that blisful place,

To which to comen god thee sende his grace!’”

Chaucer uses the idea of paradise for poetical purposes quite as often as

that of purgatory. He expresses the highest degree of earthly beauty or

joy by comparing it with paradise. Criseyde’s face is said to be like the

image of paradise.[32] Again, in extolling the married life, the poet says

that its virtues are such

“‘That in this world it is a paradys.’”[33]

And later in the same tale, woman is spoken of as

“mannes help and his confort,

His paradys terrestre and his disport.”[34]

When Aeneas reaches Carthage he

“is come to Paradys

Out of the swolow of helle, and thus in Ioye

Remembreth him of his estat in Troye.”[35]

Chaucer mentions paradise several times in its literal sense as the abode

of Adam and Eve before their fall. In the Monkes Tale we are told that

Adam held sway over all paradise excepting one tree.[36] Again, the

pardoner speaks of the expulsion of Adam and Eve from paradise:

“Adam our fader, and his wyf also,

Fro Paradys to labour and to wo

Were driven for that vyce, it is no drede;

For whyl that Adam fasted, as I rede,[Pg 22]He was in Paradys; and whan that he

Eet of the fruyt defended on the tree,

Anon he was out-cast to we and peyne.”[37]

 

5. The Four Elements.

The idea of four elements[38] has its origin in the attempts of the early

Greek cosmologists to discover the ultimate principle of reality in the

universe.

Thales reached the conclusion that this principle was water, Anaximines,

that it was air, and Heracleitus, fire, while Parmenides supposed two

elements, fire or light, subtle and rarefied, and earth or night, dense

and heavy. Empedocles of Agrigentum (about 450 B. C.) assumed as primary

elements all four—fire, air, water, and earth—of which each of his

predecessors had assumed only one or two. To explain the manifold

phenomena of nature he supposed them to be produced by combinations of the

elements in different proportions through the attractive and repulsive

forces of ‘love’ and ‘discord.’ This arbitrary assumption of four

elements, first made by Empedocles, persisted in the popular imagination

throughout the Middle Ages and is, like other cosmological ideas of

antiquity, sometimes reflected in the poetry of the time.

The elements in mediaeval cosmology were assigned to a definite region of

the universe. Being mortal and imperfect they occupied four spheres below

the moon, the elemental region or region of imperfection, as distinguished

from the ethereal region above the moon. Immediately within the sphere of

the moon came that of Fire, below this the Air, then Water, and lowest of

all the solid sphere of Earth.[Pg 23] Fire being the most ethereal of the

elements constantly tends to rise upward, while Earth sinks towards the

center of the universe. This contrast is a favorite idea with Dante, who

says in the Paradiso i. 112-117:

“‘wherefore they move to diverse ports o’er thegreat sea of being, and each one withinstinct given it to bear it on.

This beareth the fire toward the moon; thisis the mover in the hearts of things that die;this doth draw the earth together and unite it.’”

Elsewhere Dante describes the lightning as fleeing its proper place when

it strikes the earth:

“‘but lightning, fleeing its proper site, ne’er

darted as dost thou who art returning thither.’”[39]

And again:

“‘so from this course sometimes departeth thecreature that hath power, thus thrust, to swerveto-ward some other part,

(even as fire may be seen to dart down fromthe cloud) if its first rush be wrenched asideto earth by false seeming pleasure.’”[40]

The same thought of the tendency of fire to rise and of earth to sink is

found in Chaucer’s translation of Boethius:[41]

“Thou bindest the elements by noumbres proporcionables, ... that the

fyr, that is purest, ne flee nat over hye, ne that the hevinesse ne

drawe nat adoun over-lowe the erthes that ben plounged in the wateres.”

Chaucer does not make specific mention of the spheres of the elements, but

he tells us plainly that each element has been assigned its proper region

from which it may not escape:


   
