
V

Astrological Lore in Chaucer

Astrology, though resembling a science in that it makes use of observation

and seeks to establish laws governing its data, is in reality a faith or

creed. It had its beginning, so tradition tells us, in the faith of the

ancient Babylonians in certain astral deities who exerted an influence

upon terrestrial events and human life. The basis of this faith was not

altogether illogical but contained a germ of truth.

Of all the heavenly bodies, the sun exerted the most obvious effect upon

the earth; the sun brought day and night, summer and winter; his rays

lured growing things from mother earth and so gave sustenance to mankind.

But to the ancient peoples of the Orient the sun was also often a baneful

power; he could destroy as well as give life. Therefore, the ancients came

to look upon the sun as a great and powerful god to be worshipped and

propitiated by men. And if the sun was such a power, it was natural to

believe that all the other bright orbs of the sky were lesser [Pg 52]divinities

who exercised more limited powers on the earth. From this beginning,

based, as we have seen, on a germ of fact, by the power of his imagination

and credulity, man extended more and more the powers of these sidereal

divinities, attributing to their volition and influence all the most

insignificant as well as the most important terrestrial events. And if the

heavenly bodies, by revolving about the earth in ceaseless harmony,

effected the recurrence of day and night and of the seasons, and if their

configurations were responsible for the minutest events in nature, was it

not natural to suppose that, besides affecting man thus indirectly, they

also influenced him directly and were responsible for his conduct and for

the very qualities of his mind and soul? Perhaps the astonishing variety

of the influences that the celestial bodies, from ancient until modern

times, were supposed to exercise over the world and the life of mankind

can be accounted for by imagining some such process of thought to have

been involved in the beginnings of astrology.

It was but a step from faith in stellar influence on our earth to the

belief that, as the heavenly movements were governed by immutable laws, so

their influence upon the world would follow certain laws and its effects

in the future could be determined as certainly as could the coming

revolutions and conjunctions of the stars. Out of this two-fold belief was

evolved a complex system of divination, the origin of which was forgotten

as men, believing in it, invented reasons for believing, pretending that

their faith was founded on a long series of observations. The Chaldeans

believed that in discovering the unceasing regularity of the celestial

motions, they had found the very laws of life and they built upon this

conviction a mass of absolutely rigid dogmas. But when experience belied

these dogmas, unable to realize the falsity of their presuppositions and

to give up their faith in the divine stars, the astrologers invented new

dogmas to explain the old ones, thus piling up a body of complicated and

often[Pg 53] contradictory doctrines that will ever be to the student a source

of perplexity and astonishment.

On its philosophical side astrology was a system of astral theology

developed, not by popular thought, but through the careful observations

and speculations of learned priests and scholars. It was a purely Eastern

science which came into being on the Chaldean plains and in the Nile

valley. As far as we know, it was entirely unknown to any of the primitive

Aryan races, from Hindostan to Scandinavia. Astrology as a system of

divination never gained a foothold in Greece during the brightest period

of her intellectual life. But the dogma of astral divinity was zealously

maintained by the greatest of Greek philosophers. Plato, the great

idealist, whose influence upon the theology of the ancient and even of the

modern world was more profound than that of any other thinker, called the

stars “visible gods” ranking them just below the supreme eternal Being;

and to Plato these celestial gods were infinitely superior to the

anthropomorphic gods of the popular religion, who resembled men in their

passions and were superior to them only in beauty of form and in power.

Aristotle defended with no less zeal the doctrine of the divinity of the

stars, seeing in them eternal substances, principles of movement, and

therefore divine beings. In the Hellenistic period, Zeno, the Stoic, and

his followers proclaimed the supremacy of the sidereal divinities even

more strongly than the schools of Plato and Aristotle had done. The Stoics

conceived the world as a great organism whose “sympathetic” forces

constantly interacted upon one another, governed by Reason which was of

the essence of ethereal Fire, the primordial substance of the universe. To

the stars, the purest manifestation of the power of this ethereal

substance, were attributed the greatest influence and the loftiest divine

qualities. The Stoics developed the doctrine of fatalism, which is the

inevitable outcome of faith in stellar influence on human life, to its

consequences; yet they proved by facts that fatalism is not incompatible

with [Pg 54]active and virtuous living. By the end of the Roman imperial period

astrology had transformed paganism, replacing the old society of Immortals

who were scarcely superior to mortals, except in being exempted from old

age and death, by faith in the eternal beings who ran their course in

perfect harmony throughout the ages, whose power, regulated by the

unvarying celestial motions, extended over all the earth and determined

the destiny of the whole human race.

Astrology, as a science and a system of divination, exerted a profound

influence over the mediaeval mind. No court was without its practicing

astrologer and the universities all had their professors of astrology. The

practice of astrology was an essential part of the physician’s profession,

and before prescribing for a patient it was thought quite as important to

determine the positions of the planets as the nature of the disease.[139]

Interesting evidence of this fact is found in the Prologue to the

Canterbury Tales where Chaucer speaks of the Doctour’s knowledge and use

of astrology as if it were his chief excellence as a physician:

“In al this world ne was ther noon him lyk

To speke of phisik and of surgerye;

For he was grounded in astronomye.

He kepte his pacient a ful greet del

In houres, by his magik naturel.

Wel coude he fortunen the ascendent

Of his images for his pacient.”[140]

Yet in spite of the esteem in which astrological divination was held by

most people in the Middle Ages, Dante, the greatest exponent of the

thought and learning of that period, shows practically no knowledge of the

technical and practical side of astrology. When he refers to the specific

effects of the planets it is only to those most familiarly known, and he

nowhere uses such technical terms as “houses” or “aspects” of planets. But

Dante, like the great philosophers of the earlier periods, was undoubtedly

[Pg 55]influenced by the philosophical doctrines of astrology, and a general

belief in the influence of the celestial spheres upon human life was

deeply rooted in his mind. To him the ceaseless and harmonious movements

of the celestial bodies were the manifestations and instruments of God’s

providence, and were ordained by the First Mover to govern the destinies

of the earth and human life.

We can see this conviction of Dante’s with perfect certainty when we read

the Divina Commedia. For Dante’s poetry is highly subjective; on every

page his own personal thoughts and feelings are revealed quite openly.

Chaucer’s poetry, on the other hand, is objective; he tells us almost

nothing directly about himself and what we learn of him in his writings is

almost entirely by inference. Chaucer’s frequent use of astrology in his

poetry would make it hard to believe that he was not considerably

influenced by its philosophical aspects, at least in the general way that

Dante was. Part and parcel of the dramatic action in most of his poems is

the idea of stellar influences. Yet we cannot assert, with the same

assurance that we can say it of Dante, that Chaucer believed, even in a

general way, in the influence of the stars on human life. In Dante’s

poetry, as we have said, the poet himself is always before us. Chaucer,

with Socratic irony, always makes it plain to the reader that his attitude

is purely objective, that he is only the narrator of what he has seen or

dreamed, only the copyist of another’s story. Even when Chaucer makes

himself one of the protagonists, as in the Hous of Fame and the

Canterbury Tales, it is only that his narrative may be the more

convincing. He tells a story and makes its protagonists actually live

before us, as individual men and women. It is possible to imagine all of

his use of astrology in his poetry not as the reflection of his own faith

in its cosmic philosophy, but the expression of his genius for

understanding people and truthfully describing life and character.

Considerable discussion as to Chaucer’s attitude towards astrology has

been called forth by passages in which[Pg 56] he speaks in words of scorn with

regard to some of the practices and magic arts that were often used in

connection with astrology. In the Astrolabe after describing somewhat at

length the favorable and unfavorable positions of planets he says:

“Natheles, thise ben observauncez of iudicial matiere and rytes of

payens, in which my spirit ne hath no feith, ne no knowing of hir

horoscopum.”[141]

Again in the Franklin’s Tale he speaks in a similar disdainful tone of

astrological magic:

“He him remembred that, upon a day,

At Orliens in studie a book he say

Of magik naturel, which his felawe,

That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,

Al were he ther to lerne another craft,

Had prively upon his desk y-laft;

Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns,

Touchinge the eighte and twenty mansiouns

That longen to the mone, and swich folye,

As in our dayes is not worth a flye:

For holy chirches feith in our bileve

Ne suffreth noon illusion us to greve.”[142]

And elsewhere in the same tale he writes:

“So atte laste he hath his tyme y-founde

To maken his Iapes and his wreccednesse

Of switch a supersticious cursednesse.”[143]

Here follows a long description of the clerk’s instruments and

astrological observances, ending in the lines

“For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces

As hethen folk used in thilke dayes;

For which no lenger maked he delayes,

But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,

It seemed that alle the rokkes were aweye.”[144]

[Pg 57]On the strength of these passages Professor T. R. Lounsbury[145] holds

that Chaucer was far ahead of most of his contemporaries in his attitude

toward the superstitious practices connected with the astrology of his

day; that his attitude toward judicial astrology was one of total

disbelief and scorn; and he even goes so far as to say that Chaucer was

guilty of a breach of artistic workmanship in expressing his disbelief so

scornfully in a tale in which the very climax of the dramatic action

depends upon a feat of astrological magic.


