

THE LUCK OF FLOWERS

It has been a favorite pastime with maidens in all ages to try to foretell

their future by the aid of flowers and plants.

One of the most popular fancies is provided by the four-leaved clover, the

story of which is told in various legends. One runs to the effect that three

beautiful sisters, Faith, Hope and Charity, came from over the seas, and

wherever they walked three-leaved clovers, crimson, white and yellow,

bloomed profusely. In their footsteps came another more beautiful being,

whose name was Love, and in his honor the clover added a fourth petal

to the trefoil.

In time, it became the talisman of love-sick maidens, who wore it in their

shoe to ensure a speedy meeting with their sweetheart, wore it over their

heart to frighten away evil spirits and to prevent being jilted. In the case

of a quarrel, it served to effect a reconciliation.

Apart from its sentimental associations, a four-leaved clover has long been

regarded as an emblem of good luck, and has been worn by those who

believe in such things when they wished to increase their chances of good

fortune.

SPRING FLOWERS.—Naturally, many beliefs flourish around the flowers

of the garden and the hedgerow.

If you chance to find the first flower of the season on a Monday, it means

good luck.

If on a Tuesday, big undertakings are likely to be successful.

If on a Wednesday, it denotes your approaching wedding.

If on a Thursday, hard work with little profit will fall to your lot.

If on a Friday, unexpected wealth reaches you.

If on a Saturday, you may look out for misfortune.

If on a Sunday, phenomenal good luck will come to you.

THE FIRST WILD FLOWER.—From the first wild flowers which you

gather in spring, it is possible to discover the initials of your future husband or

wife. If, for instance, they should chance to be daisies, violets and buttercups,

then expect to find some suitable person with the initials D. V. B.,

but they may not be necessarily in this order.

If someone presents you with a yellow flower, then you may expect a

gift of money directly.

If you can turn a bluebell inside out without breaking it, then your lover

will be true as long as both of you live.

[100]

No. 21.

THE PANSY.—If you wish to know your future destiny, pluck a pansy,

which takes its name from pensee, a thought. Count the streaks or lines upon

the petals.

Four streaks tell that your dearest wish will be fulfilled.

Five streaks stand for hope with fear.

Six streaks suggest a surprise.

Seven streaks tell of constancy in your lover.

Eight streaks, fickleness.

Nine streaks, a change and then riches.

Markings leaning towards the left denote trouble.

Markings leaning to the right denote prosperity.

Should the central streak be the longest, then Sunday should be chosen

as your wedding day.

THE DAISY.—One of the oldest of flower charms is to pluck at the petals

of a daisy or marguerite. At first pluck, these words are said, "He loves

me"; at the second, "He loves me not." These sentences are repeated alternately

until the flower is deprived of all its petals. Whichever sentence

was uttered last describes "his" affections.

[101]

THE IVY.—

Ivy, ivy, I thee pluck,

And in my bosom, I thee put.

The first young man who speaks to me

My own true lover he shall be.

No. 22.

THE HAWTHORN OR MAY.—Once upon a time, every porch was decorated

with a branch of May to avert the evil eye and prevent witchcraft, but the

idea has been departed from, and now it is regarded as a harbinger of

ill-luck, and is rarely brought inside a house.

THE MISTLETOE.—From very ancient times, this plant has been regarded

with curious veneration. Probably it gained special fame, in the first instance,

owing to the peculiar manner in which it grew. The Druids looked

upon it as a plant possessing marvelous properties, and they esteemed nothing

in the world more sacred than it. They gathered it when the moon was

just six days old because the moon was then thought to be at its greatest

power. This done, they sacrificed two young bullocks which were milk-white.

After that, the mistletoe was cut into small pieces with the aid of

a golden hook or bill and distributed among the people present. These

took it home and suspended it in a prominent place to ward off evil spirits.

From these associations, the mistletoe has become an emblem under which

young people may kiss, without any evil coming to them through their act.

HOLLY is used as a Christmas decoration because the Romans chose it to

hang in their houses on the fast in honor of Saturn. Friends gave bunches of it

to those whom they wished to endow with luck and happiness, probably

because the prickly leaves symbolized the crown of thorns worn by Christ

and the red berries the blood of the cross.

[102]

BIRTHDAY FLOWERS

Just as there are birth stones, so there are flowers which stand for each

month of the year. By wearing the blossom named for your month, you may

count on good fortune as the result.

JANUARY.—The Snowdrop which is the emblem of purity, hope and

gentleness.

FEBRUARY.—The Violet, the emblem of modesty, kindness and faith.

MARCH.—The Daffodil, the emblem of daintiness, sincerity and graciousness.

APRIL.—The Primrose, the emblem of lovers.

MAY.—The White Lily, the emblem of purity and sweetness.

JUNE.—The Wild Rose, the emblem of love and loyalty.

JULY.—The Carnation, the emblem of kindly thoughts.

AUGUST.—The White Heather, the emblem of luck and the best of

good fortune.

SEPTEMBER.—The Michaelmas Daisy, the emblem of riches and happiness.

OCTOBER.—The Rosemary, the emblem of remembrance and kind

thoughts.

NOVEMBER.—The Chrysanthemum, the emblem of faith and truth.

DECEMBER.—The Ivy, the emblem of loyalty, fidelity and faithfulness.

THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS

For many generations, certain flowers have been accepted as having definite

meanings. Thus, a gift of any of the examples listed below, may be taken

to infer whatever description is appended.

CAMELLIA.—Beauty, loveliness.CANDYTUFT.—Indifference, lack of affection.CARNATION (Red).—Alas for my poor heart!CARNATION (White).—Disregard, disdain.CLOVER (Four-leaved).—Be mine.COLUMBINE.—Foolishness.DAISY.—Innocence, purity.DEADLY NIGHTSHADE.—Falsehood, untrue.FERN.—You fascinate me.FORGET-ME-NOT.—The same as the name.FOXGLOVE.—I bow down to you.GERANIUM.—To console you.GOLDEN ROD.—Be on your guard.[103]HELIOTROPE.—I am devoted to you.HYACINTH (White).—Your beauty is recognized.IVY.—Faithfulness. I cling to you.LILY (White).—Sweetness.LILY (Yellow).—Gay, happy, joyful.LILY OF THE VALLEY.—Happiness will return.MIGNONETTE.—Your qualities are even greater than your charms.MYRTLE.—Love.ORANGE BLOSSOM.—Chastity.PANSY.—Thoughts.PASSION FLOWER.—Willing to suffer hardships for you.PEACH BLOSSOM.—I am captivated by you.PRIMROSE.—A token of love.ROSE.—A token of love, also.ROSE (Red).—Bashful, shy.ROSE (White).—I will be worthy of you.ROSE (Yellow).—Jealousy.ROSEBUDS.—A confession of great love.SWEET PEA.—Leave me and depart, or I leave you.VERBENA.—Pray for me.

COMBINATIONS OF FLOWERS

In order to convey definite phrases, lovers have long been used to resorting

to certain combinations of flowers. A bunch made up of them has the

meaning which we print below.

DAISY AND MIGNONETTE.—Your qualities surpass even your great

beauty.

FERNS AND LILY OF THE VALLEY.—You are sweet and charming,

and you fascinate me.

IVY LEAVES AND YELLOW ROSE.—Your jealousy has put an end

to our friendship.

COLUMBINE, DAISY AND LILY.—You have played false and broken

our friendship.

PINK AND LAUREL LEAVES.—Your high qualities have been noticed

by me.

GOLDEN ROD, SWEET PEA AND FORGET-ME-NOT.—Danger is

at hand, be careful. I go away but do not forget me.

[104]