

SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS

SERPENTS.—These creatures have been regarded from very different angles,

according to the time and the country. The story of the serpent in the Garden

of Eden has caused many people to detest them: but numerous are the

references in histories which go to show that serpents and snakes have been

reverenced. In ancient Rome, the serpent was a household god: at other

times, it was regarded as a symbol of life and vitality, and it was frequently

used as a medium for healing the sick. In India, this creature is looked upon

as a mascot for time and wisdom. Thus, it is worn by fanatics as a part of

their headgear, and people make metal replicas and wear them as rings,

bracelets, etc. Clearly, then, serpents have found more favor than disapproval,

and they may be counted as mascots, standing for wisdom, long life and good

health.

CATS.—Cats, the most domestic of animals, are regarded with mixed feelings.

Generally speaking, they are supposed to be unlucky, though oddly

enough a black cat is credited with good qualities when it takes up its abode

in a house. This is due to the fact that, during the Middle Ages, black cats

were supposed to be associated with witches and in league with the evil one.

As a result, people treated them kindly and showered favors on them, not

because they liked them, but because they thought that this treatment would

avert bad luck.

The person who drowns or kills a cat may look for ill-fortune for nine

years. Bad luck attends the vessel or ship on which a cat is found, but on no

account may the creature be thrown overboard after the vessel has sailed.

This would only make matters worse.

If a cat leaves a house, it is supposed to take the luck with it, and leave

nothing but bad fortune behind. If a white cat enters a home, it announces

trouble and sickness. A cat licking itself all over signifies fair weather, but

if it merely washes its face, it means the approach of rain or storms.

DOGS.—A dog howling under a window indicates death.

Dogs begin in jest and end in earnest.

A dog, a woman, a walnut tree,

The more you beat 'em, the better they be.

If a dog bark, go in: if a bitch, go out.

A dog will bark ere he bite.

HARES.—If a hare crosses your path, you may look out for a disappointment.

If it runs past houses, there will soon be a fire in one of them.

In the Isle of Man, hares are believed to be the spirits of old women, and

on that account are shunned as articles of food. In other parts, those who

wish to look beautiful for a week make a point of eating hare.

[105]

BIRDS.—Robins are variously regarded in different parts of the country.

Some people think them unlucky, possibly because of their association with

the tragedy of the Babes in the Wood. But generally they are welcomed to

a garden or house, which is supposed to be all the luckier for their coming.

Robins that show signs of being friendly are considered to foretell a hard

winter.

Woodpeckers and kingfishers are also lucky, and any suggestion of ill-luck

is only possible when birds are deliberately killed after having built their nest

and claimed the hospitality of a home.

The screech of a peacock is best unheard when luck is particularly wanted.

The feathers of this bird, known to everyone by reason of their beautiful

coloring, should never be taken indoors, as they are reckoned specially unlucky.

There is an old superstition regarding the cuckoo. Should a maiden, hearing

its notes for the first time that season, kiss her hand to it and say:—

Cuckoo, cuckoo,

Tell me true,

When shall I be married?

she may tell the number of years which will elapse until her wedding by

counting the number of times the bird cries "Cuckoo." She must reckon

each cry as a year.

Another superstition relating to the cuckoo is that what you are doing

when you hear its cries for the first time in any season is what you will spend

most time at during the remainder of the year. Folk in the Channel Islands

claim that they are sure to be fortunate if they jingle their purses and run a

short distance when hearing the cuckoo for the first time in the year.

Owls, crows and magpies do not presage any good: in fact, many people

would rather not meet them when anxiety is at hand. An old jingle says of

magpies:—

One for anger,

Two for mirth;

Three for a wedding

Four for a birth.

Ravens are supposed to bring luck to the house where they build their nests,

so it is unlucky to kill one.

It is unlucky to touch a yellowhammer in May, since there is the devil's

blood in it then.

For a white pigeon to single out a house and hover round it is a sure sign

of an early marriage or engagement in that house.

A cock crowing during the night-time means a bad illness for someone close

at hand: if it crows during the afternoon, a visitor will arrive.

Sailors are not over-fond of seagulls, believing them to be the spirits of their

dead mates, yet they are most indignant if anyone tries to shoot or kill one

of them.

[106]

OTHER ANIMALS.—A cricket singing within a house ensures good luck

for all the household.

Kill a spider and it will surely rain.

See a moth on your clothes and you will get new ones.

A death's head moth indicates bereavement.

Pigs are unlucky creatures when seen singly.

To see a white horse and then, shortly after, a red-haired person, tells of

approaching good fortune.

Moles are unlucky to find alive.

Of bees, the following rhyme is prophetic:—

A swarm of bees in May

Is worth a load of hay.

A swarm of bees in June

Is worth a silver spoon.

A swarm of bees in July

Is not worth a fly.

Country people are still given to treating bees as if they belonged to the

family. For instance, not a few folk tell the bees of the betrothal, marriage

and other outstanding events happening in the home.

PROPHECIES REGARDING ANIMALS

(a) When black snails cross your pathBlack clouds much moisture hath.

(b) When the peacock loudly bawls,Soon we'll have both rain and squalls.

(c) When rooks fly sporting high in air,It shows that windy storms are near.

(d) Bees will not swarm before a near storm.

(e) When the cuckoo comes to the bare thorn,Sell your cow and buy your corn.But when she comes to the full bit,Sell your corn and buy some sheep.

(f) Little bantams are great at crowing.

(g) Good luck for a grey horse.

(h) Let a horse drink what he will, not when he will.

(i) Trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth.

(j) Plenty of ladybirds, plenty of hops.

(k) Never offer your hen for sale on a rainy day.

(l) When the glow-worm lights her lamp,The air is always damp.

(m) Unlucky to hear the cuckoo sing sitting.Or to sit and see the first swallow flitting.

[107]