fable of the twelve labors. 

the author of the original solar fables, have live 

in that remote age in which physical prowess was recognize 

as the highest attribute of humanity, conceive the 

idea that god sol, while passing through his apparent 

orbit, had to fight his way with the animal of the zodiac, 

and with other in conjunction with them. hence, designate 

him as the mighty hunter, and calling his exploit 

the twelve labors, they made the incarnate saviour 

the hero of similar one on earth, which they taught 

were perform for the good of mankind; and that, after 

fulfill their earthly mission, they were exhale to 

heaven through the agency of fire. when these fable 

were compose the summer solstice was in the sign of 

leo, and making the twelve labor begin in it, the first 

consist in the killing of a lion, and the second, in rescue 

a virgin (virgo) by the destruction of a hydra, the 

constellation in conjunction with her. upon one of the 

assyrian marbles on exhibition in the britain museum 

these two labor are represent as have been perform 

by a saviour by the name of nimroud. in the constellation 

of taurus, the bull of the zodiac, and of orion, originally 

known as horns, in conjunction therewith, we 

have grouping of stars represent the latter as one of 

the mighty hunter of the ancient astrolatry, support 

on his left arm the shield of the lion's skin, the trophy of 

the first labor, and holding a club in his uplift right 

hand, is engaged in perform the tenth labor by a conflict 

with the former. 

the fable of the twelve labor constitute the sacred 

record or scripture of the old form of astrolatry, one 

version of which, written with the cuneiform character 

upon twelve tablet of burnt clay, exhume from the ruins 

of an assyrian city, and now on exhibition in the britain 

museum, is ascribe to nimroud, the prototype of the 

grecian hercules, and of nimrod, the mighty hunter of 

the old testament. 

anniversary of solar worship. 

the nativity. 

apply the anniversary inculcate in the worship 

of god sol to his imaginary incarnations, the founder of 

the ancient astrolatry made them refer to the several 

stage of human existence from infancy to mature age. 

hence, compare the first day of infantile life to the 

shortest day of the year, it would naturally be expect 

that they would have placed the anniversary of the nativity 

exactly at the winter solstice; but, have conceive 

the idea that the sun stood still for the space of three days 

at each of the cardinal points, and making it represent the 

figurative death of the genius of that luminary, they fixed 

the date for its observance three days later, or on the 25th 

of december. the gnostic adherent to the ancient 

solar worship, or those who were conversant with the 

teaching of the esoteric philosophy, knowing that the 

dramati personæ of the fable of incarnation were picture 

with stars upon the azure vault, recognize the 

woman "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her 

feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars," refer 

to in revelation xii. 1, as the virgo of the zodiac; they 

also knew that she was the true queen of heaven and 

mother of god; and that the infant, ancient represent 

in her arms, and with whom, in their day, she arose on the 

eastern horizon at midnight on the 24th of december, 

was the same of whom the people were taught to sing at 

christmas "unto us a child is born this day." 

with the knowledge of these fact we can readily see 

that this is the virgin and child which constitute the 

original of those exquisite paintings, by the old masters, 

known as the madonna and child. 

epiphany or twelfth day. 

in reference to the twelve sign through which the 

sun make his apparent annual revolution, the twelfth 

day after christmas, answer to the 6th of january, was 

observe by the votary of the ancient astrolatry as the 

anniversary of the epiphany or twelfth day. in the 

solar fables, it was taught that a star appear in the 

heaven on that day to manifest the birthplace of the 

infant saviour to the magi or wise men of the east, who 

came to pay him homage, and to present him with the 

gift of gold, frankincense and myrrh, as related in matthew ii. 11. 

the reason for present these gift is explain by 

the fact that of the seven metal dedicated to the genii of 

the planets, gold was the one consecrate to god sol; and 

frankincense and myrrh were the gum burn in censer 

in his worship. 

in reading the account of the magi's visit to the infant 

saviour, we have but to exercise our thinking faculty to 

realize that it is allegory instead of literal history. 

lent or lenten season. 

in the ancient solar fable it was taught that the persecution 

to which the incarnate saviour were subject 

while passing through the dominion of god sol as lord of 

evil, rage with greatest fury during the forty days 

preceding the festival of easter, which period, beginning 

when the days were perceptible lengthening, was call 

lent, or the lenten season. it was during this season 

that the votary of the ancient religion were taught to 

manifest their sympathy for the saviour in his imaginary 

conflict with the devil by abstain from all festivities, 

and by fast and prayer; and, as that was the season 

in which the flock and herd were poor in flesh, while the 

sea and river abound with fish in good condition, the 

ancient priests, making a virtue of necessity, enjoin a 

diet principally of fish, and for that reason placed the constellation 

pisces at the point in the zodiac in which the 

lenten season ancient began; which, without regard to 

the day of the week, was always observe on the 15th day 

of february, the name of that month have been derive 

from the februa, or feast of purification and expiate of 

the old roman calendar. 

at the council of nice the lenten season was made 

to begin on the fourth day of the week, and in reference to 

the ancient custom of the more devout sprinkling ashes 

upon their head at the feast of the februa, it is call ash 

wednesday. 

hence we see that all years in which ash wednesday 

do not come on the 15th of february, the lenten 

season must necessarily contain a greater or lesser number 

than the original assignment of forty days. 

passion week. 

the last seven days of lent is call passion week, in 

reference to the apparent passage of the sun across the 

celestial equator at the vernal equinox or 21st of 

march; the ancient astrologer have conceive the idea 

that the sun stood still for the space of three days at each 

of the cardinal points, and making it represent the figurative 

death of the genius of that luminary, it was observe 

as the anniversary of the vernal crucifixion or passion of 

the incarnate saviours; and in commemoration of their 

imaginary suffering and death it was the custom to expose 

in the temple during the last three days of passion 

week figures represent their dead bodies, over which 

the votary of solar worship, especially the women, made 

great lamentation. it was in reference to one of these 

images, laid out in the temple at jerusalem, to which the 

jealous jehovah, considering it a great abomination in his 

own house, is made to direct the attention of ezekiel, the 

prophet, who, looking, beheld "women weeping for tammuz" 

as record in the eighth chapter. this divinity 

was the phoenician prototype of the grecian adonis, to 

whom the women of judea prefer to pay homage. 

it was during the last three days of passion week 

that the votary of solar worship perform their severest 

penance. besides fast and prayer, the more devout 

flagellate and slash themselves and other with knives 

and thongs, and carry heavy cross up steep acclivities. 

in all ultra-catholic country the priests, in imitation of 

the ancient custom, expose in the church figures represent 

the dead saviour, over which the laity, especially 

the women, weep and mourn; and the more devout 

men cut and slash themselves, and each other, with 

knives and thongs; and, in imitation of the imaginary 

tramp of jesus with his cross up calvary's rugged side, 

bear heavy cross up steep acclivities. 

passion plays. 

ancient drama represent the passion of incarnate 

saviours, call passion plays, were enact upon the 

stage. the most celebrated of these divine tragedies, 

known as prometheu bound, and compose by the 

greece poet Æschylus, was play at athens 500 years 

before the beginning of the christian era. to show that 

this sin-atoning saviour was not chain to a rock, while 

vulture prey upon his vitals, as popularly taught, but 

was nail to a tree; we quote front potter's translate of 

the play, that passage which, readily recognize as the 

original of a christian song, read as follows: 

"lo, stream from the fatal tree, 

his all atone blood: 

is this the infinite? 'tis he— 

prometheu and a god. 

well might the sun in dark hide, 

and veil his glory in, 

when god the great prometheu die 

for man, the creature's sin." 

the veil of the sun, as represent in these plays, 

have reference to the imaginary sympathy express by 

god sol for the suffering of his incarnate son, was shown 

upon the stage by shading the lights. the monk of the 

middle age enact play represent the passion of the 

christian saviour, and the bavarian peasantry, perpetuate 

this custom, perform the play every tenth year. 

resurrection and easter festival. 

in conformity to the ancient teachings, the incarnate 

saviours, considered as figurative dead for the space of 

three days at the vernal equinox, or 21st of march, were 

raise to new of life after the expiration of that time. 

hence, the 25th of march, without regard to the day of 

the week, was celebrated as the anniversary of the vernal 

resurrection. on the morning of this day it was the 

custom of the astrologer to say to the mourner assemble 

in the temples, "be of good cheer, sacred band of initiates; 

your god has risen from the dead, his pains and his 

suffering shall be your salvation." another form of 

this admonition, quote from an ancient poem in reference 

to the phoenician tammuz, read as follows: 

"trust ye saints, your god restored, 

trust ye in your risen lord, 

for the pains which he endured, 

your salvation hath procured." 

then would begin the festivity of easter, which 

corrupt from eostre, and derive from the teutonic 

mythology, was one of the many name given to the goddess 

of spring. in the observance of this festival the 

temple were adorn with floral offerings; the hilary 

sang their joyful lays; the fire upon the pyres, or the fire-altars, 

were extinguish and rekindle with new fire, or 

sacred fire of the stars, which the astrologer taught was 

brought down from heaven by the wing genius perseus, 

the constellation which, anciently, was in conjunction 

with the vernal equinox; paschal candles, lit from 

the new fire, were distribute to the faithful and the paschal 

feast, easter feast, or the feast of the passover, was 

eaten in commemoration of the passion of the incarnate 

saviours, or, in other words, of the passage of the sun 

across the celestial equator. 

in ultra-catholic country the descent of the sacred 

fire is represent by some secret arrange pyrotechny, 

and the credulous laity, believe they have witness a 

miraculous display, eager solicit paschal candle lit 

from it; and in imitation of the ancient festivity in honor 

of the return of spring, all catholic churches, and most of 

protestant ones, are adorn with flowers, the bell ring 

out their merriest peals, and "gloria in excelsis" and 

other jubilant songs, similar to the lay of the ancient hilaries, 

are sung. 
