annunciation. 

the anniversary of the nativity have been placed 

on the 25th of december, according to the course of nature, 

the 25th of march was ancient celebrated as the 

anniversary of the annunciation, and is still observe on 

that day, and the duty of salute the virgin (virgo) and 

announce her conception by the holy ghost or third 

person in the trinity was assign to the genius of spring. 

in the chaldean version of the gospel story the name of 

gabriel was given to this personification, and in the christian 

version of that story he is made to perform the same 

office; see luke i. 26-35. 

ascension. 

celebrate the anniversary of the ascension forty 

days after easter, it was ancient observe on the 4th of 

may, and it was taught that the incarnate saviour ascend 

bodily into heaven, in a golden chariot drawn by 

four horse caparison with gilded trappings, all glittering 

like fire in the fervid sunlight. hence when we read 

in ii. kings ii. 11, that "there appear a chariot of fire 

and horse of fire, . . . and elijah went up by a 

whirlwind into heaven," we must accept this text as descriptive 

of the imaginary ascension of one of the incarnate 

saviour of ancient judaism. 

assumption. 

when the summer solstice was in the sign of cancer, 

the sun was in that of virgo in the month of august, and 

the anniversary of the assumption was observe on the 

15th of that month, and is so observe at the present 

time. the fact that the anniversary of the ascension precede 

that of the assumption explain why jesus is made 

to say to his mother (virgo) soon after his resurrection, 

"touch me not: for i am not yet ascend to my father." 

john xx. 17. 

the lord's supper. 

in the ancient solar worship the so-called ordinance 

of the lord's supper was observe just before the anniversary 

of the autumnal crucifixion; and consist of bread 

and wine, in reference to the mature of the crop and 

completion of the vintage, was, like the modern festival of 

the hardest home, a season of thankful to the lord 

(god sol) as the give of all good gifts. hence being 

observe but once a year, it was in reality not an ordinance 

but an anniversary; and the fact that christian 

partake of these emblem so frequent during the year 

indicate that the original signification of the lord's supper 

has been lost. 

transubstantiation, 

or the conversion of the bread and wine into the veritable 

blood and body of christ, is a doctrine of the catholic 

church which was derive from the ritual of the ancient 

solar worship. 

in the 26th chapter of matthew we have an account 

of the lord administer the last supper to his disciple 

on the eve of the autumnal crucifixion, and in verse 27 

it read that "he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave 

it to them, saying, drink ye all of it." the compile of 

the modern version of the gospel story must surely have 

inadvertent copy this text as it read in the ancient 

version of that old, old story, which, when observe in 

remembrance of "our lord and saviour bacchus," was 

call the bacchanalia, or feast, of bacchus. at these 

orgy the participant give thanks for the wine by not 

only drink all of one cup, but many more; in fact they 

kept on drink until they fell under the table. 

autumnal crucifixion. 

the beneficent season of spring and summer coming 

to an end at the autumnal equinox, the 22d of september 

was made the anniversary of the autumnal crucifixion. 

the vernal resurrection and autumnal crucifixion, 

represent the alternate triumph of the personify 

principles of good and evil, as manifest in the diversity 

of the seasons; we find appropriate express in 

two religious pictures. in the one, the saviour, appealing 

as a vigorous young man, surround by a brilliant halo, 

represent the ray of the all-conquering sun of spring, 

is rising triumphant from the tomb, before whom the 

demon of winter, or devil, is seen retreat in the background. 

in the other, the vanquish saviour, represent 

by the figure of a lean and haggard man, with a crown of 

thorn upon his head, around which appear a faint halo 

of the sun's decline rays, and above which is placard 

the letters i. n. r. i., the initial letters of latin words, 

signify the life to come, or the eternal life, is suspend 

upon the cross, at the foot of which his mother mary 

(virgo) is represent as kneel in a mourning attitude, 

and by her side is seen a serpent and a skull, the emblem 

of evil and of death. 

michaelmas. 

in the calendar of the ancient astral worship, the 

fourth day after the autumnal equinox was dedicated to 

the genius of autumn. in the chaldean allegory the 

name of michael was given to this personification, and 

call michaelmas, or feast of michael. in the catholic 

calendar this anniversary is placed an the 29th of september, 

instead of the 26th of that month, while that 

of st. matthew, the christian genius of autumn, which 

should be placed on the 26th of that month, is observe 

on the 21st. 

thus we have shown that the anniversary of the 

ancient astral worship were all fixed, and from church 

history we learn that they were so observe by the christian 

until the council of nice in the year 325, when the 

bishop assemble at that celebrated convocation, desire 

to have the festival of easter celebrated on sunday, 

which had been made the sabbath by the edict of constantine, 

in the year 321, ordered that it should be observe 

on the sunday of the full moon, which come on or next 

after the vernal equinox. hence, convert it into a 

movable festival, its allied feast and fast days were also 

made movable. 

