personification of the division of time. 

in the ancient solar fable the several division of 

time were personify and made to pay homage to the 

triune deity, supposed to be enthroned above the firmament. 

the hours. 

the genii of the hour were designate as elders, and 

we find them describe in the 4th chapter of revelation 

as sitting round about the throne upon four and twenty 

seats, clothe in white raiment, and crown of gold upon 

their heads. 

the days. 

each day of the year was appropriate personified, 

and these genii of the days constitute the saint of the 

christian calendar. of these we will refer to but one. 

according to the ancient belief that the sun stood still 

for the space of three days at each of the cardinal points, 

the 24th of june was made the first of the decrease days; 

and dedicate it to st. john the baptist, he is made to say 

in reference to his opposite, (the genius of the 25th of 

december, and first of the increase days,) "he must increase, 

but i must decrease." this text, found in john 

iii. 30, simply means that the days of the one must increase 

in length, while the days of the other must decrease. 

the months. 

the fable of the twelve labor have been supersede 

by others, in which the genii of the twelve sign of the 

zodiac, corresponding to the months, were designate 

as angels, and made to minister to god sol while making 

his apparent annual revolution; but, when constitute the 

attendant of the incarnate saviour during their imaginary 

earth life, they were personify as men and call 

disciples. of these genii of the month we will refer only 

to the first and the last. the first month, dedicated to the 

genius known in the mythology as janus, and from which 

was derive the name january, was portray with two 

faces, the one of an old man look mournful backward 

over the old year, and the other of a young man look 

joyful forward to the new year. this personification, 

made the opener of the year, and represent as holding 

a pair of cross-keys, was call "the carrier of the key 

of the kingdom of heaven." hence, the pope of rome, 

claim apostolic succession from peter, the janu of the 

christian twelve, wear cross-keys as the insignia of their 

office. sometimes a crosier, or shepherd's crook, is substitute 

for one of the keys, in reference to his arrogate 

office of the leader of the sheep! the authority for the 

assumption that the pope are peter's successor is found 

in matthew xvi. 18, 19; but its fallacy become apparent 

when we bear in mind that the scripture are but collection 

of astronomical allegories, and that the peter 

refer to in the text was not a man, but the mythical 

genius of the month of january. 

in reference to the last month, we find that the 

author of the ancient solar fables, ever doubt whether 

god sol, after inaugurate winter by his supposed retreat 

from the earth, would return to revivify nature with 

his life-giving rays, gave to the genius of the twelfth 

month the title of the doubter. in the christian calendar 

this personification is known as thomas, and a more 

specific dedication of the shortest day of the year have 

been made to him, the 21st day of december is call st. 

thomas day. 

the seasons. 

when the cardinal points were in the constellation 

leo, taurus, aquarius and scorpio, the astrologers, object 

to the signification of the latter, substitute the 

constellation in conjunction therewith, which is known 

as aquila (ak-we-la) or flying eagle. in the allegorical 

astronomy of that remote period these genii of the season 

were designate as beasts, and as such we find them 

refer to in revelation iv. 7, which read as follows: 

"and the first beast was like a lion (leo), and the second 

beast like a calf (taurus, the bull calf), and the third 

beast had a face as a man, (aquarius, the waterman) and 

the fourth beast was like a flying eagle (aquila)." in the 

first chapter of ezekiel, the prophet, the genii of the season 

are refer to in the same manner. 

these genii of the seasons, standing, imaginarily, at 

the four corner of the heavens, were call corner-keepers, 

and making them witness to god sol in his apparent 

annual revolution, the founder of the astral worship 

designate them as archangels, evangelists, god-spellers 

or gospel-bearers, and claim inspiration from 

them, compose four different history of the birth and 

earth-life of the incarnate saviour, to each of which they 

attach a name, and call these record the gospel 

story. in its chaldean version, the name of gabriel, 

michael, raphael and uriel were given them; but while 

the first two of these are mention in the christian gospel 

story, its author gave to the evangelist the name 

of matthew, mark, luke and john. thus knowing the 

true signification of the disciple and evangelists, the 

very pertinent question presents itself: if they are not 

the genii of the month and the seasons, why are there 

just twelve of the one and four of the other? 

half year of increase days. 

in the ancient astrolatry, the half year of increase 

days, extend from the winter to the summer solstice, 

was personify by the composite figure represent the 

constellation of taurus and aquarius, which, constitute 

of the wing body of a bull and the head and beard 

of a man, was call the cherubim. this personification 

we find portray upon the assyrian marbles on exhibition 

in the britain museum. 

half year of decrease days. 

the half year of decrease days, extend from the 

summer to the winter solstice, was personify by the 

figure, which, represent the constellation of leo and 

aquila, and compose of the wing body and limb of a 

lion, with the head of an eagle, was call the seraphim. 

these last two personification constitute the archangel 

of the ancient astral worship. 

last quarter of the year. 

the last quarter of the year was personify in the 

ancient allegory as a decrepit old man, who, stung by 

a scorpion (scorpio), and fatally wound by an arrow 

from the quiver of an archer (saggitarius) die at the 

winter solstice; and, after lie in the grave for the space 

of three days, is brought to life again. such was the personification 

refer to in the christian gospel-story as 

have been raise from the grave by the mandate, "come 

forth, lazarus." thus have we shown that the elder 

and the saints; the angels, and the archangels; the cherubim 

and seraphim; and also poor old lazarus, are but 

personification of the several division of time. 
