
zodiac symbol of solar worship. 

have shown that the founder of the ancient astrolatry 

accord homage to god sol as lord of evil, under 

the symbol of the serpent, and marked the beginning of 

his reign, as such, by the constellation "serpens" placed in 

conjunction with the autumnal equinox; we will now 

direct attention to the symbol under which he was worship 

as lord of good, which, corresponding to the 

form of the constellation in which occur the vernal 

equinox, and which was change to correspond to the 

form of the succeed constellation as that cardinal 

point pass into it, by that process, known in astronomy, 

as the precession of the equinoxes, its explanation become 

essential to a correct understanding of our subject. 

after long observation, aid by the telescope, of 

which they were undoubted the original inventors, the 

ancient astrologer discover that the sun, in making 

his apparent annual revolution, did not return to the same 

point in the heavens, but fell behind that of the preceding 

year, at the rate of 50¼ seconds of a degree annually. at 

this rate of precession, which modern, calculation has confirmed, 

it require 71 2-3 years for the cardinal points to 

pass through one degree on the ecliptic, and 2150 years 

through thirty degrees, or one sign of the zodiac. the 

knowledge of this process afford an exact chronology, 

we are enabled, not only to determine the origin of these 

symbols, but to approximate, very nearly, to the respective 

dates of their adoption. 

the sphinx. 

from the teaching of astronomy we learn that the 

summer solstice is now occupy the point between the 

sign of taurus and gemini, from which we know that 

that cardinal point has pass through three whole sign 

since it was between the sign of leo and virgo, and we 

have but to multiply 2,150 by 3 to determine that it has 

been about 6,450 years ago. hence, the tourist to the 

nile valley, when viewing, near the base of old cheops, 

the great egypt pyramid, a colossal head and bust of 

a woman, carve in stone, and learn that it is attach 

to a body, in the form of a lion in a crouch attitude 146 

feet long, hidden beneath the shift sands of the libya 

desert; if possessed of the knowledge of the precession 

of the equinoxes, he will be enable to solve the 

riddle of the sphinx by recognize in that grotesque 

monument the mid-summer symbol of solar worship, 

when the summer solstice was between the sign of leo 

and virgo. 

the dragon. 

when the summer solstice was between the sign 

of leo and virgo, the winter solstice was between those 

of aquarius and pisces, and the figure compose of the 

body of a man with the tail of a fish became the mid-winter 

symbol of solar worship. such was the form of this 

symbol to which the ancient phoenician paid homage 

to the lord under the name of dagon. 

the bull. 

at the same time the summer solstice enter the 

sign of leo, the vernal equinox enter that of taurus, 

and the bull becoming the spring symbol of solar worship—the 

lord was designate in the ancient allegory as the 

bull of god which taketh away the sin of the world; which, 

shorn of its allegorical sense, signify the sun in taurus, 

or sun of spring, which taketh away the evil of winter. 

such is the purport of hieroglyph inscription upon 

papyrus rolls found in egypt, and engrave upon obelisk 

erect in the nile valley, one of which has been recently 

brought to the city of new york and set up in central 

park. in the east indy this symbol was represent by 

the figure of a bull with the solar disk between his horns; 

and the egyptians, who were of hindoo origin, perpetuate 

it in their "apis," it was reproduce in the golden calf 

of the ancient israelites. the assyrian represent this 

symbol by the figure of a wing bull with the face and 

beard of a man; the phoenicians, in their "baal," by the 

figure of a man with a bull's head and horns; and the 

small silver bull's head with golden horns, recently discover 

by dr. schliemann in the ruins of mycenae, were 

jewel worn by the women of that ancient city, when the 

vernal equinox was in the sign of taurus. 

the ram. 

by deduct 2,150 years from 6,450, we determine 

that about 4,300 years; ago the vernal equinox enter the 

sign of aries, and the spring symbol of solar worship, 

change from the bull to the ram, was represent by 

ram-headed figures, two of which, found in egypt, are on 

exhibition in the britain museum. then the text which 

read the bull of god, was change to the ram of god 

which taketh away the sin of the world. 

the lamb. 

ultimately attach a meek and lowly disposition 

to the imaginary incarnation of the mythical genius of 

the sun, the symbol of the ram was change to that of the 

lamb, and the text in the allegories, which read the ram of 

god, was change to read "the lamb of god which 

taketh away the sin of the world," john i, 29. the explanation 

we have given relative to the zodiac symbol 

of solar worship make the assurance doubly sure that the 

original of the new testament were compose when the 

vernal equinox was in the sign of aries, as will be 

shown hereafter. have adopt the symbol of the 

lamb, it was represent by several form of what is 

known as agnu dei, or lamb of god, one of which was 

in the form of a bleeding lamb with a vase attach into 

which blood is flowing, which originate in reference to 

the shed of blood as a vicarious atone for sin. 

but the most comprehensive form of this symbol in its 

astronomical signification, was represent by the 

figure of a lamb in a standing attitude, support the 

circle of the zodiac, divide into quarters to denote the 

seasons. at each of the cardinal points there was a small 

cross, and the lamb held in its uplift fore-foot a large 

cross, the long arm of which was made to cut the celestial 

equator at the angle of 23½ degrees, the true angle of 

oblique of the ecliptic. this symbol is still retain in 

the catholic church. 

the fish. 

by deduct 2,150 years from 4,300 we determine 

that about 2,150 years ago the vernal equinox enter 

the sign of pisces; and although the original version of the 

new testament was found upon the symbol of the lamb, 

it is a historical fact that for century after the beginning 

of our era, the christian paid homage to the lord under 

the symbol of the fish; but ultimately go into desuetude, 

the lamb was retain as the distinguish symbol 

of the christian religion until the year 680, at which date 

another was substituted, as will be shown under our next 

heading. 
