the sacred numbers 7 and 12. 

in reference to the planets, and the sign of the 

zodiac, the numbers seven and twelve were recognize 

as sacred by the ancient astrologers, and dedication 

were made to them in all kind and sort of forms. in 

the allegories, the genii of the planet were designate 

as spirits or messenger to the supreme deity, imaginary 

enthroned above the firmament, which we find describe 

in revelation iv. 5, as "seven lamp of fire burning 

before the throne, which are the seven spirits of god;" 

and which were represent by lights burning in seven 

branch candlestick set before the altar in the temples; 

the central light for the sun; the moon, mercury and 

venus on one side; and mars, jupiter and saturn on the 

other. the seven branch candlestick seen in all 

catholic churches, and in some protestant ones, are intended 

to represent the same planetary system. 

among the numerous dedication to the genii of the 

planet we mention the seven days of the week, the seven 

story of the tower of babylon, the seven gate of thebes, 

the seven pipe flute of pan, the seven string lyre of 

apollo, the seven books of fate, the book of seven seals, 

the seven caste into which the egypt and east indian 

were divided, and the jubilee of seven times seven 

years. among the dedication to the twelve sign we 

mention the twelve month of the year, the grand cycle 

of 12,000 years, the twelve altar of james, the twelve 

labor of hercules, the twelve division of the egypt 

labyrinth, the twelve shield of mars, the twelve precious 

stones, range in three to denote the seasons, in the 

breastplate of high priest, the twelve foundations of the 

sacred city, refer to in the book of revelation, the 

twelve son of jacob, the twelve tribe of israel, and the 

twelve disciples. in the book of revelation alone the 

number 7 is repeated twenty-four times, and the number 

12 fourteen times. 

the twelve thousand year cycle. 

in determine the duration of the period within 

which were to occur the event taught in the doctrine of 

the exoteric creed, the ancient astrologer dedicated 

a thousand years to each of the sign of the zodiac, and 

thus inaugurate the cycle of twelve thousand years, 

taught that, at its conclusion, the heaven and the earth, 

which they believe to be compose of the indestructible 

elements of fire, air, earth and water, would, through the 

agency of the first of these, be reduce to chaos, as a 

preliminary to the reorganize of a new heaven and a 

new earth at the beginning of the succeed cycle. such 

was the origin of the grand cycle of the ancient astrolatry, 

and it must be borne in mind that its author made its 

conclusion to correspond in time and circumstance to the 

doctrine relate to the finale of the plan of redemption. 

the ancient triad. 

after conceive the idea of a primeval chaos, constitute 

of four indestructible elements of which fire was 

the leading one, the oriental astrologer began to indulge 

in speculation relative to the agency which were engaged 

in its organization. have no knowledge of the 

forces inherent in nature, they impute this work to three 

intelligences, which, embody the all in all, they personify 

by the figure of a man with three heads, and to 

this trinity gave the name of brahma, vishnu and siva. 

such a figure, carve in stone, may be seen in the island 

cave of elephanta, near bombay, india, and is popularly 

believe to represent the creator, preserver and destroyer; 

but, in determine their true signification, we 

must be govern by the ancient teaching that "all 

things were made by one god-head with three names, and 

this god is all things." hence the conclusion is irresistible 

that the first person represent neither the creator 

nor organize of chaos, but chaos itself; the second person, 

its organize and governor; and the third person, the 

agent in nature which impress all her parts with life and 

motion; the latter being the imaginary great soul or 

spirit inculcate in the esoteric philosophy. in support 

of this opinion it will be found that the egypt triad of 

father, son and spirit is virtually the same we have assign 

to its oriental prototype. thus we see that to 

the ancient astrolatry christendom is indebted for the 

trinity of 

"god the father, god the son, 

god the spirit—three in one." 

but, have ascribe supreme intelligence or reason 

to its second person, under the name of the logos, or 

word, and designate its third person as the holy ghost, 

the ancient triad was usually formulate as the father, 

the word and the holy ghost, as may be seen by reference 

to the text in the allegory which we find record 

in i john v. 7, which read that "there are three that 

bear record in heaven, the father, the word and the 

holy ghost, and these three are one." 

considered in some form of astrolatry as too 

sacred to attach a name to the triune deity, he was call 

"the one," and we find him thus designate in the 4th 

chapter of revelation, where, like zeus and jupiter, of the 

grecian and roman mythologies, he is represent as 

seat above the firmament, upon a throne from which 

"proceeded lightning and thunderings," and to whom 

all, the subordinate divinity were made to pay homage. 

as the hurl of thunderbolt he was call "the thunderer," 

and as the opener of the window of heaven, 

when it rained, he was designate "jupiter pluvius." 

such was the ancient triad made to say of himself, in an 

inscription found in the ruins of the temple at sai in 

egypt, "i am all that has been, all that is, and all that 

shall be, and no mortal has lift yet the veil that cover 

me;" and such was the triun refer to as the god 

universe by pliny, the roman philosopher and naturalist, 

who, flourish in the first century of the christian era, 

wrote that he is "an infinite god which has never been 

created, and which shall never come to an end. to look 

for something else beyond it is useless labor for man and 

out of his reach. behold that truly sacred being, eternal 

and immense, which include within itself everything; it 

is all in all, or rather itself is all. it is the work of 

nature, and itself is nature." 

thus we see that, although inculcate homage to a 

multitude of subordinate divinities, the ancient astrolatry 

was only an apparent polytheism; its enlightened votaries, 

recognize the dogma of the unity of god, were in 

reality monotheists, pay supreme adoration to the 

mythical genius of the sun, to whom we will now direct 

attention. 
