
andrew lang. 

guy manner 

or 

the astrologer 

chapter i 

he could not deny that, look round upon the dreary region, 

and seeing nothing but bleak field and naked trees, hill 

obscure by fogs, and flat cover with inundations, he did 

for some time suffer melancholy to prevail upon him, and 

wish himself again safe at home. 

--’travels of will. marvel,’ idler, no. 49. 

it was in the beginning of the month of november 17--when a young english 

gentleman, who had just left the university of oxford, made use of the 

liberty afford him to visit some parts of the north of england; and 

curiosity extend his tour into the adjacent frontier of the sister 

country. he had visited, on the day that open our history, some monastic 

ruins in the county of dumfries, and spent much of the day in making 

drawing of them from different points, so that, on mount his horse to 

resume his journey, the brief and gloomy twilight of the season had 

already commenced. his way lay through a wide tract of black moss, 

extend for mile on each side and before him. little eminence arose 

like island on its surface, bearing here and there patch of corn, which 

even at this season was green, and sometimes a hut or farm-house, shade 

by a willow or two and surround by large elder-bushes. these insulate 

dwelling communicate with each other by winding passage through the 

moss, impassable by any but the native themselves. the public road, 

however, was tolerably well made and safe, so that the prospect of being 

benighted brought with it no real danger. still it is uncomfortable to 

travel alone and in the dark through an unknown country; and there are few 

ordinary occasion upon which fancy fret herself so much as in a 

situation like that of mannering. 

as the light grew faint and more faint, and the morass appear black 

and blacker, our traveller question more close each chance passenger 

on his distance from the village of kippletringan, where he propose to 

quarter for the night. his query were usually answer by a 

counter-challenge respecting the place from whence he came. while 

sufficient daylight remain to show the dress and appearance of a 

gentleman, these cross interrogatory were usually put in the form of a 

case supposed, as, ‘ye’ll hae been at the auld abbey o’ halycross, sir? 

there’s mony english gentlemen gang to see that.’--or, ‘your honour will 

become frae the house o’ pouderloupat?’ but when the voice of the querist 

alone was distinguishable, the response usually was, ‘where are ye coming 

frae at sic a time o’ night as the like o’ this?’--or, ‘ye’ll no be o’ 

this country, freend?’ the answers, when obtained, were neither very 

reconcile to each other nor accurate in the information which they 

afforded. kippletringan was distant at first ‘a gey bit’; then the ‘gey 

bit’ was more accurate describe as ‘ablins three mile’; then the ‘three 

mile’ diminish into ‘like a mile and a bittock’; then extend 

themselves into ‘four mile or thereawa’; and, lastly, a female voice, 

have hush a wail infant which the spokeswoman carry in her arms, 

assured guy mannering, ‘it was a weary lang gate yet to kippletringan, and 

unco heavy road for foot passengers.’ the poor hack upon which manner 

was mount was probably of opinion that it suit him as ill as the 

female respondent; for he began to flag very much, answer each 

application of the spur with a groan, and stumble at every stone (and 

they were not few) which lay in his road. 

manner now grew impatient. he was occasional betray into a 

deceitful hope that the end of his journey was near by the apparition of a 

twinkling light or two; but, as he came up, he was disappointed to find 

that the gleam proceed from some of those farm-houses which 

occasional ornament the surface of the extensive bog. at length, to 

complete his perplexity, he arrive at a place where the road divide into 

two. if there had been light to consult the relics of a finger-post which 

stood there, it would have been of little avail, as, according to the good 

custom of north britain, the inscription had been deface shortly after 

its erection. our adventurer was therefore compelled, like a knight-errant 

of old, to trust to the sagacity of his horse, which, without any demur, 

chose the left-hand path, and seem to proceed at a somewhat lively 

pace than before, afford thereby a hope that he knew he was drawing 

near to his quarters for the evening. this hope, however, was not speedy 

accomplished, and mannering, whose impatience made every furlong seem 

three, began to think that kippletringan was actually retreat before 

him in proportion to his advance. 

it was now very cloudy, although the stars from time to time shed a 

twinkling and uncertain light. hitherto nothing had broken the silence 

around him but the deep cry of the bog-blitter, or bull-of-the-bog, a 

large species of bittern, and the sigh of the wind as it pass along the 

dreary morass. to these was now join the distant roar of the ocean, 

towards which the traveller seem to be fast approaching. this was no 

circumstance to make his mind easy. many of the road in that country lay 

along the sea-beach, and were liable to be flood by the tides, which 

rise with great height, and advance with extreme rapidity. other were 

intersect with creek and small inlets, which it was only safe to pass 

at particular times of the tide. neither circumstance would have suit a 

dark night, a fatigue horse, and a traveller ignorant of his road. 

manner resolved, therefore, definitive to halt for the night at the 

first inhabit place, however poor, he might chance to reach, unless he 

could procure a guide to this unlucky village of kippletringan. 

a miserable hut gave him an opportunity to execute his purpose. he found 

out the door with no small difficulty, and for some time knock without 

produce any other answer than a duet between a female and a cur-dog, the 

latter yelp as if he would have bark his heart out, the other 

scream in chorus. by degree the human tone predominated; but the 

angry bark of the cur being at the instant change into a howl, it is 

probable something more than fair strength of lung had contribute to the 

ascendency. 

‘sorrow be in your thrapple then!’ these were the first articulate words, 

‘will ye no let me hear what the man wants, wi’ your yaffing?’ 

‘am i far from kippletringan, good dame?’ 

‘frae kippletringan!!!’ in an exalted tone of wonder, which we can but 

faint express by three points of admiration. ‘ow, man! ye should hae 

hadden eassel to kippletringan; ye maun gae back as far as the whaap, and 

baud the whaap till ye come to ballenloan, and then--’ 

‘this will never do, good dame! my horse is almost quite knock up; can 

you not give me a night’s lodgings?’ 

‘troth can i no; i am a lone woman, for james he’s awa to drumshourloch 

fair with the year-aulds, and i daurna for my life open the door to ony o’ 

your gang-there-out sort o’ bodies.’ 

‘but what must i do then, good dame? for i can’t sleep here upon the road 

all night.’ 

‘troth, i kenna, unless ye like to gae down and speer for quarters at the 

place. i’se warrant they’ll tak ye in, whether ye be gentle or semple.’ 

‘simple enough, to be wandering here at such a time of night,’ thought 

mannering, who was ignorant of the meaning of the phrase; ‘but how shall i 

get to the place, as you call it?’ 

‘ye maun baud wessel by the end o’ the loan, and take tent o’ the 

jaw-hole.’ 

‘o, if ye get to eassel and wessel again, i am undone! is there nobody 

that could guide me to this place? i will pay him handsomely.’ 

the word pay operate like magic. ‘jock, ye villain,’ exclaim the voice 

from the interior, ‘are ye lie route there, and a young gentleman 

seek the way to the place? get up, ye fause loon, and show him the way 

down the muckle loaning. he’ll show you the way, sir, and i’se warrant 

ye’ll be weel put up; for they never turn awa naebody frae the door; and 

ye ‘ll be come in the canny moment, i’m thinking, for the laird’s 

servant--that’s no to say his body-servant, but the help like--rade 

express by this e’en to fetch the houdie, and he just staid the drink 

o’ twa pint o’ tippenny to tell us how my leddy was ta’en wi’ her pains.’ 

‘perhaps,’ said mannering, ‘at such a time a stranger’s arrival might be 

inconvenient?’ 

‘hout, na, ye needna be blate about that; their house is muckle eneugh, 

and deck time’s aye canty time.’ 

by this time jock had found his way into all the intricacy of a tattered 

doublet and more tattered pair of breeches, and sally forth, a great 

white-headed, bare-legged, lubber boy of twelve years old, so exhibit 

by the glimpse of a rush-light which his half-naked mother held in such a 

manner as to get a peep at the stranger without greatly expose herself 

to view in return. jock move on westward by the end of the house, leading 

mannering’s horse by the bridle, and pilot with some dexterity along 

the little path which border the formidable jaw-hole, whose vicinity the 

stranger was made sensible of by means of more organ than one. his guide 

then drag the weary hack along a broken and stony cart-track, next over 

a plough field, then broke down a slap, as he call it, in a drystone 

fence, and lug the unresist animal through the breach, about a rood 

of the simple masonry give way in the splutter with which he passed. 

finally, he led the way through a wicket into something which had still 

the air of an avenue, though many of the tree were felled. the roar of 

the ocean was now near and full, and the moon, which began to make her 

appearance, gleam on a turret and apparently a ruin mansion of 

considerable extent. manner fixed his eyes upon it with a disconsolate 

sensation. 
