

chapter iii 

do not the hist’ries of all age 

relate miraculous presage 

of strange turn in the world’s affairs, 

foreseen by astrologers, soothsayers, 

chaldeans, learned genethliacs, 

and some that have writ almanacks? 

hudibras. 

the circumstances of the landlady were plead to mannering, first, as an 

apology for her not appear to welcome her guest, and for those 

deficiency in his entertainment which her attention might have supplied, 

and then as an excuse for pressing an extra bottle of good wine. ‘i cannot 

weel sleep,’ said the laird, with the anxious feelings of a father in such 

a predicament, ‘till i hear she’s gotten owe with it; and if you, sir, 

are not very sleepery, and would do me and the dominie the honour to sit 

up wi’ us, i am sure we shall not detain you very late. luckie howatson is 

very expeditious. there was ance a lass that was in that way; she did not 

live far from hereabouts--ye needna shake your head and groan, dominie; i 

am sure the kirk dues were a’ weel paid, and what can man do mair?--it was 

laid till her ere she had a sark owe her head; and the man that she since 

wad do not think her a pin the waur for the misfortune. they live, 

mr. mannering, by the shoreside at annan, and a mair decent, orderly 

couple, with six as fine bairn as ye would wish to see plash in a 

saltwater dub; and little curlie godfrey--that’s the eldest, the come o’ 

will, as i may say--he’s on board an excise yacht. i hae a cousin at the 

board of excise; that’s commissioner bertram; he got his commissionership 

in the great contest for the county, that ye must have heard of, for it 

was appeal to the house of commons. now i should have vote there for 

the laird of balruddery; but ye see my father was a jacobite, and out with 

kenmore, so he never took the oaths; and i ken not weel how it was, but 

all that i could do and say, they keepit me off the roll, though my agent, 

that had a vote upon my estate, rank as a good vote for auld sir thomas 

kittlecourt. but, to return to what i was saying, luckie howatson is very 

expeditious, for this lass--’ 

here the desultory and long-winded narrative of the laird was interrupt 

by the voice of some one ascend the stairs from the kitchen story, and 

singing at full pitch of voice. the high note were too shrill for a man, 

the low seem too deep for a woman. the words, as far as manner could 

distinguish them, seem to run thus:-- 

canny moment, lucky fit! 

is the lady lighter yet? 

be it lad, or be it lass, 

sign wi’ cross and sain wi’ mass. 

‘it’s meg merrilies, the gipsy, as sure as i am a sinner,’ said mr. 

bertram. the dominie groan deeply, uncross his legs, drew in the huge 

splay foot which his former posture had extended, placed it 

perpendicularly, and stretch the other limb over it instead, puff out 

between while huge volumes of tobacco smoke. ‘what needs ye groan, 

dominie? i am sure meg’s sang do nae ill.’ 

‘nor good neither,’ answer dominie sampson, in a voice whose untuneable 

harsh correspond with the awkward of his figure. they were the 

first words which manner had heard him speak; and as he had been 

watch with some curiosity when this eating, drinking, moving, and 

smoking automaton would perform the part of speaking, he was a good deal 

divert with the harsh timber tone which issue from him. but at this 

moment the door opened, and meg merry entered. 

her appearance made manner start. she was full six feet high, wore a 

man’s great-coat over the rest of her dress, had in her hand a goodly 

sloethorn cudgel, and in all points of equipment, except her petticoats, 

seem rather masculine than feminine. her dark elf-locks shot out like 

the snake of the gorgon between an old-fashioned bonnet call a 

bongrace, heighten the singular effect of her strong and weather-beaten 

features, which they partly shadowed, while her eye had a wild roll that 

indicate something like real or affected insanity. 

‘aweel, ellangowan,’ she said, ‘wad it no hae been a bonnie thing, an the 

leddy had been brought to bed, and me at the fair o’ drumshourloch, no 

kenning, nor dream a word about it? wha was to hae keepit awa the 

worriecows, i trow? ay, and the elves and gyre-carlings frae the bonnie 

bairn, grace be wi’ it? ay, or said saint colme’s charm for its sake, the 

dear?’ and without wait an answer she began to sing-- 

trefoil, vervain, john’s-wort, dill, 

hinder witch of their 

will, weel is them, that weel may 

fast upon saint andrew’s day. 

saint bride and her brat, 

saint colme and his cat, 

saint michael and his spear, 

keep the house frae reif and wear. 

this charm she sung to a wild tune, in a high and shrill voice, and, 

cutting three caper with such strength and agile as almost to touch the 

roof of the room, concluded, ‘and now, laird, will ye no order me a tass 

o’ brandy?’ 

‘that you shall have, meg. sit down yont there at the door and tell us 

what news ye have heard at the fair o’ drumshourloch.’ 

‘troth, laird, and there was muckle want o’ you, and the like o’ you; for 

there was a whin bonnie lass there, forbye mysell, and deil ane to gie 

them hansels.’ 

‘weel, meg, and how mony gipsy were sent to the tolbooth?’ 

‘troth, but three, laird, for there were nae mair in the fair, bye mysell, 

as i said before, and i e’en gae them leg-bail, for there’s nae ease in 

dealing wi’ quarrelsome fowk. and there’s dunbog has warn the red rotten 

and john young aff his grunds--black be his cast! he’s nae gentleman, nor 

drap’s bluid o’ gentleman, wad grudge twa gangrel puir body the shelter 

o’ a waste house, and the thristle by the roadside for a bit cuddy, and 

the bit o’ rotten birk to boil their drap parritch wi’. weel, there’s ane 

abune a’; but we’ll see if the red cock craw not in his bonnie barn-yard 

ae morning before day-dawing.’ 

‘hush! meg, hush! hush! that’s not safe talk.’ 

‘what do she mean?’ said manner to sampson, in an undertone. 

‘fire-raising,’ answer the laconic dominie. 

‘who, or what is she, in the name of wonder?’ 

‘harlot, thief, witch, and gipsy,’ answer sampson again. 

‘o troth, laird,’ continue meg, during this by-talk, ‘it’s but to the 

like o’ you ane can open their heart; ye see, they say dunbog is nae mair 

a gentleman than the blunker that’s biggit the bonnie house down in the 

howm. but the like o’ you, laird, that’s a real gentleman for sae mony 

hundred years, and never hund puir fowk aff your grund as if they were 

mad tykes, nane o’ our fowk wad stir your gear if ye had as mony capon as 

there’s leaves on the trysting-tree. and now some o’ ye maun lay down your 

watch, and tell me the very minute o’ the hour the wean’s born, an i’ll 

spae its fortune.’ 

‘ay, but, meg, we shall not want your assistance, for here’s a student 

from oxford that ken much better than you how to spae its fortune; he 

do it by the stars.’ 

‘certainly, sir,’ said mannering, enter into the simple humour of his 

landlord, ‘i will calculate his nativity according to the rule of the 

“triplicities,” as recommend by pythagoras, hippocrates, diocles, and 

avicenna. or i will begin ab hora questionis, as haly, messahala, 

ganwehis, and guido bonatu have recommended.’ 

one of sampson’s great recommendation to the favour of mr. bertram was, 

that he never detect the most gross attempt at imposition, so that the 

laird, whose humble effort at jocular were chiefly confine to what 

were then call bite and bams, since denominate hoax and quizzes, had 

the fairest possible subject of wit in the unsuspect dominie. it is 

true, he never laughed, or join in the laugh which his own simplicity 

afforded--nay, it is said, he never laugh but once in his life, and on 

that memorable occasion his landlady miscarried, partly through surprise 

at the event itself, and partly from terror at the hideous grimace which 

attend this unusual cachinnation. the only effect which the discovery of 

such imposition produce upon this saturnine personage was, to extort an 

ejaculation of ‘prodigious!’ or ‘very facetious!’ pronounced syllabically, 

but without moving a muscle of his own countenance. 

on the present occasion, he turn a gaunt and ghastly stare upon the 

youthful astrologer, and seem to doubt if he had rightly understood his 

answer to his patron. 

‘i am afraid, sir,’ said mannering, turning towards him, ‘you may be one 

of those unhappy person who, their dim eyes being unable to penetrate the 

starry spheres, and to discern therein the decree of heaven at a 

distance, have their heart barred against conviction by prejudice and 

misprision.’ 

‘truly,’ said sampson, ‘i opine with sir isaac newton, knight, and umwhile 

master of his majesty’s mint, that the (pretended) science of astrology is 

altogether vain, frivolous, and unsatisfactory.’ and here he repose his 

oracular jaws. 

‘really,’ resume the traveller, ‘i am sorry to see a gentleman of your 

learning and gravity labour under such strange blind and delusion. 

will you place the brief, the modern, and, as i may say, the vernacular 

name of isaac newton in opposition to the grave and sonorous authority 

of dariot, bonatus, ptolemy, haly, eztler, dieterick, naibob, harfurt, 

zael, taustettor, agrippa, duretus, maginus, origen, and argol? do not 

christian and heathens, and jew and gentiles, and poet and 

philosophers, unite in allow the starry influences?’ 

‘communis error--it is a general mistake,’ answer the inflexible dominie 

sampson. 

‘not so,’ reply the young englishman; ‘it is a general and well-grounded 

belief.’ 

‘it is the resource of cheaters, knaves, and cozeners,’ said sampson. 

‘abusus non tollit usum.--the abuse of anything doth not abrogate the 

lawful use thereof.’ 

