

chapter iv 

come and see’ trust thine own eyes 

a fearful sign stand in the house of life, 

an enemy a fiend lurk close behind 

the radiance of thy planet o be warned! 

coleridge, from schiller 

the belief in astrology was almost universal in the middle of the 

seventeenth century; it began to waver and become doubtful towards the 

close of that period, and in the beginning of the eighteenth the art fell 

into general disrepute, and even under general ridicule. yet it still 

retain many partizan even in the seat of learning. grave and studious 

men were loath to relinquish the calculation which had early become the 

principal object of their studies, and felt reluctant to descend from the 

predominate height to which a supposed insight into futurity, by the 

power of consulting abstract influence and conjunctions, had exalted them 

over the rest of mankind. 

among those who cherish this imaginary privilege with undoubt faith 

was an old clergyman with whom manner was placed during his youth. he 

waste his eyes in observing the stars, and his brains in calculation 

upon their various combinations. his pupil, in early youth, naturally 

caught some portion of his enthusiasm, and labour for a time to make 

himself master of the technical process of astrology research; so that, 

before he became convinced of its absurdity, william lil himself would 

have allow him ‘a curious fancy and piercing judgment in resolve a 

question of nativity.’ 

on the present occasion he arose as early in the morning as the short 

of the day permitted, and proceed to calculate the nativity of the young 

heir of ellangowan. he undertook the task secundum artem, as well to keep 

up appearances as from a sort of curiosity to know whether he yet 

remembered, and could practise, the imaginary science. he accordingly 

erect his scheme, or figure of heaven, divide into its twelve houses, 

placed the planet therein according to the ephemeris, and rectify their 

position to the hour and moment of the nativity. without trouble our 

reader with the general prognostication which judicial astrology would 

have infer from these circumstances, in this diagram there was one 

significator which pressed remarkably upon our astrologer’s attention. 

mars, have dignity in the cusp of the twelfth house, threaten 

captivity or sudden and violent death to the native; and mannering, have 

recourse to those further rule by which diviner pretend to ascertain the 

vehement of this evil direction, observe from the result that three 

periods would be particularly hazardous--his fifth, his tenth, his 

twenty-first year. 

it was somewhat remarkable that manner had once before try a similar 

piece of foolery at the instance of sophia wellwood, the young lady to 

whom he was attached, and that a similar conjunction of planetary 

influence threaten her with death or imprison in her thirty-ninth 

year. she was at this time eighteen; so that, according to the result of 

the scheme in both cases, the same year threaten her with the same 

misfortune that was presage to the native or infant whom that night had 

introduce into the world. struck with this coincidence, manner 

repeated his calculations; and the result approximate the event 

predicted, until at length the same month, and day of the month, seem 

assign as the period of peril to both. 

it will be readily believe that, in mention this circumstance, we lay 

no weight whatever upon the pretended information thus conveyed. but it 

often happens, such is our natural love for the marvellous, that we 

willing contribute our own effort to beguile our better judgments. 

whether the coincidence which i have mention was really one of those 

singular chance which sometimes happen against all ordinary calculations; 

or whether mannering, bewilder amid the arithmetic labyrinth and 

technical jargon of astrology, had insensible twice follow the same clue 

to guide him out of the maze; or whether his imagination, seduce by some 

point of apparent resemblance, lent its aid to make the similitude between 

the two operation more exactly accurate than it might otherwise have 

been, it is impossible to guess; but the impression upon his mind that the 

result exactly correspond was vivid and indelible strong. 

he could not help feeling surprise at a coincidence so singular and 

unexpected. ‘does the devil mingle in the dance, to avenge himself for our 

trifling with an art said to be of magical origin? or is it possible, as 

bacon and sir thomas browne admit, that there is some truth in a sober and 

regulate astrology, and that the influence of the stars is not to be 

denied, though the due application of it by the knave who pretend to 

practise the art is greatly to be suspected?’ a moment’s consideration of 

the subject induce him to dismiss this opinion as fantastical, and only 

sanction by those learned men either because they durst not at once 

shock the universal prejudice of their age, or because they themselves 

were not altogether free from the contagious influence of a prevailing 

superstition. yet the result of his calculation in these two instance 

left so unplease an impression on his mind that, like prospero, he 

mental relinquish his art, and resolved, neither in jest nor earnest, 

ever again to practise judicial astrology. 

he hesitate a good deal what he should say to the laird of ellangowan 

concerning the horoscope of his first-born; and at length resolve plainly 

to tell him the judgment which he had formed, at the same time acquaint 

him with the futility of the rule of art on which he had proceeded. with 

this resolution he walk out upon the terrace. 

if the view of the scene around ellangowan had been pleasing by moonlight, 

it lost none of its beauty by the light of the morning sun. the land, even 

in the month of november, smile under its influence. a steep but regular 

ascent led from the terrace to the neighbouring eminence, and conduct 

manner to the front of the old castle. it consist of two massive 

round tower project deep and dark at the extreme angle of a 

curtain, or flat wall, which united them, and thus protect the main 

entrance, that open through a lofty arch in the centre of the curtain 

into the inner court of the castle. the arms of the family, carve in 

freestone, frown over the gateway, and the portal show the space 

arrange by the architect for lower the portcullis and raise the 

drawbridge. a rude farm-gate, made of young fir-trees nail together, now 

form the only safeguard of this once formidable entrance. the esplanade 

in front of the castle command a noble prospect. 

the dreary scene of desolate through which mannering’s road had lain on 

the preceding evening was exclude from the view by some rising ground, 

and the landscape show a pleasing alternate of hill and dale, 

intersect by a river, which was in some place visible, and hidden in 

others, where it roll betwixt deep and wooded banks. the spire of a 

church and the appearance of some house indicate the situation of a 

village at the place where the stream had its junction with the ocean. the 

vale seem well cultivated, the little inclosure into which they were 

divide skirt the bottom of the hills, and sometimes carry their 

lines of straggle hedgerow a little way up the ascent. above these were 

green pastures, tenant chiefly by herd of black cattle, then the staple 

commodity of the country, whose distant low gave no unplease animation 

to the landscape. the remote hill were of a stern character, and, at 

still greater distance, swell into mountain of dark heath, border 

the horizon with a screen which gave a define and limited boundary to the 

cultivated country, and add at the same time the pleasing idea that it 

was sequester and solitary. the sea-coast, which manner now saw in 

its extent, correspond in variety and beauty with the inland view. in 

some place it rose into tall rocks, frequent crown with the ruins of 

old buildings, towers, or beacons, which, according to tradition, were 

placed within sight of each other, that, in times of invasion or civil 

war, they might communicate by signal for mutual defence and protection. 

ellangowan castle was by far the most extensive and important of these 

ruins, and assert from size and situation the superior which its 

founder were said once to have possessed among the chief and noble of 

the district. in other place the shore was of a more gentle description, 

indent with small bays, where the land slope smooth down, or sent 

into the sea promontory cover with wood. 

enlarge 

a scene so different from what last night’s journey had presage produce 

a proportional effect upon mannering. beneath his eye lay the modern 

house--an awkward mansion, indeed, in point of architecture, but well 

situated, and with a warm, pleasant exposure. ‘how happily,’ thought our 

hero, ‘would life glide on in such a retirement! on the one hand, the 

striking remnant of ancient grandeur, with the secret consciousness of 

family pride which they inspire; on the other, enough of modern elegance 

and comfort to satisfy every moderate wish. here then, and with thee, 

sophia!’ 

we shall not pursue a lover’s day-dream any farther. manner stood a 

minute with his arms folded, and then turn to the ruin castle. 

on enter the gateway, he found that the rude magnificence of the inner 

court ample correspond with the grandeur of the exterior. on the one 

side ran a range of window lofty and large, divide by carve mullion of 

stone, which had once light the great hall of the castle; on the other 

were various building of different heights and dates, yet so united as to 

present to the eye a certain general effect of uniform of front. the 

door and window were ornament with projection exhibit rude 

specimen of sculpture and tracery, partly entire and partly broken down, 

partly cover by ivy and trail plants, which grew luxuriant among 

the ruins. that end of the court which face the entrance had also been 

formerly closed by a range of buildings; but owing, it was said, to its 

have been batter by the ship of the parliament under deane, during 

the long civil war, this part of the castle was much more ruinous than the 

rest, and exhibit a great chasm, through which manner could observe 

the sea, and the little vessel (an armed lugger), which retain her 

station in the centre of the bay. [footnote: the outline of the above 

description, as far as the supposed ruins are concerned, will be found 

somewhat to resemble the noble remains of carlaverock castle, six or seven 

mile from dumfries, and near to lochar moss.] while manner was gaze 

round the ruins, he heard from the interior of an apartment on the left 

hand the voice of the gipsy he had seen on the preceding evening. he soon 

found an aperture through which he could observe her without being himself 

visible; and could not help feeling that her figure, her employment, and 

her situation convey the exact impression of an ancient sibyl. 

she sate upon a broken corner-stone in the angle of a paved apartment, 

part of which she had swept clean to afford a smooth space for the 

evolution of her spindle. a strong sunbeam through a lofty and narrow 

window fell upon her wild dress and features, and afford her light for 

her occupation; the rest of the apartment was very gloomy. equipt in a 

habit which mingle the national dress of the scotland common people with 

something of an eastern costume, she spun a thread drawn from wool of 

three different colours, black, white, and grey, by assistance of those 

ancient implement of housewifery now almost banish from the land, the 

distaff and spindle. as she spun, she sung what seem to be a charm. 

mannering, after in vain attempt to make himself master of the exact 

words of her song, afterwards attempt the following paraphrase of what, 

from a few intelligible phrases, he conclude to be its purport:-- 

twist ye, twine ye! even so 

mingle shades of joy and woe, 

hope, and fear, and peace, and strife, 

in the thread of human life. 

while the mystic twist is spinning, 

and the infant’s life beginning, 

dim seen through twilight bending, 

lo, what varied shape attending! 

passion wild, and folly vain, 

pleasure soon exchange for pain, 

doubt, and jealousy, and fear 

in the magic dance appear. 

now they wax, and now they dwindle, 

whirl with the whirl spindle. 

twist ye, twine ye! even so 

mingle human bliss and woe. 

ere our translator, or rather our free imitator, had arrange these 

stanza in his head, and while he was yet hammer out a rhyme for 

dwindle, the task of the sibyl was accomplished, or her wool was expended. 

she took the spindle, now charged with her labours, and, undoing the 

thread gradually, measured it by casting it over her elbow and bring 

each loop round between her forefinger and thumb. when she had measured it 

out, she mutter to herself--’a hank, but not a haill ane--the full years 

o’ three score and ten, but thrice broken, and thrice to oop (i.e. to 

unite); he’ll be a lucky lad an he win through wi’t.’ 

our hero was about to speak to the prophetess, when a voice, hoarse as the 

wave with which it mingled, hallooe twice, and with increase 

impatience--’meg, meg merrilies! gipsy--hag--tausend deyvils!’ 

‘i am coming, i am coming, captain,’ answer meg; and in a moment or two 

the impatient commander whom she address made his appearance from the 

broken part of the ruins. 




