

chapter vi 

next, the justice, 

in fair round belly with good capon lined, 

with eyes severe and beard of formal cut, 

full of wise saw and modern instances-- 

and so he play his part 

--as you like it 

when mrs. bertram of ellangowan was able to hear the news of what had 

pass during her confinement, her apartment rung with all manner of 

gossip respecting the handsome young student from oxford who had told 

such a fortune by the stars to the young laird, ‘blessings on his dainty 

face.’ the form, accent, and manners of the stranger were expatiate upon. 

his horse, bridle, saddle, and stirrup did not remain unnoticed. all this 

made a great impression upon the mind of mrs. bertram, for the good lady 

had no small store of superstition. 

her first employment, when she became capable of a little work, was to 

make a small velvet bag for the scheme of nativity which she had obtain 

from her husband. her finger itch to break the seal, but credulous 

prove strong than curiosity; and she had the firm to inclose it, in 

all its integrity, within two slips of parchment, which she sew round it 

to prevent its being chafed. the whole was then put into the velvet bag 

aforesaid, and hung as a charm round the neck of the infant, where his 

mother resolve it should remain until the period for the legitimate 

satisfaction of her curiosity should arrive. 

the father also resolve to do his part by the child in secure him a 

good education; and, with the view that it should commence with the first 

dawn of reason, dominie sampson was easily induce to renounce his 

public profession of parish schoolmaster, make his constant residence at 

the place, and, in consideration of a sum not quite equal to the wages of 

a footman even at that time, to undertake to communicate to the future 

laird of ellangowan all the erudite which he had, and all the graces and 

accomplishment which--he had not indeed, but which he had never 

discover that he wanted. in this arrangement the laird found also his 

private advantage, secure the constant benefit of a patient auditor, to 

whom he told his story when they were alone, and at whose expense he 

could break a sly jest when he had company. 

about four years after this time a great commotion took place in the 

county where ellangowan is situated. 

those who watch the sign of the times had long been of opinion that a 

change of ministry was about to take place; and at length, after a due 

proportion of hopes, fears, and delays, rumour from good authority and 

bad authority, and no authority at all; after some club had drank up with 

this statesman and other down with him; after riding, and running, and 

posting, and addressing, and counter-addressing, and proffer of lives and 

fortunes, the blow was at length struck, the administration of the day was 

dissolved, and parliament, as a natural consequence, was dissolve also. 

sir thomas kittlecourt, like other member in the same situation, post 

down to his county, and met but an indifferent reception. he was a 

partizan of the old administration; and the friends of the new had already 

set about an active canvass in behalf of john featherhead, esq., who kept 

the best hound and hunter in the shire. among other who join the 

standard of revolt was gilbert glossin, writer in--, agent for the laird 

of ellangowan. this honest gentleman had either been refuse some favour 

by the old member, or, what is as probable, he had got all that he had the 

most distant pretension to ask, and could only look to the other side for 

fresh advancement. mr. glossin had a vote upon ellangowan’s property; and 

he was now determined that his patron should have one also, there being no 

doubt which side mr. bertram would embrace in the contest. he easily 

persuade ellangowan that it would be creditable to him to take the field 

at the head of as strong a party as possible; and immediately went to 

work, making votes, as every scotch lawyer know how, by splitting and 

subdivide the superior upon this ancient and once powerful barony. 

these were so extensive that, by dint of clipping and paring here, add 

and eking there, and create over-lords upon all the estate which bertram 

held of the crown, they advanced at the day of contest at the head of ten 

as good men of parchment as ever took the oath of trust and possession. 

this strong reinforcement turn the dubious day of battle. the principal 

and his agent divide the honour; the reward fell to the latter 

exclusively. mr. gilbert glossin was made clerk of the peace, and godfrey 

bertram had his name insert in a new commission of justices, issue 

immediately upon the sitting of the parliament. 

this had been the summit of mr. bertram’s ambition; not that he like 

either the trouble or the responsibility of the office, but he thought it 

was a dignity to which he was well entitled, and that it had been withheld 

from him by malice prepense. but there is an old and true scotch proverb, 

‘fools should not have chap sticks’; that is, weapon of offence. mr. 

bertram was no soon possessed of the judicial authority which he had so 

much long for than he began to exercise it with more severity than 

mercy, and total belie all the opinion which had hitherto been form 

of his inert good-nature. we have read somewhere of a justice of peace 

who, on being nominate in the commission, wrote a letter to a bookseller 

for the statute respecting his official duty in the following 

orthography--’please send the ax relate to a gustu pease.’ no doubt, 

when this learned gentleman had possessed himself of the axe, he hew the 

law with it to some purpose. mr. bertram was not quite so ignorant of 

english grammar as his worshipful predecessor; but augustus pease himself 

could not have use more indiscriminate the weapon unwari put into his 

hand. 

in good earnest, he considered the commission with which he had been 

entrust as a personal mark of favour from his sovereign; forget that 

he had formerly thought his being deprived of a privilege, or honour, 

common to those of his rank was the result of mere party cabal. he 

command his trusty aid-de-camp, dominie sampson, to read aloud the 

commission; and at the first words, ‘the king has been pleased to 

appoint’--’pleased!’ he exclaim in a transport of gratitude; ‘honest 

gentleman! i’m sure he cannot be better pleased than i am.’ 

accordingly, unwill to confine his gratitude to mere feelings or verbal 

expressions, he gave full current to the new-born zeal of office, and 

endeavour to express his sense of the honour confer upon him by an 

unmitigated activity in the discharge of his duty. new brooms, it is said, 

sweep clean; and i myself can bear witness that, on the arrival of a new 

housemaid, the ancient, hereditary, and domestic spider who have spun 

their web over the lower division of my bookshelf (consisting chiefly 

of law and divinity) during the peaceful reign of her predecessor, fly at 

full speed before the probationary inroad of the new mercenary. even so 

the laird of ellangowan ruthless commence his magisterial reform, at 

the expense of various establish and superannuated picker and steal 

who had been his neighbour for half a century. he wrought his miracle 

like a second duke humphrey; and by the influence of the beadle’s rod 

cause the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the palsied to labour. he 

detect poachers, black-fishers, orchard-breakers, and pigeon-shooters; 

had the applause of the bench for his reward, and the public credit of an 

active magistrate. 

all this good had its rateable proportion of evil. even an admitted 

nuisance of ancient standing should not be abate without some caution. 

the zeal of our worthy friend now involved in great distress sundry 

personage whose idle and mendicant habit his own lachesse had 

contribute to foster, until these habit had become irreclaimable, or 

whose real incapacity for exertion render them fit objects, in their own 

phrase, for the charity of all well-disposed christians. the 

‘long-remembered beggar,’ who for twenty years had made his regular rounds 

within the neighbourhood, received rather as an humble friend than as an 

object of charity, was sent to the neighbouring workhouse. the decrepit 

dame, who travelled round the parish upon a hand-barrow, circulate from 

house to house like a bad shilling, which every one is in haste to pass to 

his neighbour,--she, who use to call for her bearer as loud, or louder, 

than a traveller demand post-horses,--even she share the same disastrous 

fate. the ‘daft jock,’ who, half knave, half idiot, had been the sport of 

each succeed race of village children for a good part of a century, was 

remit to the county bridewell, where, secluded from free air and 

sunshine, the only advantage he was capable of enjoying, he pine and 

die in the course of six months. the old sailor, who had so long rejoice 

the smoky rafter of every kitchen in the country by singing ‘captain 

ward’ and ‘bold admiral benbow,’ was banish from the county for no 

better reason than that he was supposed to speak with a strong ireland 

accent. even the annual rounds of the pedlar were abolish by the 

justice, in his hasty zeal for the administration of rural police. 

these things did not pass without notice and censure. we are not made of 

wood or stone, and the things which connect themselves with our heart and 

habit cannot, like bark or lichen, be rent away without our missing them. 

the farmer’s dame lack her usual share of intelligence, perhaps also the 

self-applause which she had felt while distribute the awmous (alms), in 

shape of a gowpen (handful) of oatmeal, to the mendicant who brought the 

news. the cottage felt inconvenience from interrupt of the petty trade 

carry on by the itinerant dealers. the children lack their supply of 

sugarplum and toys; the young women want pins, ribbons, combs, and 

ballads; and the old could no long barter their egg for salt, snuff, 

and tobacco. all these circumstances brought the busy laird of ellangowan 

into discredit, which was the more general on account of his former 

popularity. even his lineage was brought up in judgment against him. they 

thought ‘naething of what the like of greenside, or burnville, or 

viewforth might do, that were stranger in the country; but ellangowan! 

that had been a name amang them since the mirk monanday, and lang 

before--him to be grind the puir at that rate! they ca’d his 

grandfather the wicked laird; but, though he was while fractious aneuch, 

when he got into rove company and had ta’en the drap drink, he would 

have scorn to gang on at this gate. na, na, the muckle chumlay in the 

auld place reek like a killogie in his time, and there were as mony puir 

folk rive at the bane in the court, and about the door, as there were 

gentle in the ha’. and the leddy, on ilka christmas night as it came 

round, gae twelve sill penny to ilka puir body about, in honour of the 

twelve apostle like. they were fond to ca’ it papistrie; but i think our 

great folk might take a lesson frae the papist whiles. they gie another 

sort o’ help to puir folk than just ding down a saxpence in the brod on 

the sabbath, and kilting, and scourging, and drum them a’ the sax days 

o’ the week besides.’ 

such was the gossip over the good twopenny in every ale-house within three 

or four mile of ellangowan, that being about the diameter of the orbit in 

which our friend godfrey bertram, esq., j. p., must be considered as the 

principal luminary. still greater scope was given to evil tongue by the 

removal of a colony of gipsies, with one of whom our reader is somewhat 

acquainted, and who had for a great many years enjoy their chief 

settlement upon the estate of ellangowan. 
