

chapter vii 

come, prince of the ragged regiment, 

you of the blood! prigs, my most upright lord, 

and these, what name or title e’er they bear, 

jarkman, or patrico, cranke or clapper-dudgeon, 

prate or abram-man--i speak of all. 

beggar’s bush. 

although the character of those gipsy tribe which formerly inundate most 

of the nation of europe, and which in some degree still subsist among 

them as a distinct people, is generally understood, the reader will pardon 

my saying a few words respecting their situation in scotland. 

it is well known that the gipsy were at an early period acknowledge as 

a separate and independent race by one of the scotland monarchs, and that 

they were less favourable distinguished by a subsequent law, which 

render the character of gipsy equal in the judicial balance to that of 

common and habitual thief, and prescribed his punishment accordingly. 

notwithstanding the severity of this and other statutes, the fraternity 

prosper amid the distress of the country, and received large 

accession from among those whom famine, oppression, or the sword of war 

had deprived of the ordinary means of subsistence. they lost in a great 

measure by this intermixture the national character of egyptians, and 

became a mingle race, have all the idle and predatory habit of 

their eastern ancestors, with a ferocity which they probably borrow from 

the men of the north who join their society. they travelled in different 

bands, and had rule among themselves, by which each tribe was confine to 

its own district. the slightest invasion of the precincts which had been 

assign to another tribe produce desperate skirmishes, in which there 

was often much blood shed. 

the patriotic fletcher of saltoun drew a picture of these banditti about a 

century ago, which my reader will peruse with astonishment:-- 

‘there are at this day in scotland (besides a great many poor family 

very mean provided for by the church boxes, with other who, by living 

on bad food, fall into various diseases) two hundred thousand people 

beg from door to door. these are not only no way advantageous, but a 

very grievous burden to so poor a country. and though the number of them 

be perhaps double to what it was formerly, by reason of this present great 

distress, yet in all times there have been about one hundred thousand of 

those vagabonds, who have live without any regard or subjection either to 

the law of the land or even those of god and nature . . . no magistrate 

could ever discover, or be informed, which way one in a hundred of these 

wretch died, or that ever they were baptized. many murder have been 

discover among them; and they are not only a most unspeakable oppression 

to poor tenant (who, if they give not bread or some kind of provision to 

perhaps forty such villain in one day, are sure to be insult by them), 

but they rob many poor people who live in house distant from any 

neighbourhood. in years of plenty, many thousand of them meet together in 

the mountains, where they feast and riot for many days; and at country 

weddings, markets, burials, and other the like public occasions, they are 

to be seen, both man and woman, perpetual drunk, cursing, blaspheming, 

and fight together.’ 

notwithstanding the deplorable picture present in this extract, and 

which fletcher himself, though the energetic and eloquent friend of 

freedom, saw no better mode of correct than by introduce a system of 

domestic slavery, the progress of time, and increase both of the means of 

life and of the power of the laws, gradual reduce this dreadful evil 

within more narrow bounds. the tribe of gipsies, jockies, or cairds--for 

by all these denomination such banditti were known--became few in number, 

and many were entire rooted out. still, however, a sufficient number 

remain to give, occasional alarm and constant vexation. some rude 

handicraft were entire resigned to these itinerants, particularly the 

art of trencher-making, of manufacture horn-spoons, and the whole 

mystery of the tinker. to these they add a petty trade in the coarse 

sort of earthenware. such were their ostensible means of livelihood. each 

tribe had usually some fixed place of rendezvous, which they occasional 

occupy and considered as their standing camp, and in the vicinity of 

which they generally abstain from depredation. they had even talent and 

accomplishments, which made them occasional useful and entertaining. 

many cultivated music with success; and the favourite fiddler or piper of 

a district was often to be found in a gipsy town. they understood all 

out-of-door sports, especially otter-hunting, fishing, or finding game. 

they bred the best and boldest terriers, and sometimes had good pointer 

for sale. in winter the women told fortunes, the men show trick of 

legerdemain; and these accomplishment often help to while away a weary 

or stormy evening in the circle of the ‘farmer’s ha’.’ the wild of 

their character, and the indomitable pride with which they despise all 

regular labour, command a certain awe, which was not diminish by the 

consideration that these stroller were a vindictive race, and were 

restrained by no check, either of fear or conscience, from taking 

desperate vengeance upon those who had offend them. these tribe were, 

in short, the pariah of scotland, living like wild indian among europe 

settlers, and, like them, judge of rather by their own customs, habits, 

and opinions, than as if they had been member of the civilise part of 

the community. some horde of them yet remain, chiefly in such situation 

as afford a ready escape either into a waste country or into another 

jurisdiction. nor are the features of their character much softened. their 

numbers, however, are so greatly diminish that, instead of one hundred 

thousand, as calculate by fletcher, it would now perhaps be impossible to 

collect above five hundred throughout all scotland. 

a tribe of these itinerants, to whom meg merry appertained, had long 

been as stationary as their habit permit in a glen upon the estate of 

ellangowan. they had there erect a few huts, which they denominate 

their ‘city of refuge,’ and where, when not absent on excursions, they 

harbour unmolested, as the crow that roost in the old ash-trees 

around them. they had been such long occupant that they were considered 

in some degree as proprietor of the wretched sheale which they 

inhabited. this protection they were said ancient to have repaid by 

service to the laird in war, or more frequently, by infest or 

plunder the lands of those neighbouring baron with whom he chance to 

be at feud. latterly their service were of a more pacific nature. the 

women spun mitten for the lady, and knit boot-hose for the laird, 

which were annual present at christmas with great form. the age 

sibyl blessed the bridal bed of the laird when he married, and the cradle 

of the heir when born. the men repair her ladyship’s cracked china, and 

assist the laird in his sporting parties, worm his dogs, and cut the 

ear of his terrier puppies. the children gather nuts in the woods, and 

cranberry in the moss, and mushroom on the pastures, for tribute to the 

place. these acts of voluntary service, and acknowledgment of dependence, 

were reward by protection on some occasions, connivance on others, and 

broken victuals, ale, and brandy when circumstances call for a display 

of generosity; and this mutual intercourse of good offices, which had been 

carry on for at least two centuries, render the inhabitant of 

derncleugh a kind of privileged retainer upon the estate of ellangowan. 

‘the knaves’ were the laird’s ‘exceeding good friends’; and he would have 

deem himself very ill use if his countenance could not now and then 

have borne them out against the law of the country and the local 

magistrate. but this friendly union was soon to be dissolved. 

the community of derncleugh, who care for no rogue but their own, were 

wholly without alarm at the severity of the justice’s proceedings towards 

other itinerants. they had no doubt that he determined to suffer no 

mendicant or stroller in the country but what reside on his own 

property, and practised their trade by his immediate permission, imply 

or expressed. nor was mr. bertram in a hurry to exert his newly-acquired 

authority at the expense of these old settlers. but he was driven on by 

circumstances. 

at the quarter-sessions our new justice was public upbraid by a 

gentleman of the opposite party in county politics, that, while he 

affected a great zeal for the public police, and seem ambitious of the 

fame of an active magistrate, he foster a tribe of the greatest rogue 

in the country, and permit them to harbour within a mile of the house 

of ellangowan. to this there was no reply, for the fact was too evident 

and well known. the laird digest the taunt as he best could, and in his 

way home amuse himself with speculation on the easiest method of rid 

himself of these vagrants, who brought a stain upon his fair fame as a 

magistrate. just as he had resolve to take the first opportunity of 

quarrel with the pariah of derncleugh, a cause of provocation 

present itself. 

since our friend’s advancement to be a conservator of the peace, he had 

cause the gate at the head of his avenue, which formerly, have only one 

hinge, remain at all times hospitable open--he had cause this gate, i 

say, to be newly hung and handsome painted. he had also shut up with 

paling, curious twist with furze, certain hole in the fence 

adjoining, through which the gipsy boys use to scramble into the 

plantation to gather birds’ nests, the senior of the village to make a 

short cut from one point to another, and the lad and lass for evening 

rendezvous--all without offence taken or leave asked. but these halcyon 

days were now to have an end, and a minatory inscription on one side of 

the gate intimate ‘prosecution according to law’ (the painter had spelt 

it ‘persecution’--l’un vaut bien l’autre) to all who should be found 

trespass on these inclosures. on the other side, for uniformity’s sake, 

was a precautionary annunciation of spring-guns and man-traps of such 

formidable powers that, said the rubrick, with an emphatic nota bene--’if 

a man go in they will break a horse’s leg.’ 

in defiance of these threats, six well-grown gipsy boys and girl were 

riding cock-horse upon the new gate, and plait may-flowers, which it 

was but too evident had been gather within the forbidden precincts. with 

as much anger as he was capable of feeling, or perhaps of assuming, the 

laird command them to descend;--they paid no attention to his mandate: 

he then began to pull them down one after another;--they resisted, 

passive at least, each sturdy bronze varlet making himself as heavy as 

he could, or climb up as fast as he was dismounted. 

the laird then call in the assistance of his servant, a surly fellow, 

who had immediate recourse to his horsewhip. a few lash sent the party 

a-scampering; and thus commence the first breach of the peace between the 

house of ellangowan and the gipsy of derncleugh. 

the latter could not for some time imagine that the war was real; until 

they found that their children were horsewhip by the grieve when found 

trespassing; that their ass were poinde by the ground-officer when left 

in the plantations, or even when turn to graze by the roadside, against 

the provision of the turnpike acts; that the constable began to make 

curious inquiry into their mode of gain a livelihood, and express 

his surprise that the men should sleep in the hovel all day, and be 

abroad the greater part of the night. 

when matter came to this point, the gipsies, without scruple, enter 

upon measure of retaliation. ellangowan’s hen-roosts were plundered, his 

linen stolen from the lines or bleaching-ground, his fishing poached, his 

dogs kidnapped, his grow tree cut or barked. much petty mischief was 

done, and some evidently for the mischief’s sake. on the other hand, 

warrant went forth, without mercy, to pursue, search for, take, and 

apprehend; and, notwithstanding their dexterity, one or two of the 

depredator were unable to avoid conviction. one, a stout young fellow, 

who sometimes had gone to sea a-fishing, was hand over to the captain of 

the impress service at d--; two children were sound flogged, and one 

egypt matron sent to the house of correction. 

still, however, the gipsy made no motion to leave the spot which they 

had so long inhabited, and mr. bertram felt an unwilling to deprive 

them of their ancient ‘city of refuge’; so that the petty warfare we have 

notice continue for several months, without increase or abate of 

hostilities on either side. 
