

chapter ix 

paint scotland greeting owe her thrissle, 

her mutchkin stoup as toom’s a whistle, 

and d--n’d excisemen in a bustle, 

seize a stell, 

triumphant crushin’t like a mussel, 

or lampit shell 

burns. 

during the period of mr. bertram’s active magistracy, he did not forget 

the affair of the revenue. smuggling, for which the isle of man then 

afford peculiar facilities, was general, or rather universal, all along 

the southwestern coast of scotland. almost all the common people were 

engaged in these practices; the gentry connive at them, and the officer 

of the revenue were frequent discountenance in the exercise of their 

duty by those who should have protect them. 

there was at this period, employ as a riding-officer or supervisor, in 

that part of the country a certain francis kennedy, already name in our 

narrative--a stout, resolute, and active man, who had made seizure to a 

great amount, and was proportional hate by those who had an interest in 

the fair trade, as they call the pursuit of these contraband 

adventurers. this person was natural son to a gentleman of good family, 

owe to which circumstance, and to his being of a jolly, convivial 

disposition, and singing a good song, he was admitted to the occasional 

society of the gentlemen of the country, and was a member of several of 

their club for practise athletic games, at which he was particularly 

expert. 

at ellangowan kennedy was a frequent and always an acceptable guest. his 

vivace relieved mr. bertram of the trouble of thought, and the labour 

which it cost him to support a detailed communication of ideas; while the 

daring and dangerous exploit which he had undertaken in the discharge of 

his office form excellent conversation. to all these revenue adventure 

did the laird of ellangowan seriously incline, and the amusement which he 

derive from kennedy’s society form an excellent reason for 

countenance and assist the narrator in the execution of his invidious 

and hazardous duty. 

‘frank kennedy,’ he said, ‘was a gentleman, though on the wrang side of 

the blanket; he was connected with the family of ellangowan through the 

house of glengubble. the last laird of glengubble would have brought the 

estate into the ellangowan line; but, happening to go to harrigate, he 

there met with miss jean hadaway--by the by, the green dragon at harrigate 

is the best house of the twa--but for frank kennedy, he’s in one sense a 

gentleman born, and it’s a shame not to support him against these 

blackguard smugglers.’ 

after this league had taken place between judgment and execution, it 

chance that captain dirk hatteraick had landed a cargo of spirits and 

other contraband goods upon the beach not far from ellangowan, and, 

confiding in the indifference with which the laird had formerly regard 

similar infraction of the law, he was neither very anxious to conceal nor 

to expedite the transaction. the consequence was that mr. frank kennedy, 

armed with a warrant from ellangowan, and support by some of the laird’s 

people who knew the country, and by a party of military, pour down upon 

the kegs, bales, and bags, and after a desperate affray, in which severe 

wound were given and received, succeed in clap the broad arrow upon 

the articles, and bearing them off in triumph to the next custom-house. 

dirk hatteraick vowed, in dutch, german, and english, a deep and full 

revenge, both against the gauge and his abettors; and all who knew him 

thought it likely he would keep his word. 

a few days after the departure of the gipsy tribe, mr. bertram ask his 

lady one morning at breakfast whether this was not little harry’s 

birthday. 

‘five years auld exactly, this blessed day,’ answer the lady; ‘so we may 

look into the english gentleman’s paper.’ 

mr. bertram like to show his authority in trifles. ‘no, my dear, not till 

to-morrow. the last time i was at quarter-sessions the sheriff told us 

that dies--that die inceptus--in short, you don’t understand latin, but 

it means that a term-day is not begun till it’s ended.’ 

‘that sound like nonsense, my dear.’ 

‘may be so, my dear; but it may be very good law for all that. i am sure, 

speak of term-days, i wish, as frank kennedy says, that whitsunday 

would kill martinmas and be hang for the murder; for there i have got a 

letter about that interest of jenny cairns’s, and deil a tenant’s been at 

the place yet wi’ a boddle of rent, nor will not till candlemas. but, 

speak of frank kennedy, i daresay he’ll be here the day, for he was 

away round to wigton to warn a king’s ship that’s lie in the bay about 

dirk hatteraick’s lugger being on the coast again, and he’ll be back this 

day; so we’ll have a bottle of claret and drink little harry’s health.’ 

‘i wish,’ reply the lady, ‘frank kennedy would let dirk hatteraick 

alane. what needs he make himself mair busy than other folk? cannot he 

sing his sang, and take his drink, and draw his salary, like collector 

snail, honest man, that never fashe ony body? and i wonder at you, laird, 

for meddle and making. did we ever want to send for tea or brandy frae 

the borough-town when dirk hatteraick use to come quiet into the bay?’ 

‘mrs. bertram, you know nothing of these matters. do you think it become 

a magistrate to let his own house be made a receptacle for smuggle goods? 

frank kennedy will show you the penalty in the act, and ye ken yoursell 

they use to put their run goods into the auld place of ellangowan up by 

there.’ 

‘oh dear, mr. bertram, and what the waur were the wa’s and the vault o’ 

the auld castle for have a whin keg o’ brandy in them at an orra time? 

i am sure ye were not oblige to ken ony thing about it; and what the waur 

was the king that the laird here got a soup o’ drink and the ladies their 

drap o’ tea at a reasonable rate?--it’s a shame to them to pit such tax 

on them!--and was na i much the better of these flander head and pin 

that dirk hatteraick sent me a’ the way from antwerp? it will be lang or 

the king send me ony thing, or frank kennedy either. and then ye would 

quarrel with these gipsy too! i expect every day to hear the barnyard’s 

in a low.’ 

‘i tell you once more, my dear, you don’t understand these things--and 

there’s frank kennedy coming galloping up the avenue.’ 

‘aweel! aweel! ellangowan,’ said the lady, raise her voice as the laird 

left the room, ‘i wish ye may understand them yoursell, that’s a’!’ 

from this nuptial dialogue the laird joyful escape to meet his faithful 

friend, mr. kennedy, who arrive in high spirits. ‘for the love of life, 

ellangowan,’ he said, ‘get up to the castle! you’ll see that old fox dirk 

hatteraick, and his majesty’s hound in full cry after him.’ so saying, he 

flung his horse’s bridle to a boy, and ran up the ascent to the old 

castle, follow by the laird, and indeed by several other of the family, 

alarm by the sound of gun from the sea, now distinct heard. 

on gain that part of the ruins which command the most extensive 

outlook, they saw a lugger, with all her canvass crowded, standing across 

the bay, close pursue by a sloop of war, that kept fire upon the 

chase from her bows, which the lugger return with her stern-chasers. 

‘they’re but at long bowls yet,’ cry kennedy, in great exultation, ‘but 

they will be close by and by. d--n him, he’s start his cargo! i see 

the good nantz pitch overboard, keg after keg! that’s a d--d ungenteel 

thing of mr. hatteraick, as i shall let him know by and by. now, now! 

they’ve got the wind of him! that’s it, that’s it! hark to him! hark to 

him! now, my dogs! now, my dogs! hark to ranger, hark!’ 

‘i think,’ said the old garden to one of the maids, ‘the ganger’s fie,’ 

by which word the common people express those violent spirits which they 

think a presage of death. 

meantime the chase continued. the lugger, being pilot with great 

ability, and use every nautical shift to make her escape, had now 

reached, and was about to double, the headland which form the extreme 

point of land on the left side of the bay, when a ball have hit the yard 

in the slings, the mainsail fell upon the deck. the consequence of this 

accident appear inevitable, but could not be seen by the spectators; for 

the vessel, which had just double the headland, lost steerage, and fell 

out of their sight behind the promontory. the sloop of war crowded all 

sail to pursue, but she had stood too close upon the cape, so that they 

were oblige to wear the vessel for fear of go ashore, and to make a 

large tack back into the bay, in order to recover sea-room enough to 

double the headland. 

‘they ‘ll lose her, by--, cargo and lugger, one or both,’ said kennedy; ‘i 

must gallop away to the point of warroch (this was the headland so often 

mentioned), and make them a signal where she has drift to on the other 

side. good-bye for an hour, ellangowan; get out the gallon punch-bowl and 

plenty of lemons. i’ll stand for the france article by the time i come 

back, and we’ll drink the young laird’s health in a bowl that would swim 

the collector’s yawl.’ so saying, he mount his horse and gallop off. 

about a mile from the house, and upon the verge of the woods, which, as we 

have said, cover a promontory terminate in the cape call the point 

of warroch, kennedy met young harry bertram, attend by his tutor, 

dominie sampson. he had often promise the child a ride upon his galloway; 

and, from singing, dancing, and play punch for his amusement, was a 

particular favourite. he no soon came scamper up the path, than the 

boy loud claim his promise; and kennedy, who saw no risk, in indulge 

him, and wish to tease the dominie, in whose visage he read a 

remonstrance, caught up harry from the ground, placed him before him, and 

continue his route; sampson’s ‘peradventure, master kennedy-’ being lost 

in the clatter of his horse’s feet. the pedagogue hesitate a moment 

whether he should go after them; but kennedy being a person in full 

confidence of the family, and with whom he himself had no delight in 

associating, ‘being that he was addict unto profane and scurrilous 

jests,’ he continue his own walk at his own pace, till he reach the 

place of ellangowan. 

the spectator from the ruin wall of the castle were still watch the 

sloop of war, which at length, but not without the loss of considerable 

time, recover sea-room enough to weather the point of warroch, and was 

lost to their sight behind that wooded promontory. some time afterwards 

the discharge of several cannon were heard at a distance, and, after an 

interval, a still loud explosion, as of a vessel blown up, and a cloud 

of smoke rose above the tree and mingle with the blue sky. all then 

separate on their different occasions, augur variously upon the fate 

of the smuggler, but the majority insist that her capture was 

inevitable, if she had not already gone to the bottom. 

‘it is near our dinner-time, my dear,’ said mrs. bertram to her husband; 

‘will it be lang before mr. kennedy come back?’ 

‘i expect him every moment, my dear,’ said the laird; ‘perhaps he is 

bring some of the officer of the sloop with him.’ 

‘my stars, mr. bertram! why did not ye tell me this before, that we might 

have had the large round table? and then, they’re a’ tired o’ saut meat, 

and, to tell you the plain truth, a rump o’ beef is the best part of your 

dinner. and then i wad have put on another gown, and ye wadna have been 

the waur o’ a clean neck-cloth yoursell. but ye delight in surprising and 

hurry one. i am sure i am no to baud out for ever against this sort of 

go on; but when folk’s missed, then they are moaned.’ 

‘pshaw, pshaw! deuce take the beef, and the gown, and table, and the 

neck-cloth! we shall do all very well. where’s the dominie, john? (to a 

servant who was busy about the table) where’s the dominie and little 

harry?’ 

‘mr. sampson’s been at hame these twa hour and mair, but i dinna think 

mr. harry cam hame wi’ him.’ 

‘not come hame wi’ him?’ said the lady; ‘desire mr. sampson to step this 

way directly.’ 

‘mr. sampson,’ said she, upon his entrance, ‘is it not the most 

extraordinary thing in this world wide, that you, that have free 

up-putting--bed, board, and washing--and twelve pound sterling a year, 

just to look after that boy, should let him out of your sight for twa or 

three hours?’ 

sampson made a bow of humble acknowledgment at each pause which the angry 

lady made in her enumerate of the advantage of his situation, in order 

to give more weight to her remonstrance, and then, in words which we will 

not do him the injustice to imitate, told how mr. francis kennedy ‘had 

assume spontaneous the charge of master harry, in despite of his 

remonstrance in the contrary.’ 

‘i am very little oblige to mr. francis kennedy for his pains,’ said the 

lady, peevishly; ‘suppose he let the boy drop from his horse, and lame 

him? or suppose one of the cannon come ashore and kill him? or 

suppose--’ 

‘or suppose, my dear,’ said ellangowan, ‘what is much more likely than 

anything else, that they have gone aboard the sloop or the prize, and are 

to come round the point with the tide?’ 

‘and then they may be drowned,’ said the lady. 

‘verily,’ said sampson, ‘i thought mr. kennedy had return an hour since. 

of a surety i deem i heard his horse’s feet.’ 

‘that,’ said john, with a broad grin, ‘was grizzel chase the humble-cow 

out of the close.’ 

sampson coloured up to the eyes, not at the imply taunt, which he would 

never have discovered, or resent if he had, but at some idea which 

cross his own mind. ‘i have been in an error,’ he said; ‘of a surety i 

should have tarry for the babe.’ so saying, he snatch his bone-headed 

cane and hat, and hurried away towards warroch wood fast than he was 

ever known to walk before or after. 

the laird linger some time, debate the point with the lady. at length 

he saw the sloop of war again make her appearance; but, without 

approach the shore, she stood away to the westward with all her sail 

set, and was soon out of sight. the lady’s state of timorous and fretful 

apprehension was so habitual that her fear went for nothing with her lord 

and master; but an appearance of disturbance and anxiety among the 

servant now excited his alarm, especially when he was call out of the 

room, and told in private that mr. kennedy’s horse had come to the stable 

door alone, with the saddle turn round below its belly and the reins of 

the bridle broken; and that a farmer had informed them in passing that 

there was a smuggle lugger burning like a furnace on the other side of 

the point of warroch, and that, though he had come through the wood, he 

had seen or heard nothing of kennedy or the young laird, ‘only there was 

dominie sampson gaun rampauge about like mad, seek for them.’ 

all was now bustle at ellangowan. the laird and his servants, male and 

female, hasten to the wood of warroch. the tenant and cottager in the 

neighbourhood lent their assistance, partly out of zeal, partly from 

curiosity. boat were manned to search the sea-shore, which, on the other 

side of the point, rose into high and indent rocks. a vague suspicion 

was entertained, though too horrible to be expressed, that the child might 

have fallen from one of these cliffs. 

the evening had begun to close when the party enter the wood, and 

disperse different ways in quest of the boy and his companion. the 

darken of the atmosphere, and the hoarse sigh of the november wind 

through the naked trees, the rustling of the wither leaves which strew 

the glades, the repeated halloo of the different parties, which often 

drew them together in expectation of meeting the object of their search, 

gave a cast of dismal sublime to the scene. 

at length, after a minute and fruitless investigate through the wood, 

the search began to draw together into one body, and to compare notes. 

the agony of the father grew beyond concealment, yet it scarcely equal 

the anguish of the tutor. ‘would to god i had die for him!’ the 

affectionate creature repeated, in note of the deepest distress. those 

who were less interested rush into a tumultuary discussion of chance 

and possibilities. each gave his opinion, and each was alternate sway 

by that of the others. some thought the object of their search had gone 

aboard the sloop; some that they had gone to a village at three miles’ 

distance; some whisper they might have been on board the lugger, a few 

plank and beam of which the tide now drift ashore. 

at this instant a shout was heard from the beach, so loud, so shrill, so 

piercing, so different from every sound which the wood that day had rung 

to, that nobody hesitate a moment to believe that it convey tidings, 

and tidings of dreadful import. all hurried to the place, and, venture 

without scruple upon path which at another time they would have shudder 

to look at, descended towards a cleft of the rock, where one boat’s crew 

was already landed. ‘here, sirs, here! this way, for god’s sake! this way! 

this way!’ was the reiterate cry. ellangowan broke through the throng 

which had already assemble at the fatal spot, and beheld the object of 

their terror. it was the dead body of kennedy. at first sight he seem to 

have perish by a fall from the rocks, which rose above the spot on which 

he lay in a perpendicular precipice of a hundred feet above the beach. the 

corpse was lie half in, half out of the water; the advance tide, 

raise the arm and stirring the clothes, had given it at some distance 

the appearance of motion, so that those who first discover the body 

thought that life remained. but every spark had been long extinguished. 

‘my bairn! my bairn!’ cry the distracted father, ‘where can he be?’ a 

dozen mouth were open to communicate hope which no one felt. some one 

at length mentioned--the gipsies! in a moment ellangowan had reascende 

the cliffs, flung himself upon the first horse he met, and rode furiously 

to the hut at derncleugh. all was there dark and desolate; and, as he 

dismount to make more minute search, he stumble over fragment of 

furniture which had been thrown out of the cottages, and the broken wood 

and thatch which had been pull down by his orders. at that moment the 

prophecy, or anathema, of meg merry fell heavy on his mind. ‘you have 

strip the thatch from seven cottages; see that the roof-tree of your 

own house stand the surer!’ 







