

chapter xi 

enter time, as chorus 

i, that please some, try all, both joy and terror 

of good and bad; that make and unfold error, 

now take upon me, in the name of time, 

to use my wings impute it not a crime 

to me, or my swift passage, that i slide 

o’er sixteen years, and leave the growth untry 

of that wide gap. 

winter’s tale. 

our narration is now about to make a large stride, and omit a space of 

nearly seventeen years; during which nothing occur of any particular 

consequence with respect to the story we have undertaken to tell. the gap 

is a wide one; yet if the reader’s experience in life enable him to look 

back on so many years, the space will scarce appear long in his 

recollection than the time consume in turning these pages. 

it was, then, in the month of november, about seventeen years after the 

catastrophe related in the last chapter, that, during a cold and stormy 

night, a social group had closed around the kitchen-fire of the gordon 

arms at kippletringan, a small but comfortable inn kept by mrs. 

mac-candlish in that village. the conversation which pass among them 

will save me the trouble of telling the few event occur during this 

chasm in our history, with which it is necessary that the reader should be 

acquainted. 

mrs. mac-candlish, throne in a comfortable easychair line with black 

leather, was regale herself and a neighbouring gossip or two with a cup 

of genuine tea, and at the same time keeping a sharp eye upon her 

domestics, as they went and came in prosecution of their various duty 

and commissions. the clerk and precentor of the parish enjoy at a little 

distance his saturday night’s pipe, and aid its bland fumigate by an 

occasional sip of brandy and water. deacon bearcliff, a man of great 

importance in the village, combine the indulgence of both parties: he had 

his pipe and his tea-cup, the latter being lace with a little spirits. 

one or two clown sat at some distance, drink their twopenny ale. 

‘are ye sure the parlour’s ready for them, and the fire burning clear, and 

the chimney no smoking?’ said the hostess to a chambermaid. 

she was answer in the affirmative. ‘ane wadna be uncivil to them, 

especially in their distress,’ said she, turning to the deacon. 

‘assuredly not, mrs. mac-candlish; assured not. i am sure ony sma’ thing 

they might want frae my shop, under seven, or eight, or ten pounds, i 

would book them as readily for it as the first in the country. do they 

come in the auld chaise?’ 

‘i daresay no,’ said the precentor; ‘for miss bertram come on the white 

powny ilka day to the kirk--and a constant kirk-keeper she is--and it’s a 

pleasure to hear her singing the psalms, winsome young thing.’ 

‘ay, and the young laird of hazlewood ride hame half the road wi’ her 

after sermon,’ said one of the gossip in company. ‘i wonder how auld 

hazlewood likes that.’ 

‘i kenna how he may like it now,’ answer another of the tea-drinkers; 

‘but the day has been when ellangowan wad hae like as little to see his 

daughter taking up with their son.’ 

‘ay, has been,’ answer the first, with somewhat of emphasis. 

‘i am sure, neighbour ovens,’ said the hostess, ‘the hazlewood of 

hazlewood, though they are a very gude auld family in the county, never 

thought, till within these twa score o’ years, of evening themselves till 

the ellangowans. wow, woman, the bertram of ellangowan are the auld 

dingaway lang syne. there is a sang about ane o’ them marry a 

daughter of the king of man; it begins-- 

blythe bertram’s ta’en him owe the faem, 

to wed a wife, and bring her hame-- 

i daur say mr. skreigh can sing us the ballant.’ 

‘gudewife,’ said skreigh, gathering up his mouth, and sip his tiff of 

brandy punch with great solemnity, ‘our talent were gien us to other use 

than to sing daft auld sang sae near the sabbath day.’ 

‘hout fie, mr. skreigh; i’se warrant i hae heard you sing a blythe sang on 

saturday at e’en before now. but as for the chaise, deacon, it hasna been 

out of the coach-house since mrs. bertram died, that’s sixteen or 

seventeen years sin syne. jock jabo is away wi’ a chaise of mine for 

them; i wonder he’s no come back. it’s pit mirk; but there’s no an ill 

turn on the road but twa, and the brigg owe warroch burn is safe eneugh, 

if he haud to the right side. but then there’s heavieside brae, that’s 

just a murder for post-cattle; but jock ken the road brawly.’ 

a loud rap was heard at the door. 

‘that’s no them. i dinna hear the wheels. grizzel, ye limmer, gang to the 

door.’ 

‘it’s a single gentleman,’ whine out grizzel; ‘maun i take him into the 

parlour?’ 

‘foul be in your feet, then; it’ll be some english rider. coming without a 

servant at this time o’ night! has the hostler ta’en the horse? ye may 

light a spunk o’ fire in the red room.’ 

‘i wish, ma’am,’ said the traveller, enter the kitchen, ‘you would give 

me leave to warm myself here, for the night is very cold.’ 

his appearance, voice, and manner produce an instantaneous effect in his 

favour. he was a handsome, tall, thin figure, dress in black, as 

appear when he laid aside his riding-coat; his age might be between 

forty and fifty; his cast of features grave and interesting, and his air 

somewhat military. every point of his appearance and address bespoke the 

gentleman. long habit had given mrs. mac-candlish an acute tact in 

ascertain the quality of her visitors, and proportion her reception 

accordingly:-- 

to every guest the appropriate speech was made, 

and every duty with distinction paid; 

respectful, easy, pleasant, or polite-- 

‘your honour’s servant!’ ‘mister smith, good-night.‘ 

on the present occasion she was low in her courtesy and profuse in her 

apologies. the stranger beg his horse might be attend to: she went 

out herself to school the hostler. 

‘there was never a pretty bit o’ horse-flesh in the stable o’ the gordon 

arms,’ said the man, which information increase the landlady’s respect 

for the rider. finding, on her return, that the stranger decline to go 

into another apartment (which, indeed, she allowed, would be but cold and 

smoky till the fire bleeze up), she install her guest hospitable by the 

fireside, and offer what refreshment her house afforded. 

‘a cup of your tea, ma’am, if you will favour me.’ 

mrs. mac-candlish bustle about, reinforce her teapot with hyson, and 

proceed in her duty with her best grace. ‘we have a very nice parlour, 

sir, and everything very agreeable for gentlefolks; but it’s bespoke the 

night for a gentleman and his daughter that are go to leave this part 

of the country; ane of my chaise is gane for them, and will be back 

forthwith. they’re no sae weel in the warld as they have been; but we’re 

a’ subject to ups and downs in this life, as your honour must needs 

ken,--but is not the tobacco-reek disagreeable to your honour?’ 

‘by no means, ma’am; i am an old campaigner, and perfectly use to it. 

will you permit me to make some inquiry about a family in this 

neighbourhood?’ 

the sound of wheels was now heard, and the landlady hurried to the door to 

receive her expect guests; but return in an instant, follow by the 

postilion. ‘no, they canna come at no rate, the laird’s sae ill.’ 

‘but god help them,’ said the landlady, ‘the morn’s the term, the very 

last day they can bide in the house; a’ thing’s to be roupit.’ 

‘weel, but they can come at no rate, i tell ye; mr. bertram canna be 

moved.’ 

‘what mr. bertram?’ said the stranger; ‘not mr. bertram of ellangowan, i 

hope?’ 

‘just e’en that same, sir; and if ye be a friend o’ his, ye have come at a 

time when he’s sair bested.’ 

‘i have been abroad for many years,--is his health so much deranged?’ 

‘ay, and his affair an’ a’,’ said the deacon; ‘the creditor have enter 

into possession o’ the estate, and it’s for sale; and some that made the 

maist by him--i name nae names, but mrs. mac-candlish ken wha i mean (the 

landlady shook her head significantly)--they’re sairest on him e’en now. i 

have a sma’ matter due myself, but i would rather have lost it than gane 

to turn the auld man out of his house, and him just dying.’ 

‘ay, but,’ said the parish clerk, ‘factor glossin wants to get rid of the 

auld laird, and drive on the sale, for fear the heir-male should cast up 

upon them; for i have heard say, if there was an heir-male they couldna 

sell the estate for auld ellangowan’s debt.’ 

‘he had a son born a good many years ago,’ said the stranger; ‘he is dead, 

i suppose?’ 

‘nae man can say for that,’ answer the clerk mysteriously. 

‘dead!’ said the deacon, ‘i’se warrant him dead lang syne; he hasna been 

heard o’ these twenty years or thereby.’ 

‘i wot weel it’s no twenty years,’ said the landlady; ‘it’s no abune 

seventeen at the outside in this very month. it made an unco noise owe a’ 

this country; the bairn disappear the very day that supervise kennedy 

cam by his end. if ye kenn’d this country lang syne, your honour wad maybe 

ken frank kennedy the supervisor. he was a heartsome pleasant man, and 

company for the best gentlemen in the county, and muckle mirth he’s made 

in this house. i was young then, sir, and newly married to bailie 

mac-candlish, that’s dead and gone (a sigh); and muckle fun i’ve had wi’ 

the supervisor. he was a daft dog. o, an he could hae hauden aff the 

smuggle a bit! but he was aye venturesome. and so ye see, sir, there was 

a king’s sloop down in wigton bay, and frank kennedy, he behove to have 

her up to chase dirk hatteraick’s lugger--ye’ll mind dirk hatteraick, 

deacon? i daresay ye may have dealt wi’ him--(the deacon gave a sort of 

acquiescent nod and humph). he was a daring chield, and he fought his ship 

till she blew up like peelings of ingans; and frank kennedy, he had been 

the first man to board, and he was flung like a quarter of a mile off, and 

fell into the water below the rock at warroch point, that they ca’ the 

gauger’s loup to this day.’ 

‘and mr. bertram’s child,’ said the stranger, ‘what is all this to him?’ 

‘ou, sir, the bairn aye held an unco wark wi’ the supervisor; and it was 

generally thought he went on board the vessel alang wi’ him, as bairn are 

aye forward to be in mischief.’ 

