

chapter xiii 

they told me, by the sentence of the law, 

they had commission to seize all thy fortune. 

here stood a ruffian with a horrid face, 

lord it o’er a pile of massy plate, 

tumble into a heap for public sale; 

there was another, making villainous jest 

at thy undoing; he had ta’en possession 

of all thy ancient most domestic ornaments. 

otway. 

early next morning manner mount his horse and, accompany by his 

servant, took the road to ellangowan. he had no need to inquire the way. a 

sale in the country is a place of public resort and amusement, and people 

of various description stream to it from all quarters. 

after a pleasant ride of about an hour, the old tower of the ruin 

present themselves in the landscape. the thoughts, with what different 

feelings he had lost sight of them so many years before, throng upon the 

mind of the traveller. the landscape was the same; but how change the 

feelings, hopes, and view of the spectator! then life and love were new, 

and all the prospect was gilded by their rays. and now, disappointed in 

affection, sate with fame and what the world call success, his mind, 

goad by bitter and repentant recollection, his best hope was to find a 

retirement in which he might nurse the melancholy that was to accompany 

him to his grave. ‘yet why should an individual mourn over the instability 

of his hope and the vanity of his prospects? the ancient chief who 

erect these enormous and massive tower to be the fortress of their race 

and the seat of their power,--could they have dream the day was to come 

when the last of their descendant should be expelled, a ruin wanderer, 

from his possessions! but nature’s bounty are unaltered. the sun will 

shine as fair on these ruins, whether the property of a stranger or of a 

sordid and obscure trickster of the abuse law, as when the banner of the 

founder first wave upon their battlements.’ 

these reflection brought manner to the door of the house, which was 

that day open to all. he enter among others, who traverse the 

apartments, some to select articles for purchase, other to gratify their 

curiosity. there is something melancholy in such a scene, even under the 

most favourable circumstances. the confuse state of the furniture, 

displace for the convenience of being easily view and carry off by 

the purchasers, is disagreeable to the eye. those articles which, properly 

and decent arranged, look creditable and handsome, have then a paltry 

and wretched appearance; and the apartments, strip of all that render 

them commodious and comfortable, have an aspect of ruin and dilapidation. 

it is disgust also to see the scene of domestic society and seclusion 

thrown open to the gaze of the curious and the vulgar, to hear their 

coarse speculation and brutal jest upon the fashion and furniture to 

which they are unaccustomed,--a frolicsome humour much cherish by the 

whisky which in scotland is always put in circulation on such occasions. 

all these are ordinary effects of such a scene as ellangowan now 

presented; but the moral feeling, that in this case they indicate the 

total ruin of an ancient and honourable family, gave them treble weight 

and poignancy. 

it was some time before colonel manner could find any one disposed to 

answer his reiterate question concerning ellangowan himself. at length 

an old maidservant, who held her apron to her eyes as she spoke, told him 

‘the laird was something better, and they hope he would be able to leave 

the house that day. miss lucy expect the chaise every moment, and, as 

the day was fine for the time o’year, they had carry him in his 

easychair up to the green before the auld castle, to be out of the way of 

this unco spectacle.’ thither colonel manner went in quest of him, and 

soon came in sight of the little group, which consist of four persons. 

the ascent was steep, so that he had time to reconnoitre them as he 

advanced, and to consider in what mode he should make his address. 

mr. bertram, paralytic and almost incapable of moving, occupy his 

easy-chair, attire in his nightcap and a loose camlet coat, his feet 

wrap in blankets. behind him, with his hand cross on the cane upon 

which he rested, stood dominie sampson, whom manner recognise at once. 

time had made no change upon him, unless that his black coat seem more 

brown, and his gaunt cheek more lank, than when manner last saw him. 

on one side of the old man was a sylph-like form--a young woman of about 

seventeen, whom the colonel account to be his daughter. she was look 

from time to time anxious towards the avenue, as if expect the 

post-chaise; and between while busy herself in adjust the blanket 

so as to protect her father from the cold, and in answer inquiries, 

which he seem to make with a captious and querulous manner. she did not 

trust herself to look towards the place, although the hum of the assemble 

crowd must have drawn her attention in that direction. the fourth person 

of the group was a handsome and genteel young man, who seem to share 

miss bertram’s anxiety, and her solicitude to soothe and accommodate her 

parent. 

this young man was the first who observe colonel mannering, and 

immediately step forward to meet him, as if polite to prevent his 

drawing near to the distress group. manner instantly pause and 

explained. ‘he was,’ he said, ‘a stranger to whom mr. bertram had formerly 

shown kindness and hospitality; he would not have intrude himself upon 

him at a period of distress, did it not seem to be in some degree a moment 

also of desertion; he wish merely to offer such service as might be in 

his power to mr. bertram and the young lady.’ 

he then pause at a little distance from the chair. his old acquaintance 

gaze at him with lack-lustre eye, that intimate no token of 

recognition; the dominie seem too deep sunk in distress even to 

observe his presence. the young man spoke aside with miss bertram, who 

advanced timidly, and thank colonel manner for his goodness; ‘but,’ 

she said, the tear gushing fast into her eyes, ‘her father, she feared, 

was not so much himself as to be able to remember him.’ 

she then retreat towards the chair, accompany by the colonel. 

‘father,’ she said, ‘this is mr. mannering, an old friend, come to inquire 

after you.’ 

‘he’s very heartily welcome,’ said the old man, raise himself in his 

chair, and attempt a gesture of courtesy, while a gleam of hospitable 

satisfaction seem to pass over his fade features; ‘but, lucy, my dear, 

let us go down to the house; you should not keep the gentleman here in the 

cold. dominie, take the key of the wine-cooler. mr. a--a--the gentleman 

will surely take something after his ride.’ 

manner was unspeakable affected by the contrast which his recollection 

made between this reception and that with which he had been greet by the 

same individual when they last met. he could not restrain his tears, and 

his evident emotion at once attain him the confidence of the friendless 

young lady. 

‘alas!’ she said, ‘this is distressing even to a stranger; but it may be 

better for my poor father to be in this way than if he knew and could feel 

all.’ 

a servant in livery now came up the path, and spoke in an undertone to the 

young gentleman--’mr. charles, my lady’s wanting you yonder sadly, to bid 

for her for the black ebony cabinet; and lady jean devorgoil is wi’ her 

an’ a’; ye maun come away directly.’ 

‘tell them you could not find me, tom, or, stay,--say i am look at the 

horses.’ 

‘no, no, no,’ said lucy bertram, earnestly; ‘if you would not add to the 

misery of this miserable moment, go to the company directly. this 

gentleman, i am sure, will see us to the carriage.’ 

‘unquestionably, madam,’ said mannering, ‘your young friend may rely on my 

attention.’ 

‘farewell, then,’ said young hazlewood, and whisper a word in her ear; 

then ran down the steep hastily, as if not trust his resolution at a 

slow pace. 

‘where’s charles hazlewood running?’ said the invalid, who apparently was 

accustomed to his presence and attentions; ‘where’s charles hazlewood 

running? what take him away now?’ 

‘he’ll return in a little while,’ said lucy, gently. 

the sound of voice was now heard from the ruins. the reader may remember 

there was a communication between the castle and the beach, up which the 

speaker had ascended. 

‘yes, there’s a plenty of shell and seaware for manure, as you observe; 

and if one inclined to build a new house, which might indeed be necessary, 

there’s a great deal of good hewn stone about this old dungeon, for the 

devil here--’ 

‘good god!’ said miss bertram hasty to sampson, ‘‘t is that wretch 

glossin’s voice! if my father see him, it will kill him outright!’ 

sampson wheel perpendicular round, and move with long stride to 

confront the attorney as he issue from beneath the portal arch of the 

ruin. ‘avoid ye!’ he said, ‘avoid ye! wouldst thou kill and take 

possession?’ 

‘come, come, master dominie sampson,’ answer glossin insolently, ‘if ye 

cannot preach in the pulpit, we’ll have no preach here. we go by the 

law, my good friend; we leave the gospel to you.’ 

the very mention of this man’s name had been of late a subject of the most 

violent irritation to the unfortunate patient. the sound of his voice now 

produce an instantaneous effect. mr. bertram start up without 

assistance and turn round towards him; the ghastly of his features 

form a strange contrast with the violence of his exclamations.--’out of 

my sight, ye viper! ye frozen viper, that i warmed, till ye stung me! art 

thou not afraid that the wall of my father’s dwelling should fall and 

crush thee limb and bone? are ye not afraid the very lintel of the door 

of ellangowan castle should break open and swallow you up? were ye not 

friendless, houseless, penniless, when i took ye by the hand; and are ye 

not expel me--me and that innocent girl--friendless, houseless, and 

penniless, from the house that has sheltered us and ours for a thousand 

years?’ 

had glossin been alone, he would probably have slunk off; but the 

consciousness that a stranger was present, besides the person who came 

with him (a sort of land-surveyor), determined him to resort to impudence. 

the task, however, was almost too hard even for his 

effrontery--’sir--sir--mr. bertram, sir, you should not blame me, but your 

own imprudence, sir--’ 


