

chapter xv 

my gold is gone, my money is spent, 

my land now take it unto thee. 

give me thy gold, good john o’ the scales, 

and thine for aye my land shall be. 

then john he did him to record draw. 

and john he caste him a gods-pennie; 

but for every pounde that john agreed, 

the land, i wis, was well worth three. 

heir of linne. 

the galwegian john o’ the scale was a more clever fellow than his 

prototype. he contrived to make himself heir of linne without the 

disagreeable ceremony of ‘telling down the good red gold.’ miss bertram no 

soon heard this painful, and of late unexpected, intelligence than she 

proceed in the preparation she had already made for leave the 

mansion-house immediately. mr. mac-morlan assist her in these 

arrangements, and pressed upon her so kindly the hospitality and 

protection of his roof, until she should receive an answer from her 

cousin, or be enable to adopt some settled plan of life, that she felt 

there would be unkind in refuse an invitation urge with such 

earnestness. mrs. mac-morlan was a ladylike person, and well qualified by 

birth and manners to receive the visit, and to make her house agreeable to 

miss bertram. a home, therefore, and an hospitable reception were secure 

to her, and she went on with better heart to pay the wages and receive the 

adieu of the few domestic of her father’s family. 

where there are estimable quality on either side, this task is always 

affecting; the present circumstances render it doubly so. all received 

their due, and even a trifle more, and with thanks and good wishes, to 

which some add tears, took farewell of their young mistress. there 

remain in the parlour only mr. mac-morlan, who came to attend his guest 

to his house, dominie sampson, and miss bertram. ‘and now,’ said the poor 

girl, ‘i must bid farewell to one of my oldest and kindest friends. god 

bless you, mr. sampson, and requite to you all the kindness of your 

instruction to your poor pupil, and your friendship to him that is gone. 

i hope i shall often hear from you.’ she slid into his hand a paper 

contain some pieces of gold, and rose, as if to leave the room. 

dominie sampson also rose; but it was to stand aghast with utter 

astonishment. the idea of parting from miss lucy, go where she might, had 

never once occur to the simplicity of his understanding. he laid the 

money on the table. ‘it is certainly inadequate,’ said mac-morlan, 

mistake his meaning, ‘but the circumstances--’ 

mr. sampson wave his hand impatiently.--’it is not the lucre, it is not 

the lucre; but that i, that have ate of her father’s loaf, and drank of 

his cup, for twenty years and more--to think that i am go to leave her, 

and to leave her in distress and dolour! no, miss lucy, you need never 

think it! you would not consent to put forth your father’s poor dog, and 

would you use me waur than a messan? no, miss lucy bertram, while i live i 

will not separate from you. i’ll be no burden; i have thought how to 

prevent that. but, as ruth said unto naomi, “entreat me not to leave thee, 

nor to depart from thee; for whither thou goest i will go, and where thou 

dwellest i will dwell; thy people shall be my people, and thy god shall be 

my god. where thou diest will i die, and there will i be buried. the lord 

do so to me, and more also, if aught but death do part thee and me.”’ 

during this speech, the longest ever dominie sampson was known to utter, 

the affectionate creature’s eyes stream with tears, and neither lucy nor 

mac-morlan could refrain from sympathise with this unexpected burst of 

feeling and attachment. ‘mr. sampson,’ said mac-morlan, after have had 

recourse to his snuff-box and handkerchief alternately, ‘my house is large 

enough, and if you will accept of a bed there while miss bertram honours 

us with her residence, i shall think myself very happy, and my roof much 

favoured, by receiving a man of your worth and fidelity.’ and then, with a 

delicacy which was meant to remove any objection on miss bertram’s part to 

bring with her this unexpected satellite, he added, ‘my business 

require my frequent have occasion for a better accountant than any of 

my present clerks, and i should be glad to have recourse to your 

assistance in that way now and then.’ 

‘of a surety, of a surety,’ said sampson eagerly; ‘i understand 

book-keeping by double entry and the italy method.’ 

our postilion had thrust himself into the room to announce his chaise and 

horses; he tarried, unobserved, during this extraordinary scene, and 

assured mrs. mac-candlish it was the most moving thing he ever saw; ‘the 

death of the grey mare, puir hizzie, was naeth till’t.’ this trifling 

circumstance afterwards had consequence of greater moment to the dominie. 

the visitor were hospitable welcome by mrs. mac-morlan, to whom, as well 

as to others, her husband intimate that he had engaged dominie sampson’s 

assistance to disentangle some perplexed accounts, during which occupation 

he would, for convenience sake, reside with the family. mr. mac-morlan’s 

knowledge of the world induce him to put this colour upon the matter, 

aware that, however honourable the fidelity of the dominie’s attachment 

might be both to his own heart and to the family of ellangowan, his 

exterior ill qualified him to be a’squire of dames,’ and render him, 

upon the whole, rather a ridiculous appendage to a beautiful young woman 

of seventeen. 

dominie sampson achieve with great zeal such task as mr. mac-morlan 

chose to entrust him with; but it was speedy observe that at a certain 

hour after breakfast he regularly disappeared, and return again about 

dinner-time. the evening he occupy in the labour of the office. on 

saturday he appear before mac-morlan with a look of great triumph, and 

laid on the table two pieces of gold. ‘what is this for, dominie?’ said 

mac-morlan. 

‘first to indemnify you of your charge in my behalf, worthy sir; and the 

balance for the use of miss lucy bertram.’ 

‘but, mr. sampson, your labour in the office much more than recompense 

me; i am your debtor, my good friend.’ 

‘then be it all,’ said the dominie, wave his hand, ‘for miss lucy 

bertram’s behoof.’ 

‘well, but, dominie, this money-’ 

‘it is honestly come by, mr. mac-morlan; it is the bountiful reward of a 

young gentleman to whom i am teaching the tongues; reading with him three 

hour daily.’ 

a few more question extract from the dominie that this liberal pupil 

was young hazlewood, and that he met his preceptor daily at the house of 

mrs. mac-candlish, whose proclamation of sampson’s disinterested 

attachment to the young lady had procure him this indefatigable and 

bounteous scholar. 

mac-morlan was much struck with what he heard. dominie sampson was 

doubtless a very good scholar, and an excellent man, and the classics were 

unquestionable very well worth reading; yet that a young man of twenty 

should ride seven mile and back again each day in the week, to hold this 

sort of tete-a-tete of three hours, was a zeal for literature to which he 

was not prepared to give entire credit. little art was necessary to sift 

the dominie, for the honest man’s head never admitted any but the most 

direct and simple ideas. ‘does miss bertram know how your time is engaged, 

my good friend?’ 

‘surely not as yet. mr. charles recommend it should be conceal from 

her, lest she should scruple to accept of the small assistance arise 

from it; but,’ he added, ‘it would not be possible to conceal it long, 

since mr. charles propose taking his lesson occasional in this house.’ 

‘o, he does!’ said mac-morlan.’ yes, yes, i can understand that better. 

and pray, mr. sampson, are these three hour entire spent inconstrue 

and translating?’ 

‘doubtless, no; we have also colloquial intercourse to sweeten study: 

neque semper arcum tendit apollo.’ 

the querist proceed to elicit from this galloway phoebu what their 

discourse chiefly turn upon. 

‘upon our past meeting at ellangowan; and, truly, i think very often we 

discourse concerning miss lucy, for mr. charles hazlewood in that 

particular resembleth me, mr. mac-morlan. when i begin to speak of her i 

never know when to stop; and, as i say (jocularly), she cheat us out of 

half our lessons.’ 

‘o ho!’ thought mac-morlan, ‘sits the wind in that quarter? i’ve heard 

something like this before.’ 

he then began to consider what conduct was safest for his protegee, and 

even for himself; for the senior mr. hazlewood was powerful, wealthy, 

ambitious, and vindictive, and look for both fortune and title in any 

connexion which his son might form. at length, have the highest opinion 

of his guest’s good sense and penetration, he determined to take an 

opportunity, when they should happen to be alone, to communicate the 

matter to her as a simple piece of intelligence. he did so in as natural a 

manner as he could. ‘i wish you joy of your friend mr. sampson’s good 

fortune, miss bertram; he has got a pupil who pay him two guinea for 

twelve lesson of greece and latin.’ 

‘indeed! i am equally happy and surprised. who can be so liberal? is 

colonel manner returned?’ 

‘no, no, not colonel mannering; but what do you think of your 

acquaintance, mr. charles hazlewood? he talks of taking his lesson here; 

i wish we may have accommodation for him.’ 

lucy blush deeply. ‘for heaven’s sake, no, mr. mac-morlan, do not let 

that be; charles hazlewood has had enough of mischief about that already.’ 

‘about the classics, my dear young lady?’ wilful seeming to 

misunderstand her; ‘most young gentlemen have so at one period or another, 

sure enough; but his present study are voluntary.’ 

miss bertram let the conversation drop, and her host made no effort to 

renew it, as she seem to pause upon the intelligence in order to form 

some internal resolution. 

the next day miss bertram took an opportunity of converse with mr. 

sampson. express in the kindest manner her grateful thanks for his 

disinterested attachment, and her joy that he had got such a provision, 

she hint to him that his present mode of superintend charles 

hazlewood’s study must be so inconvenient to his pupil that, while that 

engagement lasted, he had better consent to a temporary separation, and 

reside either with his scholar or as near him as might be. sampson 

refused, as indeed she had expected, to listen a moment to this 

proposition; he would not quit her to be made preceptor to the prince of 

wales. ‘but i see,’ he added, ‘you are too proud to share my pittance; and 

peradventure i grow wearisome unto you.’ 

‘no indeed; you were my father’s ancient, almost his only, friend. i am 

not proud; god knows, i have no reason to be so. you shall do what you 

judge best in other matters; but oblige me by telling mr. charles 

hazlewood that you had some conversation with me concerning his studies, 

and that i was of opinion that his carry them on in this house was 

altogether impracticable, and not to be thought of.’ 

dominie sampson left her presence altogether crest-fallen, and, as he shut 

the door, could not help mutter the ‘varium et mutabile’ of virgil. 

next day he appear with a very rueful visage, and tender miss bertram 

a letter. ‘mr. hazlewood,’ he said, ‘was to discontinue his lessons, 

though he had generous made up the pecuniary loss. but how will he make 

up the loss to himself of the knowledge he might have acquire under my 

instruction? even in that one article of writing,--he was an hour before 

he could write that brief note, and destroy many scrolls, four quills, 

and some good white paper. i would have taught him in three week a firm, 

current, clear, and legible hand; he should have been a calligrapher,--but 

god’s will be done.’ 

the letter contained but a few lines, deep regret and murmur 

against miss bertram’s cruelty, who not only refuse to see him, but to 

permit him in the most indirect manner to hear of her health and 

contribute to her service. but it conclude with assurance that her 

severity was vain, and that nothing could shake the attachment of charles 

hazlewood. 

under the active patronage of mrs. mac-candlish, sampson picked up some 

other scholars--very different indeed from charles hazlewood in rank, and 

whose lesson were proportional unproductive. still, however, he gain 

something, and it was the glory of his heart to carry it to mr. mac-morlan 

weekly, a slight peculium only subtract to supply his snuff-box and 

tobacco-pouch. 

and here we must leave kippletringan to look after our hero, lest our 

reader should fear they are to lose sight of him for another quarter of a 

century. 
