the project gutenberg ebook of everybody's book of luck, by anonymous 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 

other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 

whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 

the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 

www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 

to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 

title: everybody's book of luck 

author: anonymous 

release date: july 10, 2017 [ebook #55082] 

language: english 

character set encoding: ascii 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook everybody's book of luck *** 

produce by chri curnow, christopher wright, and the 

online distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

(this file was produce from image generous made 

available by the internet archive) 

everybody's 

bookof 

luck 

whitman publishing company 

racine, wis. poughkeepsie, n. y. 

print in u.s.a. 

contents 

chap. 



page. 

i. 

things that bring you good luck and bad luck 

3 

ii. 

have you a talisman? 

6 

iii. 

hint on fortunetell 

12 

iv. 

palmistry—what may be learned from hand 

13 

v. 

your handwriting reveal your character 

32 

vi. 

your face is your fortune 

40 

vii. 

what do your bump mean? 

46 

viii. 

how astrology decide your destiny 

49 

ix. 

your child's occupation decided by the stars 

55 

x. 

what are your hobbies? 

59 

xi. 

what is your lucky number? 

60 

xii. 

your lucky color 

65 

xiii. 

which is your lucky stone? 

67 

xiv. 

dreams—what they mean 

72 

xv. 

teacup fortunetell 

83 

xvi. 

lucky and unlucky days 

91 

xvii. 

the luck of flower 

99 

xviii. 

superstition regarding animal 

104 

xix. 

crystal gaze 

107 

xx. 

the moon and the luck it bring 

111 

xxi. 

fortunetell by means of play cards 

113 

xxii. 

fortunetell games 

137 

xxiii. 

the luck of wedding and marriage 

151 

xxiv. 

folklore and superstition of the month 

159 

xxv. 

a calendar for lovers 

173 

xxvi. 

making useful mascot 

191 

[3] 

things that bring you good luck 

and bad luck 

ask a dozen people whether they have any superstitions, and the majority 

will tell you, without hesitation, that they have not the slightest 

belief in such things. if the truth is told there are very few of us who do not 

cherish some little weakness in this direction. one person may believe in 

a number of superstitions; another has, perhaps, only a few that are observed; 

but he or she that has none at all is a remarkably rare individual. 

as a matter of fact, most superstition are base on reason and sound 

common sense, and the man or woman who pay heed to them is acting 

intelligently, whether he or she know it or not. take, for instance, the 

belief that it is unlucky to walk under a ladder. true, the old assertion is 

that it is unlucky to do so because jesus christ was taken down from the 

cross by means of a ladder. but the more practical reason is that painter 

and other men on ladder are very likely to drop things and, if you happen 

to be passing at the time, the paintpot or the tool will fall on you. 

of course, the reason for all superstition are not so evident as this one 

about walking under a ladder: nevertheless, there is a germ of reason in them 

all, whether or not we know the reason. thus, the man or woman who 

observe the common superstition of everyday life is acting wisely. not 

only will he or she avoid a good deal of trouble, but his action will 

provide him with a sense of well-being, and the effect it will have on his 

mind, the psychological effect as it is called, is all to the good. 

it is not propose to explain why this or that superstition is worthy of 

being observed; in many cases, the reason is obscure; but here we will give 

some of the belief which are current at the present time. 

first of all, you should never pass anybody on the stairs of a private house, 

and, while talk of stairs, it may be said that many people believe that, 

for someone to fall up a step, is a sign of an approach wedding. 

never light three cigarette with the same match unless you are prepared 

for a spell of ill-fortune. this superstition gain currency during the war, 

probably because a match held long enough to light three cigarette would 

give the enemy a clue to your position, especially at night-time. 

if the cord of a picture frame snap and the picture falls to the ground, 

it is an omen that somebody is go to die. if the picture is a portrait 

of a living person, then that person's life is the one likely to be terminated. 

this omen may be considered a remarkably silly one, with not a shred of 

sense to recommend it. yet how many people can point to instance when 

the prophecy has come true! 

of salt, there are several omens. the chief one tell you not to help anybody 

to salt; in other words, it is unwise to put some on a person's plate. 

helping them to salt is helping them to sorrow. another superstition says[4] 

that if you spill salt you will be unlucky unless you throw a pinch of it 

over your left shoulder. 

to break a mirror is known by all as a serious matter. the reason why 

it is unlucky, we are told, doubtless find its origin in a mere association 

of ideas. the mirror being broken, the image of the person look into 

it is destroyed: therefore, bad luck in some form must be the fate of the 

careless one. what exactly is the penalty one must pay for break a 

mirror is not definite. some people speak of seven years of misfortune, 

while other claim that it means seven years of celibacy. 

to take certain things into the house is the height of folly, if you believe 

in superstitions. may or hawthorn blossom is one, though the berry of 

this flower seem to have no ill-potency. peacock's feather are another. 

somewhat similar is the contention that it is very unlucky to open an 

umbrella indoors. 

while sitting at the meal-table, there are several things that must not be 

done. helping a friend to salt has been already mentioned, but you must not 

allow the knives or fork to become crossed. quarrel with your friends will 

result if you do. of course, you must not sit down, thirteen of you, around 

the table. as is well known, this belief has its origin in the last supper, 

when our lord sat at meat with his twelve apostles. on the other hand, 

should you taste a fruit for the first time in that season, you have only to 

frame a wish and it will be granted. much the same apply to mince-pies. 

you will be award with a whole happy month for each pie that you eat at 

christmas-time which is made in a different house. of course, it is highly 

unwise for two people to pour tea out of the same pot at the same meal. 

to give a friend an edge tool is sure to cut the friendship, whether it be 

a knife, a pair of scissors, a razor or a chisel. when such a gift is to be 

made, the usual plan is to sell it to your friend for a penny. 

you should never put a shoe on a table, and, to see a pin lie on the 

floor and leave it there, is an omen that you will want before you die. as 

the jingle runs: 

see a pin and let it lie, you're sure to want before you die. 

see a pin and pick it up, then you're sure to have good luck. 

elsewhere, a good deal is said about dreams. here it will be sufficient 

to mention one or two item of interest. it is decidedly unlucky to dream 

of a baby, yet to dream of a funeral is lucky. the following is worth bearing 

in mind: 

friday dream and saturday told; 

sure to come true, if ever so old. 

and here it will be appropriate to recall the fact that it is an unwise 

thing to get out of bed on the wrong side. the devil will be with you all the 

day, if you do. 

you should avoid look at the new moon through glass; but if you have 

a wish that you want fulfilled, you have only to count seven stars on seven 

nights in succession. let it be said, however, that to count seven stars for 

this space of time is not as simple as it appears. 

[5] 

it is unlucky to treasure locks of people's hair, and, should you drop a 

glove, it is to your advantage if someone else pick it up for you. if the 

fire refuse to light properly in the morning, anticipate a whole day with 

the devil. 

everybody know that one of the luckiest things that can be done is to 

pick up a horse-shoe. but it is not generally known that the more nail left 

in it, the better. nor is it sufficient well recognize that a shoe, hung up, 

should have the tip point upwards. if they are turn down, the luck 

will run out of them. 

naturally, you will never start anything fresh on a friday, and you 

will not cut your fingernail on a sunday. regarding fingernails, a poet, 

of sorts, has said: 

cut them on monday, you cut them for news. 

cut them on tuesday, a new pair of shoes. 

cut them on wednesday, you cut them for health. 

cut them on thursday, you cut them for wealth. 

cut them on friday, a sweetheart you'll know. 

cut them on saturday, a journey you'll go. 

cut them on sunday, you cut them for evil: 

for all the next week, you'll be rule by the devil. 

of course, bad luck has not a monopoly on your superstitions, for good 

luck has something to say also. to see a piebald horse is fortunate; to find 

white heather, four-leaved clover or four-leaved shamrock is even more fortunate. 

to open a pea-pod and find ten pea in it is particularly lucky. 

for a black cat to come into your house is worth much. to come across a 

nickel with a hole in it is not without its merits, but the best thing of 

all is to put on some article of clothing inside out, and to wear it all day 

long, without being aware of it until bed-time. 

[6] 
