

your face is your fortune 

everybody sum up the face of his friends and of the people he meets. 

it is a habit we all have. but most of us are apt to classify these face into 

group according to whether the possessor are good-looking, ordinary or 

supreme ugly. we say to ourselves, "isn't so-and-so charming," or alternatively, 

"how positively plain is so-and-so." 

as a matter of fact, the degree of beauty express in an individual's face 

ought to count for very little. what ought to count is the character which 

his or her features reveal. let it be said quite definitely that face indicate 

character more accurate than any other physical property of an individual. 

a person can change his voice and he can check his actions, but he cannot 

alter his features for more than a second at a time, and then only superficially. 

thus it come about that face are definite indication of character, and 

these indication are fairly easy to read, once the rule are learned. of 

course, all such things as accidental blemishes, such as scar and broken 

noses, must be ignore at the outset. 

first, let us take the general shape of the face. 

no. 12. 

the shape of the face.—there can be thousand of different 

shapes, but the normal is shown by fig. 1, where the width across 

the forehead is more than across the chin. the forehead, the nose and the 

rest of the face should be about equal in length. 

add to the width across the forehead and you have a brainy person, a 

clear thinker, a person whose opinion are worth considering. of course, 

an excess of width in this place suggest some mental instability. 

fig. 2 show an entire different type. it may belong to a jolly person[41] 

who is excellent company; but do not go to him for sound advice. there 

is not enough length of forehead, nor width of forehead, to house a superabundance 

of brains. 

fig. 3 introduce us to a ponderous type, slow-thinking, fond of food, and 

with animal instinct lurk in the background of his make-up. 

fig. 4 reveal a long face, narrow for its width. this belong to a person 

who is limited in vision, and who can be very awkward at times. such an 

individual will find it very hard to agree with others, especially in business 

matters. he may be deep and more often than not, he is a rather sad 

companion. 

no. 13. 

the nose.—fig. 1 show the normal nose, betoken an average 

character. 

fig. 2 is too round at the tip. force of character is lacking. 

fig. 3 reveal a droop line between the tip of the nose and the upper 

lip. this stand for a character that love amusement and is apt to neglect 

the real things of life. 

fig. 4 give a pronounced, fleshy curl where the nose join the face. this 

is a sign that the possessor is a clear thinker, a leader of others, an intelligent 

person. 

fig. 5 show a thin, pointed nose. the possessor is, probably, of a refined 

nature, but he or she is apt to be lacking in sympathy, even cruel. 

fig. 6 depict a curve ridge. this is the nose of a person who lack a 

refined nature. he may be jolly and humorous, but certainly not actuate 

by the highest ideals. many nose of this shape are the result of an accident, 

which, of course, do not count. 

a long nose indicate cautiousness, watchfulness, and often timidity. 

a prominent nose that stand well out from the face show a desire to 

observe and examine things, without the interference of others. 

a fleshy tip to the nose display a kindly nature, and a love of ease. 

a short, small nose tell of conceit and a lack of sympathy for others. 

[42] 

a turned-up nose means that the possessor is a busybody, one who cannot 

keep a secret, but may be kind and generous. 

the eyes.—large eyes denote love of talk and the ability to learn 

languages. 

small eyes denote secrecy and close-mindedness. 

full, dark eyes denote love of the opposite sex. 

truthful eyes are set straight in the head. 

untruthful eyes slope towards the nose. 

eyes that slope downwards from the nose are cruel and deceitful. 

eyes set widely apart denote breadth of mind. 

eyes set close together denote narrow-mindedness. 

the cheeks.—full, round cheek denote sociable and a love of 

friends. 

thin cheek denote those who prefer their own company. 

full in lower part of cheek denote love of eat and drinking. 

a moderate full denote hospitality. 

high cheekbone show that the possessor is very methodical. he or she 

is likely to interfere in other people's business. 

the forehead.—prominent brow denote a practical disposition. 

full in center of forehead denote a good memory for dates and events. 

a broad forehead denote a humorous disposition. 

a round forehead denote musical ability; this is usually accompany 

by curve eyebrow and wavy hair. 

the mouth and lips.—when upper lip is deep groove down 

the center, it denote modesty and refinement. 

a plain upper lip, bold and forwardness. 

a long upper lip denote self-esteem and self-control. 

red and full in center of lip, love and passion for opposite sex. 

full at either side show love of children and animals. 

a mouth that display the teeth when smile denote love of approbation 

and attention. 

a full, red, well-developed lower lip denote a kindly, sympathetic disposition. 

thin lip denote a hard, selfish, and unsympathetic nature. the same 

with straight lips. 

no. 14. 

the chin.—a recede chin, as shown in fig. 1, p. 43, denote a lack 

of firmness. it belong to a person who has insufficient will of his own. 

a chin shaped as fig. 2 or 3, or midway between these, provide a very 

acceptable character. there is determination and grit, without an excess of 

these qualities. fig. 2 may be taken as the normal type. 

[43] 

broad, bony structure of the chin denote conscientious and straightforwardness. 

length and projection of chin denote firmness, stability, and perseverance. 

an extremely long and project chin denote stubborn and obstinacy. 

(fig. 4.) 

a full ridge of fat under the chin denote economy. 

wrinkles.—a wrinkle commence in the lower cheek and extend 

right under the chin, from side to side, is cause from constant talking. 

a wrinkle running from the side of the nose, downwards upon the lower 

cheek, to the outer corner of the mouth, is a sign of love of approbation. 

whenever in laughter three parallel circular lines are form in the cheek 

there is a fund of folly in the character. 

wrinkle lie horizontal across the root of the nose denote ability to 

command. 

several perpendicular wrinkle between the eyebrow denote a plodding, 

persevering disposition. 

dimples.—a round dimple in the chin denote love of the beautiful in 

the opposite sex. 

dimple at the outer corner of the mouth are another sign of mirthfulness. 

dimple in the center of cheek are another sign of approbation. 

when a little cleft is seen at the tip of the nose it denote the natural 

critic. 

close attention should always be given to texture and quality of the hair, 

eyes, and skin; this is most important, as the coarse or refinement of 

character is shown very plainly to those who take the trouble to notice these 

things. 

color of hair, eyes, and skin is also very important; the depth of the feelings 

and passion is shown here; poorly colored people are much less passionate 

than their deep colored fellow-creatures. 

thus from dark individual of coarse quality we expect coarse passions, 

and from dark fine-quality individual deep, refined emotions. 

no. 15. 

the eyebrows.—fig. 2 is intended for the eyebrow of a normal 

individual. such a person go about his duty in an ordinary, intelligent 

manner and do his best to make the world a little better place for have 

him in it. 

[44] 

in fig. 1, the eyebrow have insufficient shape. they belong to an 

individual of extremes; he or she is either too determined or devoid of 

kindness. 

in fig. 3, the eyebrow are too curved, form a full semi-circle. this is 

a sign of shallowness; they belong to a person who is not go to put himself 

out for somebody else. 

in fig. 4, the eyebrow are higher at the outer than at the inner ends. 

such are difficult to diagnose. they may belong to a very jolly, funny person; 

but they may also belong to someone absolutely untrustworthy, a foxy 

individual, in fact. they should be read in company with other facial signs. 

in fig. 5, the eyebrow meet on the nose. hesitate before trust a 

person so provided. he may be perfectly reliable, but make sure first. 

nos. 1 to 5 show eyebrow of fine or medium thickness, but figs. 6 and 

7 are coarse and heavier. those that are neither too fine or too thick are 

best, since they are more likely to belong to a well-balanced person. fine 

pencil streak show a finniky, perhaps unkind nature. heavy, bushy eyebrow 

point to an austere, querulous nature. 

in fig. 7, the upstanding hair suggest a nature that may derive pleasure 

from posing. 

a final hint.—in check the "points" of a face, it is often found 

that one feature may contradict another. this do not prove that the explanation 

given above are incorrect. it go to show that the character of 

the individual is not definitely set in one direction. he may vary at times or 

he may have the aptitude for fight against one characteristic in favor 

of another. the only sound plan is to assess the character by striking a 

balance of all the "points" at issue. 

[45] 

have you a mole? 

many people do not like these little marks, but let them be comforted, 

for in olden times, according to the wise men of the day, 

great reliance was placed on them. just what a mole means depend 

on where it is to be found. the following may describe a 

mole of your own:— 

right eye (above).—wealth and a happy marriage. 

left eye (above).—you have a great liking for the opposite 

sex and you will, thereby, gain much happiness. 

temple.—as above. 

nose.—you will succeed in business. 

cheek.—you will be happy, but not be blessed with fame and 

fortune. 

chin.—fortunate in your choice of friends. 

ear (either).—a contented nature. 

arms.—a happy nature, but with something of the "don't care" 

spirit. 

shoulders.—will face difficulty with fortitude. 

hands.—a practical nature. able to take care of yourself. 

legs.—strong willed. 

neck.—you have a great deal of patience. 

[46] 
