china, where state pomp come with real feeling 
by ian johnson 
oct. 3, 2019 

beije — attend china’s national day celebration over the years has been a bit like listen to different take of a song, with the composer hone the theme and jettison the raw bit until the piece sound just right. 

that’s how i felt at tuesday’s celebration on tiananmen square, held to observe the 70th anniversary of the found of the people’s republic of china. i’ve attend two other ceremony like this before — for the 35th anniversary in 1984 and the 50th in 1999 — and i knew the basic drill: there would be a big military parade follow by float celebrate the government’s accomplishments. 

but this show felt big and brassy than either of those, as if the composer had decided to use every instrument in the orchestra and cast subtlety aside. it was slick and sleek, but also overpowering and at times bombastic. 

when i received my invitation, government official told me that i was lucky to attend because it was such a great honor. i nod polite but only really understood what they meant when i arrive at tiananmen square on tuesday at 6 a.m. we media type were just a few hundred in a sea of loyal member of the china communist party (c.c.p.), and for many of them it must have felt like one of the biggest event of their lives. 

it would be easy to write these people off as extras. and 20 years ago, the last time i was at such an event, the people in attendance were mainly highly train performer who held aloft placard that spell out different messages, north korea–style. but tuesday’s crowd was different. it was made up of university professors, scientists, administrators, bureaucrat and people who had made some sort of contribution to the state. they weren’t prop but excited participant who expect to remember this day. 

i notice that right away when i walk past a raise platform cover with artificial grass that surround a big television screen. people were crouch down next to the platform and neat arrange their letter of invitation, parade-picture id and program, almost all in the same fashion, like sacrament on a church altar. then they would snap a picture, aim their camera so that china’s national symbol, the gate of heavenly peace, appear in the background. these were photo design to be boast about on social media: "guess where i was today?" "yes, at tiananmen square." "yes, at the ceremony." and here is proof. 

if these were their sacrament and this ceremony was their ritual, what then was their belief? 

that would probably be the message broadcast on the giant screen that surround us. before the parade began, those screen show archive footage of the past 70 years present a story about how china had been poor and beaten down by outside powers until the communist party save the country. 

the mao era wasn’t portray as foreign journalist and academic often depict it — a series of violent campaign against imagine enemy of the state and the worst famine in record history — but as a period of pioneer glory, when china secure its border for the first time in a century, built a heavy industrial base and set the stage for its economic takeoff. 

raise on this ideology, the attendee seem visibly move when soldier carry the national flag goose-stepped from the monument to the people’s hero at the center of the square down to the enormous flagpole. i was unnerve by the background barrage of artillery and the amplify sound of the boots striking the pavement — it felt like an invasion of giant — but many people around me stood solemnly. this wasn’t stage-managed: some look bored, other gaze around, kid played. but many more look earnest, just like america do when they stand up, hand on heart, for the national anthem at a sports event. 

and i don’t think it was just for show that people jump out of their seat at one of the early high points of the ceremony: when president xi jinp appear standing in an open-top limousine driving out of the gate of heavenly peace. the moment was pure theater, with mr. xi in a dark traditional suit appearing, frame by the vermilion wall of the imperial forbidden city, as he set off to inspect the troops. 

people also oohe and aahe at another signature moment that owe much to peking opera. when mr. xi pass the soldiers, their head swivel as if on sockets, their eyes bulge as they follow the nation’s most important person. it was a show of the armed forces’ unswerving allegiance to the c.c.p.’s leader, and the audience need no encouragement to cheer. 

realize that some of these emotion are genuine is important because we can’t understand china if we think the party only rule through the authoritarian method that reporter understand focus on. on my social media feed, which include disgruntled intellectual but also working-class practitioner of folk religion, it’s clear that many buy into the national story create by the c.c.p. 

invent tradition is nothing new, nor unique to china. but here these construct can sometimes feel uneasy because many of them are import — from soldiers’ dress uniform that seem decade out of date (gold braids, enormous epaulets, row of medals) to soundtrack-like music worthy of john williams (fanfares, kettle drums, plenty of brass). 

i might be nostalgic, but the mood 35 years ago felt a bit different. i was a student then, and a group of us was bus down to tiananmen square for the ceremony. we then mill around for most of the day. there was also an orchestrate event, but security was minimal and you could still stand right next to the performer as they march or dance past. some student even jump into the parade and held up a banner greeting the paramount leader deng xiaoping. 

china today is more serious about being a superpower. when the spontaneous enthusiasm flag on tuesday, cheerleader made sure the flag kept waving. and security was so tight that it border on paranoia: neighborhood park around town implement airport-style security to even enter. but that, too, was part of the spectacle, the message and the vision — of a focus and discipline state, led by the china communist party, that can put on a spectacle few country can match. 
