

how astrology decide your destiny 

astrology is one of the oldest science in the world. it is said to have 

originate with the egyptians, almost at the very beginning of time. indeed, 

it is almost impossible to trace a period when this science was not practiced. 

there is nothing new under the sun, and its close follower will scarcely 

allow any error in its deductions. they go so far as to declare it to be an 

exact science, a term which means that everything can be reasoned out and 

proved; nothing is left to guesswork. 

such science are mathematics, algebra, and geometry. we need not 

believe that astrology is all this, but certainly some very startle and accurate 

prediction have been made by astrologers. 

however, as in all other method of fortunetell attempt by us mortals, 

it is far from infallible. so long as we do not take it to be exact and sure, 

we shall get plenty of amusement and interest from its study, with the exciting 

feeling all the time at the back of our mind that "it might come true." 

here is a list give you the name and meaning given to planet by 

astrologers. 

name. 

approximate meaning given by astrologers. 

mars. 

strength. 

venus. 

beauty. 

mercury. 

capacity for adapt oneself. 

uranus. 

improvement. 

sun. 

life. 

jupiter. 

freedom and growth. 

saturn. 

diminished—shrinking—lack of growth. 

neptune. 

able to receive—receptive. 

earth. 

physical—not spiritual. 

the moon. 

feeling. 

the main idea at the back of astrology is that the planet (or starry 

body which revolve round the sun) each have a strong and vary influence 

upon the mind of human beings. 

the zodiac.—of course when the planet revolve round the sun they 

travel through a course or path. the zodiac is the name given by astronomer 

to the boundary which enclose this course or path in the sky. 

the sign of the zodiac are the space into which the zodiac is divided. 

[50] 

here are the sign of the zodiac arrange in order to show which sign are 

opposite to each other. 

aries. 

facing 

libra. 

taurus. 



scorpio. 

gemini. 



sagittarius. 

cancer. 



capricorn. 

leo. 



aquarius. 

virgo. 



pisces. 

now each sign has a planet which is said to rule it; this is call the ruling 

planet. it is from the nature of this planet that the probable character 

and fate of the individual are told. it is not necessary to know the whys and 

wherefores of this, if you have not studied astronomy it will only serve to 

muddle you, and if, on the other hand, you do understand astronomy you will 

not need any explanation. we will just say what do happen, and that 

will tell you all you need in these first steps. 

well, we all know that the earth revolve upon its axis once in every 24 

hours. now, according to astronomers, this cause one of the zodiac sign 

to appear in the eastern sky, where it remains for two hours. we have said 

that each sign has a planet ruling it, so the sign that appear on the sky at 

the time of birth decide what planet that person is born under or is influence 

by. 

let us suppose for a moment that you were born when the sign libra 

was rising, as the saying is. the planet which rule libra is venus, so the 

person born at that time would be a venus type, i.e., a person have the 

influence of venus upon him. 

in addition to the main ruling planet, astrologer will tell you that there 

are other "neighboring" planets—we will call them neighboring because it is 

a simple term—which also have their effect upon us. astrologer call this one 

planet being "in aspect" with another. for instance, you might have the 

planet mars in aspect with (or influence by) the planet saturn; you would 

then be dealing with a very strong character. 

the quality of mars which give the fighter and the push type, or in 

excess the bully, will be well steady by the quality of saturn, which by 

themselves give cold and, in excess, lack of feeling. the two together 

result in a character remarkable for its steady combine with its never-wearying 

energy and good balance. 

so you see, we seldom find pure type (i.e., quality of mars, or other 

planet by themselves), and it is very fortunate that this is so; we should get 

a very one-sided world if we did. 

now we come to that part of astrology which really interests most people; 

here will be shown the birth-dates for each month in the year and the 

probable character of person born at that special time. you may ask why 

the character are given and why not the fate or future of the person concerned. 

the reason is this: you can be pretty sure that what you read of an 

individual's character will give you a sound idea of what in all probability 

his future will be. 

[51] 

after all, the carving out of our lives is in our own hands. we are the 

master of our fate, or as the song has it, "captain of our soul." 

however, if we believe astrologers, there is a way to tell the times of our 

lives when matter should go smooth or the reverse. the most favorable 

times for speculate with money, start in business, in fact, the most 

and least favorable periods of our lives can, according to astrology, be 

work out by what is known as the horoscope. 

now this horoscope is in reality a chart of your life. the rocky waters 

are shown, and the barrier reef which each of us must avoid through our 

life, so you will see a use in the study of astrology. it would seem to be 

nature's warning to us all of the necessity for effort, effort and again effort. 

here are the birth dates and characteristic of person born between the 

dates mentioned. since astrology is not infallible, do not take all these 

characteristic too seriously. 

you will notice that each date is taken from about the 20th of one month 

to the 20th of the next month. 

when were you born? 

dec. 22nd to jan. 20th. 

people born during this period have considerable mental ability and a keen 

business instinct. they are fond of the imaginative arts. they are proud; 

they like their own way and they see that they get it. generally speaking, 

they are better fitted to lead than to follow others. 

however, they do not take kindly to change of any kind, and are 

annoy by newfangled ideas. they do not want the advice of other 

people and often resent it. they do not strike out in new directions and 

they avoid taking risks. they lack "push." 

to these people, we say: 

don't wait for opportunities—make them. 

don't let your pride persuade you to keep on the wrong road rather than 

turn back. 

don't be afraid of admit and correct a mistake. 

don't run away from trouble; meet it with a bold front. 

jan. 21st to feb. 19th. 

people born during this period have a strong sense of duty. they have a 

kindly disposition and are inclined to be affectionate. they refuse to think 

ill of anyone until the bad quality are proved. being straightforward themselves, 

they imagine everyone else is the same and, on this account, they 

are likely to suffer some bitter experiences. 

however, they lack a proper regard for their own welfare. they are a 

little too confiding and they are not adaptable. once they make up their 

mind on a matter, it is almost impossible to persuade them to change it. 

to these people we say: 

don't brood over troubles. face the facts, fight them out, and then, forget 

all about them. 

[52] 
