

your child's occupation decided 

by the stars 

it is a well-known fact that every human being is considerably influenced, 

as far as character and capabilities are concerned, by the time of the year in 

which he or she was born. that being so, it follow that the occupation best 

suit to any particular individual is, in a measure, related to his or her 

birth-date. 

parent who are anxious to do the best for their children should take note 

of these conditions; they may be helpful in keeping round peg out of square 

holes. below, we offer suggestion which have prove of use in thousand 

of cases, where doubt had previous existed. the information may be use 

in this way: suppose a child is about to leave school and is ready to make his 

or her entry into the world of work. in a number of cases, the child has 

a very definite idea of what he or she wants to do. if the work is reasonably 

suit to the child's temperament, station in life, and so on, it is much the 

best plan to allow him or her to follow the particular bent. it is just as 

well to note whether the chosen occupation fit in with the work which we 

list below for his or her individual birth-date. if it approximate to some 

occupation which we mention, well and good. let the child go ahead, 

there is every chance of success. but, if it is quite alien to anything which 

is given in the list, caution is needed. we do not say that the child's ambition 

should be checked and that he or she should be put to a job of our selection, 

but we do say that caution ought to be exercised. we are perfectly ready to 

admit that the stars and the birth-date are not the only factor which count. 

environment, upbringing, the father's occupation, and other things must influence 

the child. all these influence should be weigh and careful 

considered. 

but where astrology and the stars can give most help is in the case of a 

boy or girl who has no formulate idea as to what he or she wants to 

become. thousand of children reach the school-leaving age without showing 

the slightest inkling for any particular job. to the parent of such children, 

we say, consult the lists set out below, seeing that they are base on astrology 

teachings. go over the select occupation carefully, discuss them with the 

child, explain what they offer in terms of money, work, hours, etc., and watch 

the effect they have on the child. in this way, it will soon be possible to 

gain an idea as to what occupation should be eventually decided on. 

here are the occupation suitable for each person: 

capricorn born (dec. 22nd to jan. 20th).—since people born in 

this period have considerable mental ability, it follow that they do well in 

most of the professions, since they can pass the necessary examination and 

become well qualified. thus, they ought to do satisfactory in medicine,[56] 

the law, dentistry, the scholastic profession and similar occupations. the 

fact that they do not care to take risk unfit them for many business openings, 

but where aspiration are not high, they do well as clerk and in filling 

post which consist of routine work. girls, especially, should seek work which 

is connected with the imaginative arts. 

aquarian born (jan. 21st to feb. 19th).—boys display a good deal 

of interest in occupation which require the use of their hands. this make 

them capable in many engineering posts, in wireless, in cabinet-making and 

similar jobs. they are not good at create or invent in connection with 

these industries, however. there is the rove disposition implant in 

these boys and many of them think that the pilot's job on an air liner could 

not be equalled. 

girl are, also, interested in working with their hands: thus they are fitted 

for dressmaking, the millinery trade, for dealing with arts and craft supplies, 

etc. a certain number are eminently suit to secretarial work. 

piscean born (feb. 20th to march 20th).—children born in this 

period have a love for the sea and, therefore, the boys find congenial work as 

ship's mates, stewards, marine engineers, etc., while girl are suitable for 

stewardess and other job fill by women on ocean-going vessels. 

in addition boys and girl are both fitted to all kind of work in shops, 

chain stores, etc., but they are not at their best when manage their 

own businesses. they require authority behind them. 

a few piscean have artistic ability which should lead them to do splendid 

as authors, painters, musicians, etc. 

aries born (march 21st to april 19th).—the aries child is often a 

problem, for certain of them have a rooted objection to anything in the 

nature of routine work. they chafe at go and coming at the same hour 

each day, and of do the same work year after year. it is not that they 

are lazy, but that their nature refuse to be driven by set rules. with such 

children, it is wisest to interest them in whatever they fancy, until the time 

come when they launch out on some brilliant scheme of their own. aries 

men are the one that fill unusual, out-of-the-way posts. 

where this rooted objection do not exist, the children are good in almost 

any position which permit of movement, as travellers, for instance. 

taurian born (april 20th to may 20th).—as a rule, children who 

are taurian are very successful. they do not mind hard work and they 

have a "flair" for do the right thing, without knowing why. they have 

a head for figures and money, and thus do well in bank and stockbroker's 

offices. they take kindly to long training, which enable them to succeed 

in law and medicine. 

both boys and girl are good with their hands. this make them successful 

in a large number of occupations, as widely diverse as engineering and 

tailoring, or hairdress and piano playing. 

[57] 

gemini born (may 21st to june 21st).—gemini children show a 

good deal of ambition, and their chief fault is that they object to beginning 

at the bottom of the ladder. perhaps this is useful, in a way, as it goad 

them on to climb upwards. they have a good deal of vision. thus 

they make excellent newspaper men and women. they do well in new 

trades, notably in radio and the motor world. also, they ought to make a 

success in certain branch of aviation. their eloquence fit them admirable 

for travellers, and they would make their mark in any business which, 

eventually, gave them work of an imaginative nature. in a general way, 

they find interest in theatrical work, in literary activity and in architecture. 

all gemini people have a streak in their nature which cause them to 

seek unnecessary changes. 

cancer born (june 22nd to july 22nd).—children born during this 

period are usually "workers." they will plod, they do not mind long hours, 

and they will set themselves to difficult jobs, if told to get on with them. 

as a rule, they should be set to something which enable them to work 

"on their own." they much prefer this to being a small peg in a large 

machine. they are suit to small business and agencies. a mail-order 

business might fit in with their requirements. girl would do well as private 

teachers, running small school of their own. they are, also, suit to the 

drapery trade. 

leo born (july 23rd to august 21st).—those who are born during 

this period succeed best in what might be call "clean" occupations. the 

boys do not want to put on overalls and become grimy, and the girl prefer 

work that enable them to be always neat and tidy. both of them show 

aptitude in marketing such things as jewelry, drugs, books and clothes, 

but they do not want to be concerned with making them. they are not so 

much interested in vend the necessaries of life as the luxuries. thus, 

motor cars, victrolas, cameras, sports requisites, etc., attract them. 

they are not much suit to clerical work, but a good number find an 

outlet for their ambition in the theatrical and literary world, while a few 

make good dentists, radiologist and medical practitioners. 

virgo born (aug. 22nd to sept. 22nd).—these children are capable, 

but their great failing is that, once they find a fairly suitable post, they will 

not look for anything better. they prefer to hold on to a moderate certainty 

than to risk a little for a great success. consequently, virgo-born are found 

living on salary just sufficient to keep them from want. 

they are eminently suit to clerical work of the higher types, such as 

in banks, insurance companies, stockbrokers' offices, etc. they make good 

company secretaries, excellent journalists, fairly good actor and actresses, 

and the girl do well as teachers. 

libra born (sept. 23rd to october 23rd).—children of this period 

do not mind hard work, but they hate monotony, especially if it is at all 

sordid. they have good judgment, a quality which fit them for such[58] 

diverse occupation as medicine and the drama, the law and dressmaking. 

no special trades or profession can be single out for them; but, as long as 

they are set to work in a direction which provide them with an outlet for 

a nicely balanced judgment and a capacity for what might be term the 

detective instinct, they should succeed admirably. 

scorpio born (oct. 24th to nov. 22nd).—there is an abundance of 

ambition in these children, and they seek position rather than money. thus, 

the boys do well in the navy and the army, and, in a less degree, in the 

air force. the church hold out good opening for many of them, and 

the mercantile marine interest not a few. medicine attract both boys and 

girls, and so do the stage. anything to do with chemical seem to influence 

many of the boys. scorpio-born children are often heard to say that they 

want to make a name for themselves. 

sagittarian born (nov. 23rd to dec. 21st).—children of this 

period are fond of animals; thus they are suit to become veterinary surgeons, 

horse-dealers, farmer and even jockeys. one section of them, have excessive 

will power and plenty of self-reliance, make a type of individual who 

seek publicity in the politics world. all are capable in business, especially 

in the executive branches. not a few men become company promoters, 

chairmen and directors. the girl make excellent teacher and welfare 

workers. 

[59] 
