
your lucky color 

the old saying, "green for grief," is a well-known one, and the writer 

would rather wear any color on earth than green, not even a green scarf or 

belt. moreover, she see to it that the other member of the family do not 

indulge in the unlucky color. but mind you, green only bring her ill-fortune 

when use for wearing apparel. there is no objection, of course, to a green 

front-door nor to wallpaper of the same color. for such uses, green play 

its part harmless enough. 

though green dress are more distressing to the writer than a red rag 

to a bull, she is quite prepared to admit that many people find it a very 

lucky color. this bring us to the point. there is no color that is universally 

unlucky; it is only so in the hand of certain individuals. with 

others, it may be an absolute harbinger of all that is lucky. even green may 

do this. 

now the question is, "which is your lucky color?" if you know it, well 

and good. make use of it in every possible way. when wearing dress 

made of it, you will feel more confident of yourself than when array in 

something else. you will get more work done, and it will be better work. 

the only thing is that you must be sure that it is your lucky color. if you 

are not quite sure, the tonic effect is absolutely lost. 

not only should you wear your fortunate color, but it is a good plan 

to surround yourself with it. we know a woman who pin her faith to 

purple. her dress are mostly purple; the wallpaper in her bedroom is 

purple; purple case curtains adorn the windows; there are purple rug 

in various parts of the house; even the back of the hair-brush on her dressing 

table is purple. and, since she decided that purple was her lucky color and 

use it in every reasonable way, she has had several stroke of marvelous 

good fortune. 

but, of course, you may say in reply to all this that you do not know 

your lucky color. what then? this is where we can give you a little help. 

most people's lucky color depend on the time of their birth and the following 

list set out the birth colors. we know full well that everybody do not 

derive good fortune from his birth color, but that they find it in some other 

hue. therefore, the proper course is to make trial with the appropriate 

color list below and, if that do not answer satisfactorily, to choose another 

of your own liking and try that. only by personal experiment can you 

finally decide the point. 

these are the birth-colors. the first given for any period is the one almost 

universally accepted. those following after the first are, however, favored 

by a certain number of people. 

[66] 

birth date 

colors 

dec. 22nd to jan. 20th 

emerald green 

sapphire blue 

black 

jan. 21st to feb. 19th 

various blues 

dark green 

feb. 20th to march 20th 

purple 

white 

silver 

march 21st to april 19th 

rose red 

april 20th to may 20th 

turquoise blue 

other shades of blue 

may 21st to june 21st 

light shades of yellow 

orange 

gold 

june 22nd to july 22nd 

mauve 

white 

silver 

july 23rd to august 21st 

gold 

brown 

yellow 

aug. 22nd to sept. 22nd 

yellow 

orange 

light blue 

sept. 23rd to oct. 23rd 

rose pink 

yellow 

oct. 24th to nov. 22nd 

dark green 

red 

brown 

nov. 23rd to dec. 21st 

purple 

blue 

colors, of course, have certain value attach to them: 

white is a symbol of purity. 

red is typical of fire, blood and anger. 

orange stand for marriage. 

green recall spring and suggest youth and hope. 

purple means royalty and everything regal. 

yellow is associate with great success. 

black is a symbol of sad and mourning. 

[67] 

which is your lucky stone? 

ever since time began, it has been a common belief that people derive 

luck and good fortune by wearing precious stones. a stone, however, that 

brought luck to one person might be ineffective when worn by someone else. 

thus everybody is require to find out which stone he or she must wear in 

order to enjoy the utmost good fortune. 

as a rule, the stone which any particular person must choose is decided 

by the month in which that individual was born. but this it not invariable 

the case. many people have notice that luck has come to them when they 

have been wearing some other stone than that decree by their birth-month. 

and, of course, the opposite has often happened. history record a well-known 

case in point. the hope diamond, for instance, wreck the lives 

of several royal personages, even including some that were born in april; 

while an opal, possessed by member of the spain royal family, brought 

disaster to many people, one after the other, although certain of them were 

born in october. 

clearly, then, the proper thing is for all of us to choose our lucky stone 

according to our own preferences; but failing any definite preference to 

select it according to the month of our birth. 

stone of the month 

twelve verse of poetry have been written which set down in rhyme 

the stone for all the month of the year. here they are:— 

january 

by her, who in this month was born, 

no gem save garnet should be worn. 

they will ensure her constancy, 

true friendship and fidelity. 

february 

the february born shall find 

sincerity and peace of mind, 

freedom from passion and from care, 

if they the amethyst will wear. 

march 

who in this world of ours, their eyes 

in march first open, shall be wise, 

in days of peril, strong and brave, 

and wear a bloodstone to their grave. 

[68] 

april 

those who from april date their years, 

should diamond wear lest bitter tear 

for vain repentance flow: this stone, 

emblem of innocence is known. 

may 

who first behold the light of day, 

in spring's sweet, flowery month of may, 

and wear an emerald all her life, 

shall be a love and loving wife. 

june 

who come in summer to this earth 

and owe to june her time of birth, 

with ring of agate on her hand 

can health, wealth and lengthy life command. 

july 
