

dreams—what they mean 

a 

abroad.—(dreamer go or gone) an early journey. 

accident.—(being the victim of one) business deal impending require 

great caution. 

accident.—(to a friend or relative) a letter from him or her convey 

good news. 

anchor.—a voyage across the sea: (in water) a disappointment: (if a 

girl dreams) a sailor will fall in love with her. 

anger.—to dream of being angry with anyone means that that person 

is a true friend. 

animals.—as a rule, luck; (domestic animals) speedy return of absent 

friends, family reconciliation: (wild animals) secret enemies. 

apples.—long life: (to a woman) many years and many children. 

arrow.—a letter has been written which will cause regret. 

axe.—a way will present itself soon to attain a much desire end. 

b 

ball.—(game) money coming soon. (rolling ball) an unexpected gift 

of money which will be soon spent. 

ballroom.—(dancing with a dear friend) marriage to him or her. 

bananas.—a piece of good luck coming. 

band.—(musical) a lucky speculation or business deal. 

barefoot.—a successful speculation or bargain. 

barrel.—(full) money coming quickly. 

bath.—health and long life: (if dreamer is a young girl) early marriage 

to present lover. 

battle.—(by girl) will shortly fall in love; (by a soldier) promotion. 

bear.—(chasing the dreamer) victory of an enemy: (bear running from 

dreamer) victory over an enemy. 

bees.—steady pursuit of object in view will bring success. 

beggars.—to dream of beggar is a fortunate sign to lovers and business 

people. 

blind.—to dream of being blind is a very lucky sign; to see a blind 

person is a warning of danger. 

[73] 

blood.—to see blood means great riches, an inheritance. 

boat.—the arrival of a dear friend. 

bouquet.—to receive one means much pleasure; to give one, constancy 

of a lover or friend. 

bracelet.—good luck and fortune coming. 

brother.—seeing dead brother or sister in a dream is a sign of long 

life. 

bulldog.—a good omen in love or business. 

burial.—to dream of being bury means that wealth is coming—"as 

much wealth as earth laid over you." 

burning.—(houses, etc.) riches and prosperity. 

buying.—happiness and contentment, a legacy. 

c 

cage.—(birds in) early fortunate marriage; (empty) friends or lovers 

will go away. 

cakes.—to dream of any kind of cake is a good omen. 

canary.—(singing) marriage and a charming house. 

cards.—(playing at) speedy marriage. 

cathedral.—prosperity and fortune. 

cemetery.—an omen of prosperity. 

chair.—an increase in the family. 

cherries.—good news, pleasure and enjoyment. 

children.—lucky omen: increase in wealth. 

chimney.—good luck, the higher the better. 

christening.—good fortune approaching. 

cock crowing.—great prosperity. 

coins.—(copper) good fortune; (silver) worry; (gold) commercial 

troubles. 

cold.—friends will be kind to you. 

cornfield.—health, wealth and pleasant times. 

cows.—prosperity, the more the better. 

d 

daffodils.—pleasure and amusement in abundance. 

dagger.—a friend will confer a favor. 

[74] 

dead.—to dream of oneself as dead is a good and auspicious sign of 

long life and success. 

death of a friend.—arrival of good news. 

digging.—good luck with perseverance. 

docks.—good news from abroad. 

dog.—as a rule, a favorable sign; (dog barking) somebody is try to 

do you an ill turn; (dogs fighting) serious quarrel between two friends of 

the dreamer. 

donkey.—lucky omen, usually a legacy. 

doves.—success, especially to lovers. to the married, they denote a 

pleasure in store. 

drowning.—(either the dreamer or another person.) success, joy, 

prosperity. 

ducks.—increased prosperity and happiness. 

e 

eagle.—success in a new place. 

ears.—a pleasant letter from a friend. 

eating.—(dreamer eating) ill luck; (seeing other eat) good luck. 

echo.—sickness either of dreamer or relations. 

eggs.—good luck, money, success; (eggs broken) failure and loss. 

elm tree.—a good turn offer by a male relative. 

elopement.—sign of a speedy marriage. 

emerald.—a sign of good luck and happiness. 

emptiness.—always a bad sign in a dream. 

engagement.—(to dream of being engaged to a handsome person) 

great pleasure in store; (to a plain person) worry and trouble. 

eyes.—in general a sign of good luck, and the pretty the eyes the better. 

to dream of someone with a defect of the eyes signify minor misfortunes. 

f 

faces.—(smiling) happy times with friends; (pale and gloomy) trouble 

and poverty; (changing faces) a removal; (washing own face) repentance 

for sin; (own face in glass) long-cherished secret plan will fail. 

fairy.—all dream of fairy are good omens—success and riches. 

falling.—indicates some misfortune. 

fan.—quarrels, a rival in love. 

[75] 

farmyard.—good fortune coming; comfort and happiness. 

feathers.—(white) success and riches; (black) loss and failure. 

fence.—(climbing) a sudden rise in life. 

fields.—(green) prosperity, a happy marriage, handsome children; 

(clover, barley, wheat, etc.) great prosperity and happiness. 

figs.—a good dream, joy and pleasure; (if a woman dreams) happy 

marriage and many children. 

fleet.—(at sea) realization of cherish hopes. 

floating.—to dream of floating on water is a good and lucky sign. 

floods.—success after triumph over difficulties. 

flour.—death of a relative bring a legacy. 

flowers.—prosperity. 

fly.—(swarm of flies) rival and jealous person are spread scandal. 

flying.—(without wings) success in love and business; (if end by 

a fall) failure in attain object; (with wings) bad omen—frustrated ambition. 

fog.—bad dream—business losses. 

foreign.—(country) success and prosperity at home. 

forest.—trouble and loss through rivals. 

fork.—a warning of imminent danger. 

fountain.—(playing) good luck, happy times and laughter. 

fox.—trouble through secret enemy; (killing one) good luck. 

friends.—(absence of) speedy return; (death of) good news; (illness) 

bad news; (in good health) their prosperity. 

frogs.—beware of flatter and pessimists. 

frost.—success through aid of friends. 

fruit.—usually a good dream, according to kind of fruit; (dreamer 

eat or throw away fruit) bad sign. 

funeral.—a legacy or a rich marriage. 

g 

gas.—minor discomfort and annoyances. 

gate.—an obstacle to success will sudden disappear. 

geese.—happiness, success; (to hear geese cackling) a profitable business 

deal will be quick concluded. 

gems.—usually an unfortunate omen. 

[76] 

ghosts.—to dream of ghost is invariable the presage of misfortune. 

giant.—good fortune, success in business or love. 

gifts.—(receiving) good fortune coming. 

gypsies.—a profitless voyage to many strange countries. 

glass.—to dream of anything made of glass refer to women; (receiving 

glass of water) birth in the family. 

gloves.—usually bad luck; (gloves on hands) honor and safety; (losing 

gloves) loss in business. 

goat.—bad luck, some misfortune, especially unlucky to sailors; (white 

goat) a profitable venture; (many goats) an inheritance. 

god.—a good dream—health and happiness. 

gold.—omen of loss and bad luck: (dreamer finding gold) a sign that 

he will be robbed; (dreamer pay out gold) a sign that he will increase 

the number of his friends. 

gooseberries.—time and trouble spent only for the benefit of others. 

h 

hair.—riches and fine clothes; (hair fall over face) a coming event 

will cause displeasure; (having hair cut) loss in business; (becoming bald) 

great danger. 

hammer.—triumph over difficulties. 

hammock.—loss of something that is prized. 

happiness.—a presage of doubt and difficulty. 

hare.—(alive) friendship: (dead) good luck: (hare running) a lengthy 

journey. 

harvest.—hopes will not come to fruition. 

hat.—(new) a small success: (blown off or damaged) losses. 

hatchet.—a solution near to existing difficulties. 

hawk.—a happy omen—success in life. 

hay.—good luck: (dreamer cutting hay) trouble and sorrow. 

hazel nut.—(eating) trouble and discord. 

head.—good omen—health and money. 

horseshoe.—(seeing one) a journey: (finding one) great good lock. 

hospital.—misery, poverty, wounds. 

house.—good luck: (dreamer building house) unlucky dream, signify 

loss and sickness. 

hunchback.—a trouble life, with many ups and downs. 

[83] 
