

teacup fortunetell 

(in the following pages, you may learn something of the meaning attach 

to the tea leaves which remain among the dregs in the bottom of your teacup.) 

how to test your fortune 

leave a slight amount of tea in the cup, not so much as a spoonful. place 

the saucer on the cup, swill the cup round, male do this so that the liquid 

move round in a clockwise direction, female in an anti-clockwise direction. 

the tea is then run out of the cup, the saucer lift off and the shape or formation 

are ready to be examined. 

no. 17.—birds seen in tea leaves generally denote an end of your troubles. 

what the formation mean 

anchor.—denotes a voyage full of hope. it is considered a splendid 

omen for a sailor's bride. 

arch.—you are to undertake a journey in the near future. it is some[84]times 

a happy omen for a woman, signify that she will marry a tall, handsome 

man and be blessed with healthy children. 

axe.—denotes that your difficulty have now been overcome by your 

own splendid endeavors. you have sever the old bad habit and made a 

clean cut at your past blunders. 

balloon.—although it denote a certain rise in the consultant's fortunes, 

it carry the warning to beware of a sudden fall. 

banana.—signifies to the sick, quick restoration to health. 

basket.—implies that a person, by change his or her mind within the 

last twenty-four hours, has reason for congratulation. 

bells.—if they are connected to a rope, you can look forward to splendid 

news. 

birds.—generally, they denote an end of your troubles. 

boat.—if you cannot discover an occupant of the boat, the symbol means 

a voyage. 

book.—you should ask advice from some friend for whom you care. 

good advice is precious. 

bugle.—you will be the recipient of good news shortly. 

butterfly.—a warning to a young lady that her lover, whom she 

trust implicitly, is rather fond of flit from one "peach" to another. 

cap.—if you see a man's cap, you may have minor worries: if a widow's 

cap, married joy will be yours. 

cards.—if you gamble, you will certainly lose. 

chain.—this bid you put forth every ounce of energy in one big endeavor: 

then, success will be yours. 

cigar.—some of your scheme may "end in smoke." 

clock.—this signify that you are to have an important appointment 

with someone very soon. 

comet.—a symbol to warn you against play with fire. beware. 

cross.—you may have anxiety: but it will soon pass away. 

crown.—denotes great honors coming to you. 

dart.—you will shortly have a proposal of marriage. cupid is about. 

dice.—you will lose money if you gamble. 

doves.—your trial will end when you see this welcome "messenger of 

peace." 

envelope.—good tidings are heralded. 

eye.—look to some other power than your own. 

fingerprint.—a reminder to you to ask and you will find out a secret. 

[85] 

fish.—this signify good news from abroad. if the fish is surround by 

dot you will emigrate. 

flag.—a splendid omen—the best of news is coming from abroad, and 

you are about to experience good fortune at home. 

no. 18.—cross. you may have anxiety, but it will soon pass away. 

foot.—this leaf-picture denote good news which, however, is still far off. 

fork.—your life would be all the happy were you not so easily flattered. 

gallows.—contrary to expectation, to see this picture denote nothing 

of evil significance, but is merely a warning to you to be cautious—in fact, a 

kindly symbol. 

garden.—prosperous, joyful days. 

gate.—a reminder that patience is a virtue, and that the gate to fortune 

will open for you in due course. 

giant.—this denote you are attempt something which is far too big 

for you. better be a successful dwarf than a gigantic failure. 

gypsy.—an invitation to you to wish for something you dearly desire, and 

your wish will be granted. 

globe.—denotes you are to take a roundabout journey leading finally to 

your home. 

glove.—a sign of good luck. 

[86] 

goose.—you will be the recipient of foolish remark from stupid persons, 

but these need cause you no concern. 

grapes.—from time immemorial the symbol of perfect love between 

couples. 

hair.—a lock of hair signify great devotion on the part of your lover. 

halter.—a warning that you are too easily led, and that you must 

cultivate the art of self-reliance. 

ham.—this is a sign you will undergo a brief illness, but will make a 

quick recovery. 

hammer.—triumph over adversity. after enduring many knock you 

will hit the nail of success. 

hammock.—points to the knowledge that your sailor-lover is true and 

dream of you every night. 

hamper.—suggests useful and serviceable, but inexpensive, presents are 

coming. 

handcuffs.—this is a cogent warning to you to get rid of an evil 

habit before it is too late. little sin lead to great crimes, and no one desire 

to receive the attention of the law. 

harp.—count yourself very fortunate. 

hat.—this picture, if it is a lady's hat, signify luck, but if a man's, it 

means that you may experience a slight misfortune. 

hatchet.—this leaf-picture is a warning to take great care or you may 

experience danger. 

initial.—in this important leaf-picture the initial should be careful 

studied. if the initial is form near the rim, the significance is one of good 

fortune. initial most commonly found are those without curves. such 

straight initial are—a, i, l, n, t, v, w. 

interrogate mark.—signifies doubt. be careful. 

key.—an important picture suggest that you look deep and more 

careful in the cup for an initial, which, when you have found it, will unlock 

something that has been up till now a mystery. a closed book will be open 

for you and past enigma unravelled. 

label.—this ticket-like picture, which must not be mistaken for an 

envelope, is the sign that you possess a dear friend who will one day be "tied" 

to you for life. 

lace.—denotes you will err on a very minor and fragile matter and make 

a false move on very flimsy grounds. 

ladder.—if on the side of the cup a rise in your fortune is indicated. 

lady.—points to the fact that you will shortly make a friend of one who 

will prove of great service. 

[87] 

no. 19.—a mark of interrogate signify doubt: be careful. 

lines.—these indicate journeys. 

lock.—this denote that you can safe confide in your nearest friend. 

he or she will lock your secret in his or her bosom. 

locket.—a picture denote steadfast loyalty on the part of a friend 

whom you have not seen for long months. 

look glass.—you are warn by this picture that the world see 

you for what you really are. your character is mirror for your friends to 

gaze upon. 

man.—denotes a visitor who will bring a gift if his arm is outstretched. 

if the symbol is clear he is a dark man; if vague he is very fair. 

map.—a symbol bidding you travel, for you will be sure of success wherever 

you go. 

maze.—a regular "maze of difficulty" confront you, but with care you 

will find a way out of the labyrinth. 

milestones.—you are about to win success after travel a long and 

difficult road. 

moon.—if shown as a crescent prosperity and fortune are indicated. 

motorcar.—denotes that you will achieve a rapid success. 

mountains.—this majestic picture signify an arduous, lengthy, and 

uphill fight against bad fortune. set your heart to it, and toil on to the goal. 

[88] 

mouse.—a reminder that the little irritation you are nursing is really a 

very trivial affair. 

navvy.—a token that you are very bookish, and fond of digging into 

abstruse treatises. you are remind that "all work and no play make 

jack a dull boy." 

necklace.—grace and beauty of body and mind are here indicated. 

needle.—a single needle signify you are able to withstand all the 

sharp prick of circumstances. several needle together mean quarrels. 

pendulum.—great indecision and lack of character are here indicated. 

pennon.—to decipher this small-pointed flag is a sign that someone 

on board a ship is thinking much of you. 

pennies.—they denote great careful in small details, which leads 

to ultimate prosperity. 

ring.—a very important symbol. generally speaking, it always denote 

marriage, especially if seen at the bottom of the cup, in which case search 

for an initial which will reveal to a man or woman his or her future life-partner. 

rivers.—these denote much peace of mind. 

roads.—if the road appear in the clear they predict a speedy change 

of circumstances, usually for the better. 

robin.—this bird always denote hope. if you see it you can cheer up, 

as the trouble you now experience is about to pass away. 

rock.—a massive rock denote great burdens. if there are a number of 

small rocks easy fortune and much happiness are indicated. 

rocket.—another warning against high ambition. 

rod.—if it is long and slender you will be very fortunate. 

roof.—if what appear to be the roof only of a house is seen the signification 

is domestic bliss. 

rook.—great happiness is indicated. 

sailor.—foretells that very shortly you will receive a letter from over 

the sea. 

scales.—this picture is the token that the friend you have weigh in 

the balance and found wanting is really true and just. 

sceptre.—a sign of honor from royalty. 

serpent.—if on the side of the cup and appear to be rising to near 

the brim you may take comfort in the fact that you will shortly receive some 

information which will be of use. 

sheaves.—a good omen of a bounteous harvest of prosperity. 

shield.—a reminder that you have just escape from a great calamity. 

[89] 

ship.—a large ship with funnel and mast is a token of a long journey, 

usually on business. 

thimble.—this homely picture denote that industry and devotion to 

duty bring their own reward. 

thin person.—the figure of a very slender person is usually the sign 

of very prosperous days ahead. 

thistle.—this striking leaf-picture is a sign that you will only achieve 

success by plain living and high thinking. 

thorn.—this is always an excellent omen. good luck and many 

friends are indicated. 

tongs.—suggests you are of a fiery nature, and will quarrel with your 

best friend. 

tongue.—someone you are fond of who is far away is speak about 

you. 

tool.—any instrument of manual operation denote that hard knock 

may be coming. 

triangle.—this is a token of all-round prosperity in love. 

trident.—this is a token of success and honors in the navy. 

wagon.—a reminder that you are soon to undertake a long journey. 

waiter.—this picture denote that riches and married happiness will 

come to you. 

walking stick.—a warning not to lean too much on your own 

efforts. 

waterfall.—indicates the removal of many obstruction in your path 

to happiness. 

weathercock.—this picture points to a friend who is unreliable. 

web.—signifies you will one day be caught in the toils as the result of 

ignore friendly warnings. 

well.—this denote you are not dip deep enough into knowledge. 

[90] 

when will you marry? 

it has long been held that an unmarried person can tell 

how many years it will be before he or she is married, in the 

following manner. 

balance a small spoon on the edge of a teacup. the spoon 

should be perfectly dry. then, with the assistance of a second 

spoon, tilt drops of tea into the balance spoon and count 

them, one by one. the number of drops it take to upset 

the spoon reveal the number of years that will elapse before 

the wedding take place. 

[91] 
