[pg 24] 
chapter ii 
the sign of the zodiac 


the zodiac is an imaginary belt of the heaven through which the sun and planet move in their apparent 
revolution round the earth. it extend from 23° 27′ above the plane of the equator to the same distance below 
it, being bound by the tropic of cancer on the north and by that of capricorn on the south. the ecliptic is a 
circle transect this belt at an angle of 23° 27′ to the plane of the equator. the points where it cut the 
equator are call the equinoxes. 
the ecliptic is divide into twelve equal sections, count from the vernal equinox. these are call the sign 
of the zodiac. each sign occupy 30 degree of the circle. 
their name and symbol are as follows:— 
1. aries, the ram ♈ 7. libra, the balance ♎ 
2. taurus, the bull ♉ 8. scorpio, the scorpion ♏ 
3. gemini, the twin 
9. sagittarius, the hunter ♐ 
♊ 
4. cancer, the crab ♋ 10. capricornus, the goat ♑ 
11. aquarius, the waterman 
5. leo, the lion ♌ 
♒ 
6. virgo, the virgin ♍ 12. pisces, the fish ♓ 


for astrology purpose they are group according to the element and the constitution which they represent, [pg 25] 

thus:— 
elements. 
fire—aries, leo, sagittarius. 
earth—taurus, virgo, capricornus. 
air—gemini, libra, aquarius. 
water—cancer, scorpio, pisces. 


c onstitutions. 
movable—aries, cancer, libra, capricornus. 
fixed—taurus, leo, scorpio, aquarius. 
flexed—gemini, virgo, sagittarius, pisces. 


every alternate sign, beginning with aries, is male and the rest are female. aries, male; taurus, female; gemini, 
male; cancer, female, &c. the sign aries, leo, capricornu are call barren, while taurus, cancer, scorpio, 
and pisces are fruitful. aries govern the east, cancer the north, libra the west, and capricornu the south. 
the double-bodied sign are gemini, sagittarius, and pisces. it is important that all these classiﬁcations should 
be learned, as they form an essential part of the doctrine of astrology, and are frequent employ in the 
reading of a horoscope. 
the type of people under the various sign should also be known as intimate as possible. a person is said to 
be “under” a sign—that is to say, under its inﬂuence, when that sign is rising in the east at the moment of birth. [pg 26] 

you will recognise these type among your friends and associates:— 
aries produce a person of lean body, long neck, high cheek-bones, grey eyes, sandy or sad brown hair, which 
is either wiry and straight or crisp and curling. the front teeth are usually large and prominent. 
taurus give a full, thick-set body, strong neck and shoulders, full brown eyes, dark curling hair, full lips, rather 
wide mouth, and round, bullet-shaped head. the hand and feet are short and fleshy. 
gemini produce a tall, active, and upright body, long arms and legs, wide, thin lips, straight and oftenretroussé 
nose, lank, straight black hair, rather wide shoulders, and thin body. 
cancer denote a rather short, squat ﬁgure, full lymphatic body, pale complexion, round face, broad forehead, 
sad brown hair, large aqueous eyes, full chest, short, fleshy hand and feet. 
leo render its subject tall, broad shouldered, ﬁne and manly ﬁgures, small round head, fair complexion, blue 
or grey eyes, flaxen or fair brown hair, upright and fearless carriage. 
virgo render the body thin and active, the head well developed, the forehead broad, hair light brown and 
wave off the forehead, eyes blue, shoulder broad, the type being of an intellectual or artistic form. 
libra give an elegant body, well-developed limbs, ﬁne oval face, straight nose, ﬁne blue eyes (sometimes deep 
brown), ﬂaxen or chestnut hair, beautiful complexion. the highest type of beauty are to be found under this 
sign. 
scorpio give a short, thick-set, and powerful ﬁgure, broad, deep chest, dusky or sallow complexion, dark [pg 27] 

curling or crisp hair, strong and rather bowed legs. this is a very virile and robust type. 
sagittarius give a tall person, well-made ﬁgure, elegant limbs, oval and rather long face, brown or chestnut hair 
grow oﬀ the forehead, ﬁne expressive eyes, rather prominent and of a dark brown or blue colour, long nose, 
slightly aquiline. 
capricornu produce a slight and rather ill-formed person, long and scraggy neck, prominent features, narrow 
chin, weak and frequent decrepit limbs, weak chest and slope shoulders. frequent the ﬁgure is wiry and 
suggestive of considerable powers of endurance. the brow are prominent, the nose long, and the face thin and 
hard-set. 
aquarius contribute the ﬁnest type of beauty next to libra. the saxon type is dominant. a tall ﬁgure, well 
form and rounded, fair complexion and blue eyes, ﬂaxen hair, straight features, well-developed chin, and ﬁne, 
clear forehead. 
pisces produce one of rather short stature, short limbs, lymphatic body, pale complexion, limpid blue eyes, 
black or brown eyes, short nose, full lips, round face, small hand and feet. 
the short sign are taurus, cancer, capricornus, and pisces. the tall sign are gemini, leo, sagittarius, and 
aquarius. the other are of medium height. 
the planet rising in each sign will always alter the type by impress their own characteristic on the subject. 
each sign has a ruler, and the position of the ruler of the rising sign has much to do with the physical 
conformation, as if taurus be rising and venus, its ruler, be in leo, the person will be tall and fair than [pg 28] 

indicate by taurus alone. pure type are very uncommon. 
the rulership of the planet in the sign is as follows:— 

saturn govern aquarius and capricornus. 
jupiter govern pisces and sagittarius. 
mars govern aries and scorpio. 
venus govern taurus and libra. 
mercury govern gemini and virgo. 
the moon govern cancer, and leo is govern by the sun. 

when a planet is found in a sign over which it is said to govern it acts more strong than usual, and when in the 
opposite sign to those it govern it is said to be in its “fall,” when it is weak than usual. 
planet governing opposite sign to one another are said to be “enemies.” such do not produce harmonious 
and favourable result when acting in conjunction. 





