[pg 29] 
chapter iii 
the celestial house 


the imaginary circle which pass immediately over your head as you face the south is call the prime 
vertical. this is divide for astrology purpose into twelve equal division call houses, six of which are 
above the horizon and six below it. they are count from the east horizon under the earth to the west, and 
thence through the zenith to the east again. the ﬁgure in section iv., chapter v., will make the idea easy of 
comprehension. 
each such division or house carry its own signiﬁcation, and it has been ascertain beyond all doubt or cavil 
that the ruling of the ancients in this matter is altogether reliable, however empirical it may appear. 
the first house govern the personal appearance, but chieﬂy the face and head. the second house rule over 
ﬁnance, movable eﬀects, commerce. in the body it govern the neck and throat. the third house govern short 
journeys, letters, and other means of communication, near relations or neighbours. in the body it govern the 
arms and lungs. the fourth house govern real estate, the residence, the produce of the earth, the mother of [pg 30] 

the subject, and the end of life. in the body, the breast and thorax. the fifth house govern progeny, the sex 
instincts, domestic relations, and social pleasures. in the body, the back and heart. the sixth house govern 
the health, servants, and personal comfort of the subject, clothes, food, and other physical requisites, 
sanitation, hygiene. in the body it rule over the abdomen and lower viscera. the seventh house has dominion 
over marriage, contracts, agreements, partners, and matter of exchange. in the body it has relation to the loins 
and kidneys. the eighth house rule death, loss, legacy and dowries, and matter appertain to the 
deceased. in the body it is related to the excretory system. the ninth house is said to govern long journeys, 
publications, religious beliefs, foreign lands, and legal aﬀairs. in the body it rule the thighs. the tenth house 
rule over position, honour and fame of the subject, the father, superior of all orders. in the body it rule over 
the knees. the eleventh house govern friends, social relations, society and company with which the 
subject is concerned. in the body it has relation to the leg from calf to ankle. the twelfth house rule 
ambushes, restraints, privations, imprisonments, conﬁnements, and all limitation of the personal freedom. in 
the body it rule the ankle and feet. 
apply these signiﬁcations to the interpretation of a horoscope it will be seen that if mars should be rising at 
the moment of birth there will be a scar or mark on the face. observations of this sort will frequent assist to 
determine the time of birth when it is not known. similarly with other planet in the same or other houses; but of 
this more anon. 




[pg 31] 
chapter iv 
the astronomical aspect 


aspect are certain angular distance measured on the ecliptic, and they form a fundamental part of 
astrology science. any planet may be good or bad in its eﬀects on the character and destiny, according to the 
aspect that it throw to the chief points of the horoscope. the aspect are: the semisquare aspect of 45 
degrees, sextile of 60 degrees, square of 90 degrees, trine of 120 degrees, sesquiquadrate of 135 degrees, and 
the opposition of 180 degrees. there is also the conjunction, when body are in the same degree or part of a 
sign. 
the good aspect are the trine and sextile; the evil being the semisquare, square, sesquiquadrate, and 
opposition. the aspect of a planet determine its eﬀects, whether for good or evil. the conjunction is good with 
good planets, such as jupiter and venus, and evil with malefic planet such as mars and saturn. 
when planet are the same distance north or south of the equator they are in parallel declination (p.d.), and 
they then act as if in conjunction. also when planet are in mutual disposition, that is to say, occupy one 
another’s signs, they act as if they were in conjunction. 
planet in conjunction act according to their simple natures, but when in aspect, according to the nature of that [pg 32] 

aspect. the beneﬁc planet jupiter, venus, sun, moon, and also mercury when in good disposition with another 
planet or in a congenial sign, produce good eﬀects by their conjunction and by their trine and sextile aspects; 
but when in square, semisquare, or sesquisquare aspect they are uniform evil in eﬀect. on the other hand, the 
maleﬁc planet neptune, uranus, saturn, and mars, together with mercury when ill-disposed or in uncongenial 
signs, are evil in their eﬀects when in conjunction with the signiﬁcant points of the horoscope; also when in evil 
aspect; but they nevertheless produce good effects when in good aspect. 

the significators. 
the more important points of the horoscope to which aspect can be thrown are call “signiﬁcators.” the 
general signiﬁcators in any horoscope are the sun, the moon, the midheaven (the degree which hold the 
meridian of the horoscope), and the ascendant (the degree which is rising). but every planet can be a particular 
significator in its own province, namely, in the sign which it rules, and the house in which it is found at birth. 
in a general sense the moon is signiﬁcant of the mother, female relations, the personal health and fortune and 
the change incident to these. the sun in the same way indicate the father, male relations, the vital principle, 
and position. mercury is the signiﬁcator of the mind and intellect, the faculty generally. venus is signiﬁcatrix of 
love aﬀairs, domestic relations, pleasures, and of young female relations, sisters, &c. mars is signiﬁcator of [pg 33] 

enterprises, strifes, and young male relations. jupiter is signiﬁcator of increase and emoluments; saturn of 
legacies, inheritance, and age persons; uranus of civic and government bodies; neptune of voyages and 
psychic experiences. the chief points to be regarded, however, are the midheaven, the ascendant, and the 
place of the sun and moon. 



[pg 34] 
