coronaviru and the panic epidemic 
by ian johnson 
jan. 30, 2020 

beije — the absurd of the situation hit me on wednesday when i was coming home from a local bar at 8 p.m. i had ridden my bike a few hour early to a park for a walk and then to meet a friend — my first human contact in five days, excluding the cashier at the grocery store. 

but the side gate i’d use to leave the enormous communist-era compound was now chain shut. what? a notice in china said it was lock to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus. 

so i head toward the north entrance. that one is for pedestrian and has two barrier set slightly apart, just wide enough to get through on foot. that’s o.k., i thought, i can squeeze by with my bike and be home in a few minutes. 

i rode around the block, but when i got to the gate i had to slam on the brakes. someone had taken a dozen ride-share bikes, lash them together with wire and pile them in between the barriers. then, for good measure, they’d fasten the heap to the post with more wire, making it into some sort of postmodern commentary on our hypermobile society. 

laughing, i rode on to the main entrance. it has a car entrance with a big gate and on either side, walkway for pedestrians. one of those was also pile high with ride-share bike sacrifice for the national good; the other was protect by two security guard i’d never seen before. they block my way. 

"what do you want?" one of them asked. 

"to go home. i live here." 

"have you been to wuhan recently?" 

"i just rode back. i’m exhausted!" 

the humor was beyond their pay grade. 

"is anyone in your home from wuhan or has been there recently?" 

i need to stop fool around. 

"no, i haven’t been there in four years. i live alone. no fever. i feel fine." 

they silent let me through. 

this felt like the height of foolishness: why would the gate be open during the day but lock down at night? do virus operate like vampires? that’s when i realize the guards’ effort was just part of a borg-like lockdown that the state had put into place with the alacrity of official in full c.y.a. mode. 

the next day i was clean my apartment: no one could enter beije anymore, so my one luxury, an hour-a-week house cleaner, was stuck in her village even though the main phase of the lunar new year holiday was over. there was a knock on my door. it was the good people from the apartment management office, mrs. luo and her assistant. 

"oh, mr. zhang, nice to see you," mrs. luo, the henna-haired manager of lease renewals, said, address me by my china name. "is there anyone from wuhan in your apartment?" 

"no. still not." 

"o.k. take a look at this please." 

she hand me a sheet from the local communist party district committee, list dos and don’ts to follow during the outbreak. 

do seek help. do listen to the local government. do keep warm. do stay at home. do avoid contact. do wash your hands. don’t spit. don’t exert yourself too much. don’t associate with people who’ve recently arrive from the infect area around the megac of wuhan. on the back was a list of all the communist party street committee and their phone numbers. 

finally, after five years of living in this neighborhood and countless fail effort to register my complaint about illegal construction at night, i had some phone numbers. i file the sheet for future use. 

the germany language has, as usual, a hyper-specific word for this phenomenon: "aktionismus," literally actionism, or action for action’s sake. what i was witness was aktionismu in the face of a problem that require a sensitive response involve public trust. but since the china government cannot elicit either of those things, i was seeing the compensatory flailing-around of a state with no other options. 

instead of have an adult conversation with the population about the virus and putt in place reasonable policy that have been use effectively elsewhere, the china state has gone into full lockdown mode. this demonstrate one of those truism from politics science: authoritarian government are like people who don’t have any finger but do possess two thumbs. they can take forceful action but can’t fine-tune the lever of government. 

actually, i’m not being fair. when the china communist party has time, it can come up with and use sophisticated policy — witness its co-opting of traditional faith to fill a spiritual vacuum in society. 

but when face with a crisis, the party can’t seem to avoid grand gestures: building hospital from scratch in two weeks, lock down ten of million of people, ban million more from travel to big city and so on. in some ways, a moment like this one is a technocrat’s dream: when western health care expert say that this sort of lockdown won’t work, they basically mean it’s never been try on this scale with this kind of uberefficient government. 

now that it’s being tried, not just in beije but also across the country, the effects are kind of thrill to watch. apartment compound like mine are being fumigated. (with what? who cares!) people are walking around with loudspeaker blare out warning against the virus. village are close their gate as if bandit were on the prowl. and go to a restaurant or a bar is almost an act of treason or, at best, foolish selfishness. 

the most interesting question is why the party feel the need to carry on like this. i think it know the people don’t trust it in these case and assume there has been a cover-up. 

hence one of the most popular figures in the crisis: zhong nanshan, the hero of the 2002-3 sar outbreak, now 83, who is back in action, treat patient and warning citizen about the need for hygiene. he has been adopt as the incorruptible official — a familiar trope in china history, the confucian official who stand tall despite pressure to bend. and so we read endless profile of dr. zhong in china social media, discuss his family background, upbringing, success and apolitic pursuit of science-based truth. the clear implication is that he is that rare official capable of such principled conduct. 

behind all this lie the feeling that most other people in the party can’t quite be trusted. this has been reinforce over the past few days by report that at least eight people who were detain in wuhan in early january on charge of spread rumor are in fact medical doctors, not fear-mongering ne’er-do-wells. this startle fact is now leak out in online report that are sometimes, but not always, being blocked. at some point, the government will have to admit to a partial cover-up. 

considering the underlying distrust, it’s hard for the government to say what many epidemiologist are saying: this outbreak is serious but not catastrophic. because if the state level with the people, it would also have to admit that there is no need for this degree of social control. some 259 people were report to have die as of saturday evening, in a country of nearly 1.4 billion, and there is no indication that we are at the start of a hollywood disaster-style movie. 

the government’s inability to formulate a measured response will turn this outbreak into a direct successor of the sar epidemic. that hardly was a huge public health disaster — few than 800 death — yet it has taken on a legendary reputation as a catastrophe of unimaginable proportions, one that should never be allow to recur. 

but of course a new outbreak has occurred. 

do this mean that the state will suffer? i don’t think so. for despite their mistrust of the system, people over all are go along with the lockdown. in private conversation and on chat rooms, they say it’s impossible not to take drastic action in a country as big as china. 

in this sense, the population has absorb the government’s narrative of china exceptionalism: running china require a strong hand, and these measures, as absurd as they seem, are proof that the government is do a good job — and portend that the party will come out of this, as always, triumphant. 
