
section iii 
how to read the horoscope 
chapter i 
the planet in the house 


it is impossible to categorical state the eﬀects which are due to the position of the planet in the several 
houses, because very much depend upon the sign they are in and the aspect they have from other planets. 
the means of judge the eﬀects is very simple, when once the nature of the planet and the dominion of the 
several house have been thorough digested. thus, it is ﬁrst necessary to see in what house a planet is 
situated. then consider the nature of the planet in the following concrete manner: 
neptune means chaos, confusion, deception. 
uranus, eccentricity, originality, estrangement. 
saturn, privation, hindrance, denial. 
jupiter, affluence, fruitfulness, increase. 
sun, dignities, honours. 
mars, excess, impulse, quarrels. 
venus, peace, happiness, agreement mercury, commerce, versatility, adaptability. [pg 52] 

moon, changes, publicity. 
now look to the things that are govern by the house in which any particular planet is situated at the moment 
of birth (sect. i., chap. iii.). 
suppose saturn to be found in the 11th house. saturn is “privation” and the 11th house is the domain of 
“friends.” hence a paucity of friends, or such as there may be are evil or unfortunate to the subject. jupiter in 
the 2nd house, in the same manner, would signify “increase” of “money and possessions.” mars in the 7th 
would indicate “quarrels” with “partners”; and so on. each planet reﬂects its own nature upon the aﬀairs 
govern by the house in which it is found at the moment of birth. 
it will not infrequent happen, however, that there are more than one planet in the same house. suppose two 
planet to occupy the same house. in such case one may be good (jupiter), and the other evil (mars). it is then 
necessary to take ﬁrst that which ﬁrst come to the horizon or midheaven, that is to say, the one which is in the 
early part of the house, and next that which follows. thus saturn follow by jupiter in the 11th house, would 
signify misfortune by means of adviser and friends, follow at a later period in the life by some great good 
through the same source. the degree which separate the planet will indicate the years which elapse between 
these change of fortune. similarly if there be more than two planet in the same house; in such case you may 
safe predict many change in that department of life which the house is said to rule. 
but the fact of a planet being in a house is not of itself suﬃcient evidence from which to make a judgment. the [pg 53] 

aspect which that planet has must also be considered, for in this matter saturn when throw a good aspect to 
any of the signiﬁcators—the sun, moon, ascendant or midheaven, and well aspect by other planets, is to be 
prefer to jupiter when the latter is badly placed and aspected; for jupiter has his own ill eﬀects, and saturn 
has his good inﬂuences. jupiter is only a beneﬁc when acting by conjunction or good aspect with another 
planet, and saturn is only a malefic when acting by conjunction or evil aspect. 
these things being duly considered, it is possible to arrive, with even brief experience, at the result that are 
signify by the planet in the several houses. 




[pg 54] 
chapter ii 
the constitution 


the sun is the chief signiﬁcator of the constitution, and the aspect he hold to the other planet are to be 
considered. thus if he be found in good aspect, or at least not in evil aspect, to the other planets, the 
constitution may be judge as sound. 
when, however, the sun is aﬄicted by some planet and assist by others, there will be only a moderate 
constitution, and judgment has to be made as to which inﬂuence predominates, the good or evil. when the 
aﬄicting planet are angular—that is to say, in the 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10th houses—the congenital or hereditary 
tendency to organic disease is by that circumstance so much the stronger. but when the assist planet are 
angular, the predisposition to disease is considerably mitigated, and in most case entire overcome. 
the predisposition of the body to aﬀections of a constitutional nature is to be judge from the prevalence of evil 
aspect to the sun, and the parts of the body liable to be aﬀected are judge from the sign which are occupy 
by the afflict bodies. 
the various aﬀections due to the several planet have already been cite (sect. i., chap. i.). the sign are 
group for purpose of pathological study as follows:— 
the movable signs—aries, cancer, libra, and capricornus—have relation to the head, stomach, skin, kidneys, [pg 55] 

liver, and spine. 
the fixed signs—taurus, leo, scorpio, and aquarius—are related to the throat, heart, blood, and excretory 
system. 
the common signs—gemini, virgo, sagittarius, and pisces—are related to the lungs, bowels, and nervous 
system. 
it will also be advisable to read sect. i., chap. ii., in order to determine the special points liable to aﬀections, the 
nature of the affection being judge solely by the planet which cast the malefic aspect to the sun. 
when the sun is found to be aﬄicted by several planets, and at the same time there is no assistance from the 
good aspect or conjunction of other bodies, then the constitution is deem faulty and liable to early 
disruption. but when there are several planet aﬄicting and at the same time some beneﬁc inﬂuences from 
others, it is probable that there will be prolonged disease and physical weakness, though life will continue. 
death in infancy occur when the maleﬁc planet are immediately rising or culminate at the birth in evil aspect 
to the luminary which at the time may be above the horizon. also when there are maleﬁc planet immediately 
setting or passing the nadir, in evil aspect to the luminary below the horizon. but when there are mitigate 
inﬂuences from the good aspect of the beneﬁc planets, or the luminaries, the maleﬁc planet will not induce 
death, but there will be great difficulty in rearing. 




[pg 56] 
chapter iii 
health and sickness 


the aspect of the moon are the chief consideration in the matter of sickness. if the moon be found to be 
aﬄicted by the evil aspect of several planets, and no assistance be given by the good aspect of others, then 
the health will be precarious and frequent spell of illness will result. the moon being well aspect and not in 
any way aﬄicted, show that the health will be well established, and that there will be immune from sickness of 
all sorts. 
the consideration necessary to be made in this matter are similar to those which have been cite in regard to 
the sun and the constitution, except that we substitute the moon for the sun. for, whereas the sun govern the 
vital power in man, the moon govern the functional powers, and whereas the sun denote those aﬀections 
which are congenital or hereditary, the moon denote such as are brought about by cause after birth. similarly, 
the sun denote aﬀections which are incidental to the body, while the moon denote such as are accidental 
thereto. 
these points being borne in mind, they may be memorise at sight:— [pg 57] 


sun. moon. 
organic. functional. 
hereditary. acquired. 
incidental. accidental. 


but it should be observe that the constitution may be strong and the health may be at the same time very bad, 
or, on the other hand, the health may be good and the constitution may be weak. in the ﬁrst case, there would 
be a long life of considerable suﬀering from ill-health; and in the second case, there would be little or no ill- 
health for some considerable time, but the constitution would give way and the vital powers become deplete by 
the first serious illness that occurred. 
only when the sun and moon are both unaﬄicted by evil aspect or conjunctions, the health and constitution 
are both good, and there is every indication of a robust and vigorous life reach to a ripe old age. 
when the sun and moon are both heavy aﬄicted, and there is no assistance given by good aspects, there is 
every probability of death in infancy, or before reach maturity. 
for reason which are allied to the connection existing between the constitution and the health, the good aspect 
of the moon to the sun at birth is an excellent augury, for it indicate co-ordination between the organic and 
functional. where this co-ordination exist there is always considerable power of recuperation, so that illness is 
easily overcome and the balance of power restore in the system. 
maleﬁc planet rising and aﬄicting either the sun or moon indicate prolonged ill-health, and most frequent [pg 58] 

some permanent hurt to the body. 
when predisposition to illness is shown in the horoscope, the particular aﬀection can be determined by the sign 
which the aﬄicting planet hold. thus if saturn aﬄict the moon from aries, you will judge some hurt and 
obstruction in the head, chill and colds, inﬂuenza, coryza, &c. similarly mars in leo would indicate functional 
defect of the heart due to accelerate action and overstrain, such as result from fevers. 
a good aspect of the planet jupiter and venus is of material help in counteract the inﬂuence of maleﬁc 
aspect or evil positions. 
thus it will be seen that the health may be judge entire apart from the constitution, the planet which are in 
aspect to the moon being of first consideration, and next those which may be rising at the time of birth. 




[pg 59] 
chapter iv 
how to read character and disposition 


ptolemy says: “mercury is the ruler of the rational soul, the moon of the animal soul.” by this he would mean, no 
doubt, that mercury has relation to the faculty of the mind, while the moon is related to brain function. there are 
certain attribute of the mind which are distinctive of the human being, and certain other quality which are 
common to man and the lower animals. these latter are under the dominion of the moon, while mercury has 
chief signification of the rational faculties. 
the position and aspect of the moon and mercury are therefore to be considered in making judgment of the 
mental endowment and disposition of the subject. 
planet that are in conjunction or aspect to either the moon or mercury will impress their nature strong on the 
character and disposition. the nature of the planet have already been recite (sect. i., chap. i.), and it is 
therefore only necessary to consider further, in this connection, the nature of the aspect that is thrown to the 
mental signiﬁcators by the other bodies. thus the sun being in trine to the moon will give a proper degree of [pg 60] 

independence and dignity, while the square aspect or opposition of the sun would indicate an excess of pride, 
harmful to the subject in his ordinary relationships. in the same manner, the good aspect of jupiter would show 
benevolence and regulate philanthropy, while the opposition or other evil aspect of the same body would 
indicate extravagance and ostentatious display of charity. 
the good and bad aspect of the planet may be sum up in a few lines as follows:— 

in good aspect. in evil aspect. 
neptune—genius, inspiration. insanity, obsession. 
uranus—originality, invention. obstinacy, eccentricity. 
saturn—steadfastness, fidelity. deceitfulness, suspicion. 
jupiter—benevolence, joviality. ostentation, profligacy. 
mars—energy, executiveness. impulse, destructiveness. 
sun—dignity, independence. vanity, egotism. 
venus—affability, art. self-indulgence, disorderliness. 
mercury—alertness, ingenuity. inquisitiveness, meddling. 
moon—grace, idealism. inconstancy, awkwardness. 


the general trend of the disposition and habit of mind is judge by the position of the majority of the planets, 
according to the “constitution” of the sign they occupy. thus, the majority of the planet being in— 
cardinal or movable sign indicate executive ability, business aptitude, pioneer spirit, ambition, capability to 
cut out a line in life for oneself, and to make headway against diﬃculties. such person are usually the foremost 
in their particular sphere of life, and are always found in the most progressive movements, reforms, &c. 
fixed signs—stability, patience, endurance, method, caution, and diplomacy. such person are apt to become [pg 61] 

the originate of school of thought, policies, and schemes. they have ﬁxity of purpose, determination, 
independence, and pivotal stability. they sit still and the world revolve around them. 
flex or common signs—versatility, flexibility, suavity, adaptability, and lack of originality. such people usually 
have too many irons in the ﬁre, and take in hand more than they can bring to satisfactory conclusion. this is 
due to their versatility. they have a superﬁcial knowledge of many things, but lack the persistence to bring that 
knowledge to practical eﬀect. at the same time their adaptable is the occasion of many success in life, and 
their agreeableness, sympathy, and suave create many friends for them. 
in the wheel of life the cardinal sign denote the rim or tyre which is ever on the move, have the greatest 
acceleration. the common sign represent the spoke of the wheel, unite the tyre to the nave, and in that 
sense represent the power of adaptability. the fixed sign represent the nave, which remains quiescent and 
still, being useful by that pivotal stability and apparent non-entity. 
thus, while the sign-groupings of the planet are useful in give the keynote of the nature and disposition, the 
particular faculty and characteristic are to be judge only from the aspect of the planet to the moon and 
mercury. further, it will be noted that those planet which occupy the 3rd and 9th houses, and those also which 
are just rising at the moment of birth, will strong impress themselves on the nature, apart from any aspect 
they may hold to the mental rulers. this is on account of the natural relationship of those house to the mind 
and its means of expression. 
due attention must be paid to the position and aspect of those planet which are in aspect to the mental [pg 62] 

rulers, for if they be badly placed, in uncongenial signs, and themselves badly aspect by other planets, they 
will not act with the same direct and force as they otherwise would do. 
it is of course admitted, in all astrology inquiries, that the eﬀects of heredity, training and association count for 
something. a man who is generate from a vitiate parentage, badly nourish and imperfect trained, cannot 
be expected, even with the best aspects, to manifest the highest faculty in their fullest or most perfect 
expressions. i have not the slightest doubt that many a clodpole was born under similar aspect to those which 
obtain at the birth of shakespeare, raphael, newton, or cæsar. i am not dismayed. non gli astri muovono 
solamente per roma! who shall tell the tale of the world’s starved, neglected, and submerge genius? we are 
do the right thing, at all events, in keeping the school-door wide open. 
but to continue. the inspiration and ardent temperament is indicate by the majority of planet being in fiery 
signs. the mental or intellectual temperament is shown by the majority in aerial signs. the psychic or emotional 
temperament by the majority in watery signs, and the practical or sordid temperament by the majority being in 
earthy signs. 
the rising sign at birth often impress itself strong on the mind of the subject, and its characteristic are 
those which belong to the planet which govern it, and the “elemental” nature of the sign itself. 
thus you have the chief key to the estimate of character in the individual, and when once the student is [pg 63] 

convinced by experience of the paramount reliability of this method of character-delineation, its use will need 
no special pointing. 

mental and brain disorders. 
when either the moon or mercury is aﬄicted by the maleﬁc planets, that is to say, when neptune, uranus, 
saturn, or mars are in conjunction or evil aspect with the mental signiﬁcators, and there be no relieve aspect 
from the beneﬁc planets, jupiter, venus, or the sun, then there is every predisposition to aﬀections of the brain 
and nervous system. this is the more to be fear when the moon or mercury is aﬄicted in the ﬂexed or 
common signs. this observation has been scientiﬁcally establish by mr. a. g. trent, in his little work entitle 
“the soul and the stars,” to which the student is refer for a mass of statistic evidence. 




[pg 64] 

