[pg 76] 
chapter viii 
marriage circumstances 


the question as to how, when, and where marriage will take place is an all-absorbing one to the majority of men 
and women, and no less important than interesting. astrology has made it possible to answer these question 
categorical and with particular precision and verity. 
the conditions of connubial life are judge (in a male horoscope) from the condition of the moon and venus, 
and (in a female horoscope) from that of the sun and mars. the planet to which the luminary ﬁrst form an 
aspect after birth (that which it “applies” to) denote the marriage partner. if the aspect be good there will be 
agreement and the choice of a partner will be fortunate. but if the aspect be evil, there will be trouble after 
marriage. the nature of the planet to which the luminary form its aspect after birth ought also to be considered, 
for if it be that the luminary apply by a good aspect to a beneﬁc planet, or to one that is well-placed and 
aspected, then there will be considerable happiness and fortune in marriage. on the other hand, if both the 
aspect and the planet be evil—as if the moon were apply to the opposition of saturn or uranus or mars— [pg 77] 

then the fate in marriage will be extremely unhappy and disagreement will be frequent and even permanent. 
when the aspect and the nature of the planet are at variance, as when the moon has a good aspect to saturn, 
or a bad aspect to jupiter, there will be a mingle fortune of good and ill in marriage. there is no better sign of 
happiness and harmony in marriage than a good aspect between the sun and moon. 
moreover, it may happen that the moon apply by good aspect to a planet after birth, and that there is at the 
same time a maleﬁc body in the 7th house. this indicate that there will be agreement in the connubial life, but 
that bereavement will soon follow. 
when the moon apply to neptune there will be some peculiarity or touch of genius in the partner, according as 
neptune may be aspected. uranus show eccentricity and sometimes wilfulness. saturn show steadiness, 
industry; or jealousy and coldness. jupiter indicate a good nature, bountiful and honest, but may be given to 
excess and extravagance. mars induce industry and practicality, but it give a strong temper and considerable 
independence. the sun show dignity and loyalty, but may indicate ostentation and foolish pride. venus 
denote peaceful and a genial, reﬁned nature, but its perversion bring indiﬀerence, neglect and 
disorderliness. mercury denote an active and energetic nature, but may produce a busybody and meddler. 
everything depend on the aspect which the signiﬁcant luminary throw to the planet it apply to, for if the 
aspect be good it will indicate the better quality of that planet; but if evil, then there is frequent the 
unfortunate consequence of choose a partner in whom the pervert quality of the planet are predominant. [pg 78] 

good planet in the 7th house indicate a good partner, but when at the same time the aspect of the luminary is 
evil, it will denote a good marriage, follow by bereavement. 
marriage to a widow (or widower) occur when mars and saturn are the planet concerned in the indications, as 
if mars be in the 7th house and in aspect to saturn, or if the moon apply to mars when aspect by saturn, or 
when one of them is in the 5th house and the other in the 7th. 
love aﬀairs before marriage are indicate by the 5th house, the planet therein and their aspects, and in a 
general sense by venus in a male horoscope and mars in a female horoscope. 
thus if venus (or mars) be aﬄicted by saturn or uranus there will be disappointment in the early aﬀections. 
uranus in aspect to venus give romantic attachment and much inﬂuence over the other sex. neptune in 
aspect show idealism, and when aﬄicting venus it produce chaos and entanglement, danger of seduction. 
mars afflict venus give ardour and impulse. 

more than one marriage 
is indicate when the luminary is in aspect to more than one planet in a double-bodied sign,e.g., gemini, 
sagittarius, or pisces. or, if the luminary itself be in a double sign and in aspect to any planet other than one 
which may be in the 7th house. also a double sign being on the cusp of the 7th house, and the luminary in a 
fruitful sign, cancer, scorpio, or pisces, or in aspect to planet in those signs. all these are sign of more than [pg 79] 

one marriage during life. 
sign of separation or divorce are as follows: the luminary apply to the ill aspect of a maleﬁc planet, venus 
aﬄicted, and uranus in the 7th house or aﬄicting the moon or venus. in female horoscope change the 
significators, taking the sun and mars instead of the moon and venus, and judge the same. 
where more than one marriage is shown, the ruler of the 7th house denote the ﬁrst partner, and the planet 
ruling the sign it occupy is call its “dispositor” or “displacer.” this dispositor represent the second partner. 
the planet to which the signiﬁcant luminary apply is that which is taken to describe the partner, according to 
the sign it is in. but if this planet be retrograde, i.e., go backwards in the zodiac by apparent motion, then it 
only represent an attachment which will be broken oﬀ. its dispositor then become the signiﬁcator of the 
partner. but the ruler of the 7th house is taken for the condition and fortune of the partner, and if it be aﬄicted 
or badly placed and weak in the horoscope, then the marriage will be ill-assorted, unfortunate, and full of 
dissatisfaction. the contrary is the case when the significant planet is well placed and aspected. 
the place or circumstances under which the partner will be met may be known from the sign and house 
occupy by the planet to which the luminary ﬁrst apply after birth. thus if it be in the 11th house, the partner 
will be met among friends, at the house of a friend, or introduce by a friend. if in the 3rd house, then on a short [pg 80] 

journey or in correspondence; in the 5th, at a place of amusement; in the 10th, in the course of business; and so 
on, judgment being made according to the place and circumstances rule by the house occupy by the 
planet. 




[pg 81] 
chapter ix 
indication of progeny 


the 5th house, the planet therein and the position and aspect of the moon, have to be considered in this 
matter. 
if the 5th house be occupy by beneﬁc planets, or planet well aspect by others, then the progeny will be a 
source of satisfaction and credit to the subject, and will be rear to maturity. but the contrary is the case when 
the 5th house is occupy by malefic planet and such as may be heavy afflicted. 
the moon represent the tendency in the male and the capacity in the female, and when well aspected, or free 
from evil aspect and well placed, then there will be good fortune in connection with the progeny. 
when uranus aﬄicts a planet in the 5th house, there will be some premature births, and generally it will be 
observe that when planet are oppose from the 11th and 5th houses, or maleﬁc planet occupy those 
houses, there is trouble through the progeny, and usually the loss of one or more during infancy is to be feared. 
as to the number of children, no empirical rule exist for the judgment of this matter, which necessarily is a [pg 82] 

diﬃcult one owe to the fact that we have no means of compare the horoscope of man and wife, but the 
nature of the sign on the cusp of the 5th house is usually to be depend upon for an approximation. thus 
aries, leo, and capricornu give small families. taurus, cancer, virgo, scorpio, and pisces give large families, 
and the other sign yield a moderate family. when the moon is strong, angular, and not aﬄicted, the number is 
increased. twin are born from double-bodied sign occupy the cusp of the 5th house, or planet in the 5th 
in a double-bodied sign. 
the condition of each child is known in a general manner from the alternate houses, commence with the 5th. 
thus the ﬁrst child is (in a male horoscope) rule by the 5th house, and planet therein; the second child by the 
7th house; the third by the 9th house, and so on. in a female horoscope the ﬁrst child is rule by the 4th house; 
the second by the 6th house, and so on. 
thus if it be found that there is probability of loss of some of the progeny, the children most liable to aﬄiction 
may be known by this method; for the house which contain the maleﬁc planets, or the aﬄicted planets, 
correspond to the afflict progeny. 
illustrious children are born to the subject when the ruler of the 5th house is in elevation and well aspected, and 
in a congenial sign. but if the ruler of the 5th house be badly placed and aspect and in a sign of debility, i.e., 
opposite to one over which it rules, then the progeny are ill-equipped for the battle of life, either mental or 
morally. the particular quality and fortune of the progeny can only be known from their individual horoscopes. [pg 83] 

when maleﬁc planet hold the 12th house in a female horoscope, there will be danger in conﬁnement; and the 
same happen if either of the luminaries, but particularly the moon, be afflict in the 5th house. 




[pg 84] 
chapter x 
voyages and journey 


the indication of short journeys, inland and around the coast, are to be judge from the 3rd house and the 
planet therein. if a movable sign be on the cusp of the 3rd house, or planet in a movable sign occupy the 3rd 
house, then there will be much travel and many short journey to and fro. the aspect to these planet in 
the 3rd will indicate whether such journey will be mainly successful or not. when there are no aspect to the 
planet or planet in the 3rd house the fortune of short journey is to be judge from the nature of the planet in 
the 3rd, as if jupiter, they will be fortunate and lucrative; but if saturn, unfortunate and subject to many 
hindrance and delays. when maleﬁc planet are aﬄicted in the 3rd house, or maleﬁc planet in the 3rd throw 
evil aspect to the sun or moon, then there will be danger and accidents. 
watery sign on the cusp of the 3rd house, or planet in watery sign in the 3rd, indicate cruise and yachting, 
short journey by water around the coast. if the moon be in good aspect to these planets, then there will be 
safety in passage; but if aﬄicted by the planet in the 3rd there will be danger of collision, capsizing, &c., [pg 85] 

according to the nature of the planet in the 3rd house. 
long voyages are to be judge in exactly similar manner from the 9th house, the planet therein and their 
aspects. 
the 4th house indicate the place of birth, and if this house hold a beneﬁc planet, or either the sun or moon, 
well aspected, then there is fortune in the place of birth, and journey should only be undertaken when they are 
without doubt fortunate in their issue and admit of a return to the native place. when, however, the 4th house 
is occupy by evil planet or planet heavy aﬄicted, it will be advisable to remove from the place of birth and 
seek fortune in more propitious localities. 
in this matter the choice is made by reference to that planet which hold the greatest power for good in the 
horoscope of birth, and the quarter of the heaven which it occupy will indicate the direction, as from the 
place of birth, to which the subject should repair. 
thus, if between the east horizon and the meridian, south-east; between the meridian and the west horizon, 
south-west; and so of the rest. the points of the compass follow the cardinal points of the heavens, the 
midheaven being south; the nadir, north; the ascendant, east; and the descendant, west. if a maleﬁc planet is 
rising or setting at birth it is advisable to ﬁx the place of residence so much to the eastward of the birthplace as 
will suﬃce to bring the maleﬁc planet out of the angle of the horoscope. the same if maleﬁc planet occupy 
the 10th or 4th houses. on the contrary, if beneﬁc planet are in the 3rd and 9th house the subject should [pg 86] 

move westward so as to bring the benefic influence into the 10th and 4th houses. 
when beneﬁc planet or planet well aspect occupy the angle of the ﬁgure at birth the subject should not 
travel far, nor reside long away from the place of birth. 
indication of many voyages are as follows: many planet in watery signs, cancer, scorpio, and pisces, and 
also in the sign virgo. when the majority of the planet are in cardinal and ﬂexed signs, aries, gemini, cancer, 
virgo, libra, sagittarius, capricornus, and pisces, there will be many change and journeys. also if the sun, 
moon, mars, and mercury are in either the 3rd, 9th, 12th, or 6th houses, there will be many journey and long 
exploration in foreign countries. 
when planet are aﬄicted in watery sign there will be danger in voyages, and if the moon or sun be aﬄicted in 
virgo there will be submersion due to wreck. 
also, when there are planets, especially maleﬁcs, in scorpio, leo, taurus, and aquarius, aﬄicted by the 
aspect of other planets, or themselves afflict the sun or moon, then there is danger of drowning. 
when the sign of voyage are propitious, and especially when the indication in the 4th house are not so, 
then removal from the place of birth to some other permanent centre of activity will be advisable. but when good 
planet or planet well aspect are either rising or in the 4th house, the subject should remain in his native 
place, and in the end his patience will be justified. 




[pg 87] 
chapter xi 
of friends and enemy 


the general harmony of the horoscope consist in the position and aspect of the planet and their relations 
with the luminaries. when this is conspicuous there will be many friends and supporters, and the association of 
the subject will be pleasant and proﬁtable. but when the horoscope is fraught with evil aspect and angular 
position of the malefic there will be much strife and many enmities. 
in a particular sense the friends and association of the subject are to be known from the 11th house and the 
planet therein. for if there be a beneﬁc planet in the 11th, especially if in good aspect to either of the 
luminaries, there will be many friends and adherents. 
similarly, the enemy of the subject are known from the 7th house, and secret enemy from the 12th. maleﬁc 
planet therein, especially in evil aspect to the sun or moon, show many opponents. 
neptune in any maleﬁc aspect to the sun or moon show danger of deceit and treachery being practisedupon [pg 88] 

the subject, and if violent testimony concur from the ill aspect of mars or uranus he will be in danger of an 
ambush. saturn in the 7th or 12th show long feud and implacable enmities. uranus therein show litigation 
and heckle of creditors. mars therein is an index of violence and passionate hatred. mercury therein show 
much scandal and many petty annoyances. 
now observe the place of the maleﬁc planet and the house wherein they are situated. take the date when 
the sun is in the same longitude as any of these maleﬁc planets, which will be the same in any year, and this 
will be the birthday of person who are to be avoid as likely to bring mischief into the life. supposing, for 
instance, that saturn is found at birth in the 10th house, in the 13th degree of the sign aquarius. reference to 
the ephemeri (sect. ii., chap. i.) will show that the sun is in aquarius 13 on the 1st and 2nd february. hence it 
would be unfortunate for the subject to serve any man who was born between the 28th january and the 3rd 
february in any year. also, if uranus were in leo 23 in the 7th house he should not go into partnership or 
marriage with anybody born on or near the 15th august in any year. 
take now the place of the beneﬁc planets, and also the place of the moon, and ﬁnd the corresponding solar 
dates, for these will be the birth dates of such person as should be cultivated and drawn into close association 
for mutual benefit. 
observe also the trine and sextile of the beneﬁc planet and of the moon, and the square and opposi 
tion of [pg 89] 

the malefics, for these will operate in a minor degree in a similar manner as already indicated. 
a comparison of the horoscope of persons, whether kings or plebeians, with those of other who have wrought 
great good or evil in their lives, will immediately establish this observation. indeed there is nothing more 
dependable in the whole range of scientiﬁc observation than this sympathy and antipathy of horoscope and 
their corresponding results. it is an argument for the claim of its advocate that astrology should be regard in 
the light of a science, for if the planet act not at all upon the disposition and tendency of men their square 
and opposition in two separate horoscope would have no signiﬁcation. let those who are unhappily mate 
compare their horoscope and they will ﬁnd the sign of discord to which reference has been made above. on 
the other hand, let any man who has been lift to wealth, fame, or position by the patronage of another 
compare his horoscope with that of his benefactor, and it will be found that the beneﬁc planet in the latter hold 
the place of the sun, moon, midheaven, or ascendant in his own. this frequent account for the fact that 
men with comparatively unfortunate horoscope are sometimes found in position of inﬂuence and in the 
enjoyment of considerable fortune. the complex fabric of life has its warp and woof wherein many coloured 
thread are woven together for the complete of the grand design, and the great loom of life has its wheels 
within wheels which only the great artiﬁcer can understand and regulate. we here below, subject all of 
interplanetary action, must content ourselves with the design as reveal to us in the history of mankind, or we [pg 90] 

must seek to understand the purpose of life, its motif, the complex law which operate to bring about the 
unfold of the great plan, and thence to prognosticate that which hereafter shall be reveal to the 
commonplace observer. 




[pg 91] 
chapter xii 
the end of life 


the end of life is judge from the planet occupy the 8th and 4th houses, for the 8th denote death, and the 
4th denote the ﬁnal resting-place of man. when beneﬁc planets, or the luminary well aspected, occupy 
these houses, you may judge that the end will be peaceful, normal, and that death will take place in the midst of 
congenial and even exceptional agreeable surroundings. 
when, however, the maleﬁc planet hold these houses, or aﬄict the luminary therein, you may judge greater 
stress and privation. 
uranus in the 8th house denote a sudden death, and the same result is observe when the luminary therein 
are aﬄicted by uranus. neptune in the 8th denote danger of trance, coma, and simulated death, and when this 
position is observe it is necessary that all the sign of mortiﬁcation should be present before interment is 
eﬀected. saturn produce death by privation and obstructions, by chill and colds. mars induce death by fever 
and inflammatory action, and frequent by hæmorrhage. 
planet in fixed sign in the 8th house show death from heart or throat aﬀections, aﬀections of the excretory [pg 92] 


