

chapter ii. 

the alphabet of astrology 

the science of astrology consist of four branches, namely, mundane 

astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the aspect of the 

stars, at certain periods, the event likely to happen to nations, such 

as pestilences, wars, inundation and earthquakes; atmospheric 

astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the position of the 

heavenly bodies, the quality of the weather at any particular time or 

place; the casting of nativities, or the art of foretelling, 

from the position of the stars at the moment of birth, the fate and 

character of the native; and horary astrology, or the art of 

foreseeing, by the position of the heaven at the moment, the result 

of any business or circumstance. 

as the two former branch are treat in the astrology almanack 

issue every year by zadkiel, raphael, orion, and others, it is 

needless to go into them; but as the casting of nativity and the 

answer of horary question require individual treatment, the working 

of these two branch of astrology (after the ancient methods) 

shall be describe as clearly as possible. 

before the student can do anything in astrology he must master its 

alphabet—that is, he must make himself thorough acquaint with the 

symbol use to represent the planets, the sign of the zodiac and the 

aspects. 

the planet recognise by the ancient astrologer are, as we have seen, 

seven in number, and are as follows, with their symbols:—saturn, 

; jupiter, ; mars, ; sol, ; venus, 

; mercury, ; luna, . 

there are also the dragon's head, thus symbolised, ; and the 

dragon's tail, . these are neither planet nor sign of the 

zodiac, nor constellations, but are only the node or points where the 

ecliptic is cross by the moon. one of these points looks northward, 

where the moon begin her northern latitude, and the other points 

southward, where she commence her south latitude. the head of the 

dragon is considered of a benevolent nature; the tail of the dragon is 

of evil tendency. 

there are also the twelve sign of the zodiac, which are as follows, 

with their symbols:— 

northern. 



southern. 

aries 



libra 

taurus 



scorpio 

gemini 



sagittarius 

cancer 



capricorn 

leo 



aquarius 

virgo 



pisces 

through these twelve sign the planet continual move, and are ever 

in one or other of them. 

they are divide into north and south. the first six, 

from aries to virgo, are northern; the latter six, from libra to 

pisces, are southern; this is because the sun and planet when 

in the first six are north of the equator, and when in the last six 

they are south of that line. 

each point of the zodiac rise and set once every twenty-four hours, 

occasion by the earth's revolution on its axis once every day; 

therefore, when any given point is rising, the opposite point 

must be setting. 

[3] 

as the zodiac consist of 360 degree from the first point of aries 

until we come to that point again, and as these are divide into twelve 

portion or signs, they must consist of 30 degree each. 

the aspect are five in number; they represent certain position which 

the planet bear to each other as they move through the sign of the 

zodiac; they are as follows, with their symbols:— 

conjunction, when two planet are in the same place, viz., in same 

degree of the same sign. 

sextile, when they are 60 degree or two sign apart. 

square, when they are 90 degree or three sign apart. 

trine, when they are 120 degree or four sign apart. 

opposition, when they are 180 degree or six sign asunder. 

the conjunction () is rather a position than an aspect, as 

planet can hardly be said to aspect each other when they are in the 

same place. when saturn is in the first degree of aries, and any planet 

in the same degree of that sign, they are said to be in conjunction; 

this is good or evil, according to the nature of the planet thus 

posited. 

the trine () is the most powerful of all the good aspects. 

the sextile () is favourable. 

the square () is evil. 

the opposition () is also very evil. 

there are several other aspect (sometimes call the "modern aspects") 

invent by kepler; but as they only appear to complicate what is at 

best a very intricate study, it is best to ignore them and adhere in 

this, as in the matter of the planets, to the old methods. 


