

chapter iii. 

concerning the sign of the zodiac 

the zodiac is a band or belt, measure about 14 degree in breadth, 

but, as venus sometimes appear to have more than her real latitude, it 

is more correct considered to be 18 degree in breadth. the 

ecliptic, or path of the sun, pass exactly through the centre 

of the zodiac, longitudinally. 

the ancients divide the zodiac into ten signs—libra being 

omit altogether, virgo and scorpio being merge into one, thus: 

virgo-scorpio. this account for the similarity of their symbols, 

. 

ptolemy divide the zodiac into twelve equal parts, of 30 degree each. 

he says: "the beginning of the whole zodiac circle (which in its 

nature as a circle can have no other beginning or end capable of being 

determined) is, therefore, assume to be the sign aries, which 

commence at the vernal equinox in march." 

one of the many objection urge against ptolemy's system of astrology 

is that the sign are continual moving from their positions; but 

ptolemy seem to have been aware of this motion of the signs, and has 

met this objection by what he say in the twenty-fifth chapter of the 

first book of the tetra-biblos, where he make it clear that the 

respective influence he ascribe to the twelve sign were considered 

by him to belong rather to the place they occupy in the 

ambient than to the stars of which they are composed; and he especially 

speak of the ambient as produce the effects attribute to the 

respective sign of the zodiac when in the ascendant in a nativity; 

thus his astrology is just as applicable to modern astronomy as it was 

to his own. 

the sign have been divide into four triplicities, thus: 

fiery , , ; earthy, , , 

; airy, , , ; and watery, 

, , . 

the bicorporal, or double-bodied, sign are , , and 

the first half of . the fruitful sign are , 

, ; the barren sign are , , and . 

these description are useful in showing the modification brought to 

bear (by the sign ascending) on the planet's influence. but, when no 

planet are in or near the ascendant at birth, the following 

description of the temperament and form of body produce by each sign 

ascend at birth should be used. 

aries () is a hot and fiery sign and produce a lean body, 

spare and strong, large bones, grey eyes, with a quick glance and sandy 

or red-coloured hair. the temper is violent. it govern the head and 

face; its colour is white. 

taurus () differ greatly, in its effects, from the preceding 

sign; it is cold and dry, and give a broad brow and thick lips. a 

person born under it is melancholy and slow to anger but, when roused, 

furious and difficult to be appeased. it govern the neck and throat; 

its colour is red. 

gemini () is in nature hot and moist and produce a person of 

straight, tall body, sanguine complexion, brilliant eyes and light 

brown hair. the temperament of those born under gemini is lively and 

the understanding good. this sign govern the arms and shoulders; its 

colours are red and white. 

cancer () is by nature cold and moist; it produce a native 

fair and pale, short in stature, with a round face, sand-coloured brown 

hair and grey eyes. those born under it are phlegmatic, indolent and 

gentle tempered. women born under this sign generally have many 

children. it govern the breast and stomach; its colours are green and 

russet-brown. 

leo () is a fiery, hot and dry sign. when it rise at birth 

without any planet being near the ascendant, the native will be of tall 

stature, with yellow hair, ruddy complexion and oval face, and he will 

have a quick glance and a strong voice. it govern the heart, the back 

and the neck; its colours are red and green. 

virgo () is an earthy, cold, barren, feminine sign. when it 

ascends, it show a well-formed body, slender and tall, straight, 

dark-brown hair and a round face. the mind of the native is ingenious, 

but rather inconstant. it govern the belly; its colour is black 

speckle with blue. 

libra () is an aërial, sanguine, masculine, hot and moist sign. 

rising at birth it produce a well-made body, with long limbs, an oval 

and beautiful face, sanguine complexion, straight flaxen hair and grey 

eyes. those born under it are courteous, just and honourable. it 

govern the loins; and the colours under its rule are black, crimson 

and tawny. 

scorpio () is a moist, phlegmatic, feminine sign. it give a 

strong, corpulent body, low stature, thick legs, hair grow low on 

the forehead and heavy eyebrows. those born under this sign are 

reserved, thoughtful, subtle and malicious. it govern the lower parts 

of the body; the colour under its rule is brown. 

sagittarius () is a fiery, masculine sign. the person born 

under its rule is handsome, with a rather long face and features, 

chestnut hair, inclined to bald and ruddy complexion; the body 

strong and active. those born under this sign are fond of field sports, 

are good riders, and are lovers of animals. they are kindly, generous 

and careless of danger. this sign govern the thigh and hips, and 

rule yellow and green. 

capricorn () is an earthy, cold, dry, feminine sign. it 

produce a person of slender stature, with a long neck, narrow chest 

and dark hair. the mind is quick, witty and subtle. it govern the 

knee and ham and, in colours, it rule black or dark brown. 

aquarius () is an airy, moist, masculine sign. in a nativity 

where no planet are in or near the ascendant, it would produce a 

person of a well-set, strong body, long face and delicate complexion, 

with brown hair. it govern the leg and ankle and rule the 

sky-colour or blue. 

pisces () is a watery, cold and feminine sign. it produce a 

person of short stature and fleshy body, with a rather stoop gait. 

those born under its influence are indolent and phlegmatic. it govern 

the feet and toe and preside over the pure white colour. it is 

needful to remember the colours belong to the signs, as they are 

especially useful in horary questions. 


