coronaviru spreads, and the world pay for china’s dictatorship 
by nichola kristof 
jan. 29, 2020 

china’s leader sometimes seem 10 feet tall, preside over a politics and economic juggernaut that has found university at a rate of one a week and that recently use more cement in three years than the united states did in the entire 20th century. 

president trump has hail china’s president, xi jinping, as a "brilliant leader," and michael bloomberg say xi is "not a dictator." but we’re now seeing the danger of xi’s authoritarian model, for china and the world. 

the first known coronaviru infection in the city of wuhan present symptom beginning on dec. 1, and by late december there was alarm in wuhan’s medical circles. that would have been the moment for the authority to act decisively. 

and act decisive they did — not against the virus, but against whistle-blowers who were try to call attention to the public health threat. a doctor who told a wechat group about the virus was discipline by the communist party and forced to admit wrongdoing. the police report give "education" and "criticism" to eight front-line doctor for "rumormongering" about the epidemic; instead of punishing these doctors, xi should have listen to them. 

china informed the world health organization of the virus on dec. 31 but kept its own citizen in the dark; as other country report infection even as china pretended that it had confine the outbreak to wuhan, china joke grim about a "patriotic" virus that only struck foreigners. 

wuhan’s mayor said he wasn’t authorize to discuss the virus until late this month. in that time, people traveled to and from wuhan and didn’t take precautions. 

the government finally ordered a lockdown on jan. 23 that effectively quarantine people in wuhan. but by then, according to the mayor, five million people had already flee the city. 

partly because the government cover up the epidemic in the early stages, hospital were not able to gather supplies, and there are now major shortage of test kits, mask and protective gear. some doctor were reduce to making goggles out of plastic folders. 

one reason for the early cover-up is that xi’s china has systematic gut institution like journalism, social media, nongovernmental organizations, the legal profession and other that might provide accountability. these institution were never very robust in china, but on and off they were tolerate until xi came along. 

i conduct a series of experiment on china blog over the years beginning in 2003 and was sometimes surprise by what i could get away with — but no longer. xi has drag china backward in terms of civil society, crush almost every wisp of freedom and oversight. 

for the same reason that xi’s increasingly authoritarian china bungle the coronaviru outbreak, it also mishandle a swine fever virus that since 2018 has devastate china’s hog industry and kill almost one-quarter of the world’s pigs. 

dictator often make poor decision because they don’t get accurate information: when you squelch independent voice you end up get just flattery and optimism from those around you. senior china official have told me that they are routine lie to on trip to meet local official and must dispatch their driver and secretary to assess the truth and gauge the real mood. 

for this or other reasons, xi has made a series of mistakes. he mishandle and inflamed the politics crisis in hong kong, he inadvertent assured the re-election of his nemesis as president of taiwan, and he has preside over worsen relations with the united states and many other countries. 

the coronaviru has already reach the xinjiang region in the far west of china, and one risk is that it will spread in the internment camp where china is confine about one million muslim with poor sanitation and limited health care. 

virus are challenge for any country, and it’s only fair to note that china do a better job protect its people from measles than the u.s. does. it’s a credit to china’s system that a baby born in beije today has a long life expectancy than a baby born in washington, d.c. more broadly, the united states, which has several impoverish county with lower life expectancy than cambodia or bangladesh, is in no position to lecture anyone about health. 

but, with a dose of humility, let’s get over any misplace admiration some america have for xi’s authoritarian model. 

the china social contract has been that citizen will not get ballot but will live steady better lives, yet china’s economy is now as weak as it has been in three decade — and the coronaviru will sap growth further. xi is not living up to his end of the bargain, and this is seen in the anger emerge on china social media despite the best effort of censors. 

i don’t know if xi is in politics trouble for his misrule, but he should be. he’s a preen dictator, and with this outbreak some citizen are pay a price. 
