

chapter vi. 

concerning the twelve house of heaven and their powers 

the ancient astrologer divide the heaven into twelve houses. 

the first house.—this is call the ascendant, and the 

planet rising therein—whether well or ill-dignified—will material 

affect the mind, bodily appearance and fate of the native through his 

whole existence. this house is masculine, and govern the head and face 

of man and, if the planet mars be in this house at the time of birth, 

there will always be some blemish or mole in the face of the native; if 

a few out of the degree have ascend the scar or blemish is, without 

fail, on the upper part of the head; if the middle part of the sign 

ascend the mark is in the middle of the face; if the latter part of 

the sign is ascend the mark is near the chin. this house represent 

the head, the tongue and the memory, and it govern in colours white. 

the second house.—this house has signification of the native's 

wealth and worldly goods. the house is feminine, ruling the neck, and 

the colour is green. 

the third house.—this govern brother and sisters, short 

journeys, neighbours, letters and writings. it is masculine and govern 

the hands, arms and shoulders; its colours are red and yellow mixed. 

the fourth house.—this rule the father, inheritance or 

property of the native, and show his condition at the close of life. 

it is feminine, and rule the stomach, breast and lungs; its colour is 

red. 

the fifth house.—this signify the children of the native, 

also his success in speculation and hazardous games, the pleasure he 

enjoy and the wealth of the father. it rule the heart, back and 

liver, is masculine, and represent in colour black and white mixed. 

the sixth house.—this concern the native's servants, sheep, 

goat and small cattle. it also signify the father's kindred. this 

house is feminine. it rule the belly and intestine and its colour is 

black. 

the seventh house give judgment of marriage and describe the 

man or woman in all love questions. it is masculine, it rule the 

haunches, and its colour is black. 

the eighth house argue of death, of legacy and wills, also of 

the kind of death a man shall die; it is a feminine house. it rule the 

lower parts of the trunk of the body; its colours are green and black. 

the ninth house give judgment on voyages and long journeys, and 

also on event happening to the wife's kindred. it rule the hip and 

thighs. it is a masculine house; its colours are green and white. 

the tenth house is call the mid-heaven, and is 

feminine. this concern the native's mother, and also his calling. it 

rule the knee and hams, and its colours are red and white. 

the eleventh house represent friends and friendship. it is 

masculine and rule the legs. 

the twelfth house.—this house is often call the evil 

dæmon, for it is the house of sorrow, self-undoing, enemy and 

imprisonment. it govern great cattle. it is feminine, and rule the 

feet and toes, and in colour it govern green. 

the strongest house are the first (the ascendant) and the tenth 

(the mid-heaven). the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth are 

call angular houses, and represent the four cardinal points of the 

compass; thus the first is east, the seventh west, the fourth is north, 

and the tenth south. the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh house are 

call succedent houses; the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth house 

are term cadent house (see plate 1). any planet posit in a cadent 

house is regard as weak in its effects on the native. it is necessary 

to have thorough master the influence of the twelve houses, as 

well as those of the seven planets, and of the sign of the zodiac, 

before attempt to cast a nativity or to work a horary question. 



chapter vii. 

an explanation of various terms use in astrology 

ascension, right.—the distance any body or point in the heaven 

is from the beginning of the ecliptic or first point of aries. it is 

measured in degree and minutes of a degree. it is thus abbreviated, a. 

r. 

ascension, oblique.—if a star be not on the equator, it will, 

when it rises, form an angle with that part of the equator which is 

rising at the same time, and this is call its 

ascension difference.—this, add to its right ascension (a. 

r.) if it have south declination, but subtract from it if it 

have north declination, give its oblique ascension. 

application signify the approach of two planet and is of 

three kinds: first, when a planet, swift of motion, apply to one of 

slow progress: for example, we will suppose mercury posit in 16 

degree of the sign gemini, and mars in 21 degree of the same sign 

(both being in direct motion), mercury being swift would 

overtake and form a conjunction with mars, which is term a direct 

application. the second kind of application is form by two 

retrograde planets: thus we will suppose mercury in 16 degree of 

gemini and saturn in 15 degree of the same sign, both retrograde. 

mercury being the swiftest planet, apply to saturn, a more ponderous 

planet, by retrogradation, and this is call a retrograde 

application. the third kind of application is when one planet, 

being direct in motion, meet another which is retrograde: for 

instance, we will suppose mercury retrograde in 16 degree of gemini, 

and saturn direct in motion in 12 degree of the same sign; here 

mercury, being the higher planet, apply to a conjunction of 

saturn by a retrograde motion. these two last are considered 

evil applications. it should also be remember that the 

superior planets, saturn, jupiter and mars, never apply to the inferior 

planets, venus, mercury and the moon, except by retrograde motion; but 

the inferior planet apply in both ways. 

besiege signify a planet situated between the two malevolent 

planets, saturn and mars: thus, if saturn were in the 12th degree of 

aries, jupiter in the 14th, and mars in the 16th, jupiter would then be 

besiege by the two malefic planets, saturn and mars. this is, 

of course, an evil position. 

cazimi.—a planet is said to be in cazimi when it is in 

the heart of the sun: that is, only 17 minutes before or after the sun. 

all astrologer agree that a planet is fortify by this position, but 

a planet when combust is very evil in its influences. 

direct motion signify that a planet is moving on its natural 

course, according to the succession of the sign of the zodiac: thus a 

planet is direct in motion when it move from aries to taurus, 

or from taurus to gemini. 

frustration means the approach of a swift planet to an aspect 

with one of slow motion; but before it can approach near enough to 

join that aspect the more weighty planet is join to some other, by 

which the first aspect is frustrated. 

hayz is when a masculine diurnal planet is situated above the 

horizon in the daytime, or when a feminine nocturnal planet is placed 

below the horizon in the night-time; this is fortunate in its 

influence. 

node.—that part of the ecliptic where a planet pass out of 

north into south latitude is its south node; that where it go into 

north latitude is its north node. 

oriental and occidental.—a planet, when oriental, rise before 

the sun; when occidental set after him and is seen above the horizon 

when the sun is down; consequently, when a planet is oriental it is 

posit in the east, and when occidental, in the west. 

from the fourth house eastward to the tenth is oriental and from the 

tenth westward to the fourth is occidental. but or 

are oriental between the first and tenth and its 

opposite quarter and are occidental between the tenth and 

seventh and its opposite quarter. 

void of course is when a planet is separate from another 

planet, and do not, during its continuance in the same sign, form any 

aspect with any other planet. this most usually happen with the moon. 

the effect of this is 

to face chapter viii. 


