

chapter viii. 

of the figure of the heaven 

this was formerly term a horoscope, but is now more generally 

call a figure of the heavens. it is simply a scheme, or plan, 

represent an accurate picture of the heavens—that is, of the 

position of the sun, moon, and planets, and, in some instances, of the 

fixed stars also, for the moment at which a child is born. in horary 

question the figure is drawn for the require time, which may be the 

moment of the propound of a question to an astrologer, or of the 

occurrence of any event of the result of which astrology information 

is desired. 

this map, which contain the twelve division already describe as the 

twelve house of heaven, may be drawn in either a square or circular 

form. lil and other mediæval writer use both form indiscriminately; 

but as the latter is more easily understood, the diagram (plate 2) is 

drawn up in that manner. it will be seen that it is form of three 

circles. in the centre space the date, time and place of the event of a 

horary question are entered, and in a nativity the name, sex and moment 

of birth of the native. the next space (divided into twelve equal parts 

for the houses) is reserved for the planet and in the outer space are 

placed the sign of the zodiac, with the number of their degrees, on 

the cusp of each house. the cusp of the house are represent by that 

line between each house. have obtain an ephemeris, or astrology 

almanack 

[7] for the year required, we must find the sidereal time for 

the day and month of the birth, or question; then, if the time of the 

event be before noon we must deduct the difference 

between the given time and noon from the sidereal time of the day; for 

example, on the day of the event (the 9th january, 1889), the sidereal 

time at noon is shown by the ephemeri to be 19 hour 16 minutes 51 

seconds, if the birth had been at 9 a.m. the difference between 9 a.m. 

and noon is 3 hours. we should, therefore, have to deduct 3 

hour from 19 hour 16 minutes 51 seconds, which give 16 hour 16 

minutes 51 seconds, the sidereal time required. 

as the event is supposed to happen at 3 in the afternoon, we 

must add the difference between noon and the time given to the 

sidereal time of the day. the difference between noon and 3 p.m. is 3 

hours, and, as the sidereal time on the 9th january, 1889, is 19 hour 

16 minutes 51 seconds, we add 3 hour to this amount, which 

give 22 hour 16 minutes 51 seconds, the sidereal time required. 

we must now proceed to place the sign for 3 p.m. on the 9th january, 

1889, which is thus done: we turn to the "table of houses" (which will 

be found at the end of the ephemeris), and have found (under the 

column head "sidereal time") the nearest time to 22 hour 16 minutes 

51 seconds, which in this case is 22 hour 16 minutes 48 seconds for the 

latitude of london, we see in the next column (headed 10) the sign 

(pisces), and the number 3° opposite our sidereal time, 

showing that the third degree of pisces is on the cusp of the 10th 

house, in the next column (headed 11) we see , and the number 

7°; we therefore place 7° on the cusp of the 11th 

house, next 24° on the 12th; then 7° 5′ on the 

ascendant (or first house), 23° on the 2nd and 10° 

on the 3rd; for the remain house we place the sign in 

order opposite to those already given, keeping the same number of 

degree to each corresponding house and sign. the opposite house to the 

10th is the 4th, and the opposite sign to is ; we 

therefore place 3° on the cusp of the 4th house, and so on 

of the rest. it will, however, now be seen that the two sign 

and are missing; these sign are "intercepted," which means that 

they lie between two house without occupy the cusp of either; they 

must, therefore, be placed in their order between the cusp of 

the houses. this is, of course, not always the case, and some horoscope 

will have no intercept signs. 

how to place the planets. 

in the ephemeri the longitude of the planet are given daily for mean 

noon; so, to find the exact place of a planet for a given time, 

we must note the difference of longitude between the previous noon and 

noon of the day for drawing the map for a.m. and for p.m., the 

difference between noon of the day and noon of the day after. this 

difference is the motion of the planet in 24 hours, which we 

must work thus: as 24 hour are to—hours (i.e., the difference 

between the given time and noon), so is the daily motion to the motion 

required. for example, the at noon on the 6th january is 

(omitting seconds) in 19° 29′ , and on the 10th january at 

noon he is in 20° 30′ , which give a daily motion 

of 59 minutes. we must find his place for 3 p.m. on the 9th january. as 

24 hour are to 3 hours, so are 59 minutes to the time required; this 

equal about 7 minutes, which we add to the 's longitude at noon 

on the 9th. if the event had been for a.m. this amount would have been 

deduct from the 's longitude at noon on the day 

of the event. we must proceed in the same way for the other planet and 

place them in the map according to their position in respect to the 

degree on the cusp of the houses. the will be in 19° 

36′ , or about the middle of the 7th house. and note 

that the number of degree of a sign on the cusp of any house show 

that that sign commence in the previous house. supposing the 

had been 1° of , we should then have 

placed it in the 6th house, a little below the cusp of the 7th. when a 

planet is retrograde (shown in the ephemeri thus, r.), 

we add the amount to the longitude when the event is before noon 

or a.m., and deduct it from the longitude when the event is 

after noon or p.m. the mode of give the judgment on a horoscope will 

be shown farther on. 


