

chapter xi. 

on form a general judgment on a nativity 

respecting the distribution of the doctrine of nativities, we are to 

consider first the parents, then the duration of life; the shape 

and figure of the body; after these the quality of the mind; then as to 

fortune in regard to honours as well as wealth. in succession to these 

the character of the employment; the question relative to marriage, 

children, and friendships; then that concerning travel; and lastly, 

that concerning the kind of death which await the native from 

the configuration of the heaven at his birth. 

the parents.—in conformity with nature, say ptolemy, the sun 

and saturn are allot to the person of the father, and the moon and 

venus to that of the mother; and the mode in which these luminary and 

planet may be found posited, with reference to each other as well as 

to other planet and stars, will intimate the situation of affair 

affecting the parents. 

if mars should be in bad aspect to the sun, the father will receive 

some injury to the face or die suddenly; but a long life is presage if 

jupiter or venus be in any mode whatever configurate with either the 

sun or saturn. 

if mars be succedent to the moon or venus, or in quartile or opposition 

to them, or if saturn be similarly aspect to the moon only, and both 

of them be void of course or retrograde, or cadent, adverse accident 

and disease will attend the mother; should they, on the other hand, be 

swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend that her life will 

be short or grievous afflicted. 

should the sun be configurated, in any mode whatever, with the moon or 

venus, or should venus herself be harmonious configurate with the 

moon, either by the sextile, the trine, or the conjunction, the mother 

will live long. 

concerning the duration of the native's own life, the hylegliacal[9] 

place are, according to ptolemy, the sign on the angle of the 

ascendant from the fifth degree above the horizon to the twenty-fifth 

degree below it; the thirty degree in dexter sextile thereto 

constitute the eleventh house; also the thirty degree in dexter 

quartile form the mid-heaven above the earth; those in dexter trine 

making the ninth house; and, lastly, those in opposition belong to 

the angle of the west. 

among these places, the degree which constitute the mid-heaven are 

entitle to preference, as being of a more potent influence; the 

degree in the ascendant are next in virtue; then the degree in the 

eleventh house, succedent to the mid-heaven; then those in the angle of 

the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house, which precede the 

mid-heaven. 

he also hold that "the sun, the moon, and the ascendant to be 

considered as the four principally liable to be elect to the office 

of prorogator"—or hyleg. 

these view are not adopt by the modern astrologers, but as this is a 

book setting forth the ancient method it is needless to discuss 

the various objection made by them to this, as to some other of the 

theory laid down by ptolemy. 

among the four prorogator already given, the sun by day is to be 

preferred, provided he is placed in one of the hylegliacal places, and 

if not, the moon; but if the moon also should not be so posit that 

planet is to be elect as hyleg which may have most claim to dominion 

in reference to the sun, the moon and the ascendant, which means that 

the planet should have dominion, in any one of the place where these 

are situated, by at least three dignities. if, however, no planet 

should be so circumstance the ascendant is then to be taken as hyleg. 

by night the moon is to be elect as prorogator, provided, in like 

manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the 

sun; if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which 

may have most right of dominion in reference to the moon, and the 

antecedent full moon, and the part of fortune. but if there be no 

planet claim dominion in the mode prescribed the ascendant must be 

taken; in case a new moon had last precede the birth; but if a full 

moon, the part of fortune. 

if the two luminary and also some ruling planet of appropriate 

condition should be each posit in a prorogatory place, then, provided 

one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important and 

influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen; but should 

the ruling planet occupy the strong place, and have prerogative of 

dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the planet must 

then be prefer to either of them. 

when the hyleg has been determined by the foregoing rules, then note 

whether it is support by benevolent planet in good aspect towards 

it and free from affliction—that is, from evil aspect from evil 

planets—if so, the life is likely to continue and the constitution to 

be strong; but if the hyleg, whether it be the sun, the moon, or the 

ascendant, be afflict with evil planet and there be no assistance 

from good planets, the child will die in infancy: if there be some 

assistance from good planets, but yet the evil aspect exceed the good, 

the constitution will be weak and the first train of evil directions 

will destroy the life. 

concerning the disposition and quality of the mind, we must look 

principally to the planet in the ascendant, the influence of which 

over mind and body have already been given in the chapter on the seven 

planets. we must, however, always bear in mind that mercury has chief 

dominion over the mental faculties, whilst the sentient passion are 

govern by the moon and the planet in the ascendant. the moon 

well-aspected, that is, in trine, sextile, or conjunction to mercury at 

birth, will give to the native excellent abilities, ingenuity, 

versatile and wit. even the evil aspect of the square and opposition 

are better than no aspect at all, though these sometimes produce a 

cynical and obstinate nature. 

the abilities of those born when mercury is in "cazimi" (that is, 

within seventeen minutes of the sun's centre) are of the highest order. 

mercury in conjunction with saturn at birth give clear judgment and a 

love of occult subjects. 

venus in good aspect with mercury give love of music and an artistic 

nature. 

if mercury and the moon throw no aspect to each other and are afflict 

by mars and saturn, the native will be liable to become insane.[10] 

the fortune of wealth is determined by the sun and the moon; if they 

are in good position, that is, angular and well-aspected by the two 

luminaries, the native will be rich. if the sun and the moon are well 

placed, and if there be benefic stars in the mid-heaven, the native 

will rank high in the world. if the contrary, the native never rise 

above mediocrity; and if saturn afflict the mid-heaven, he meet 

disgrace. if mars is strong and in good aspect to the sun and moon, he 

will gain military glory. jupiter on the mid-heaven and the sun and 

moon in trine to each other, the moon, have the trine of jupiter, is 

one of the best position for rising in the world. jupiter in the tenth 

house will cause the native to do fairly well in the world; but saturn 

in that house, if not extremely well-aspected, will bring him to shame 

and beggary. 

concerning the nature of employment, the dominion of the employment is 

claim by the sun and by the planet on the mid-heaven. if mercury 

should rule alone he produce writers, teacher of science, merchant 

and bankers; also, if well-aspected to saturn and the moon, astrologer 

and student of all occult matters; if jupiter is in conjunction, then 

the native will be an orator, actor, or painter and his pursuit will 

lead him into the society of person of rank. 

venus ruling make wine-merchants, dealer in colours, dyes, perfumes, 

drugs, garment or apparel, &c.; if connected with saturn, she make 

person have to do with amusement, players, jugglers, &c.; if with 

jupiter, person attend exhibition and priest who have much 

personal decoration such as catholic priests, bishops, &c. and they 

will gain by women. mars ruling alone make martial men and, if in 

scorpio, cancer, or pisces, naval men.[11] the sun join with him, 

being near the mid-heaven, or in aspect, make person dealing with 

fire or metals, the latter especially if in taurus or leo. if mars be 

separate from the sun, he make shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists, 

stonemason and carpenters. 

if saturn bear testimony in addition to mars, person become mariners, 

worker in mines, wells, vaults, &c., underground, keeper of cattle, 

cooks, butchers. if jupiter join with mars, they will be soldiers, 

innkeepers, tax-gatherers, mechanics. if mercury and venus become joint 

arbiter of employment, they produce musicians, dancers, poets, weaver 

and painters, &c. jupiter in connection with them make magistrate and 

senator and also teacher of youth. mercury with mars make surgeons, 

statuaries, boxers. if mercury be more powerful, they will be 

scientific; and if mars be stronger, they will be more violent and 

cruel in their practices.[12] if saturn join these two, they will be 

thief (especially if the moon be in ill aspect to mercury); if 

be in ill aspect to , they will be robber 

or assassins. if jupiter join and , 

they engage in honourable warfare and are industrious. if venus and 

mars rule together, person will be dyers, worker in tin, lead, gold, 

silver and medical drugs. 

the moon regulate the employment and, separate from the sun and 

form an aspect with mercury, incline to the pursuit of astrology, 

spiritualism and magic. 

concerning marriage, ptolemy has laid down some very clear 

rules. he advise person about to marry to have a care that the 

luminaries—that is, the sun and moon in their respective 

nativities—are in concord. it is of happy augury if the moon in the 

bridegroom's nativity is in good aspect—that is, in trine or sextile 

to the sun in the bride's nativity. the square or opposition aspect 

form between the luminary in the two nativity indicate discord 

and separation, and very evil effects follow if the malefic planets, 

saturn and mars, have a bad aspect to the sun and moon in both 

nativities. if venus be with them the separation will be cause by 

adultery. good planets, such as jupiter and venus, placed between the 

luminary in both nativities, show much happiness. 

in men's nativity the moon must be chiefly considered in regard to 

marriage. should she be in her first or third quarter at birth, the man 

will marry under thirty, or if old his wife will be a very young 

woman. 

if the moon be configurate with saturn, she entire deny marriage. 

if she should be in a sign of single form, such as libra or taurus, the 

native will marry only once, but if she should be placed in a 

double-bodied sign, such as pisces or sagittarius, the man will marry 

more than once. 

if the moon make application to the benefics, the wives will be good 

and true; but if she make application to evil planets, the wives will 

prove either bad or of a quarrelsome disposition. for example: if 

saturn receive the moon's application the wife will prove troublesome 

and morose, yet constant and industrious; if jupiter receive it, the 

wife will be decorous, good and economical; if mars, bold and 

refractory; if venus, cheerful, handsome and agreeable; if mercury, 

sensible, prudent and clever. 

women in whose nativity venus is configurate with jupiter or mercury 

are virtuous and well-conducted; but, when venus is with mars and no 

other planet is there, women born under such aspect are liable to 

become licentious. mars in square to venus show adultery. 

for women the sun is to be chiefly regard in estimate their chance 

of marriage and happiness. if the sun be oriental (i.e., between 

the ascendant and mid-heaven, or between the descendant and nadir) the 

native will marry in her youth; or when old, to a young man. if the sun 

be occidental, the native will marry late in life; or when young, to an 

old man. if the sun be in a sign of single form, she will marry but 

once; if in a double-bodied sign, or configurate with several oriental 

planet (in one sign) she will marry more than once. if saturn be 

configurate with the sun, the husband will be steadfast, prosperous 

and industrious. 

jupiter configurate with the sun give a good, benevolent and 

honourable husband. "mars," say ptolemy, "gives a severe husband, void 

of affection and intractable." venus give an amiable husband of 

handsome appearance. mercury give one who is provident and expert in 

business and of a lively and cheerful temperament. 

if mars be separate from venus and saturn, yet have the assistance of 

jupiter, men will lead virtuous lives. if mars be configurate with 

venus only men are of a licentious temperament. 

saturn, when in the 7th house of a nativity, bring either unhappy 

in marriage or early death of one or other of the married people. the 

sun badly aspect by saturn in the nativity of a woman and the moon 

afflict by the same planet in the nativity of a man, will bring 

trouble in love and marriage. 

description of the wife or husband.—the planet with the sign in 

which it is placed, which is posit near the cusp of the 7th house, 

must be taken to describe the person. if no planet should happen to be 

so placed, then we must go by the sign alone. benefic planet in the 

8th house show that the wife or husband will be rich; unfortunate 

planet show the reverse. 

children.—as regards the probability of have children, the 

10th and 11th house must be consult and, should there be no planet 

in them, then the opposite, the 4th and 5th houses, must be considered. 

the moon, jupiter and venus are said to be give of children; the sun, 

mars and saturn deny children, or give very few and those either die 

early, or are a source of trouble to their parents. mercury either 

give or deny according to the planet with which he may happen to be 

posited. 

if the sun and malefic be in barren sign or in masculine sign and in 

the before-named houses, there will be no children; but if they be in 

fruitful or feminine, or common signs, there may be children, but they 

will be delicate and short-lived. 

if jupiter, the moon and venus, are well-dignified in the 10th and 11th 

houses, the children born will attain rank and distinction in the 

world. 

friends and enemies.—persons born under the same sign of the 

zodiac are likely to be sympathetic; so also if the planet in the 

ascendant of one person's nativity is one which is friendly to that 

which rise in the ascendant in the other's. thus, a person whose 

ruling planet is venus would be attract by one in whose ascendant 

mars is dominant and a person whose ruling planet is the moon rarely 

contract a warm friendship with one who has mars in the ascendant of 

his nativity and vice versâ. the friendship and enmity of the 

planet have already been given in the chapter on the influence of the 

seven planets. 

mars in bad aspect to the sun or moon in the 7th house cause quarrel 

in married life. 

travelling.—the position of the moon and mars are here to be 

considered. if they should be in a cadent position the native will 

travel a great deal. the moon in a watery sign cause much travel 

by water. ptolemy tell us that mars in square or opposition to the sun 

or moon will cause much travel in foreign countries. if the 

benefic are conjoin with the moon, the journey will be safe and 

pleasant; if with the malefic they will produce mischance and 

ill-health in travelling. mercury ascend at birth, in a 

double-bodied or moveable sign, show a great disposition to travel. if 

a malefic affecting the moon should be in the watery sign of cancer, 

scorpio, or pisces, shipwreck and even death by drown may ensue 

during travelling. 

of the manner of death.—if the hyleg and ascendant should be 

well-aspected and if either jupiter, venus, mercury or the moon 

well-dignified should appear in the eighth house the native will die a 

natural death. if either the sun or moon should be badly aspect by 

mars or saturn in the eighth house it is significant of a violent or 

remarkable death. saturn cause lingering death and mars those which 

are sudden. 

saturn indicate death by chronic diseases, rheumatism, ague and 

paralysis. 
