

chapter xiv. 

aphorism cull from the works of ptolemy and other ancient 

astrologer 

whosoever may be adapt to any particular event or pursuit will 

assured have the star indicative thereof very potent in his nativity. 

if virgo or pisces be on the ascendant the native will create his own 

dignity; but if aries or libra be there he will cause his own death. 

venus give pleasure to the native in that part of the body which may 

be rule by the sign she occupies. it is the same with other stars. 

should a disease begin when the moon may be in a sign occupy at the 

birth by some malefic, or in quartile or opposition to any such sign, 

such disease will be most severe; and if the malefic also behold the 

said sign, it will be dangerous. on the other hand, there will be no 

danger if the moon be in a place held at the time of birth by some 

benefic. 

in all horary question remember that there is no affliction to the 

moon so great as when she is in conjunction with the sun; the ill 

aspect for the malefic must affect her, but no evil aspect is so 

powerful as her conjunction. 

mercury in trine or sextile to the moon give the capacity for 

acquire foreign languages. in bad aspect to the moon make the native 

envious, sarcastic, ill-natured, given to lie and thieving. 

saturn in trine or sextile to venus show much power of attachment to 

wife and family. in a woman's nativity this is very good, as it 

indicate purity. 

those born near noon are generally successful in life, owe to the 

sun's influence being then most powerful. those born near midnight are 

by no means so fortunate as those born at midday, and it is a singular 

peculiarity in such nativity that the most remarkable event of their 

lives take place after their thirtieth year, and they are also 

certain of some kind of a name after death, meritorious or otherwise, 

according to what their horoscope declares. person born near midnight 

are very imaginative, and subject to see visions, dream dreams, and to 

be believer in the unseen world. 

in all travels the moon is to be considered, for she is a general 

signify of journeys, whether by sea or land. 

when the moon is besiege between mars and the sun in a nativity, it 

argue a short life to the native. 

mercury, if posit in one of the house of saturn, in trine or sextile 

to that planet, give excellent understanding; and if the moon be also 

well-dignified, the native is much given to the study of occult 

science, and will have much renown in that particular. 

those born with the moon powerful in their horoscope would do well to 

be guide by her aspect in their daily avocations. if she should be in 

trine or sextile to jupiter, it is a good day to seek favours of the 

great, or to make arrangement with employers. when she is in trine or 

sextile to mercury, all intellectual matter taken in hand will be 

likely to prosper. when she is so aspect to venus, matter undertaken 

with reference to love, marriage, or friendship will have a happy 

issue. when she is in square or opposition she would have, of course, 

the contrary effects. 

the sun and moon in conjunction with mercury give to the native great 

intellectual abilities. 

those who have the benevolent planets, jupiter and venus, well posit 

in either the ascendant or the mid-heaven at birth will always be much 

beloved during the whole course of their lives. 

he who is born with the sun in trine to jupiter is fond of rule, and 

very famous in his generation. 

venus in square to saturn at a birth cause the native to be sensual 

and given to unnatural vices. 

all the planets, or most of them above the earth, make the native 

eminent and famous, and if all should be well-dignified, he will—like 

a comet—outshine all other in the world's esteem. if, on the 

contrary, all the planet are under the earth at a birth, the native 

will be of a fall fame and fortune, or if they promise by their 

nature honour, dignity and fortune (that is, if they appear 

essentially dignified in nocturnal genitures), these good things will 

only come in the latter part of the native's life. 

jupiter in conjunction with the moon in a watery sign give 

drunkenness. 

venus in conjunction, trine or sextile to the moon, give happy 

marriage, but in square to the moon, prodigality, indolence and 

drunkenness. 

saturn in square to mars means a malicious and murderous temperament, 

and liability to imprisonment. 

it is advantageous to make choice of days and hour at a time well 

constitute by the nativity. should the time be adverse, the choice 

will in no respect avail, however favourable an issue it may chance to 

promise. 

a sagacious mind improve the operation of the heavens, as a skilful 

farmer by cultivation improve nature. 

part ii. 

chiromancy 

"god has placed sign in the hand of all men, that every man may 

know his work."—job xxxvii. 7 (st. hierom's translation). 


