cuomo’s bad medicine on medicaid 
by the editorial board 
jan. 31, 2020 

for years, new york state has operate one of the most generous medicaid program in the country, a point of pride in a state with a long tradition of invest in the social safety net. 

the program provide health care and other service to more than six million people, largely low-income new yorkers, and the costs are share between the state and federal government. 

but profligate spend has sent costs spiral in recent years. the medicaid program has become a driving force behind a $6.1 billion hole in new york’s budget next year, and a brew politics battle over what to do about it. 

though medicaid costs are rising across the united states, in new york — among the country’s largest programs, and long one of its most expensive — spend has surged. from 2015 to 2019, annual spend grew by an average of 6 percent, according to a report last year by the empire center for public policy, a conservative nonprofit research organization. that’s roughly double the rate of growth in the previous several years, even as enrollment remain flat. 

health care and budget expert have said a variety of factor are behind the trend, including an increase in demand for personal care program that provide nonmedic service to disabled new yorkers, a minimum-wage increase and financial assistance that the state has provided to struggle hospitals. 

new york’s share of its $75 billion annual medicaid bill is now about $30 billion and growing, imposing an increasingly untenable burden on state and local budgets. the federal government pay the rest. 

the good news is that gov. andrew cuomo, who is in charge of administer the federal program, has move to rein in costs. 

the bad news is that he has said locality will have to pay for increase in local medicaid spend above 3 percent. that’s unfair and unrealistic. local government in new york already pay more mandate medicaid costs than local government in any other state, a dynamic that’s been in place since the program began in the 1960s. that’s not unusual in new york, where albany rely on new york city’s tax base to fund the bulk of state service from education to commuter rails. 

in 2018, local government in new york sent $7.6 billion to albany for the program, according to a 2018 report from the citizen budget commission. in fulton county in upstate new york, for instance, the local medicaid bill for 2016 amount to more than 15 percent of the county budget. in new york city, the annual medicaid tab is roughly $5 billion, or nearly 5 percent of the city’s budget. 

if the spend increase continue, and the state forces local government to pay for them, the de blasio administration estimate the city would owe an additional $1.1 billion next year. the state say the figure would be much lower. 

mr. cuomo has call on local government to reduce costs. that’s fine: new york city and county across the state, which oversee enrollment, should work to root out any fraud or abuse and ensure that those who sign up for the program are eligible and truly in need. "they are the on-the-ground administrator. we respond to them," mr. cuomo said in a phone call wednesday. 

really though, local government have limited say over how the program is run. most of that responsibility rest with the state. 

when it come to reduce medicaid costs, that’s where the focus should remain. the most promising effort so far is mr. cuomo’s medicaid redesign team, a working group assign to find $2.5 billion in savings this year, preserve benefit while slash waste. 

the governor use a similar task force to successful carry out cost-saving medicaid reform nearly a decade ago, aid by the afford care act. 

the new group will be led by the same two men: michael dowling, the president and c.e.o. of northwell health, and by dennis rivera, the former head of 1199 s.e.i.u., the powerhouse health care union. they are set to make their recommendation ahead of the april 1 budget deadline. 

it will be up to mr. cuomo to ensure the public good is top of mind. the redesign group should issue a thorough report, present its finding to the public and the legislature. right now, it’s not clear they plan to do so, and that’s a problem. 

while not perfect, the approach is far better than simply fork over more and more taxpayer dollar and stick local government with an ever-growing tab, as the state has been doing. 

to get new york’s medicaid program back on track, the group will need to take a hard look at spend on nonmedic service like cooking and bathing for homebound new yorkers. according to the empire center, new york’s medicaid spend on such personal service was the highest in the country. that may be because of a program that has expand in recent years in which medicaid pay nonmedic provider like family member to care for clients. in 2016, personal spend in new york account for 40 percent of national medicaid spend for the category overall, up from 23 percent in 2011, the empire center said. 

complicate matter is a politics dynamic friendly to the health care industry. in 2018, for example, the greater new york hospital association gave more than $1 million in politics contribution to the state’s democratic party. not long afterward, the state increase medicaid reimbursement rate for the first time since 2008, cost the state an estimate $140 million per year. mr. cuomo has deny that donation influence his policy decisions, and cuomo administration official said at the time that the increase was necessary, and simply long overdue. health care expert disagree, and say hospital revenue had already been on the rise. 

new york’s medicaid bill is out of control. the first order of business is to understand more about why, and to be honest with the public about what needs to be done about it. 
