i. w. kelly 

recent shift in astrology idea 
classical (traditional) astrology was associate with prognostication and 
relatively specific, test hypothese about planetary configuration and 
human activities. until the twentieth century, astrologer have held that the 
stellar connection mainly reflect actual outward human behavior, but to- 
day there is a tendency to claim that the stellar connection reflect only in- 
ner life. to appreciate the shlft in claim, consider first the view of charles 
carter, who was the leadmg britain astrologer in the mid-twentieth century: 
practical experiment wiu soon convince the most sceptical that the body of the solar system 
indicate, if they do not actually produce, change in (1) our minds, (2) our feelings and emo- 
[ions, (3) our physical bodies, (4) our external affair and relationship with the world at large 
(1925, p. 14). 

although every birth chart was different and many astrology factor had 
to be assess (often with mutual conflict indications), it was concede 
that there was an observable, relatively specific something in common that 
should be exhibit by people with a particular planetary configuration in 
their birth chart (horoscope). as the dutch psychologist jan van rooij 
pointed out, 
if one take 100 people w~rhthe sun in aries, they should have something in common, irre- 
spective of other astrolog~cdfactors. and this common should be d&erent from the com- 
mon factor in 100 people uith the sun in taurus, irrespective of additional factor (1994, p. 
55). 

on this basis we should not expect to see the influence of a particular factor 
on a particular person. but examine large group of people should allow 
common to be detectable, if they exist. contrast this with the view of 
psychotherapist and astrologer dr. glenn perry, perhaps the leadmg propo- 
nent of modern inner psychological astrology (also known as astropsychology 
and archetype astrology) in the united states today: 
astrology do not deal with quantity that can be objective measured.. . the [birth] chart 
depict the structure and dynamics of consciousness.. . [it] shift the emphasis from predict 
outcome to interpret the meonirzg of outcome as they relate to the inner life of the person 
(1993, pp. 7, 8, 9). 

further, "astrology only play a role in the mental plane and do not ex- 
press itself consistent or systematic in event or behavior" (terpstra, 
1994, p. 42). here carter's direct connection with outward behavior and ex- 
tern event is denied. instead the connection is with the unobservable in- 
ner life. when leadmg astrologer cannot even agree on what astrology deal 
with, other confict and problem can only further reduce the plausibhty of 
astrology. 
since the 1950s many study were conduct by both astrologer and 
sympathetic researchers. the picture that emerge out of this research, as 
modern astrology: a critique 1039 

pointed out, was mostly bad for astrology. but negative studes, even when 
they are cumulative, have been 'explained away' and dismiss in many dif- 
ferent ways by astrologers, allow them to maintain their belief in astrolo- 
gy whatever the evidence or criticisms. 
~ e a l i with 
n ~ criticism the astrology way 
some typical ways astrologer have react to negative findmg and cri- 
tique are brief considered. 
ignore bad news.-first of all, such finding can be ignore or play 
down. as the astrologer robert hand said, "positive result in the scientific 
study of astrology have to be taken seriously undeniably, but negative result 
not so seriously" (cited in perry, 1995a, p. 37). overall, this has been the 
dominant response by the astrology community. this tack is taken by 
john anthony west in his "the case for astrology" (1991) where he say 
"since the aim of this book is to present the positive evidence, intimate de- 
t d s of the bulk of the negative evidence do not really concern us" (p. 234). 
but nearly all the evidence is negative, so west's dehberate suppression of it 
is irresponsible (dean, 1993). a visit to any astrology bookstore win quick 
confirm that research into astrology is rarely cite and when it is, it usually 
only involve a distort presentation of the gauquelin finding (kelly & 
saklofske, 1994)' and an outdated reliance and misinterpret of study 


'the research of the late michael gauquelin and his d e francoise have been consistent mis- 
understood and distort by astrologer and those sympathetic to astrolo y the gauquehn 
found evidence of a weak relationship between planetary position in the 5; 
eminent professional in some occupations. for exam le, mars tend to occur more often 
and the birth of 
than ex ect by chance in some sector of the sky ar t f e birth of o u t s t a n d q athlete in many 
sports. h e gauquelin attempt to explain these eind by suggestin that the underlying 
process involved an inherit temperament (character traits) imprint ey planetary geomag- 
net effects. an implication here was chat, if thc suggest mediatin factor were correct, one 
would expect such lanetary relationshi s to be lnked ro hereditary factors. an initial study by 
g a u q u e h indeed pound a (weak) tenbence for chlldren to be born with the same particular 
planet in the same secror of the sky as their parents. un€ortunatel , follow-up study by gau- 
quelin with twice 4s lar e a sample as the initial study did nor conirm the reality of the plane- 
tary link with herecllry &auquelin, 1988). a further re-analysis of gauquelin's heredity hypoth- 
esis, by errel (1989. 1992) usin an improve methodology, also ave negative results. in addi- 
tion, in a s e r m of study by g ~ r t e l(1990, 19931, gau u e h ' s aaracter-rrait hypothese and 
planetary geornagnerjc hypothese were nor supported, 
- - 
?caving wide open the meaning of the 
findings. - 
it 1s of interest to note that the over-all finding of gauquelin were hardly supportive of 
astrology. first of all, the planetary relationship were only found with ot~tstandingpeo le in 
some occupations. no planetary relationship were uncover for the rest of the popu&rion, 
namely, the vast ma'ori of people who visit astrologers. second, even within the restricted 
group of eminent indivixals, the effect was extremely weak; there was only abour a 2% ddfer- 
ence benveen those with the hypothesize planet in the relevant sector and chance expecta- 
tions. third, the data support planetary relationshi s &d not support other central asrrologi- 
cal h pothese such as zodiac signs, transits, and pfanetary aspects. fourth, gauquelin only 
found(sorne of the planet (the moon, venus, mars, ju iter, and saturn) to be related to the 
birth-times of the eminent individual considered. no etfect were found for the other astrolog- 
ice significant planets, namely, mercury, uranus, ne tune, pluto, or the sun. and the rela- 
tionship that were found were also inconsistent w i l astrology in rhat astrology theory 
1040 i. w. kelly 

examine allege lunar effects on human behavior (see kelly, rotton, & 
culver, 1996 for a recent review of stud on lunar effects).' 
knock science.-a second popular response is the ever-applicable argu- 
ment that the limitation is with the present day science and not astrology. 
hand again said: "i don't think that science is yet capable of dealing with 
the full complexity of the symbolic language as employ by astrologers" 
(cited by perry, 1995a, p. 37). unfortunately, this promissory note may never 
be cash in. how would an appropriate science differ from our present 
one? as gross said, "like all utopian these [astrologers] are short on spe- 
cif and we are never told what such a science as science would look hke, 
even in o u t h e , much less in detail, nor how [such a future science] is likely 
to dlffer as science from present day science" (1994, pp. 434-435; actually 
gross was tallung about extreme view on feminist science, but the analogy 
is perfect). 
move goalposts.-criticisms and serious long lasting anomahe can also 

would predct weakness rather than strength for the planetary result obtain by gauquelin. 
f i n d y , gauquelin test the ability of astrolo ers use the whole chart to discern important 
life characteristic of peoples' lives. the astrofoger inevitabl fail his tests. h e conclude 
that horosco es did not provide information of any useful varue in understanding human be- 
havior and ciaracter (gauquelin, 1983). 
seymour (1990, 1996) recently ar ed for the valid of a limited astrolo y base on the 
gau uelin findings. alon these lmes, has attempt to strengthen the case for the gauque. 
lin &netary-occupation findlngh by propose a s eculacive mechanism base on the aucgcj 
response of our neural network< ro fluctuate in $e earth's geomagnetic field which, m [urn, 
interact with the gravitation field of the planets. udortunately, while seymour's t h e o r ~ z ~ n ~ 
do not contradict modern physical theories, to make a plausible case, one needs much more 
than an ad hoc fit to the gauquelin results. and, it is precisel at this point that seymour's 
proposal lack substance. inrerestin iy, he cite as support for %is explanatory theory the he- 
and eomagnetic effects h i t i d y uncover by gauquelin but neglect to inform reader 
:$loth eauqudinv own research and later study b e n d did not reppcate such findings. 
furthermore, seymour never satisfactory address x e problem of the mismatch between 
planetary and biological frequency or how the nervous system is influence (other than by 
vague reference to 'inducing current in the neural networks,' whch tell us nothing). for all of 
seymour's appealing to the scientific status of his ex lane he never s ecify test by which 
his theory could be examined. the entire edifice o?~eymour's theory aeo rely on the trust- 
worthy of the g a u x e l i n d a ~ base 
a which has been challenge by the dutch mathematician 
nienhuy (in press). e rehabhty of the g a u q u e h database has been the scene of a bitter 
controversy. interested reader might consult the debate between ertel and irving (1997) and 
furtz, nienhuys, and sandhu (1997) for the most recent exchange on this topic. 
the quality of much astrology thinking is summarize by astrologer joanna ashmun's de- 
script of internet exchange between astrologers: "skepticism is not in evidence and is in 
fact discouraged.. . . the way astrologer treat research and ske tic is just the way they 
treat other astrologer who disagree with them-continuing on as f they and their disagree- 
ment never existed. . . . the thing that i find least comfortable about astrolo discussion 
(and not just on the internet) is their irnmateriahty, their lack of grounding. ~stro!&ers are less 
literate than average; they write badly and they read badly; there is almost no critical re onse; 
error are ignored, correction are not acknowle ed they answer off the top of their eeads, 
quote from memory, claim that anythin publishef anywhere at an time is general knowle e 
and then get sidetrack into argue atout who's a liar instead orsort out the fact of i%c 
original question. there is nothing resemble peer review, except in regard ro politics correct- 
ness. the fact is they don't look stuff up, not even when they d ~ s a ~ r cwith e you! most 
astrologer would rather have an dfy quotation from dane rudhyar or c g. jung to supporr 
their opinion than some good research" (ashmun, 1996, pp. 41-43). 
modern astrology: a critique 1041 

be dealt with by hand-waving in another drection and the elevation of spec- 
ulation to a futuristic higher plane. for example, a serious problem for as- 
trology is the great &vide between the eastern sidereal zo&ac and the west- 
ern tropical zodiac. these zodiac current differ by almost one sign. one 
may be an aries in north america but a pisces in lndia (cornelius, hyde, 
& webster, 1995, p. 31). is this conact between zodiac a problem for as- 
trology? of course not! cornehu state this could occur because there are 
"two different orders of influence, one from the constellation and the other 
from the earth-sun cycle" or, alternatively, we can view "both zodiac as two 
reflection of the same symbolic forms. . . [that] both show in their own dif- 
ferent ways" (p. 32). the obfuscate 'orders of influence' and 'reflecuons 
. . . showing in their own ways' are nowhere clarified, hence we are no h r - 
the in our understanding after being told this than we were before. 
\xlhat about people who are born at the same time and have m e r e n t 
destinies? l h s has been a standard argument against astrology. the same as- 
trologer tell us: "the singular horoscope [can be1 read as a signature for 
these particular twin with m e r e n t group of planet describe the two 
individual . . . where frequent one twin answer to the sun and the other 
to the moon in the same horoscope" (cornelius, et al., 1995, p. 131). here 
the term 'frequently' refer to inch not compeumg, to avoid dsconfir- 
mation. we are also entitle to ask how one would tell which one is sun and 
which one is moon, but no answer is p r ~ v i d e d if 
. ~ that doesn't work, cor- 
nelius, et al. remind us that we can always interpret astrology symbolism 
in a metaphorical way, for example, "sigmund freud was born on a differ- 
ent continent but within minutes of robert perry. freud discover the un- 
conscious and perry discover the north pole" (p. 131; see also p. 96). 
hence, these time-twins were both &scoverers!' if interpretation encom- 
passing both literal and symbolic (including metaphorical) are equally adrnis- 
sate with astrology claims, then we cannot fail to find a fit between the 
horoscope and the person. the positive side to this is never have to admit 
you are wrong, the negative side saying very little of import. 
invoke negatives.-a fourth popular response is to say that the phe- 
nomena astrology deal with are very subtle and elusive and what we need 
are more creative ways of investigate them. for example, even though a 
large, consistent body of research converge on the view that sun sign are 


'a variety of ad hoc rule could be used, for example, oldest=sun, o r (for op osite-sex wins) 
male=sun, or it could be whichever one on inspection fit best. at the end o r t h e day all chat 
. 
matter to astrolo ers is have a ~ r a c t i c a strategy 
l no matter how arbitrary. 
'ac,tud freud j i d n ' ~discover t e vnconscious. there is a l a q e pre-freudian literature on the 
toplc. &at freud did was use the term as a working tool chat could be investi ated psycho- 
logically (fine, 1973, pp. 36-37). further, the noccb pole wasn't 'discovered' at a%. everybody 
knew where and what it was. 
1042 i. w . kelly 

not valid, the astrologer harvey could still say "it is absolutely correct to say 
that there is no evidence for sign and house as yet. . . (1982, p. 47, itahc 
harvey's) and twelve years later, after again acknowledge the lack of evi- 
dence, tell us "i am personally still convinced that, given more sensitive and 
imaginative tests, confirmation of the reality of sun-sign typologies, and the 
sign generally, will be obtained" (1994, p. v). since it is difficult to prove a 
negative in such cases, this position can be maintain indefinitely. a col- 
lorary is that astrologer with incompatible position on fundamental tent 
can adopt the same intransigent attitude in regard to their own beliefs. such 
a posture in the face of negative evidence can guarantee a static system and 
a lack of progress. it also contradict the supposed ease with which astrolog- 
ice connection were first recognized. as perry (1993) tell us of the an- 
cients, "the partial if not complete validlty of astrology was self-evident to 
anyone w h g to attempt a serious study of the subject" (p. 3 ) . this dis- 
crepance is in need of explanation. furthermore, appeal to the self-evident 
have not been very fruitful guide to truth in the history of ideas. 
blame faulty methods.-finally, one can say that, if you are obtain 
negative results, you must be do it wrong. you are use the wrong meth- 
odology, the wrong paradigm or both. this approach has been adopt by 
increase numbers of astrologer since the 1950s, when research (and nega- 
tive results) got undenvay. west (1991), for example, contend that scien- 
tific criticism of astrology are irrelevant because astrology is "a system of 
magic" (p. 223), where magic is "the attempt to master the fundamental 
law of resonance that have produce the cosmos" (p. 220). west was insuf- 
ficient explicit about this 'system of magic' and we are left with a conjunc- 
tion of unformulated statement about 'the creative powers of nature' or the 
'laws of harmony' and appeal to authority ('ancient wisdom'). as evans 
(1994) pointed out, west's 
magical system is a closed system. w e are invite to bcheve that it is true, not because it con- 
nect up with other things which experience has shown to be true, but by some inherent truth 
of its own which will have it that the planet saturn symbolize contraction whereas jupiter 
symbolize expansiveness. . . (p. 413). 

while, in general, astrologer pretend that claim about zochacal signs, 
houses, planetary aspects, and so on are empirical statements, that is, claim 
capable of being reject or modify by research or theory, to most astrolo- 
ger such claim actually function as necessarily true claims. the "truth" of 
central astrology tenet themselves is never in doubt.' 


'a more general underlying issue here is why astrologer themselves beheve in astrology. as 
dean, mather, and kell (1996) point out, the steps in b&ef are roughly: (1) read astrology 
books, become aware o r h e system. (2) learn more, calculate charts, see that they appear to 
work. (3) become dazzle by the history, majesty, and sheer appeal of it all. (4) adopt the sys- 

the origin of astrology idea 
a legitimate query here concern how these astrology connection 
were establish in the first place. to make it easier, let us initially consider 
a relatively straightforward 
- astrology claim and examine the theory ad- 
vance by astrologer to explain the origin of these connections. if astrolo- 
ger have no plausible explanation, then we have good reason to reject 
more complicated claim base on these connections. 
according to traltional astrology, the planet are supposed to be asso- 
ciate with certain character traits; for example, mars is associate with com- 
bat and courage, and uranus is associate with originality and inde- 
pendence. how did astrologer find this out or determine this? 
g a u q u e h (1980) and startup (1981) have describe five such theory 
that are taken seriously by member of the astrology community. ln what 
1046 i. w. kelly 

follows, i w d describe each of these theories, rely heavy on many of the 
insight of startup to examine them critically: 
(1) the planetary connection were reveal to the ancients by a higher 
intelligence, for example, by gods, angels, demons, or extraterrestrials. apart 
from beg the question about the existence of these being in the first 
place, explain mystery in terms of other mystery do not take us any 
further than we were before. "we have not explain how these alien got 
their knowledge" and so it merely push the problem elsewhere (startup, p. 
26). it is also not clear how this proposal could be independent tested. 
(2) the early astrologer acquire this information about planet and 
person&ty by paranormal means. this similarity beg the question in that it 
assume esp has been demonstrate and is capable of establish relation- 
ship far and beyond the claim of the majority of even the most fervent 
advocate of the paranormal. also, 
which parricular psi ability is to be invoked? surely telepathy is not good here since, prior to 
the esrablishment of the typology, there was no one's mind to read. clairvoyance is equally du- 
bious since it is difficult to imagine what state of affair could have been paranormal per- 
ceive which was not available to ordinary perceptions. that leaves precognition. . . but this 
would presumable require that the ancient astrologer somehow saw the result of modern in- 
vestigauon which were themselves, in turn, inspired, albeit indirectly, by the 'insights' of the 
ancients (startup, 1981, p. 26). 

there are other problems. what is the 'it' we are detect by paranormal 
means? some 'force' emanate from the celestial object? how do the item 
detect paranormal relate to item detect by normal perception? (for 
example, if we detect all sort of paranormal 'rays' around us, how can we 
tell that they are coming from what we visually perceive as mars?) how do 
we know that there is a correlation between the normal and the paranormal 
items? by paranormal means?-that's doubly question begging! by normal 
means? if so, then why could not we have notice the paranormal item 
through normal channels? 


