
psychological astrology involve four fundamental claims. the first two 
are common to other h d s of astrology, namely, that there is a correlation 
between celestial and terrestrial phenomena, and that everything in the birth 
chart affect everything else in the birth. the third and fourth claim are the 
unusual ones, namely, that the birth chart indicate not behavior or event 
but change in consciousness, and that astrology should be view in the 
perspective of a magical, organic world-view. a look at these four claim can 
now be taken one by one. 
1. relationship postulate by astrologer between celestial phenomena 
and terrestrial phenomena are only correlational. 
traditional astrology usually adopt the notion that the relationship 
between celestial and terrestrial affair was some h d of causal one. as 
placidu said in 1657, "it is impossible for the efficient heavenly cause (as 
being so very far distant from things below) to influence sublunary bodes, 
unless by some rnedum or instrumental virtue. . . the instrumental cause of 
the stars is light," and "the stars, where they do not rise, are inactive," so 
astrologer should "reject a secret influence as superfluous, nay, even im- 
possible" (p. 1, 3 ) . most modern astrologer reject this causal approach. per- 
ry (1994) tell us that the relations between people and their birth chart are 
not causal but correlational. the astronomical bode reflect human life expe- 
rience rather hke a mirror reflect a landscape which has to be inter- 
preted. but there is much disagreement over the kind of celestial configura- 
tion that are relevant and how they are to be interpreted. in fact, no matter 
what an astrologer may claim, a search of the literature vjlu invariable find a 
conflict claim. this dsagreement exist even at the most fundamental lev- 
el for entire population of astrologers, for example, western astrologer dis- 
agree with eastern astrologer on which zodiac to use and how many planet 
to use. this lack of agreement is widespread within western astrology itself: 
ln horary astrology (answering questions, e.g., should i marry x?) the 
moon's north node is a point of ill-fortune, but in humanistic astrology it is 
the direction of personal growth (jones, 1996). such system are mutual 
incompatible, yet are seen as completely vahd by their users. 


tern as true, and reject attack to avoid cognitive dissonance. the sequence from 1 to 4 is not 
unreasonable. student of astrolo y are not told to accept astrolo without question, they are 
told ro try thin s out for themsefves, so at first sight, what c o u l ~ b efairer? the roblem, of 
course, is that [ley are nor made aware of all the pidall of personal valtdation (ancfthe coneir- 
mate bias), nor are they told how to make control test or to design research that actually 
test astrology hy othese and not auxiliary hypotheses. nor are they present the vast body 
of criticism oe astro?ogical tenets, as is, for example, found in h i s arty e and references. once 
they reach (4) then any internal inconsistent and disagreement can lo ice be accomrno- 
dated as minor hiccu s due to the complexity of astrology or inevitable fuman fallible (see 
dean, mather, & ~ e f 1996).~ , 
1044 i. w . kelly 

astrologers' meanlng of astrology sign and house are not very clear- 
cut and there are no agree upon rule for weigh their effects. for exam- 
ple, as the astrologer prudence jones (1996, p. 282) says, 
[the zodiac signs] rest on shaky foundations from the modern point of view. how in heaven 
do twelve 30' sector of the ecliptic, measured from the vernal equinox but name after now- 
far-distant constellations, impart any quality at all to the planets, houses, parts and node 
which we view against their backgrounds? do they do so in fact, or is this wishful thinking? 
some astrologer justdy the sign (taking, u s u d y without explanation, the sun in the sign as 
their exemplar) as shorthand for seasonal characteristics. but this imply that their order 
should be reverse in the southern hemisphere, which seldom happens. and what, in any case 
of horoscope for equatorial latitudes where seasonal change is minimal, but where, of course, 
astrology was invented? 

the meaning of sign depend upon which zodiac is use and the meaning 
of house depend on which house system is used. house system differ with 
regard to number, sequence, method of division, and interpretation (mar- 
ten & trachet, 1995). western astrologer also dlffer in how many planet 
should be used, some use undiscovered hypothetical planets, other use as- 
teroid (dean & mather, 1977). this dvers in fundamental give us 
grou!lds to be sceptical of claim that astrologer are speakmg about some- 
thir-;<they have actually apprehended. 
2. the horoscope is a whole syslem in which every part is influence by 
every other part. 
astrology factor cannot be examine in isolation; the whole birth 
chart is needed. so the golden rule is that "only the whole chart should be 
considered, for any astrology purpose whatever" (dwyer, 1985, p. 1). as 
perry pointed out ". . . no one part of a horoscope can be isolated. . . since 
everything influence everything else" and ". . . you cannot empirical ob- 
serve a pure [astrological factor] isolated from other factor in the chart" 
(perry, 1993, p. 6). but astrologer disagree over which individual factor are 
important, so they dsagree over what the whole chart consists; they just 
agree that whatever it is, it is important to keep it in mind when do as- 
trology. as the psychologist jan van rooij (1994) asked: 
where do the whole chart end? with ten planets, rwelve signs, twelve houses, midpoints, ar- 
abic points, nodes, aspect and whatever other astrology concept may be used, it is simply 
impossible to interpret a "whole chart." when astrologer claim that they use the whole chart, 
they only refer to the fact that they use more factor than just one. nevertheless, no matter how 
many factor they may use, they always use a restricted nzrrmber of factors, and therefore only a 
part of the horoscope. they neuer use the whole chart. but then the question become how many 
factor would be considered, and which factors?. . . suppose that i consider as many as 20 fac- 
tors, then undoubted an astrologer will come up who claim that i should use 21 factor (p. 
56 italics mine). 
the "whole chart" therefore has a different meaning to different 
school of astrology. some astrologer use asteroid in birth charts. as hand 
modern astrology: a critique 1045 

(1981) pointed out, size of an astronomical body is unrelated to astrology 
effectiveness, therefore "[tlhe lsaster is that there are thousand of aster- 
oid and other minor bode orbit the sun, and use present-day astro- 
logical technique there is no way of account for all of them in a chart" 
(p. 93). other astrologer use hypothetical planet such as vulcan that have 
not been detect by astronomer (hand, 1981, p. 95). there is no evidence 
that astrologer use asteroid or hypothetical planet are more insightful or 
more successful counsellor than those use "incomplete charts," or nonas- 
trologic orient psychotherapist or even lay therapist (dean, 1985; mc- 
grew & mcfall, 1992). 
how can dlfferent set of parts give the same meaningful whole? this 
problem would seem to be exacerbate when we remember that conflict 
western astrology uthze different factors, and even when the same factor 
are used, they are often weighted differently. if different school of astrology 
use different astrology factor and hence operate with ddferent notions of 
the "whole chart," then any reference to the supposed common of the 
"whole chart" is less than meaningful. perry state "every planet and every 
sign of the z o l a c is influence by the whole in which it is embedded" 
(1995, p. 34). but if my whole chart and your whole chart involve factor 
that are ddferent in type or number, the end result must (according to per- 
ry) be open to question. it is as if we thought we were taking about the 
same thing, but upon investigate found that i meant volkswagens, while 
you were refer to cadillacs. 
so when we are told by astrologer that "astrology works," we are not 
sure what to make of it. it is like being told that you will survive your de- 
mise in some form by ddferent rehgion and have little idea how this wdl be 
accomplished. (wlliyou be a disembodied spirit, a resurrect body, an as- 
tral body, or even come back as a mosquito, etc?) 
