

someproblem o f modern astrology idea 
(3) astrology predict change in consciousness not behavio~or events. 
it is here that the new psychological astrology depart from tradition. 
here the relationship between celestial pattern and human being is not 
with outward, observable pattern of behavior and tendency but rather 
with the unobservable, inner me of a person, or what perry call the "psy- 
chic structure which underlie personality" (perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, 
perry, 1988). he said 
a horoscope symbolize the complex, evolve narure of consciousness.. . the depths of per- 
sonality.. . the dynamic relations between psychological drives. for example, sun square saturn 
symbolize a conflict between the need for self-expression and the need for self-control.. . 
(perry, 1995b, p. 124). 

zodiac sign symbolize general, ". . . fundamental human needs, or motiva- 
tional drives, inherent in the human condition" (perry, 1988, p. i), whereas 
the house position and planetary aspect symbolize a particular inlvidual's 
"map of consciousness" or "inborn personality structure" (perry, 1988, p. 2, 
3 ) . the extreme problem of account for the relations between celestial 
factor and observable, relatively specific outcome postulate by the trad- 
tional astrologer are further exacerbate by the psychological astrologer's ad- 
dtional conjectures. how do we know such invisible psychological process 
underlie the astrology symbolism? perry state such cognitive process 
and structure are distde from the composite description associate with 
traditional astrology symbolism. for example, 
". . . the need of a [zodiac] sign can be infer from the behavior which is characteristic of 
that sign, e.g., leonian pride, creativity, and a~niabilityevidence the universal human need for 
vabdation of perceive identity" (perry. 1988, p. 2). 

it is ddficult to see how it follow in the f i s t place from the character- 
istic behavior of a sign that one intrinsic motivation factor tie them all 
together, and even if the case could be made, a further case would need to 
be independent made for the particular human drive postulate by perry. 
h e never clearly set out how he arrive at these conclusions. no set of 
studle of a quantitative or qualitative nature are discussed, nor is there any 
kind of an appeal to any careful examination of the astrology symbolize 
behavior by independent astrologer or psychologist to determine what 


t w o harbinger and precursor of modern astrop chology are dane and rudhyar and alan 
leo. in the earl rwentiech century, the britain astrofoger leo in.ected theosophist and mystical 
idea into astrolgy. the move away from traditional idea in d e united states was begun by 
rudhyar and his humanistic astrology orientation during the third decade of the century. in 
their "inner" orientation, rudhyar and perry overlap, the main difference being that rudhyar is 
more i n c h e d to eastern mysticism and rehgion. a critical examination of rudhyar's idea can 
be found in kelly and krutzen (1983). 
1052 i. w. kelly 

one might infer from them. furthermore, if only the whole chart will do, in- 
ference base on parts are by definition meaningless. 
perry elevated psychological astrology to miracle status by further in- 
form us that the dynamic relations between various psychological drive 
symbolize by the horoscope are "fluid and changing, vary in accord 
with situation specificity, developmental age, emotional maturity, and level 
of psychological integration" (1995b, p. 123; 1994, p. 34). further, ". . . un- 
like the boundary of physical objects, the contents and process of con- 
scious involve meaning whose boundary regions are fuzzy. . . . [mlean- 
ing are indefinite, arbitrary, relational and cultural embedded" (perry, 
1995a, p. 34). the psychological astrologer claim these incredb complex, 
changing, amorphous, inner complexity (which may not even be conscious) 
have been infer from cluster of behavior associate with astrology 
symbolism. 
it is clear that no theory of consciousness base on physical process 
can perform the role demanded, so perry opt for dualism, the existence of 
a nonphysical, immaterial mind. while psychological astrology was describe 
as a theory of "extraordinary complexity and a model of consciousness" 
(perry, 1995a, p. 32; 1994, p. 33), epistemologic question regarding this 
dualistic view of consciousness were never addressed; we are merely offer 
tidbit such as, consciousness is a "nonphysical system" (1995a, p. 32) and 
"a subjective experience of aware that has no material correlates.. ." 
(1995a, p. 34). nowhere &d perry articulate the intrinsic nature of his ver- 
sion of the nonphysic mind. it is also far from clear how the postulate of 
a soul/nonphysical mind can contribute toward clarlfylng and inform our 
understanding of central notions such as purposive behavior, values, internal 
self-causation, meaning and creativity, over that offer by contemporary 
model consistent with materialism (such as those offer by flanagan, 1992; 
searle, 1992; crick, 1994; penrose, 1994; dennett, 1996). neither do he 
offer us any inkling as to the mediate role the nonphysic mind play be- 
tween cosmos and psychic structure. 
since psychological astrology do not have a theory of its own regard- 
ing the nature and structure of the inner psychological process supposedly 
mirror by planetary configurations, it rest m a d y on those postulate by 
modern psychodynamic theories. more specifically, perry related the birth 
chart (horoscope) to "conscious and unconscious processes, area of repres- 
sion and conflict, pathway of sublimation, transference dynamics, projec- 
tion and the lke" (perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, perry, 1988). even if we 
contend that psychological astrologer have refined the crude approxima- 
tion of the traditional astrologer (who do not offer plausible scenario of 
how their correlation were established), this case is very difficult to make. 
the reason is simple. twentieth century theorize was influence by a great 
modern astrology: a critique 1053 

variety of area of research, including invest~gat~ons into brain function, hu- 
manistic and existential school of psychology, artificial intelligence, physical- 
ism and functionahsm in philosophy, and so on. ancient, medieval, and re- 
naissance theory of mind uthze by the astrologer of the past were quite 
ddferent. and, to complicate the picture further, as philosopher of science 
such as thomas kuhn (1970) have pointed out, when new paradigm come 
and go, the same or similar terms often acquire new meanings. for example, 
the contemporary terms 'motion' and 'matter' were also use by aristotle 
with ddferent interconnection and meaning. therefore, perry's claim that 
"there is near uniform agreement base on century of observation, as to 
the meaning of [astrological symbolism]" (1993, p. 7 ) is clearly problematic 
in light of the historical disagreement over the nature and constituent of 
the mind. 
consider also the psychological astrologers' claim that inner mental dy- 
name can be express in a great variety of ways. here they reject as sim- 
plistic the traditional astrologer's claim that celestial pattern are typically as- 
sociate with relatively specific outcomes. but in rnakmg this rejection, they 
step from the fry pan into the volcano, because it further increase 
the already impossible complexity of possible associations. as an example of 
this new complexity, the britain astrologer charles harvey (1995) claimed: 
the same [planetary] combination can express itself in a whole range of ways. for exam- 
ple, uranus in hard aspect with the midpoint of sun and ,kloon may produce a napoleon or a 
hitler, but equally it may produce a margaret thatcher, d s p ~ k em d i g a n , a martin luther or 
a particular [spiritual, caring1 astrologer [such] as dr. zip dobyn (p. 52). 

similarly, perry claim that the psychological astrology do not pre- 
dtct specific behavior or life outcome but rather "predicts qualttative expe- 
rience of consciousness that can be reflect in a variety of manifestations" 
(perry, 1994, p. 34; 1995a, p. 34). h e affirm that "the meaning of the 
parts may be stable, [but] the emergent quality they ~ r o d u c ewhen com- 
bin are not [because] real people are changing, evolve entity that are 
far too complex to type or tag with a few simple key words" (perry, 1993, 
p. 7). ln other words, according to perry and harvey, the birth chart accu- 
rate show our underlying subjective processes, but as to their outward 
manifestation, astrologer can only guess at a range of possible happenings. 
the inner psychic state is shown in the birth chart, but after that just about 
anything goes. as perry said, "we all have the potential to behave in any 
way that is humanly possible, and we frequent do" (1995a, p. 36). 
we can see that the psychological astrologer is worlung with a challeng- 
ing system. to start with, it involve celestial configuration that can never 
be examine in isolation and whose variety when combine is immensely 
large than anyone could possibly cope with. nevertheless, the planetary 
1054 i. w. kelly 


configuration supposedly correlate with an invisible, largely unconscious, 
psychlc structure that underlie personality, and that is associate with out- 
come so varied and so uncertain that the astrologer can only make guesses. 
finally, this psychic structure is base on psychoanalytic and humanistic psy- 
chologic theory that since the 1950s have come under very heavy criti- 
cism. 10 if this criticism is successful then psychological astrology in its pres- 
ent form will go down with the ship (e.g., see macmdan, 1991; esterson, 
1993; grunbaum, 1993; kerr, 1993; spence, 1994; webster, 1995; crews, 
1996; dean, 1996a). after all, if the psychological structure symbolize by 
the planet and their interrelationship is problematic, the rest of the theory 
is on shaky ground. 
4. astrology can only be appropriate evaluate in a magical, animistic 
world-view. 
traditional astrology emphasize the prehction of events, the associa- 
tion of relatively spechc, observable outcome with astrology factors, 
sometimes with the view that planet are transmitter of physical influence. 
thus the client of the famous 17' century astrologer wdlam l1uy ex- 
pecte prediction and decision making, not psychology and rehgion. such 
an orientation is not adverse to experimental investigation. a main problem 
for this approach, as perry acknowledged, is that the vast majority of study 
have not support such claim (perry, 1995a). further, there is no prospect 
that plausible physical hkage wdl be discover that explain astrology 
association with human activity (perry, 1995a, pp. 26-33; culver & ianna, 


"'astrolo ers are forever try to increase the surface plausible of astrology b associate it 
with theqatest theory that have caught the public imagination. so ~ l u m e n t h i ( 1 9 9 4 p. 
, 19) 
appeal to the relevance of "fuzzy logic" to astrology, while perry allude to "chaos theory" 
(1994, p. 34) and the "new physics" exemplify by fritjof capra and david bohm. townley 
(1994) informed us that "the more advanced area of system mathematics [complexity theory, 
information theory] and neuroscience [could] be very friendly to the type of structural thinking 
that the best of astrology has to offer and to which astrology could make important contribu- 
tions" ( p 43). tewsbury (1988) noted how rupert sheldrakes' g c i p l e o€ formative causauon 
"should remove the objection that astrology is impossible," ad g m an interesting circular 
that "astrology ~ r s d fis a further poinrer to its truth." a negative feature of these astrologers' 
writings 1s (llelr penchant to be crucial vague at critical points. we are not provided specifics 
of how these juxtaposition wdl take place. we are on1 given promissory notes. it is never 
made clear how the new physics and other modern disci iine can provide support for the sup- 
position that specific planetary configuration can synzbojze fundamental human needs, or moti- 
vational drive (e.g., how sun square mars symbolize over-all strength and vigor in the person- 
ality) [see stengler (1995. 1996) for critical comment on misinterpret of quantum me- 
chanic by advocate of new age claims]. further, such modern approach in ysic do not 
explain why the planetary position of a moment in the past (birth) describe supposedly 
continue nature of a person in the present. and what about the 'birth' of a country, a com- 
pany, a resolution, a domicile, and so on, all of whch astrologer confident taking as have 
their own natal charts? (jones, 1996). 
\ve have also heard it all before. in the past, the same confidence was express by 
s every prominent theory of the time. the two millennia of failure provide 
a s t ~ o l o ~ e rwith 
some good inductive grounds for believe that the confidence of present-day astrologer is as 
misplnce as that of their predecessors. such represent the triumph of hope over experience. 
modern astrology: a critique 1055 

1988; crowe, 1990). for example, no propose physical explanation can ex- 
plain, in advance, how sun-jupiter contact symbolize expansive, optimistic 
belief rather than something else, how scorpio can symbolize secrecy rather 
than something else, or how the 2nd house can symbolize possession rather 
than something else, and so on. 
perry stated, even though study relate astrology configuration 
with specific observable outcome have failed, this pose no ddficulty for 
psychological astrology since it is concerned with the 'inner me' of an indi- 
vidual, which cannot be adequate test by modem, materiahstic, scienufic 
methodology. besides, he claimed, astrologer already have independent ex- 
periential (clinical) evidence that astrology works" (perry, 1995a, pp. 14, 26). 
while astrology seem implausible from the perspective of modern physical 
theories, if we adopt a different set of metaphysics assumption (for exarn- 
ple, a more magical-animistic framework) we are told, astrology become 


the seductive phrase 'ex eriential evidence' is roblematic. practitioner of psychological a 
;aches perry disavowecf (e.g., skinnerian bepaviorism, freudian psychoanalysis) and ;!tt 
many competin school of astrolo in both h e east and west, many of whom would contest 
perry's approacf, all cite tesrimoniyevidence and case study which support. but if we can all 
cite experiential evidence for our r i t i o n s , that can hardly, by itreg distinguish the good from 
the bad, the better theory €ram t e worse. as meehl pointed out, "the scholarly author of 
malleu malejironrm pursue . . . an enterprise detail symptom that diagnose witchcraft. de- 
spite their scholarly efforts, we know today there are no person who have made a solemn pact 
wch satan and thereby gain preternatural powers. if ask to su port their theoretical sys- 
rem m d the technical procedure warrant by it, [they] would j u b d e s s have invoke the 
med~evalequivalent of 'clinical experience"' (1995, p. 1021). 
a salutary lesson here is provided by other nonmainstream approach such as phrenology, 
graphology (handwriting analysis), and palmistry which cover the same ground as psycholog~cal 
astrology. phrenology was immensely popular in the nineteenth century and both hrenolog~sts 
and their client were very satisfy with phrenology readings. graphology has t e e n around 
for century and is still very popular. it is instructive to compare the following endorse 
of psychological astrolog/, renology, graphology, and palm-reading: (1) "[tlhe client's char- 
act and hfe story inevita~fyconform to the range o potenoal symbolze by the [horo- 
scope], often in exmaordinary specific ways" (perry, 1994, 35). (2) "the phrenologist has 
shown thar he is able to read character wte an open book an$.to lay bare the hidden spring of 
conduct with an accuracy that the most inrimate friends cannot ap roach" (alfred russel 
wallace, cite in severn, 1913, 6). (3) "your handwriting is a l l - r e v e k g . to the train eye 
it lay open your secret mind. %very whirl or line you en ex ose your true character and 
ersonal . . ." (marne. 1988, p. 2). (4) "a study of the :and tee much a b o u t . . . he physical 
e o d y . . . health, vitality. . . the emotional nature--love potential. . . the will and individuality 
. . . success in business. . . talent. . . creativity. . . fame. . . self-fu&ent-travel, life experi- 
ence, spiritual developmeni" (wilson, 1971, pp. 7-8). 
astrolog is only one of a very lar e number of contenders, past and present, which rely 
on ma ice dinlung and purport to yi$d knoude e unattainable to materialist science. no 
plausib?e reason have been provided that all of i e s e extrascience contender are intercon- 
nected, or mutual sup ort (lo tson 1996). planet or head.bumps or palm or 
handwriting, at least one o? them is rezundint. astrology is in the unenviable position of hav- 
ing to show either that it provide enuine insight into area not cover by the social science 
and related disciplines, o r to show k a t it can meliorate our unde~stand~ng in the same domain 
cover by contemporary psychological and sociology theories. astrologer have to show they 
can provide insight or benefit beyond those provided by nonastrologic theories. 
third, many source of bias operate in such personal experience that can lead clinician 
to claim of personal knowledge that are invahd, despite their association with high level of 
conviction (dawes, 1994; grove & meehl, 1996; dean, kelly, saklofske, & furnham, 1992). 
1056 i. w. kelly 

plausible. l2 perry (1995a) state the world-view need to make sense of as- 
trology must involve "a sacred realm that unites, orders, and animate the 
cosmos" (p. 19), or what west call "a system of magic" (1991, p. 223) 
and corneliu (1994, p. 19) call "some other element" (that is, other than 
delusion and esp). the metaphysics perspective propose by perry reintro- 
duce ancient notions of teleology causation, occult powers of attraction, 
psychospiritual explanation, and most importantly, the notion that psyche 
and cosmos are alike, and correspond through symbolic action-at-a-distance 
(1995a, pp. 15-16). 
further, perry explained, this will involve a return, at least in part, to 
belief that were common in prescientific culture in which a 'world soul or 
consciousness' was immanent in all parts of the universe. the universe, so 
conceived, involved a hierarchy with parts interconnecte by "sympathetic 
resonances." astrology play a large part in such world-views because it 
gave people a symbolic language "for understanding the various meaning 
and correspondence of natural phenomena" (perry, 1995a, p. 15; also, 1993, 
p 2). 
perry and most other western astrologer tend to avoid specifics 
when describe their animistic world-views. lstead we are provided sprin- 
h g s of opaque terms and expression such as 'laws of resonance,' 'spiritual 
reality,' 'the soul,' 'the sacred,' 'occult cause,' and 'inherent powers to attract 
other things.' while most of us have some familiarity with such terms it is 
unlikely that we could give a coherent account of them. so an explicate of 
astrology theory should explain these central elements. but instead of 
clarification, we are offer evasion such as "astrology seem to belong to 
some other order of knowing things, barely conceivable in the modern 


"the astrologer pottenger (1994) said "opponents of astrology like to quote 'extraordinary 
claim require extraordinary proof without give any roof that 'as above so below' is an ex- 
traordinary c l a h . it is only extraordinary in some ~ h ~ o s o p l u e sespecial 
. materxa[i$b frame- 
works which den meaning" (p. 37). as it stands, w at pottenger state is trival true. whal- 
euer is ostulatei(barring logical im ossibilitiesl is more 'plausible' within some world-view(s) 
than o k r s . for example, fairy b u b b l , oblins, and guardian angel are extraordinary claim 
in materialist conception of the world ?and perhaps many ocher as well), but this alone do 
not provide any reason to believe in cheir existence. 
the claim that the universe has meaning and provide us with sign or portent do not 
imply that the sign are to be found 'up there,' they might only be found in entrails, the track 
and movements of nature, or only in message from angel or similar beings, or in a number of 
other forms. it do not follow that an animistic/magical universe nust have, or even might 
have, meaning reflect everywhere. w e need cogent reason to prefer the animistic universe of 
astrologer to ocher possible animistic universes, and furthermore evidence for a particular as- 
trologic system than other alternatives. 
there are also an incredible large number of ossible pair between 'as above, so 
below.' the possibility are even large for a system ease on the symbolic meaning of si ns 
for example, there are probably more possible pair of two things in, say, jungian sym%ol: 
ism than if we confiie o u n d v e s to putative causal (material) r d a t i o n s h i ~ ~so; it is even more 
incumbent on astrologer to provide a reason why they connect two t lng cogether than it 
would be for a materiahsc. 
