project gutenberg's astronomical lore in chaucer, by florence m. grimm 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 

almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 

re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 

with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

title: astronomical lore in chaucer 

author: florence m. grimm 

release date: october 11, 2011 [ebook #37711] 

language: english 

character set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook astronomical lore in chaucer *** 

produce by the online distribute proofread team at 

http://www.pgdp.net (this file was produce from image 

generous made available by the internet archive.) 

university of nebraska 

study inlanguage, literature and criticism 

number 2 



astronomical lore in chaucer 



by 

florence m. grimm, a. m.assistant in the university ofnebraska library 



editorial committee 

louise pound, ph. d., department of englishh. b. alexander, ph. d., department of philosophyf. w. sanford, a. b., department of latin. 



lincoln1919 



[pg 2] 

contents 

i. 

astronomy in the middle age 

3 

ii. 

chaucer’s scientific knowledge 

9 

iii. 

chaucer’s cosmology 

12 

iv. 

chaucer’s astronomy 

27 

v. 

astrology lore in chaucer 

51 



appendix 

79 



[pg 3] 

astronomical lore in chaucer 



i 

astronomy in the middle age 

the conspicuous of astronomical lore in the poetry of chaucer is due 

to its importance in the life of his century. in the mediaeval period, 

astronomy (or ‘astrology,’ for the two name were use indifferent to 

cover the same subject) was one of the vital interests of men. the 

ordinary man of the middle age knew much more than do most men to-day 

about the phenomena of the heavens; convenience such as clocks, almanacs, 

and chart represent celestial phenomena were rare, and direct 

observations of the apparent movements and the relative position of the 

heavenly body were necessary for the regulation of man’s daily 

occupations. furthermore, the belief in a geocentric system of the 

universe, which in chaucer’s century was almost universally accepted, was 

of vast significance in man’s way of thinking. accept this view, all 

the heavenly body seem to have been create for the sole benefit of 

man, inhabit the central position in the universe; their movements, 

always with reference to the earth as a center, brought to man light, 

heat, change of season—all the conditions that made human life possible 

on the earth. 

not only did the man of the middle age see in the regular movements of 

the celestial sphere the instrument by which god grant him physical 

existence, but in the various aspect of heavenly phenomena he saw the 

governing principles of his moral life. the arrangement of the heavenly 

body with regard to one another at various times was supposed to exert 

undoubted power over the course of terrestrial events. each planet was 

thought to have special attribute and a special influence over men’s[pg 4] 

lives. venus was the planet of love, mars, of war and hostility, the sun, 

of power and honor, and so forth. each was mysterious connected with a 

certain color, with a metal, too, the alchemist said, and each had 

special power over some organ of the human body. the planet’s influence 

was believe to vary greatly according to its position in the heavens, so 

that to determine a man’s destiny accurate it was necessary to consider 

the aspect of the whole heavens, especially at the moment of his birth, 

but also at other times. this was call “casting the horoscope” and was 

regard as of great importance in enabling a man to guard against 

threaten peril or bad tendencies, and to make the best use of 

favorable opportunities. 

it is not astonishing, then, that the great monument of literature in the 

mediaeval period and even much later are fill with astronomical and 

astrology allusions; for these are but reflection of vital human 

interests of the times. the greatest poetical work of the middle ages, 

dante’s divina commedia, is rich in astronomical lore, and its dramatic 

action is project against a cosmographic background reflect the 

view of dante’s contemporary as to the structure of the world. milton, 

writing in the seventeenth century, bases the cosmology of his paradise 

lost in the main on the ptolemaic system, but make adam and the 

archangel raphael discuss the relative merit of this system and the 

heliocentric view of the universe. the latter had been brought forth by 

copernicus a century earlier, but even in milton’s day had not yet 

succeed in supplant the old geocentric cosmology. 

the view of the universe which we find reflect in chaucer’s poetry is 

chiefly base on the ptolemaic system of astronomy, though it show trace 

of very much more primitive cosmology ideas. the ptolemaic system owe 

its name to the famous alexandrian astronomer of the second century a. d., 

claudiu ptolemy, but is base largely on the works and discovery of the 

early greece philosopher and astronomers, especially eudoxus, 

hipparchus, and aristarchus, whose investigate ptolemy compiled[pg 5] and, 

along some lines, extended. ptolemaic astronomy was a purely geometric 

or mathematics system which represent the observe movements and 

relative position of the heavenly body so accurate that calculation 

as to their position at any given time could be base upon it. ptolemy 

agree with his contemporary in the opinion that to assign cause for 

the celestial movements was outside the sphere of the astronomer. this was 

a proper field of philosophy; and the decision of philosophers, 

especially those of aristotle, were regard as final, and their teaching 

as the basis upon which observe phenomena should be described. 

according to the ptolemaic system the earth is a motionless sphere fixed 

at the center of the universe. it can have no motion, for there must be 

some fixed point in the universe to which all the motions of the heavenly 

body may be referred; if the earth had motion, it was argued, this would 

be proportionate to the great mass of the earth and would cause object 

and animal to fly off into the air and be left behind. ptolemy believe 

this reason sufficient to make untenable the idea of a rotatory motion of 

the earth, although he was fully aware that to suppose such a motion of 

the earth would simplify exceedingly the representations of the celestial 

movements. it did not occur to him that to suppose the earth’s atmosphere 

to participate in its motion would obviate this difficulty. the earth was 

but a point in comparison with the immense sphere to which the stars were 

attach and which revolve about the earth once in every twenty-four 

hours, impart its motion to sun, moon, and planets, thus cause day 

and night and the rising and setting of the heavenly bodies. the irregular 

motions of the planet were account for by supposing them to move on 

circle of small sphere call ‘epicycles’, the centre of which move 

around the ‘deferents’, or circle of large sphere which carry the 

planet in course concentric to the star sphere. by give each of the 

planet an epicycle and deferent of the proper relative size and velocity 

the varied oscillation of the planets, as far as they could be follow 

by means of the simple instrument then in use, were almost perfectly 

account for. 

[pg 6]though it was a purely mathematics system which only attempt to give a 

basis for compute celestial motions, ptolemaic astronomy is of great 

importance historical as it remain the foundation of theoretical 

astronomy for more than 1400 years. throughout the long dark century of 

the middle age it survive in the study of the retired student of the 

monastery and of the few exceptional enlightened men who still had 

some regard for pagan learning in the days when many of the church father 

denounce it as heretical. 

ptolemy was the last of the great original greece astronomers. the 

alexandrian school produced, after him, only copyist and commentators, 

and the theoretical astronomy of the greeks, so highly perfect in 

ptolemy’s almagest, was for many century almost entire neglected. 

the roman state gave no encouragement to the study of theoretical 

astronomy and produce no new school of astronomy. although it was the 

fashion for a roman to have a smattering of greece astronomy, and famous 

latin author like cicero, seneca, strabo and pliny wrote on astronomy, 

yet the roman care little for original investigate and contribute 

nothing new to the science. the romans, however, appreciate the value of 

astronomy in measure time, and applied to the alexandrian school to 

satisfy their practical need for a calendar. what julius caesar obtain 

from the alexandrian sosigenes, he greatly improve and gave to the 

empire, as the calendar which, with the exception of the slight change 

made by gregory xiii, we still use. 

the pseudo-astronomical science of astrology, or the so-called ‘judicial 

astronomy’ was pursue during the roman empire and throughout the middle 

age with much greater zeal than theoretical astronomy. the interest in 

astrology, to be sure, encourage the study of observation astronomy to 

a certain extent; for the casting of horoscope to foretell destiny 

require that the heavenly body be observe and method of calculating 

their position at any time or place be known. but there was no desire to 

inquire into the underlying law of the celestial motions or to 

investigate the real nature of the heavenly phenomena. 

[pg 7]if the roman state did not encourage astronomy, the roman church 

positively discourage it. the bible became and long remain the sole 

authority recognize by the church father as to the constitution of the 

universe. by many of the patristic ptolemaic astronomy was despised; not 

because it did not describe accurate the observe phenomena of the 

heavens, for it did this in a way that could scarcely have been improve 

upon with the facilities for observation then available; and not because 

it was found upon the false assumption that the earth is the motionless 

center of the universe about which all heavenly body revolve; but 

because there was no authority in scripture for such a system, and it 

could not possibly be made consistent with the cosmology of genesis. 

allegorical description of the universe base on the scripture held 

almost complete sway over the mediaeval mind. the whole universe was 

represent allegorical by the tabernacle and its furniture. the earth 

was flat and rectangular like the table of shew bread, and surround on 

all four side by the ocean. the wall of heaven beyond this support the 

firmament shaped like a half-cylinder. angel move the sun, moon, and 

stars across the firmament and let down rain through its window from the 

expanse of water above. 


