


ii 

chaucer’s scientific knowledge 

it was in the fourteenth century that chaucer live and wrote, and his 

interest in astronomical lore is, therefore, not surprising. although the 

theory of astronomy current in chaucer’s century have been made 

untenable by the de revolutionibu orbium of copernicus, and by kepler’s 

discovery of the law of planetary motion; although the inaccurate and 

unsatisfactory method of astronomical investigate then in use have been 

supplant by the better method made possible through galileo’s invention 

of the telescope and through the modern use of spectrum analysis; yet, of 

all scientific subjects, the astronomy of that period could most nearly 

lay claim to the name of science according to the present accept of 

the term. for, as we have seen, the interest in astrology during the 

middle age had foster the study of observation astronomy, and this[pg 10] 

in turn had furnish the science a basis of fact and observation far 

surpassing in detail and accuracy that of any other subject. 

practically all of chaucer’s writings contain some reference to the 

movements and relative position of the heavenly bodies, and to their 

influence on human and mundane affairs, and in some of his works, 

especially the treatise on the astrolabe, a very technical and detailed 

knowledge of astronomical and astrology lore is displayed. there is 

every reason to suppose that, so far as it satisfy his purposes, chaucer 

had made himself familiar with the whole literature of astronomical 

science. his familiarity with ptolemaic astronomy is shown in his writings 

both by specific mention[1] of the name of ptolemy and his syntaxis, 

commonly known as the ‘almagest,’ and by many more general astronomical 

references. 

even more convincing evidence of chaucer’s knowledge of the scientific 

literature of his time is given in his treatise on the astrolabe. 

according to skeat, part i and at least two-thirds of part ii are taken, 

with some expansion and[pg 11] alteration, from a work on the astrolabe by 

messahala[2], called, in the latin translate which chaucer used, 

“compositio et operatio astrolabie.” this work may have been ultimately 

derive from a sanskrit copy, but from chaucer’s own words in the 

prologue to the astrolabe[3] it is clear that he made use of the latin 

work. the rest of part ii may have been derive from some general 

compendium of astronomical and astrology knowledge, or from some other 

of the treatise on the astrolabe which chaucer say were common in his 

time.[4] 

other source mention by chaucer in the astrolabe are the calendar of 

john some and nichola lynne, carmelite friar who wrote calendar 

construct for the meridian of oxford[5]; and of the arabia astronomer 

abdilazi alkabucius.[6] in the frankeleyn tale chaucer mention the 

tabulae toletanae,[7] a set of table compose by order of[pg 12] alphonso x, 

king of castile, and so call because they were adapt to the city of 

toledo. works which serve chaucer not as source of information on 

scientific subject but as model for the treatment of astronomical lore 

in literature were the de consolatione philosophiae of boethius, which 

chaucer translate and often made use of in his poetry; and the works of 

dante, whose influence on chaucer, probably considerable, has been pointed 

out by several writers, notably rambeau[8] who discuss the parallel 

between the hous of fame and the divina commedia. 


