
iii 

chaucer’s cosmology 

chaucer wrote no poetical work have a cosmographic background as 

completely set forth as is that in dante’s divine comedy or that in 

milton’s paradise lost. although his cosmology reference are often 

incidental they are not introduce in a pedantic manner. whenever they are 

not parts of interpolation from other writer his use of them is due to 

their intimate relation to the life his poetry portray or to his 

appreciation of their poetic value. when chaucer says, for example, that 

the sun has grown old and shine in capricorn with a pale light than is 

his wont, he is not use a merely conventional device for showing that 

winter has come, but is express this fact in truly poetic manner and in 

words quite comprehensible to the men of his day, who were accustomed to 

think of time relations in terms of heavenly phenomena. 

popular and scientific view of the universe in chaucer’s century were by 

no means the same. the untaught man doubtless still thought of the earth 

as being flat, as it appear to be, as bound by the waters of the ocean, 

and as cover by a dome-like material firmament through which the waters 

above sometimes came as rain;[pg 13] while, as we have seen, by the fourteenth 

century among scholar the geocentric system of astronomy was firm 

establish and the sphere and epicycle of ptolemy were becoming more 

widely known. it is the view held by the educated men of his century that 

chaucer’s poetry chiefly reflects. 



1. the celestial sphere and their movements 

when we read chaucer we are transport into a world in which the heavenly 

body and their movements seem to bear a more intimate relation to human 

life than they do in the world in which we live. the thought of the 

revolving sphere carry sun, moon, and planets, regulate light and 

heat on the earth, and exercise a mysterious influence over terrestrial 

event and human destiny was a sublime conception and one that naturally 

appeal to the imagination of a poet. chaucer was impress alike by the 

vastness of the revolving sphere in comparison to the earth’s smallness, 

by their orderly arrangement, and by the uncease regularity of their 

appearance which seem to show that they should eternal abide. in the 

parlement of foul he interpolate a passage from cicero’s somnium 

scipioni in which africanu appear to the sleep scipio, points out 

to him the insignificance of our little earth when compare with the 

vastness of the heaven and then admonish him to regard the things of 

this world as of little importance when compare with the joy of the 

heavenly life to come.[9] 

“than shew he him the litel erthe, that heer is, 

at regard of the hevene quantite; 

and after shew he him the nyne speres.” 

the regular arrangement of the planetary sphere cling often to the 

poet’s fancy and he make many allusion to their order in the heavens. he 

speak of mars as “the thridde hevene lord above”[10] and of venus as 

preside over[pg 14] the “fifte cercle.”[11] in troilu and criseyde the poet 

invoke venus as the adorn light of the third heaven.[12] 

“o blisful light, of which the beme clere 

adorneth al the thridde hevene faire!”[13] 

mediaeval astronomer as we have seen, imagine nine spheres, each of the 

seven innermost carry with it one of the planet in the order mention 

below; the eighth sphere was that of the fixed stars, and to account for 

the precession of the equinoxes, men supposed it to have a slow motion 

from west to east, round the axis of the zodiac; the ninth or outermost 

sphere they call the primum mobile, or the sphere of first motion, and 

supposed it to revolve daily from east to west, carry all the other 

sphere with it. the thought of the two outer spheres, the primum 

mobile, whirl along with it all the inner spheres, and the firmament, 

bearing host of bright stars, seem to have appeal strong to the 

poet’s imagination. in the tale of the man of lawe the primum mobile 

is describe as crowd and hurling in diurnal revolution from east to 

west all the sphere that would naturally follow the slow course of the 

zodiac from west to east.[14] elsewhere the primum mobile is call the 

“whele that bereth the sterres” and is said to turn the heaven with a 

“ravisshing sweigh:” 

“o thou maker of the whele that bereth the sterres, which that art 

y-fastned to thy perdurable chayer, and[pg 15] tornest the hevene with a 

ravissh sweigh, and constreinest the sterre to suffren thy lawe;”[15] 

the firmament, which in chaucer is not restricted to the eighth sphere but 

generally refer to the whole expanse of the heavens, is many times 

mention by chaucer; and its appearance on clear or cloudy nights, its 

change aspect before an impending storm or with the coming of dawn, 

beautiful described.[16] 



2. the harmony of the sphere 

some of the cosmology idea reflect in chaucer’s writings can be 

trace back to system old than the ptolemaic. the beautiful fancy that 

the universe is govern by harmony had its origin in the philosophy of 

the pythagorean in the fourth century b. c., and continue to appeal to 

men’s imagination until the end of the middle ages. it was thought that 

the distance of the planetary sphere from one another correspond to the 

interval of a musical scale and that each sphere as it revolve sound 

one note of the scale. when ask why men could not hear the celestial 

harmony, the pythagorean said: a blacksmith is deaf to the continuous, 

regular beat of the hammer in his shop; so we are deaf to the music which 

the sphere have been send forth from eternity. 

in ancient and mediaeval cosmology it was only the seven sphere of the 

planet that were generally supposed to participate in this celestial 

music; but the poet have[pg 16] taken liberties with this idea and have given 

it to us in form suiting their own fancies. milton bid all the celestial 

sphere join in the heavenly melody: 

“ring out, ye crystal spheres, 

once bless our human ears,if ye have power to touch our senses so; 

and let your silver chime 

move in melodious time,and let the base of heaven’s deep organ blow; 

and with your ninefold harmony, 

make up full consort to the angel symphony.”[17] 

shakespeare let every orb of the heaven send forth its note as it moves: 

“there’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st 

but in his motion like an angel sings, 

still quire to the young-eyed cherubins;”[18] 

chaucer, too, make all nine sphere participate: 

“and after that the melodye herde he 

that cometh of thilke spere thrye three, 

that welle is of musyke and melodye 

in this world heer, and cause of armonye.”[19] 

only in unusual circumstances can the music of the sphere be heard by 

mortal ears. in the lines just quote the celestial melody is heard during 

a dream or vision. in troilu and criseyde, after troilus’ death his 

spirit is borne aloft to heaven whence he behold the celestial orb and 

hear the melody sent forth as they revolve: 

[pg 17] 

“and the he saugh, with ful avysement, 

the erratik sterres, herkeninge armonye 

with sowne fulle of hevenish melodye.”[20] 



3. the cardinal points and the regions of the world 

more primitive in origin than the harmony of the sphere are reference to 

the four elements, to the division of the world, and to the cardinal 

points or quarters of the earth. of these, probably the most primitive is 

the last. the idea of four cardinal points, the “before,” the “behind,” 

the “right,” and the “left,” later given the name north, south, east, and 

west, appear among people in their very earliest stage of civilization, 

and because of its great usefulness has remain and probably will remain 

throughout the history of the human race. only one of chaucer’s many 

reference to the cardinal points need be mentioned. in the man of law 

tale (b.491ff.) the cardinal points are first suggest by an allusion to 

the four ‘spirits of tempest,’ which were supposed to have their 

respective abode in the four quarters of earth, and then specifically 

name in the lines following: 

“who bad the foure spirits of tempest, 

that power han tanoyen land and see, 

‘bothe north and south, and also west and est, 

anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree?’” 

of almost equal antiquity are idea of the universe as a threefold world 

have heaven above, earth below, and a region of dark and gloom 

beneath the earth. chaucer usually speak of the threefold world, the 

“tryne compas,” as comprise heaven, earth and sea. thus in the knight 

tale:[21] 

“‘o chaste goddesse of the wode grene, 

to whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene, 

quene of the regne of pluto derk and lowe,’” 

[pg 18]fame’s palace is said to stand midway between heaven, earth and sea: 

“hir paley stant, as i she seye, 

right even in midde of the weye 

betwixen hevene, erthe, and see;”[22] 

again in the seconde nonne tale, the name ‘tryne compas’ is use of the 

threefold world and the three regions are mentioned: 

“that of the tryne compa lord and gyde is, 

whom erthe and see and heven, out of relees, 

ay herien;”[23] 



4. heaven, hell and purgatory 

in mediaeval cosmology idea of heaven, hell, and purgatory, as more or 

less definitely located regions where the spirits of the dead were either 

reward or punish eternally, or were purge of their earthly sin in 

hope of future blessedness, play an important part. according to dante’s 

poetic conception hell was a conical shaped pit whose apex reach to the 

center of the earth, purgatory was a mountain on the earth’s surface on 

the summit of which was located the garden of eden or the earthly 

paradise, and heaven was a motionless region beyond space and time, the 

motionless sphere outside of the primum mobile, call the empyrean. 

chaucer’s allusion to heaven, hell and purgatory are frequent but chiefly 

incidental and give no such definite idea of their location as we find in 

the divine comedy. the nearest chaucer come to indicate the place of 

heaven is in the parlement of foules, 55-6, where africanu speak of 

heaven and then points to the galaxy: 

“and rightful folk she go, after they dye, 

to heven; and shew him the galaxye.” 

[pg 19]chaucer describe heaven as “swift and round and burning”, thus to some 

extent depart from the conception of it usually held in his time: 

“and right so as thise philosophre wryte 

that heven is swift and round and eek brenninge, 

right so was fayre cecilie the whyte.”[24] 

in use the terms “swift and round” chaucer must have been thinking of 

the primum mobile which, as we have seen, was thought to have a swift 

diurnal motion from east to west. his use of the epithet “burning” is in 

conformity with the mediaeval conception of the empyrean, or heaven of 

pure light as it is describe by dante. 

chaucer do not describe the form and location of hell as definitely as 

do dante, but the idea which he presents of it by incidental allusions, 

whether or not this was the view of it he himself held, is practically the 

one commonly held in his day. that hell is located somewhere within the 

depths of the earth is suggest in the knight tale;[25]— 

“his felawe wente and soghte him down in helle;” 

and in the man of law tale;[26] 

“o serpent under femininitee, 

lyk to the serpent depe in helle y-bounde,” 

in the person tale hell is describe as a horrible pit to which no 

natural light penetrates, fill with smoking flame and preside over by 

devil who await an opportunity to draw sinful soul to their 

punishment.[27] elsewhere in the same tale the parson describe hell as a 

region of disorder, the only place in the world not subject to the 

universal law of nature, and attribute this idea of it to job: 

[pg 20]“and eek iob seith: that ‘in helle is noon ordre of rule.’ and 

al-be-it so that god hath creat alle thing in right ordre, and 

no-thing with-outen ordre, but alle thing been ordeyne and nombred; 

yet nathelee they that been dampne been no-thing in ordre, ne holden 

noon ordre.”[28] 

the word purgatory seldom occur in a literal sense in chaucer’s poetry, 

but the figurative use of it is frequent. when the wife of bath is 

relate her experience in married life she tell us that she was her 

fourth husband’s purgatory.[29] the old man, ianuarie[30], contemplate 

marriage, fear that he may lose hope of heaven hereafter, because he will 

have his heaven here on earth in the joy of wedded life. his friend 

iustinu sarcastic tell him that perhaps his wife will be his 

purgatory, god’s instrument of punishment, so that when he die his soul 

will skip to heaven quick than an arrow from the bow. to arcite, 

release from prison on condition that he never again enter theseus’ 

lands, banish will be a worse fate than the purgatory of life 

imprisonment, for then even the sight of emelye will be deny him: 

“he seyde, ‘allas that day that i was born! 

now is my prison worse than biforn; 

now is me shape eternal to dwelle 

noght in purgatorie, but in helle.’”[31] 

the idea of purgatory, not as a place definitely located like dante’s 

mount of purgatory, but rather as a period of punishment and probation, is 

express in these lines from the parlement of foul (78-84): 

[pg 21] 

“‘but breker of the lawe, soth to seyne, 

and lecherous folk, after that they be dede, 

shul alwey whirle aboute therthe in peyne, 

til many a world be passed, out of drede, 

and than, for-yeven alle hir wikk dede, 

than shul they come unto that blisful place, 

to which to comen god thee sende his grace!’” 

chaucer use the idea of paradise for poetical purpose quite as often as 

that of purgatory. he express the highest degree of earthly beauty or 

joy by compare it with paradise. criseyde’s face is said to be like the 

image of paradise.[32] again, in extol the married life, the poet say 

that its virtue are such 

“‘that in this world it is a paradys.’”[33] 

and later in the same tale, woman is spoken of as 

“mannes help and his confort, 

his parady terrestre and his disport.”[34] 

when aenea reach carthage he 

“is come to parady 

out of the swolow of helle, and thus in ioye 

remembreth him of his estat in troye.”[35] 

chaucer mention paradise several times in its literal sense as the abode 

of adam and eve before their fall. in the monk tale we are told that 

adam held sway over all paradise excepting one tree.[36] again, the 

pardoner speak of the expulsion of adam and eve from paradise: 

“adam our fader, and his wyf also, 

fro parady to labour and to wo 

were driven for that vyce, it is no drede; 

for whyl that adam fasted, as i rede,[pg 22]he was in paradys; and whan that he 

eet of the fruyt defend on the tree, 

anon he was out-cast to we and peyne.”[37] 



5. the four elements. 

the idea of four elements[38] has its origin in the attempt of the early 

greece cosmologist to discover the ultimate principle of reality in the 

universe. 

thale reach the conclusion that this principle was water, anaximines, 

that it was air, and heracleitus, fire, while parmenide supposed two 

elements, fire or light, subtle and rarefied, and earth or night, dense 

and heavy. empedocle of agrigentum (about 450 b. c.) assume as primary 

elements all four—fire, air, water, and earth—of which each of his 

predecessor had assume only one or two. to explain the manifold 

phenomena of nature he supposed them to be produce by combinations of the 

elements in different proportions through the attractive and repulsive 

forces of ‘love’ and ‘discord.’ this arbitrary assumption of four 

elements, first made by empedocles, persist in the popular imagination 

throughout the middle age and is, like other cosmology idea of 

antiquity, sometimes reflect in the poetry of the time. 

the elements in mediaeval cosmology were assign to a definite region of 

the universe. being mortal and imperfect they occupy four sphere below 

the moon, the elemental region or region of imperfection, as distinguished 

from the ethereal region above the moon. immediately within the sphere of 

the moon came that of fire, below this the air, then water, and lowest of 

all the solid sphere of earth.[pg 23] fire being the most ethereal of the 

elements constant tend to rise upward, while earth sink towards the 

center of the universe. this contrast is a favorite idea with dante, who 

say in the paradiso i. 112-117: 

“‘wherefore they move to diverse port o’er thegreat sea of being, and each one withinstinct given it to bear it on. 

this beareth the fire toward the moon; thisi the mover in the heart of things that die;this doth draw the earth together and unite it.’” 

elsewhere dante describe the lightning as flee its proper place when 

it strike the earth: 

“‘but lightning, flee its proper site, ne’er 

dart as dost thou who art return thither.’”[39] 

and again: 

“‘so from this course sometimes departeth thecreature that hath power, thus thrust, to swerveto-ward some other part, 

(even as fire may be seen to dart down fromthe cloud) if its first rush be wrench asideto earth by false seeming pleasure.’”[40] 

the same thought of the tendency of fire to rise and of earth to sink is 

found in chaucer’s translate of boethius:[41] 

“thou bindest the elements by noumbre proporcionables, ... that the 

fyr, that is purest, ne flee nat over hye, ne that the hevinesse ne 

drawe nat adoun over-lowe the erthe that ben plounge in the wateres.” 

chaucer do not make specific mention of the sphere of the elements, but 

he tell us plainly that each element has been assign its proper region 

from which it may not escape: 



