democrats’ baffling 2020 mess 
by frank bruni 
dec. 7, 2019 

kamala harris fold her tent, and on that patch of ground, many flimsy theory bloomed. 

disappointed democrat grouse that you obviously had to be rich to compete in the 2020 race — because she was gone, while two billionaire remain — and pointed to the potential all-white, un-diverse lineup at the party’s next debate as proof that the qualify criteria put too much of a premium on fund-raising. 

but harris had made the cut for that debate. and she enter the presidential sweepstakes with a higher net worth ($6 million, according to forbes) than bernie sander ($2.5 million), amy klobuchar ($2 million) or pete buttigieg ($100,000), who are still in the hunt and are among the six contender slate to be spar onstage on dec. 19. what’s more, sander and another of the six, elizabeth warren, have raise bucket of money without courting plutocrats. 

many democrat blame the media for harris’s demise. they have a point, inasmuch as some news organization never had the kind of romance with her that they did with buttigieg and beto o’rourke, two white men. i noted as much in a column last may, point to o’rourke’s placement on the cover of vanity fair and buttigieg’s on the cover of time. 

but the media fell quick out of love with o’rourke and is pick buttigieg apart for his lack of support among african-americans and his past employment as a mckinsey consultant. and harris was hardly ignored: her initial campaign rally in oakland, calif., in january was cover live, in its entirety, on msnbc and cnn. that same month, rachel maddow of msnbc told her, in a face-to-face interview, "i think there is a good chance that you are go to win the nomination." and after the democratic debate in june, when harris stirring confront joe biden about his past opposition to federal mandate bus to integrate schools, she received a bonanza of media attention and rapturous reviews. 

i get that this democratic primary isn’t play out as anyone predict or in remote accordance with the party’s image of itself and with its priorities. none of the top four candidate — biden, warren, buttigieg and sander — is a person of color, three of them are 70 or older, and the billionaires, tom steyer and mike bloomberg, are dip into their personal fortune in their effort to gain ground. for a party that celebrate diversity, pitch itself to underdog and pride itself on being future-minded and youth-oriented, that’s a freaky, baffling turn of events. 

but some of the conclusion being drawn and complaint being raise don’t fully hold water. 

take the fear about the nomination being purchased. without question, running for office is too expensive. that dynamic can definitely favor candidate with lucrative connections. and candidate are forced — unless they’re steyer or bloomberg — to devote ludicrous and possibly corrupt sum of time to politics panhandling. 

but at least at present, neither steyer nor bloomberg is exactly barrel toward victory. and while cory book drew a connection between harris’s departure and a process warp by wealth, the link is tenuous. booker, whose campaign press on despite his failure to qualify for the december debate, said of harris’s withdrawal, "voters did not determine her destiny." 

actually, they kind of did. they’re the one who are or aren’t excited enough about a candidacy to donate money and keep it alive. they’re the one respond to pollster and, by flag their preferences, determine which candidate take on the air of plausible that often generate the next round of donations. i keep seeing, on twitter and facebook, lament about harris’s fate from democrat who chose to support candidate other than her. well, she couldn’t succeed on generalized, ambient good will. 

i also keep seeing and hearing statement along the lines that the party should be ashamed of the way things are turning out, that the party failed. while an official party entity, the democratic national committee, indeed set criteria for the debate — which had to have some criteria — there’s otherwise no committee of elder or secret cabal that decree which candidate prosper and which don’t. 

besides which, as ere levitz observe in new york magazine, harris "boasted the enthusiast support of hillary’s donor network and supporters, warm relations with obamaworld, and the sympathies of a broad range of democratic lawmaker in the nation’s largest state and beyond." levitz add that when harris end her campaign on tuesday, she trail only biden in the website fivethirtyeight’s tally of important endorsements; that book has more such endorse than sanders, who is far ahead of him; and that klobuchar has more than buttigieg, whom she distantly trails. so if the party is fellow democratic politician of note, it’s hardly driving the direction of this contest. 

we in the media aren’t driving it, either, though there’s constant carp along those lines. we’ve always been fundamentally responsive, bestow coverage base on establish interest, and we’re more responsive than ever in this digitize age of sophisticated, real-time measure of precisely what our audience do and doesn’t turn to. we give you a tide of warren in part because you thrill to the early trickle. we serve you oodles of buttigieg because we’ve notice your appetite for it. 

another questionable assessment of this primary is that "electability" is crowd out candidate who don’t fit some safe profile. yes, many democratic voter tell pollster that choose the candidate most likely to beat trump is their top concern. yes, there’s evidence that such an impulse is leading some voter away from candidate of color. 

but if "electability" emphatically rule the day, wouldn’t at least one of the three current or former governor already gone from the race — john hickenlooper of colorado, steve bullock of montana and jay inslee of washington — have fare better? governor are frequent tout as the best candidates, and they account for four of the past seven presidents. 

if "electability" rule the day, would biden’s stiffest competition be coming from a 78-year-old democratic socialist who recently had a heart attack (and just placed first in a california poll), a 70-year-old former ivy league law professor whom trump delight in calling "pocahontas" and the 37-year-old gay mayor of a small indiana city? 

there’s a lot to this primary that’s more complicated than meet the eye, a lot that explode assumptions. according to the polling so far, voter aren’t drawn to candidate whose demography profile overlap with theirs. biden’s support from black democrat in a national quinnipiac poll late last month was more than eight times what harris’s or booker’s was. he and sander do exponential better among latino than julián castro does. sanders, not buttigieg, has the advantage among democrat under the age of 35. and many gay democrat have reject buttigieg as inadequate progressive and even insufficient gay. 

so if identity group, electability, media bias and personal wealth aren’t the secret to success, what are? i think we’re learning yet again that there’s no tidy, trusty formula. but broad name recognition among engaged voter — which biden, sander and, to a lesser extent, warren all had at the outset — is an enormous asset. so are a sales pitch and brand, like buttigieg’s, that are distinct from any other contender’s. 

finally, there’s politics acumen. there’s raw talent. the last democratic president, barack obama, had plenty of it. the next democratic president will, too. 
