
v 

astrology lore in chaucer 

astrology, though resemble a science in that it make use of observation 

and seek to establish law governing its data, is in reality a faith or 

creed. it had its beginning, so tradition tell us, in the faith of the 

ancient babylonian in certain astral deity who exert an influence 

upon terrestrial event and human life. the basis of this faith was not 

altogether illogical but contained a germ of truth. 

of all the heavenly bodies, the sun exert the most obvious effect upon 

the earth; the sun brought day and night, summer and winter; his ray 

lure grow things from mother earth and so gave sustenance to mankind. 

but to the ancient people of the orient the sun was also often a baneful 

power; he could destroy as well as give life. therefore, the ancients came 

to look upon the sun as a great and powerful god to be worship and 

propitiate by men. and if the sun was such a power, it was natural to 

believe that all the other bright orb of the sky were lesser [pg 52]divinities 

who exercise more limited powers on the earth. from this beginning, 

based, as we have seen, on a germ of fact, by the power of his imagination 

and credulity, man extend more and more the powers of these sidereal 

divinities, attribute to their volition and influence all the most 

insignificant as well as the most important terrestrial events. and if the 

heavenly bodies, by revolving about the earth in ceaseless harmony, 

effect the recurrence of day and night and of the seasons, and if their 

configuration were responsible for the minutest event in nature, was it 

not natural to suppose that, besides affecting man thus indirectly, they 

also influence him directly and were responsible for his conduct and for 

the very quality of his mind and soul? perhaps the astonish variety 

of the influence that the celestial bodies, from ancient until modern 

times, were supposed to exercise over the world and the life of mankind 

can be account for by imagine some such process of thought to have 

been involved in the beginning of astrology. 

it was but a step from faith in stellar influence on our earth to the 

belief that, as the heavenly movements were govern by immutable laws, so 

their influence upon the world would follow certain law and its effects 

in the future could be determined as certainly as could the coming 

revolution and conjunction of the stars. out of this two-fold belief was 

evolve a complex system of divination, the origin of which was forgotten 

as men, believe in it, invent reason for believing, pretend that 

their faith was found on a long series of observations. the chaldean 

believe that in discover the uncease regularity of the celestial 

motions, they had found the very law of life and they built upon this 

conviction a mass of absolutely rigid dogmas. but when experience belie 

these dogmas, unable to realize the falsity of their presupposition and 

to give up their faith in the divine stars, the astrologer invent new 

dogma to explain the old ones, thus pile up a body of complicated and 

often[pg 53] contradictory doctrine that will ever be to the student a source 

of perplexity and astonishment. 

on its philosophical side astrology was a system of astral theology 

developed, not by popular thought, but through the careful observations 

and speculation of learned priest and scholars. it was a purely eastern 

science which came into being on the chaldean plain and in the nile 

valley. as far as we know, it was entire unknown to any of the primitive 

aryan races, from hindostan to scandinavia. astrology as a system of 

divination never gain a foothold in greece during the brightest period 

of her intellectual life. but the dogma of astral divinity was zealous 

maintain by the greatest of greece philosophers. plato, the great 

idealist, whose influence upon the theology of the ancient and even of the 

modern world was more profound than that of any other thinker, call the 

stars “visible gods” ranking them just below the supreme eternal being; 

and to plato these celestial gods were infinite superior to the 

anthropomorphic gods of the popular religion, who resemble men in their 

passion and were superior to them only in beauty of form and in power. 

aristotle defend with no less zeal the doctrine of the divinity of the 

stars, seeing in them eternal substances, principles of movement, and 

therefore divine beings. in the hellenistic period, zeno, the stoic, and 

his follower proclaim the supremacy of the sidereal divinity even 

more strong than the school of plato and aristotle had done. the stoic 

conceive the world as a great organism whose “sympathetic” forces 

constant interact upon one another, govern by reason which was of 

the essence of ethereal fire, the primordial substance of the universe. to 

the stars, the purest manifestation of the power of this ethereal 

substance, were attribute the greatest influence and the loftiest divine 

qualities. the stoic develop the doctrine of fatalism, which is the 

inevitable outcome of faith in stellar influence on human life, to its 

consequences; yet they prove by fact that fatalism is not incompatible 

with [pg 54]active and virtuous living. by the end of the roman imperial period 

astrology had transform paganism, replace the old society of immortal 

who were scarcely superior to mortals, except in being exempt from old 

age and death, by faith in the eternal being who ran their course in 

perfect harmony throughout the ages, whose power, regulate by the 

unvarye celestial motions, extend over all the earth and determined 

the destiny of the whole human race. 

astrology, as a science and a system of divination, exert a profound 

influence over the mediaeval mind. no court was without its practice 

astrologer and the university all had their professor of astrology. the 

practice of astrology was an essential part of the physician’s profession, 

and before prescribe for a patient it was thought quite as important to 

determine the position of the planet as the nature of the disease.[139] 

interesting evidence of this fact is found in the prologue to the 

canterbury tale where chaucer speak of the doctour’s knowledge and use 

of astrology as if it were his chief excellence as a physician: 

“in al this world ne was the noon him lyk 

to speke of phisik and of surgerye; 

for he was ground in astronomye. 

he kepte his pacient a ful greet del 

in houres, by his magik naturel. 

wel coude he fortunen the ascendent 

of his image for his pacient.”[140] 

yet in spite of the esteem in which astrology divination was held by 

most people in the middle ages, dante, the greatest exponent of the 

thought and learning of that period, show practically no knowledge of the 

technical and practical side of astrology. when he refer to the specific 

effects of the planet it is only to those most familiarly known, and he 

nowhere use such technical terms as “houses” or “aspects” of planets. but 

dante, like the great philosopher of the early periods, was undoubted 

[pg 55]influenced by the philosophical doctrine of astrology, and a general 

belief in the influence of the celestial sphere upon human life was 

deep rooted in his mind. to him the ceaseless and harmonious movements 

of the celestial body were the manifestation and instrument of god’s 

providence, and were ordain by the first mover to govern the destiny 

of the earth and human life. 

we can see this conviction of dante’s with perfect certainty when we read 

the divina commedia. for dante’s poetry is highly subjective; on every 

page his own personal thought and feelings are reveal quite openly. 

chaucer’s poetry, on the other hand, is objective; he tell us almost 

nothing directly about himself and what we learn of him in his writings is 

almost entire by inference. chaucer’s frequent use of astrology in his 

poetry would make it hard to believe that he was not considerably 

influence by its philosophical aspects, at least in the general way that 

dante was. part and parcel of the dramatic action in most of his poem is 

the idea of stellar influences. yet we cannot assert, with the same 

assurance that we can say it of dante, that chaucer believed, even in a 

general way, in the influence of the stars on human life. in dante’s 

poetry, as we have said, the poet himself is always before us. chaucer, 

with socratic irony, always make it plain to the reader that his attitude 

is purely objective, that he is only the narrator of what he has seen or 

dreamed, only the copyist of another’s story. even when chaucer make 

himself one of the protagonists, as in the hous of fame and the 

canterbury tales, it is only that his narrative may be the more 

convincing. he tell a story and make its protagonist actually live 

before us, as individual men and women. it is possible to imagine all of 

his use of astrology in his poetry not as the reflection of his own faith 

in its cosmic philosophy, but the expression of his genius for 

understanding people and truthful describe life and character. 

considerable discussion as to chaucer’s attitude towards astrology has 

been call forth by passage in which[pg 56] he speak in words of scorn with 

regard to some of the practice and magic arts that were often use in 

connection with astrology. in the astrolabe after describe somewhat at 

length the favorable and unfavorable position of planet he says: 

“natheles, thise ben observauncez of iudicial matiere and ryte of 

payens, in which my spirit ne hath no feith, ne no knowing of hir 

horoscopum.”[141] 

again in the franklin’s tale he speak in a similar disdainful tone of 

astrology magic: 

“he him remembre that, upon a day, 

at orlien in studie a book he say 

of magik naturel, which his felawe, 

that was that tyme a bacheler of lawe, 

al were he the to lerne another craft, 

had prive upon his desk y-laft; 

which book spak muchel of the operaciouns, 

touchinge the eighte and twenty mansioun 

that longen to the mone, and swich folye, 

as in our day is not worth a flye: 

for holy chirche feith in our bileve 

ne suffreth noon illusion us to greve.”[142] 

and elsewhere in the same tale he writes: 

“so atte laste he hath his tyme y-founde 

to maken his iape and his wreccednesse 

of switch a supersticious cursednesse.”[143] 

here follow a long description of the clerk’s instrument and 

astrology observances, ending in the lines 

“for swiche illusioun and swiche meschaunce 

as hethen folk use in thilke dayes; 

for which no lenger make he delayes, 

but thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye, 

it seem that alle the rokke were aweye.”[144] 

[pg 57]on the strength of these passage professor t. r. lounsbury[145] hold 

that chaucer was far ahead of most of his contemporary in his attitude 

toward the superstitious practice connected with the astrology of his 

day; that his attitude toward judicial astrology was one of total 

disbelief and scorn; and he even go so far as to say that chaucer was 

guilty of a breach of artistic workmanship in express his disbelief so 

scornful in a tale in which the very climax of the dramatic action 

depend upon a feat of astrology magic. 


