

the luck of flower 

it has been a favorite pastime with maiden in all age to try to foretell 

their future by the aid of flower and plants. 

one of the most popular fancies is provided by the four-leaved clover, the 

story of which is told in various legends. one runs to the effect that three 

beautiful sisters, faith, hope and charity, came from over the seas, and 

wherever they walk three-leaved clovers, crimson, white and yellow, 

bloom profusely. in their footstep came another more beautiful being, 

whose name was love, and in his honor the clover add a fourth petal 

to the trefoil. 

in time, it became the talisman of love-sick maidens, who wore it in their 

shoe to ensure a speedy meeting with their sweetheart, wore it over their 

heart to frighten away evil spirits and to prevent being jilted. in the case 

of a quarrel, it serve to effect a reconciliation. 

apart from its sentimental associations, a four-leaved clover has long been 

regard as an emblem of good luck, and has been worn by those who 

believe in such things when they wish to increase their chance of good 

fortune. 

spring flowers.—naturally, many belief flourish around the flower 

of the garden and the hedgerow. 

if you chance to find the first flower of the season on a monday, it means 

good luck. 

if on a tuesday, big undertaking are likely to be successful. 

if on a wednesday, it denote your approach wedding. 

if on a thursday, hard work with little profit will fall to your lot. 

if on a friday, unexpected wealth reach you. 

if on a saturday, you may look out for misfortune. 

if on a sunday, phenomenal good luck will come to you. 

the first wild flower.—from the first wild flower which you 

gather in spring, it is possible to discover the initial of your future husband or 

wife. if, for instance, they should chance to be daisies, violet and buttercups, 

then expect to find some suitable person with the initial d. v. b., 

but they may not be necessarily in this order. 

if someone presents you with a yellow flower, then you may expect a 

gift of money directly. 

if you can turn a bluebell inside out without break it, then your lover 

will be true as long as both of you live. 

[100] 

no. 21. 

the pansy.—if you wish to know your future destiny, pluck a pansy, 

which take its name from pensee, a thought. count the streak or lines upon 

the petals. 

four streak tell that your dearest wish will be fulfilled. 

five streak stand for hope with fear. 

six streak suggest a surprise. 

seven streak tell of constancy in your lover. 

eight streaks, fickleness. 

nine streaks, a change and then riches. 

marking leaning towards the left denote trouble. 

marking leaning to the right denote prosperity. 

should the central streak be the longest, then sunday should be chosen 

as your wedding day. 

the daisy.—one of the oldest of flower charm is to pluck at the petal 

of a daisy or marguerite. at first pluck, these words are said, "he love 

me"; at the second, "he love me not." these sentence are repeated alternate 

until the flower is deprived of all its petals. whichever sentence 

was utter last describe "his" affections. 

[101] 

the ivy.— 

ivy, ivy, i thee pluck, 

and in my bosom, i thee put. 

the first young man who speak to me 

my own true lover he shall be. 

no. 22. 

the hawthorn or may.—once upon a time, every porch was decorate 

with a branch of may to avert the evil eye and prevent witchcraft, but the 

idea has been departed from, and now it is regard as a harbinger of 

ill-luck, and is rarely brought inside a house. 

the mistletoe.—from very ancient times, this plant has been regard 

with curious veneration. probably it gain special fame, in the first instance, 

owe to the peculiar manner in which it grew. the druid look 

upon it as a plant possess marvelous properties, and they esteem nothing 

in the world more sacred than it. they gather it when the moon was 

just six days old because the moon was then thought to be at its greatest 

power. this done, they sacrifice two young bullock which were milk-white. 

after that, the mistletoe was cut into small pieces with the aid of 

a golden hook or bill and distribute among the people present. these 

took it home and suspend it in a prominent place to ward off evil spirits. 

from these associations, the mistletoe has become an emblem under which 

young people may kiss, without any evil coming to them through their act. 

holly is use as a christmas decoration because the roman chose it to 

hang in their house on the fast in honor of saturn. friends gave bunch of it 

to those whom they wish to endow with luck and happiness, probably 

because the prickly leaves symbolize the crown of thorn worn by christ 

and the red berry the blood of the cross. 

[102] 

birthday flower 

just as there are birth stones, so there are flower which stand for each 

month of the year. by wearing the blossom name for your month, you may 

count on good fortune as the result. 

january.—the snowdrop which is the emblem of purity, hope and 

gentleness. 

february.—the violet, the emblem of modesty, kindness and faith. 

march.—the daffodil, the emblem of daintiness, sincerity and graciousness. 

april.—the primrose, the emblem of lovers. 

may.—the white lily, the emblem of purity and sweetness. 

june.—the wild rose, the emblem of love and loyalty. 

july.—the carnation, the emblem of kindly thoughts. 

august.—the white heather, the emblem of luck and the best of 

good fortune. 

september.—the michaelmas daisy, the emblem of riches and happiness. 

october.—the rosemary, the emblem of remembrance and kind 

thoughts. 

november.—the chrysanthemum, the emblem of faith and truth. 

december.—the ivy, the emblem of loyalty, fidelity and faithfulness. 

the language of flower 

for many generations, certain flower have been accept as have definite 

meanings. thus, a gift of any of the example list below, may be taken 

to infer whatever description is appended. 

camellia.—beauty, loveliness.candytuft.—indifference, lack of affection.carnation (red).—alas for my poor heart!carnation (white).—disregard, disdain.clover (four-leaved).—be mine.columbine.—foolishness.daisy.—innocence, purity.deadly nightshade.—falsehood, untrue.fern.—you fascinate me.forget-me-not.—the same as the name.foxglove.—i bow down to you.geranium.—to console you.golden rod.—be on your guard.[103]heliotrope.—i am devoted to you.hyacinth (white).—your beauty is recognized.ivy.—faithfulness. i cling to you.lily (white).—sweetness.lily (yellow).—gay, happy, joyful.lily of the valley.—happiness will return.mignonette.—your quality are even greater than your charms.myrtle.—love.orange blossom.—chastity.pansy.—thoughts.passion flower.—willing to suffer hardship for you.peach blossom.—i am captivate by you.primrose.—a token of love.rose.—a token of love, also.rose (red).—bashful, shy.rose (white).—i will be worthy of you.rose (yellow).—jealousy.rosebuds.—a confession of great love.sweet pea.—leave me and depart, or i leave you.verbena.—pray for me. 

combinations of flower 

in order to convey definite phrases, lovers have long been use to resort 

to certain combinations of flowers. a bunch made up of them has the 

meaning which we print below. 

daisy and mignonette.—your quality surpass even your great 

beauty. 

fern and lily of the valley.—you are sweet and charming, 

and you fascinate me. 

ivy leaves and yellow rose.—your jealousy has put an end 

to our friendship. 

columbine, daisy and lily.—you have play false and broken 

our friendship. 

pink and laurel leaves.—your high quality have been notice 

by me. 

golden rod, sweet pea and forget-me-not.—danger is 

at hand, be careful. i go away but do not forget me. 

[104] 
