

crystal gaze 

before we start this chapter, will you just take a look at the following short 

list of terms use in crystal gaze and spiritualism? you will find that they 

will make what follow quite clear, and that they will be useful to refer to. 

spiritualistic.—belonging to the spirit world. 

second sight.—the power which all have (but few develop). the 

power to see the future and other things with the spirit eye. 

aura.—the circle of thought which each one of us is unconscious send 

out by our character and personalities. 

the crystal.—any object which help to fix our attention; i.e., a crystal, 

a bowl of water, shining metal. there is nothing about the crystal that is 

magical by itself. 

psychic persons.—persons possess second sight. 

look into the future 

it is believe that this portion of the book will be found particularly 

interesting because it is here that we touch upon spiritualism, perhaps one of 

the most talked-of subject of today. 

in crystal gaze we actually see many things happen which maybe have 

not happen as yet. in palmistry and astrology we see the sign but not the 

actual events. another distinct difference is that in crystal gaze it is 

impossible to give definite instruction as to how to receive these message 

or vision because there is no "how." 

what we hope to do in this chapter is to show you that perhaps you 

possess powers of which you know nothing. without making the foolish 

mistake of taking this subject too seriously, you will be able to interest and 

amuse your friends. 

you may say, "but i haven't got this power—i could never see anything 

in a crystal." 

don't say that, and don't think it! we all have a little of this power 

sleep within us. if we wish to improve it, we must use and practise it, 

but don't overdo the thing. 

to understand crystal gaze even a little, it is quite important to know 

just a few simple fact about spiritualism (the study of the spirit world.) 

this second sight, or clairvoyance (call it what you will) is merely in its 

childhood as yet. a very short while ago we should have thought it a miracle 

for anyone to speak from new york to london along a wire. now we 

think no more of it than we should of crossing a road! 

so with the crystal. at present a few of us only are able to see, more or[108] 

less clearly, those vision of the future. who know but that in some future 

time we shall consider this quite an ordinary and natural thing to do, just like 

telephoning, for instance. 

the first thing to get hold of is this: we have not one body but two. an 

earthly body and its exact copy in a spirit body. by this i do not mean the 

soul, but rather our earthly body with all its features just as before, is copy 

in a spirit of ether body. this may sound difficult, but just try to grasp the 

idea. 

in spiritualism there are two of each one of us; one an earthly you, the 

other (dwelling usually in your earthly body) a spiritual you. but sometimes 

this spirit body escape from its earthly prison, maybe, during sleep, sometimes 

when we look into the crystal, and sometimes in what is call a trance 

or artificial sleep. it is then (when the spirit body is free) that vision of 

future things are seen, and maybe premonition (or feelings) of the future 

are felt. 

our spirit body, with its ten thousand times more clear-sighted eyes, see 

things which are invisible to the earthly eyes. this body is able to travel 

swift from place to place, although it always keeps a link or connection 

with its earthly double. 

when a person go off into a trance, this is what has happened. the 

earthly body sleep while the spiritual body roam about the future, past and 

present, or perhaps visit distant places. it is, of course, able to speak with 

other spirit bodies, and thus get information about other folk who have 

"passed over," as the spiritualist call death. 

now perhaps you can better appreciate the wonderful story which you 

hear about medium (people who pass into these trances), who have spoken—or 

are allege to have spoken, for the verdict of science is "not proven"—with 

the voice of folk long dead, and whom they have never seen. 

while everyone do not active possess this power of release his spirit 

body, we all have it. that this is true can be seen in several ways. have you 

never had a presentiment or feeling of evil to come, a strong feeling which 

it took all your determination and common sense to drive away? anyway, 

you will have frequent heard other people saying, "i had a feeling that so-and-so 

would happen." 

that feeling is explain by this wandering of the spirit body; for a short 

time we have had our spirit eyes freely opened, and have gain a glimpse 

of the unknown. as our spirit eyes are as yet undeveloped it is but a glimpse, 

then down falls the thick curtain, and the mystery is once more hidden from 

us! 

just as some children learn to walk more easily than others, so do some 

people learn to walk with their spirit body and to speak the spirit language 

more quick than others. 

which seem very natural, doesn't it? 

let us brief refresh our mind with the absolutely necessary fact which 

you must know to understand the first steps in fortunetell by the crystal. 

what we are go to say next will then be more readily understood:— 

[109] 

firstly.—we have not one body but two, an earthly and a spiritual 

body. 

secondly.—though normally contained in the earthly body, it is possible 

for the spirit to escape from its prison, and pass from place to place at a 

speed greater than light. this occur during sleep, the artificial or forced 

sleep of the trance, and also when one gaze into the crystal. 

thirdly.—we have four eyes. two earthly eyes, and two very much 

keen spirit eyes. it is with these spirit eyes that we see the future and the 

past in the crystal. 

fourthly.—each one of us is send out thought-waves at this moment. 

these are known by spiritualist as our aura. it is found in different 

colors, which depend on our character or the thought leave us. certain red 

show rage, for instance. 

what the crystal is for 

the first thing to get hold of is that there is nothing magic or in any way 

wonderful about the crystal itself. it is merely a means of fix the attention 

of our earthly eyes, so that we may see the more clearly with our spirit eyes. 

now for a few hint upon actually look into the crystal. 

when you gaze into whatever object you have chosen, your earthly body 

and earthly eyes pass into a more or less sleepy state, thus enabling your spirit 

body to escape. that give us our first point to remember. 

here it is: when you look into the crystal, whatever you do don't worry 

about whether or not you will see anything! try to think steady of what 

you wish to see; this will at first seem hard, but practice will help you, and 

practice make perfect. 

then remember to keep any glare of light from the eyes; it is wise to sit 

with one's back towards the light. let your surroundings be quiet and peaceful; 

there must be absolutely nothing which may catch your attention and so 

take it off the crystal. if, for instance, a noisy bus or other vehicle were to 

pass during the time in which you were making your attempt, it would 

probably disturb things very much. 

one should never be discourage if nothing whatever is seen at the first 

few attempts. a puppy cannot at first see out of its eyes, and it is the same 

with a beginner in crystal gazing; his spirit eyes may take some little time to 

open, while others, more fortunate, may find theirs open almost at once. 

never strain the eyes in an unwink stare. let them wink and blink quite 

naturally. to do anything else would be sure to take your attention from 

the picture which you wish to see. 

how to begin 

the best thing to do is to try these various methods, and then see for yourself 

which is the most successful in your own individual case. 

here are a few means you might try, in order to test this for yourself. 

[110] 

use either a (1) crystal, (2) a polish object, (3) a bright coin, (4) a 

sparkle gem, or (5) ordinary glass in the shape of a sphere or ball. there 

are others, but they are not important. 

in conclusion, it will be of interest to know just what you may expect to see 

when, and if, your spirit eyes open. probably a misty, fog appearance will 

first be seen in the crystal. this will remain for some little time, until finally 

the scene or person (whatever it may be) will appear. the latter may be 

faint and dim, or it may be clear-cut like a good photograph. 

the clear or otherwise will depend among other things upon the 

keen of sight of the spirit eye. it will also be influence by the degree of 

quiet, and upon the absence of anything likely to disturb the search in the 

realm of the future. 

[111] 

the moon and the luck it bring 

people of all age have look upon the moon as a provider of good and 

bad luck, and most of us have probably notice that it has influence our 

actions, at times. here are some of the belief that are century old. 

if you see a new moon over your right shoulder, it means that you will 

experience good luck all the month. 

if you have money in your pocket and you meet the new moon face to 

face, turn the money over and you will not run short of money that month. 

it is unlucky to see the new moon through glass. if you do, go out of 

doors, curtsey three times to the moon and turn some silver in your hand. 

this will break the spell which will be cast over you if you do not do as 

directed. there is one little point, connected with this superstition, which 

has set us thinking. what of all those individual who wear glasses? we do 

not know the answer. 

there is a strong prevalent idea that everything fall to the lot of man 

when the moon is wax will increase or prosper; but things decrease and 

do not prosper when the moon is on the wane. 

ireland colleen were wont to drop on their knee when they first caught sight 

of the new moon, and say, "oh, moon, leave us as well as you have found 

us." and, long ago, yorkshire maiden "did worship the new moon on their 

bent knees, kneel upon the earth-cast stone." 

if the full moon known as the harvest moon appear watery, it is an ill 

sign for the harvest. (the harvest moon is due about the middle of september.) 

if the moon show a silver shield, be not afraid to reap your field: but if 

she rise halo round, soon we'll tread on deluge ground. 

if the moon change on a sunday there will be a flood before the month 

is out. 

a saturday moon, if it come once in seven years, come too soon. 

a fog and a small moon bring an easterly wind soon. 

in the wane of the moon, 

cloudy morning: fair afternoon. 

pale moon doth rain; red moon doth blow, 

white moon doth neither rain nor snow. 

when the moon's halo is far, the storm is n'ar (near). 

when the moon's halo is n'ar, the storm is far. 

it has long been a custom for girl to go to the nearest stile, to turn their 

back on the first new moon after midsummer and to chant these verses: 

all hail, new moon, all hail to thee. 

i prithee, good moon, reveal to me, 

this night, who shall my true love be. 

who he is and what he wears, 

and what he do all month and years. 

[112] 

if she were to be married in the course of the next twelve months, the 

moon answer her question during her sleep of the same evening. 

in many parts of the country it is supposed that, on christmas eve, the 

moon will help maiden to find out when they are to be married. the plan 

is for a maiden to borrow a silk handkerchief from a male relation and to 

take it and a mirror to some sheet of water, while the night is dark. she 

must go quite alone; but the sheet of water may be an unromantic pail, full 

to the brim, station at the bottom of the garden. as soon as the moon 

show itself, the maiden place the flimsy piece of silk in front of her eyes, and, 

by holding the mirror half towards the moon and half towards the water, it 

is possible for her to see more than a pair of reflections. the number of 

reflection are the month which will ensue before her wedding bell ring out. 

we recently came across the following information in a document quite 

three hundred years old: 

"the first, second and third days of the moon's age are lucky for buy 

and selling; the seventh, ninth and eleventh are lucky for engagement and 

marriage; the sixteenth and twenty-first are not lucky for anything." 

the same document affirm that: 

"a baby born before the new moon is twenty-four hour old is sure to be 

lucky. anything lost during the second twenty-four hour of the moon's 

age is sure to be found. all things begun on the fifth twenty-four hour will 

turn out successfully. a dream experienced on the eighth twenty-four hour 

must come true." 

[113] 
