

viii. the sacred pickaxe 

told by the magistrate 

the first wolf-grey of the dawn was creep over the scene, and turning 

to a sickly yellow the flare of the little oil lamp arrange around the 

veranda. the morning air bit shrewdly, and more than one of the seat 

or recline figures had gather his robe more close around him. all 

eyes were now turn on the kotwal. he alone of the company had not 

contribute from his store of experiences. 

"methinks it is too late for any more story-telling," he protest 

diffidently, with gesture and glance toward the east in token that he 

spoke truly. 

"nay, nay," cry the rajput, "this night will not be complete without 

the full measure of our entertainment. come, come, friend; the sun is 

yet an hour below the horizon." 

murmur of approval show that the general wish had been interpreted. 

"be it so, then," assent the magistrate. "i have heard so many story 

this night that it would indeed be churlish on my part to refuse to give 

you one of mine. well, listen. 

"know, my friends, that i am a district judge in[pg 171] delhi, preside over 

that quarter known as the bara bazaar, where the merchant most do 

congregate. one day some few years ago it befell that i was seat alone 

in the hall where i hold my court. it was the afternoon hour, all the 

suit of the day had been disposed of, punishment had been mete out to 

those who deserve it, justice had been done to rich and poor alike, in 

accordance with the orders of our most righteous master akbar, to whom 

be all honour and glory. 

"i had taken from my garment my silver betel-nut box, and was leisurely 

spread on a leaf the smear of lime preparatory to enjoy my pan 

supari, muse the while on the strange little irony of life that came 

to my knowledge each day in the discharge of my magisterial functions. 

all at once a shadow from the open doorway fell across the room. raise 

my eyes, i beheld the tall figure of a man. on meeting my look he bowed 

his body, and with both hand outstretched, courteous salaam me. 

"'protector of the poor, listen to my story,' he said. 

"in silence, while i adjust the fragment of betel-nut on the lime 

leaf and roll up the morsel, i motion him to a place on the edge of 

the carpet whereon i myself sat. for my first glance had shown me that 

the stranger was a man of consequence, his garment being rich and his 

look that of one accustomed to the exercise of authority. 

"he took his seat, and arrange his flowing and finely embroider robe 

around him. i proffered[pg 172] him the pan supari i had prepared, but with a 

wave of the hand he decline this courtesy. so i placed the morsel in my 

own mouth, fell to its meditative mastication, and await the beginning 

of his tale. 

"'i am a well-to-do traveller, as you would think. o kadi—a pilgrim on 

my way to the sacred shrine of juggernaut, as i profess myself to all 

who make inquiry and to whom an answer is due. but i am not what i 

appear to be. in reality you behold in me—a thug.' 

"the man lower his voice mysterious when he pronounced the last 

word, bend forward so that i might hear it. 

"'and what may be a thug?' i asked, for the name to me was quite a new 

one. 

"'listen,' he said eagerly, and still in a low whisper. 'the thug are 

worship of bowani.' 

"'there are countless thousand who worship kali, the dread goddess,' i 

replied. 

"'yes, but we, the thugs, not only worship her as the wife of siva, god 

of destruction, but we are her devoted priest who put men to death in 

her name and for her glory.' 

"now indeed did i prick up my ear and listen intently. but i did not 

suffer my awaken interest to betray itself in look or tone of voice. 

"'some fanatic may seek to justify human sacrifice,' i said. i was 

tread cautiously; later i would tell the man that such foul deed 

were against the decree of akbar, and involved the penalty of death[pg 173] 

under the feet of elephants. but meanwhile i want his confession. 

"'ah, you know nothing about the thugs,' continue the stranger. 'but 

hearken to me, for i have come to tell you all, and for a reason you 

will presently understand. we are thousand strong, and we live in all 

parts of hindustan and the deccan. we are caste brothers, and are bound 

together by our worship of bowani. the tradition of our creed have been 

hand down for generation from father to son. you have never heard of 

the thugs, o kadi, although you sit in the place of justice. do you know 

why? because i am the very first of the sect who has broken his vow of 

silence, and spoken the word thug to one outside our secret 

association.' 

"'yet you say you are thousand strong.' 

"'yes, we are strong in numbers, but strong still in our fidelity to 

our vows. when once we have sworn on the sacred pickaxe, it is 

impossible to speak words of treachery.' 

"'if it be for the good and happiness of all men,' i interpolated, 

encourage him to keep on speak freely, 'there can be no treachery, 

no break of vow in revealing the truth.' 

"'it is to reveal the truth that i have come to you. it is by the orders 

of bowani herself; for i have wrong her, and she is angry and has 

loud proclaim to me that thuggee is ended—that her protection is 

for ever withdrawn from me and my fellows, because, o misery, we have 

grievous offend her. hark! do you not hear the voice of bowani even 

now?' 

"the man raise his face toward the rafter of the room, and, with right[pg 174] 

hand uplifted, his attitude was one of intent listening. 

"'unworthy, unworthy, unworthy,' he murmured, in a strange absent 

monotone, as if repeating words he was actually hearing. 'you have 

broken my laws. go now to your doom, you and all your brothers. such 

priest kali will not have. thuggee is no more. i will seek some other 

worshippers.' 

"after a pause of tense silence, as if the listener was await for 

more, he drop hand and eyes. and now my mind took a new turn of 

thought. there was the confused, unmistakable glare of insanity in the 

man's eyes. half unconsciously, i lean back on my cushion and placed 

a hand upon the dagger in my kummerbund. 

"the stranger notice the movement, and, lunatic though he undoubted 

appear to be, interpret my thoughts. 

"'be not afraid of me, master,' he said. 'this is the only weapon i 

carry.' 

"and with these words he slip off a silken scarf that he had been 

wearing loose around his throat, and toss it on the carpet between 

us. 

"now was i all the more confirmed in my estimate of his madness. to call 

such a thing a weapon!—a strip of soft fabric that might kill a 

butterfly but would be poor defence indeed to rely on against sword or 

dagger. i suppose i smile contemptuously, for again the man read my 

thoughts. 

"then instantly did he do a thing that made my[pg 175] blood run cold. with a 

toss of the scarf into the air, he form it into a noose, and this he 

threw over one upbende knee. next with a swift twist of fierce hand he 

drew the knot tight, and so terribly realistic was his action that for 

the moment i saw above his knee the contort mouth and protrude eyes 

of his sudden strangle victim. 

"there was horror in my gaze now, but only calm professional pride in 

his, as he flung back the still loop and knot kerchief on to the 

carpet. 

"'yes, i am a strangler,' he said calmly, 'as are all the thugs, born to 

become stranglers, and taught how to use the room in early youth by 

their own fathers' hands.' 

"of strangle as a means of murder i of course knew, and, indeed, 

during the years of my magistracy, i had heard vague rumour of robber 

habitual resort to this method of dispatch their victim rather 

than to club or swords. but such appalling dexterity as this man 

display in the handle of an innocent-looking silken scarf i had 

never imagined. 

