 
project gutenberg's frankenstein, by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: frankenstein 
or the modern prometheu 

author: mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

release date: june 17, 2008 [ebook #84] 
last updated: january 13, 2018 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook frankenstein *** 




produce by judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen, 
and david meltzer. html version by al haines. 
further correction by menno de leeuw. 



frankenstein; 


or, the modern prometheu 




by 


mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 






contents 




letter 1 

letter 2 

letter 3 

letter 4 

chapter 1 

chapter 2 

chapter 3 

chapter 4 

chapter 5 

chapter 6 

chapter 7 

chapter 8 

chapter 9 

chapter 10 

chapter 11 

chapter 12 

chapter 13 

chapter 14 

chapter 15 

chapter 16 

chapter 17 

chapter 18 

chapter 19 

chapter 20 

chapter 21 

chapter 22 

chapter 23 

chapter 24 





letter 1 
preface 
_to mrs. saville, england._ 


st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—. 


you will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompany the 
commencement of an enterprise which you have regard with such evil 
forebodings. i arrive here yesterday, and my first task is to assure 
my dear sister of my welfare and increase confidence in the success 
of my undertaking. 

i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the street of 
petersburgh, i feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which 
braces my nerves and fill me with delight. do you understand this 
feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards 
which i am advancing, give me a foretaste of those icy climes. 
inspirite by this wind of promise, my daydream become more fervent 
and vivid. i try in vain to be persuade that the pole is the seat of 
frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the 
region of beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever 
visible, its broad disk just skirt the horizon and diffuse a 
perpetual splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, i will put 
some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; 
and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be waft to a land surpassing in 
wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discover on the habitable 
globe. its production and features may be without example, as the 
phenomena of the heavenly body undoubted are in those undiscovered 
solitudes. what may not be expect in a country of eternal light? i 
may there discover the wondrous power which attract the needle and may 
regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this 
voyage to render their seeming eccentricity consistent for ever. i 
shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world 
never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprint by 
the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to 
conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this 
laborious voyage with the joy a child feel when he embark in a little 
boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his 
native river. but supposing all these conjecture to be false, you 
cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all 
mankind, to the last generation, by discover a passage near the pole 
to those countries, to reach which at present so many month are 
requisite; or by ascertain the secret of the magnet, which, if at 
all possible, can only be effect by an undertaking such as mine. 

these reflection have dispel the agitation with which i began my 
letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevate me 
to heaven, for nothing contribute so much to tranquillise the mind as 
a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual 
eye. this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i 
have read with ardour the account of the various voyages which have 
been made in the prospect of arrive at the north pacific ocean 
through the sea which surround the pole. you may remember that a 
history of all the voyages made for purpose of discovery compose the 
whole of our good uncle thomas’ library. my education was neglected, 
yet i was passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study 
day and night, and my familiarity with them increase that regret which 
i had felt, as a child, on learning that my father’s die injunction 
had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life. 

these vision fade when i perused, for the first time, those poet 
whose effusion entrance my soul and lift it to heaven. i also 
became a poet and for one year live in a paradise of my own creation; 
i imagine that i also might obtain a niche in the temple where the 
name of home and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well 
acquaint with my failure and how heavy i bore the disappointment. 
but just at that time i inherit the fortune of my cousin, and my 
thought were turn into the channel of their early bent. 

six years have pass since i resolve on my present undertaking. i 
can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this 
great enterprise. i commence by inure my body to hardship. i 
accompany the whale-fishers on several expedition to the north sea; 
i voluntary endure cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often 
work hard than the common sailor during the day and devoted my 
nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those 
branch of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive 
the greatest practical advantage. twice i actually hire myself as an 
under-mate in a greenland whaler, and acquit myself to admiration. i 
must own i felt a little proud when my captain offer me the second 
dignity in the vessel and entreat me to remain with the greatest 
earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services. 

and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose? 
my life might have been pass in ease and luxury, but i prefer glory to 
every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh, that some encourage 
voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage and my resolution is 
firm; but my hope fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. i am 
about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergency of which 
will demand all my fortitude: i am require not only to raise the spirits 
of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. 

this is the most favourable period for travel in russia. they fly 
quick over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in 
my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach. the 
cold is not excessive, if you are wrap in furs—a dress which i have 
already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the 
deck and remain seat motionless for hours, when no exercise 
prevent the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no 
ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and 
archangel. 

i shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my 
intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by pay the 
insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailor as i think necessary 
among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not intend to 
sail until the month of june; and when shall i return? ah, dear sister, how 
can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, 
will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail, you will see me again soon, 
or never. 

farewell, my dear, excellent margaret. heaven shower down blessing on you, 
and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your 
love and kindness. 

your affectionate brother, 

r. walton 






letter 2 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


archangel, 28th march, 17—. 


how slow the time pass here, encompass as i am by frost and snow! 
yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hire a 
vessel and am occupy in collect my sailors; those whom i have 
already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly 
possessed of dauntless courage. 

but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the 
absence of the object of which i now feel as a most severe evil, i have no 
friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there 
will be none to participate my joy; if i am assail by disappointment, no 
one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. i shall commit my thought 
to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of 
feeling. i desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose 
eyes would reply to mine. you may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but i 
bitter feel the want of a friend. i have no one near me, gentle yet 
courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose 
taste are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. how would such a 
friend repair the fault of your poor brother! i am too ardent in execution 
and too impatient of difficulties. but it is a still greater evil to me 
that i am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild 
on a common and read nothing but our uncle thomas’ books of voyages. 
at that age i became acquaint with the celebrated poet of our own 
country; but it was only when it had cease to be in my power to derive its 
most important benefit from such a conviction that i perceive the 
necessity of becoming acquaint with more language than that of my native 
country. now i am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many 
schoolboy of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more and that my 
daydream are more extend and magnificent, but they want (as the painter 
call it) _keeping;_ and i greatly need a friend who would have sense 
enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to 
endeavour to regulate my mind. 

well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find no friend on the 
wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchant and seamen. yet 
some feelings, unal to the dross of human nature, beat even in these 
rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage 
and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase 
more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. he is an 
englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, 
unsoftened by cultivation, retain some of the noblest endowment of 
humanity. i first became acquaint with him on board a whale vessel; 
finding that he was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist 
in my enterprise. 

the master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the 
ship for his gentle and the mild of his discipline. this 
circumstance, add to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made 
me very desirous to engage him. a youth pass in solitude, my best years 
spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the 
groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to 
the usual brutality exercise on board ship: i have never believe it to be 
necessary, and when i heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindly 
of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt 
myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. i heard 
of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owe to him the 
happiness of her life. this, briefly, is his story. some years ago he love 
a young russia lady of moderate fortune, and have amass a considerable 
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consent to the match. he saw 
his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bath in 
tears, and throw herself at his feet, entreat him to spare her, 
confess at the same time that she love another, but that he was poor, 
and that her father would never consent to the union. my generous friend 
reassure the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover, 
instantly abandoned his pursuit. he had already bought a farm with his 
money, on which he had design to pass the remainder of his life; but he 
bestow the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his 
prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicit the young 
woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but the old 
man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, 
when he found the father inexorable, quit his country, nor return 
until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her 
inclinations. “what a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. he is 
so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a turk, and a kind 
of ignorant careless attend him, which, while it render his conduct 
the more astonishing, detract from the interest and sympathy which 
otherwise he would command. 

yet do not suppose, because i complain a little or because i can 
conceive a consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am 
waver in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage 
is only now delay until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the 
winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promise well, and it 
is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail 
soon than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly: you know me 
sufficient to confide in my prudence and considerate whenever the 
safety of other is committed to my care. 

i cannot describe to you my sensation on the near prospect of my 
undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you a conception of 
the tremble sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which 
i am prepare to depart. i am go to unexplored regions, to “the 
land of mist and snow,” but i shall kill no albatross; therefore do not 
be alarm for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and 
woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but i 
will disclose a secret. i have often attribute my attachment to, my 
passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mystery of ocean to that 
production of the most imaginative of modern poets. there is something 
at work in my soul which i do not understand. i am practically 
industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and 
labour—but besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief 
in the marvellous, intertwine in all my projects, which hurry me out 
of the common pathway of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited 
regions i am about to explore. 

but to return to dear considerations. shall i meet you again, after 
have traverse immense seas, and return by the most southern cape of 
africa or america? i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to 
look on the reverse of the picture. continue for the present to write to 
me by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasion when 
i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly. 
remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. 

your affectionate brother, 
robert walton 






letter 3 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


july 7th, 17—. 


my dear sister, 

i write a few lines in haste to say that i am safe—and well advanced 
on my voyage. this letter will reach england by a merchantman now on 
its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not 
see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good 
spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the 
floating sheet of ice that continual pass us, indicate the danger 
of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we 
have already reach a very high latitude; but it is the height of 
summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales, 
which blow us speedy towards those shore which i so ardent desire 
to attain, breathe a degree of renovate warmth which i had not 
expected. 

no incident have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a 
letter. one or two stiff gale and the spring of a leak are 
accident which experienced navigator scarcely remember to record, and 
i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage. 

adieu, my dear margaret. be assured that for my own sake, as well as 
yours, i will not rash encounter danger. i will be cool, 
persevering, and prudent. 

but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefore not? thus far i 
have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars 
themselves being witness and testimony of my triumph. why not 
still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? what can stop the 
determined heart and resolve will of man? 

my swelling heart involuntary pour itself out thus. but i must 
finish. heaven bless my beloved sister! 

r.w. 






letter 4 




_to mrs. saville, england._ 


august 5th, 17—. 


so strange an accident has happen to us that i cannot forbear 
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before 
these papers can come into your possession. 

last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surround by ice, which closed 
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leave her the sea-room in which 
she floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we 
were compass round by a very thick fog. we accordingly lay to, 
hope that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather. 

about two o’clock the mist clear away, and we beheld, stretch out 
in every direction, vast and irregular plain of ice, which seem to 
have no end. some of my comrade groaned, and my own mind began to 
grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight sudden 
attract our attention and divert our solicitude from our own 
situation. we perceive a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by 
dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a 
being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, 
sat in the sledge and guide the dogs. we watch the rapid progress 
of the traveller with our telescope until he was lost among the 
distant inequality of the ice. 

this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed, 
many hundred mile from any land; but this apparition seem to denote that 
it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by 
ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observe with the 
greatest attention. 

about two hour after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before 
night the ice broke and free our ship. we, however, lay to until the 
morning, fear to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which 
float about after the break up of the ice. i profit of this time to 
rest for a few hours. 

in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and 
found all the sailor busy on one side of the vessel, apparently 
talk to someone in the sea. it was, in fact, a sledge, like that we 
had seen before, which had drift towards us in the night on a large 
fragment of ice. only one dog remain alive; but there was a human 
being within it whom the sailor were persuade to enter the vessel. 
he was not, as the other traveller seem to be, a savage inhabitant of 
some undiscovered island, but a european. when i appear on deck the 
master said, “here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish 
on the open sea.” 

on perceive me, the stranger address me in english, although with a 
foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he, 
“will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” 

you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question address 
to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have 
supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not 
have exchange for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i 
replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the 
northern pole. 

upon hearing this he appear satisfy and consent to come on board. 
good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulate for 
his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limb were 
nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciate by fatigue and 
suffering. i never saw a man in so wretched a condition. we attempt 
to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quit the fresh 
air he fainted. we accordingly brought him back to the deck and 
restore him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and force him to 
swallow a small quantity. as soon as he show sign of life we 
wrap him up in blanket and placed him near the chimney of the 
kitchen stove. by slow degree he recover and ate a little soup, 
which restore him wonderfully. 

two days pass in this manner before he was able to speak, and i often 
fear that his suffering had deprived him of understanding. when he 
had in some measure recovered, i remove him to my own cabin and 
attend on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw a more 
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of 
wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone 
perform an act of kindness towards him or do him any the most 
trifling service, his whole countenance is light up, as it were, with 
a beam of benevolence and sweet that i never saw equalled. but he 
is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnash his 
teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woe that oppress him. 

when my guest was a little recover i had great trouble to keep off 
the men, who wish to ask him a thousand questions; but i would not 
allow him to be torment by their idle curiosity, in a state of body 
and mind whose restoration evidently depend upon entire repose. 
once, however, the lieutenant ask why he had come so far upon the ice 
in so strange a vehicle. 

his countenance instantly assume an aspect of the deepest gloom, and 
he replied, “to seek one who flee from me.” 

“and did the man whom you pursue travel in the same fashion?” 

“yes.” 

“then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we 
saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.” 

this arouse the stranger’s attention, and he ask a multitude of 
question concerning the route which the dæmon, as he call him, had 
pursued. soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “i have, 
doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good 
people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.” 

“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to 
trouble you with any inquisitive of mine.” 

“and yet you rescue me from a strange and perilous situation; you have 
benevolent restore me to life.” 

soon after this he inquire if i thought that the break up of the 
ice had destroy the other sledge. i reply that i could not answer 
with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near 
midnight, and the traveller might have arrive at a place of safety 
before that time; but of this i could not judge. 

from this time a new spirit of life animate the decay frame of the 
stranger. he manifest the greatest eager to be upon deck to watch for 
the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuade him to remain in 
the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the raw of the atmosphere. 
i have promise that someone should watch for him and give him instant 
notice if any new object should appear in sight. 

such is my journal of what relate to this strange occurrence up to the 
present day. the stranger has gradual improve in health but is very 
silent and appear uneasy when anyone except myself enter his cabin. 
yet his manners are so conciliate and gentle that the sailor are all 
interested in him, although they have had very little communication 
with him. for my own part, i begin to love him as a brother, and his 
constant and deep grief fill me with sympathy and compassion. he must 
have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck 
so attractive and amiable. 

i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find no friend 
on the wide ocean; yet i have found a man who, before his spirit had been 
broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother 
of my heart. 

i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, 
should i have any fresh incident to record. 




august 13th, 17—. 


my affection for my guest increase every day. he excite at once my 
admiration and my pity to an astonish degree. how can i see so 
noble a creature destroy by misery without feeling the most poignant 
grief? he is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and 
when he speaks, although his words are cull with the choicest art, 
yet they flow with rapid and unparalleled eloquence. 

he is now much recover from his illness and is continual on the deck, 
apparently watch for the sledge that precede his own. yet, although 
unhappy, he is not so utterly occupy by his own misery but that he 
interests himself deep in the project of others. he has frequent 
converse with me on mine, which i have communicate to him without 
disguise. he enter attentive into all my argument in favour of my 
eventual success and into every minute detail of the measure i had taken 
to secure it. i was easily led by the sympathy which he evince to use the 
language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul 
and to say, with all the fervour that warm me, how gladly i would 
sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my 
enterprise. one man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for 
the acquire of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should 
acquire and transmit over the elemental foe of our race. as i spoke, a 
dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. at first i 
perceive that he try to suppress his emotion; he placed his hand before 
his eyes, and my voice quiver and fail me as i beheld tear trickle 
fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heave breast. i 
paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “unhappy man! do you 
share my madness? have you drunk also of the intoxicate draught? hear me; 
let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” 

such words, you may imagine, strong excited my curiosity; but the 
paroxysm of grief that had seize the stranger overcame his weaken 
powers, and many hour of repose and tranquil conversation were 
necessary to restore his composure. 

have conquer the violence of his feelings, he appear to despise 
himself for being the slave of passion; and quell the dark tyranny of 
despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. he ask 
me the history of my early years. the tale was quick told, but it 
awaken various train of reflection. i spoke of my desire of finding a 
friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than 
had ever fallen to my lot, and express my conviction that a man could 
boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing. 

“i agree with you,” reply the stranger; “we are 
unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dear than 
ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to 
perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. i once had a friend, the most 
noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting 
friendship. you have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for 
despair. but i—i have lost everything and cannot begin life 
anew.” 

as he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled 
grief that touched me to the heart. but he was silent and presently 
retired to his cabin. 

even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deep than he 
do the beauty of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight 
afford by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of 
elevate his soul from earth. such a man has a double existence: he 
may suffer misery and be overwhelm by disappointments, yet when he 
has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a 
halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures. 

will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine 
wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutor and 
refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore 
somewhat fastidious; but this only render you the more fit to 
appreciate the extraordinary merit of this wonderful man. sometimes i 
have endeavour to discover what quality it is which he possess that 
elevate him so immeasurable above any other person i ever knew. i 
believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never-failing 
power of judgment, a penetration into the cause of things, unequalled 
for clear and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a 
voice whose varied intonation are soul-subduing music. 




august 19th, 17—. 


yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain 
walton, that i have suffer great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had 
determined at one time that the memory of these evil should die with 
me, but you have won me to alter my determination. you seek for 
knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardent hope that the 
gratification of your wish may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine 
has been. i do not know that the relation of my disaster will be 
useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursue the same 
course, expose yourself to the same danger which have render me 
what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one 
that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you 
in case of failure. prepare to hear of occurrence which are usually 
deem marvellous. were we among the tame scene of nature i might 
fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things 
will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would 
provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers 
of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale convey in its series 
internal evidence of the truth of the event of which it is composed.” 

you may easily imagine that i was much gratify by the offer 
communication, yet i could not endure that he should renew his grief by 
a recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eager to hear 
the promise narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong 
desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. i express 
these feelings in my answer. 

“i thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is 
useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i 
shall repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continue he, 
perceive that i wish to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my 
friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my 
destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocable it is 
determined.” 

he then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when i 
should be at leisure. this promise drew from me the warmest thanks. i have 
resolve every night, when i am not imperative occupy by my duties, to 
record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during 
the day. if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this 
manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who 
know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and 
sympathy shall i read it in some future day! even now, as i commence my 
task, his full-toned voice swell in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me 
with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raise in 
animation, while the lineament of his face are irradiate by the soul 
within. strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which 
embrace the gallant vessel on its course and wreck it—thus! 





chapter 1 

i am by birth a genevese, and my family is one of the most 
distinguished of that republic. my ancestor had been for many years 
counsellor and syndics, and my father had fill several public 
situation with honour and reputation. he was respect by all who 
knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public 
business. he pass his younger days perpetual occupy by the 
affair of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevent his 
marry early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a 
husband and the father of a family. 

as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot 
refrain from relate them. one of his most intimate friends was a 
merchant who, from a flourish state, fell, through numerous 
mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a 
proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty 
and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been 
distinguished for his rank and magnificence. have paid his debts, 
therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreat with his 
daughter to the town of lucerne, where he live unknown and in 
wretchedness. my father love beaufort with the truest friendship and 
was deep grieve by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. 
he bitter deplore the false pride which led his friend to a conduct 
so little worthy of the affection that united them. he lost no time in 
endeavour to seek him out, with the hope of persuade him to begin 
the world again through his credit and assistance. 

beaufort had taken effectual measure to conceal himself, and it was ten 
month before my father discover his abode. overjoyed at this discovery, 
he hasten to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the 
reuss. but when he entered, misery and despair alone welcome him. beaufort 
had save but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but 
it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in 
the meantime he hope to procure some respectable employment in a 
merchant’s house. the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; 
his grief only became more deep and rankle when he had leisure for 
reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end 
of three month he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion. 

his daughter attend him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw 
with despair that their little fund was rapid decrease and that 
there was no other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort 
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support 
her in her adversity. she procure plain work; she plait straw and 
by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to 
support life. 

several month pass in this manner. her father grew worse; her time 
was more entire occupy in attend him; her means of subsistence 
decreased; and in the tenth month her father die in her arms, leave 
her an orphan and a beggar. this last blow overcame her, and she knelt 
by beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father enter the 
chamber. he came like a protect spirit to the poor girl, who 
committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he 
conduct her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a 
relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife. 

there was a considerable difference between the age of my parents, but 
this circumstance seem to unite them only close in bonds of devoted 
affection. there was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind 
which render it necessary that he should approve highly to love 
strongly. perhaps during former years he had suffer from the 
late-discovered unworthy of one beloved and so was disposed to set 
a greater value on try worth. there was a show of gratitude and 
worship in his attachment to my mother, differ wholly from the 
doting fond of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her 
virtue and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompense 
her for the sorrow she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace 
to his behaviour to her. everything was made to yield to her wish 
and her convenience. he strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is 
sheltered by the gardener, from every rough wind and to surround her 
with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and 
benevolent mind. her health, and even the tranquill of her hitherto 
constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. during 
the two years that had elapse previous to their marriage my father had 
gradual relinquish all his public functions; and immediately after 
their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change 
of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, 
as a restorative for her weaken frame. 

from italy they visit germany and france. i, their eldest child, was born 
at naples, and as an infant accompany them in their rambles. i remain 
for several years their only child. much as they were attach to each 
other, they seem to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very 
mine of love to bestow them upon me. my mother’s tender caress and 
my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my 
first recollections. i was their plaything and their idol, and something 
better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestow on 
them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in 
their hand to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfill 
their duty towards me. with this deep consciousness of what they owe 
towards the being to which they had given life, add to the active spirit 
of tender that animate both, it may be imagine that while during 
every hour of my infant life i received a lesson of patience, of charity, 
and of self-control, i was so guide by a silken cord that all seem but 
one train of enjoyment to me. 

for a long time i was their only care. my mother had much desire to have a 
daughter, but i continue their single offspring. when i was about five 
years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontier of italy, they 
pass a week on the shore of the lake of como. their benevolent 
disposition often made them enter the cottage of the poor. this, to my 
mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a 
passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been 
relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the 
afflicted. during one of their walk a poor cot in the fold of a vale 
attract their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number 
of half-clothed children gather about it spoke of penury in its worst 
shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother, 
accompany by me, visit this abode. she found a peasant and his wife, 
hard working, bent down by care and labour, distribute a scanty meal to 
five hungry babes. among these there was one which attract my mother far 
above all the rest. she appear of a different stock. the four other were 
dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. her 
hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her 
clothing, seem to set a crown of distinction on her head. her brow was 
clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lip and the moulding of 
her face so expressive of sensibility and sweet that none could behold 
her without look on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, 
and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features. 

the peasant woman, perceive that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and 
admiration on this lovely girl, eager communicate her history. she was 
not her child, but the daughter of a milanese nobleman. her mother was a 
germany and had die on give her birth. the infant had been placed with 
these good people to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been 
long married, and their eldest child was but just born. the father of their 
charge was one of those italy nurse in the memory of the antique glory 
of italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exert 
himself to obtain the liberty of his country. he became the victim of its 
weakness. whether he had die or still linger in the dungeon of austria 
was not known. his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and 
a beggar. she continue with her foster parent and bloom in their rude 
abode, fair than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. 

when my father return from milan, he found play with me in the hall of 
our villa a child fair than picture cherub—a creature who seem 
to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter 
than the chamois of the hills. the apparition was soon explained. with his 
permission my mother prevail on her rustic guardian to yield their 
charge to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presence had seem 
a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty 
and want when providence afford her such powerful protection. they 
consult their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza 
became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than 
sister—the beautiful and adore companion of all my occupation and 
my pleasures. 

everyone love elizabeth. the passionate and almost reverential 
attachment with which all regard her became, while i share it, my 
pride and my delight. on the evening previous to her being brought to 
my home, my mother had said playfully, “i have a pretty present for my 
victor—tomorrow he shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she 
present elizabeth to me as her promise gift, i, with childish 
seriousness, interpret her words literally and look upon elizabeth 
as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. all praises bestow on 
her i received as made to a possession of my own. we call each other 
familiarly by the name of cousin. no word, no expression could body 
forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than 
sister, since till death she was to be mine only. 





chapter 2 

we were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in 
our ages. i need not say that we were stranger to any species of 
disunion or dispute. harmony was the soul of our companionship, and 
the diversity and contrast that subsist in our character drew us 
near together. elizabeth was of a calm and more concentrated 
disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of a more intense 
application and was more deep smitten with the thirst for knowledge. 
she busy herself with following the aerial creation of the poets; 
and in the majestic and wondrous scene which surround our switzerland 
home —the sublime shape of the mountains, the change of the seasons, 
tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of 
our alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight. 
while my companion contemplate with a serious and satisfy spirit the 
magnificent appearances of things, i delight in investigate their 
causes. the world was to me a secret which i desire to divine. 
curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden law of nature, 
glad akin to rapture, as they were unfold to me, are among the 
earliest sensation i can remember. 

on the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parent gave 
up entire their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native 
country. we possessed a house in geneva, and a _campagne_ on belrive, 
the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a 
league from the city. we reside principally in the latter, and the 
lives of my parent were pass in considerable seclusion. it was my 
temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervent to a few. i was 
indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but i united 
myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. henry 
clerval was the son of a merchant of geneva. he was a boy of singular 
talent and fancy. he love enterprise, hardship, and even danger for 
its own sake. he was deep read in books of chivalry and romance. he 
compose heroic song and began to write many a tale of enchantment and 
knightly adventure. he try to make us act play and to enter into 
masquerades, in which the character were drawn from the hero of 
roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous 
train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hand 
of the infidels. 

no human being could have pass a happy childhood than myself. my 
parent were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. 
we felt that they were not the tyrant to rule our lot according to 
their caprice, but the agent and creator of all the many delight 
which we enjoyed. when i mingle with other family i distinct 
discern how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assist 
the development of filial love. 

my temper was sometimes violent, and my passion vehement; but by some 
law in my temperature they were turn not towards childish pursuit 
but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things 
indiscriminately. i confess that neither the structure of languages, 
nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states 
possessed attraction for me. it was the secret of heaven and earth 
that i desire to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of 
things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man 
that occupy me, still my inquiry were direct to the metaphysical, 
or in its highest sense, the physical secret of the world. 

meanwhile clerval occupy himself, so to speak, with the moral 
relations of things. the busy stage of life, the virtue of heroes, 
and the action of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was 
to become one among those whose name are record in story as the 
gallant and adventurous benefactor of our species. the saintly soul 
of elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. 
her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of 
her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. she was 
the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become 
sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that 
she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. and 
clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval? yet 
he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his 
generosity, so full of kindness and tender amidst his passion for 
adventurous exploit, had she not unfold to him the real lovely of 
benefice and made the do good the end and aim of his soar 
ambition. 

i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollection of childhood, 
before misfortune had taint my mind and change its bright vision of 
extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflection upon self. besides, 
in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those event which 
led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would 
account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards rule my 
destiny i find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost 
forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent 
which, in its course, has swept away all my hope and joys. 

natural philosophy is the genius that has regulate my fate; i desire, 
therefore, in this narration, to state those fact which led to my 
predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age we all went 
on a party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclement of the 
weather oblige us to remain a day confine to the inn. in this house i 
chance to find a volume of the works of corneliu agrippa. i open it 
with apathy; the theory which he attempt to demonstrate and the wonderful 
fact which he relate soon change this feeling into enthusiasm. a new 
light seem to dawn upon my mind, and bound with joy, i communicate my 
discovery to my father. my father look careless at the title page of my 
book and said, “ah! corneliu agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste 
your time upon this; it is sad trash.” 

if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me 
that the principles of agrippa had been entire exploded and that a modern 
system of science had been introduce which possessed much greater powers 
than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while 
those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i 
should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my 
imagination, warm as it was, by return with greater ardour to my 
former studies. it is even possible that the train of my idea would never 
have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the cursory glance 
my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was 
acquaint with its contents, and i continue to read with the greatest 
avidity. 

when i return home my first care was to procure the whole works of this 
author, and afterwards of paracelsu and albertu magnus. i read and 
studied the wild fancies of these writer with delight; they appear to me 
treasure known to few besides myself. i have describe myself as always 
have been imbue with a fervent longing to penetrate the secret of 
nature. in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discovery of modern 
philosophers, i always came from my study discontented and unsatisfied. 
sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child pick 
up shell beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. those of his 
successor in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquaint 
appear even to my boy’s apprehension as tyro engaged in the same 
pursuit. 

the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquaint 
with their practical uses. the most learned philosopher knew little 
more. he had partially unveil the face of nature, but her immortal 
lineament were still a wonder and a mystery. he might dissect, 
anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, cause 
in their secondary and tertiary grade were utterly unknown to him. i 
had gaze upon the fortification and impediment that seem to keep 
human being from enter the citadel of nature, and rash and 
ignorant i had repined. 

but here were books, and here were men who had penetrate deep and knew 
more. i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their 
disciple. it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth 
century; but while i follow the routine of education in the school of 
geneva, i was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite 
studies. my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a 
child’s blindness, add to a student’s thirst for knowledge. 
under the guidance of my new preceptor i enter with the greatest 
diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir 
of life; but the latter soon obtain my undivided attention. wealth was an 
inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could 
banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but 
a violent death! 

nor were these my only visions. the raise of ghost or devil was a 
promise liberally accord by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which 
i most eager sought; and if my incantation were always unsuccessful, i 
attribute the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a 
want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. and thus for a time i was 
occupy by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand 
contradictory theory and flounder desperate in a very slough of 
multifarious knowledge, guide by an ardent imagination and childish 
reasoning, till an accident again change the current of my ideas. 

when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near 
belrive, when we witness a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. it 
advanced from behind the mountain of jura, and the thunder burst at once 
with frightful loud from various quarters of the heavens. i remained, 
while the storm lasted, watch its progress with curiosity and delight. 
as i stood at the door, on a sudden i beheld a stream of fire issue from an 
old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yard from our house; and so 
soon as the dazzle light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing 
remain but a blasted stump. when we visit it the next morning, we found 
the tree shatter in a singular manner. it was not splinter by the 
shock, but entire reduce to thin ribbon of wood. i never beheld 
anything so utterly destroyed. 

before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious law of 
electricity. on this occasion a man of great research in natural 
philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he enter on 
the explanation of a theory which he had form on the subject of 
electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonish to me. 
all that he said threw greatly into the shade corneliu agrippa, 
albertu magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by 
some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my 
accustomed studies. it seem to me as if nothing would or could ever 
be known. all that had so long engaged my attention sudden grew 
despicable. by one of those caprice of the mind which we are perhaps 
most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former 
occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deform 
and abortive creation, and entertain the greatest disdain for a 
would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of 
real knowledge. in this mood of mind i betook myself to the 
mathematics and the branch of study appertain to that science as 
being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. 

thus strange are our soul constructed, and by such slight ligament 
are we bound to prosperity or ruin. when i look back, it seem to me 
as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the 
immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort 
made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even 
then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. her victory was 
announce by an unusual tranquill and glad of soul which 
follow the relinquish of my ancient and latterly torment 
studies. it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with 
their prosecution, happiness with their disregard. 

it was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual. 
destiny was too potent, and her immutable law had decree my utter and 
terrible destruction. 





chapter 3 

when i had attain the age of seventeen my parent resolve that i 
should become a student at the university of ingolstadt. i had 
hitherto attend the school of geneva, but my father thought it 
necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made 
acquaint with other customs than those of my native country. my 
departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day 
resolve upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life 
occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery. 

elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was 
in the greatest danger. during her illness many argument had been urge to 
persuade my mother to refrain from attend upon her. she had at first 
yield to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her 
favourite was menaced, she could no long control her anxiety. she 
attend her sickbed; her watchful attention triumph over the malignity 
of the distemper—elizabeth was saved, but the consequence of this 
imprudence were fatal to her preserver. on the third day my mother 
sickened; her fever was accompany by the most alarm symptoms, and the 
looks of her medical attendant prognosticate the worst event. on her 
deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert 
her. she join the hand of elizabeth and myself. “my 
children,” she said, “my firmest hope of future happiness were 
placed on the prospect of your union. this expectation will now be the 
consolation of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to 
my younger children. alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy 
and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are 
not thought befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerful to 
death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” 

she die calmly, and her countenance express affection even in death. 
i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest tie are rent 
by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the 
soul, and the despair that is exhibit on the countenance. it is so 
long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day 
and whose very existence appear a part of our own can have departed 
for ever—that the bright of a beloved eye can have been 
extinguish and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear 
can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflection of 
the first days; but when the lapse of time prove the reality of the 
evil, then the actual bitter of grief commences. yet from whom has 
not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and why should i 
describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at 
length arrive when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and 
the smile that play upon the lips, although it may be deem a 
sacrilege, is not banished. my mother was dead, but we had still 
duty which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the 
rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the 
spoil has not seized. 

my departure for ingolstadt, which had been defer by these events, 
was now again determined upon. i obtain from my father a respite of 
some weeks. it appear to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, 
akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of 
life. i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. i was 
unwill to quit the sight of those that remain to me, and above 
all, i desire to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled. 

she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. 
she look steady on life and assume its duty with courage and 
zeal. she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call 
her uncle and cousins. never was she so enchanting as at this time, 
when she recall the sunshine of her smile and spent them upon us. 
she forgot even her own regret in her endeavour to make us forget. 

the day of my departure at length arrived. clerval spent the last 
evening with us. he had endeavour to persuade his father to permit 
him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. his 
father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idle and ruin in the 
aspiration and ambition of his son. henry deep felt the misfortune 
of being debar from a liberal education. he said little, but when 
he spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animate glance a 
restrained but firm resolve not to be chain to the miserable detail 
of commerce. 

we sat late. we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor 
persuade ourselves to say the word “farewell!” it was said, and we 
retired under the pretence of seek repose, each fancy that the 
other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn i descended to the 
carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there—my father 
again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to 
renew her entreaty that i would write often and to bestow the last 
feminine attention on her playmate and friend. 

i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulge in 
the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surround by 
amiable companions, continual engaged in endeavour to bestow mutual 
pleasure—i was now alone. in the university whither i was go i 
must form my own friends and be my own protector. my life had hitherto 
been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible 
repugnance to new countenances. i love my brothers, elizabeth, and 
clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but i believe myself 
total unfit for the company of strangers. such were my reflection as 
i commence my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hope rose. i 
ardent desire the acquisition of knowledge. i had often, when at home, 
thought it hard to remain during my youth coop up in one place and had 
long to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desire were comply with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to 
repent. 

i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflection during my 
journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the 
high white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alight and was 
conduct to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased. 

the next morning i deliver my letters of introduction and paid a visit to 
some of the principal professors. chance—or rather the evil 
influence, the angel of destruction, which assert omnipotent sway over me 
from the moment i turn my reluctant steps from my father’s 
door—led me first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he 
was an uncouth man, but deep imbue in the secret of his science. he 
ask me several question concerning my progress in the different branch 
of science appertain to natural philosophy. i reply carelessly, and 
partly in contempt, mention the name of my alchemist as the principal 
author i had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he 
said, “really spent your time in study such nonsense?” 

i reply in the affirmative. “every minute,” continue m. krempe with 
warmth, “every instant that you have waste on those books is utterly 
and entire lost. you have burden your memory with exploded system 
and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived, 
where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you 
have so greedy imbibe are a thousand years old and as musty as they 
are ancient? i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific 
age, to find a disciple of albertu magnu and paracelsus. my dear 
sir, you must begin your study entire anew.” 

so saying, he step aside and wrote down a list of several books 
treat of natural philosophy which he desire me to procure, and 
dismiss me after mention that in the beginning of the following 
week he intended to commence a course of lecture upon natural 
philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a fellow 
professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he 
omitted. 

i return home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long 
considered those author useless whom the professor reprobated; but i 
return not at all the more inclined to recur to these study in any 
shape. m. krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a 
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in 
favour of his pursuits. in rather a too philosophical and connected a 
strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusion i had come 
to concerning them in my early years. as a child i had not been 
content with the result promise by the modern professor of natural 
science. with a confusion of idea only to be account for by my 
extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, i had retrod the 
steps of knowledge along the path of time and exchange the 
discovery of recent inquire for the dream of forgotten alchemists. 
besides, i had a contempt for the use of modern natural philosophy. 
it was very different when the master of the science sought 
immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now 
the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquire seem to limit 
itself to the annihilate of those vision on which my interest in 
science was chiefly founded. i was require to exchange chimera of 
boundless grandeur for reality of little worth. 

such were my reflection during the first two or three days of my 
residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming 
acquaint with the locality and the principal resident in my new 
abode. but as the ensue week commenced, i thought of the information 
which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures. and although i 
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver 
sentence out of a pulpit, i recollect what he had said of m. 
waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town. 

partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecture 
room, which m. waldman enter shortly after. this professor was very 
unlike his colleague. he appear about fifty years of age, but with an 
aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hair cover his 
temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. his person 
was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard. 
he began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and 
the various improvement made by different men of learning, pronounce 
with fervour the name of the most distinguished discoverers. he then took 
a cursory view of the present state of the science and explain many of 
its elementary terms. after have made a few preparatory experiments, he 
conclude with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i 
shall never forget: 

“the ancient teacher of this science,” said he, 
“promised impossible and perform nothing. the modern master 
promise very little; they know that metal cannot be transmute and that 
the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hand seem 
only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or 
crucible, have indeed perform miracles. they penetrate into the recess 
of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. they ascend into the 
heavens; they have discover how the blood circulates, and the nature of 
the air we breathe. they have acquire new and almost unlimited powers; 
they can command the thunder of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even 
mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” 

such were the professor’s words—rather let me say such the words of 
the fate—enounced to destroy me. as he went on i felt as if my soul 
were grapple with a palpable enemy; one by one the various key were 
touched which form the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was 
sounded, and soon my mind was fill with one thought, one conception, 
one purpose. so much has been done, exclaim the soul of 
frankenstein—more, far more, will i achieve; tread in the steps 
already marked, i will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and 
unfold to the world the deepest mystery of creation. 

i closed not my eyes that night. my internal being was in a state of 
insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i 
had no power to produce it. by degrees, after the morning’s dawn, 
sleep came. i awoke, and my yesternight’s thought were as a dream. 
there only remain a resolution to return to my ancient study and to 
devote myself to a science for which i believe myself to possess a 
natural talent. on the same day i paid m. waldman a visit. his 
manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, 
for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in 
his own house was replace by the greatest affable and kindness. i 
gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuit as i had 
given to his fellow professor. he heard with attention the little 
narration concerning my study and smile at the name of corneliu 
agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had 
exhibited. he said that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal 
modern philosopher were indebted for most of the foundations of their 
knowledge. they had left to us, as an easy task, to give new name 
and arrange in connected classification the fact which they in a 
great degree had been the instrument of bring to light. the 
labour of men of genius, however erroneous directed, scarcely ever 
fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i 
listen to his statement, which was deliver without any presumption 
or affectation, and then add that his lecture had remove my 
prejudice against modern chemists; i express myself in measured 
terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his 
instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have 
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulate my intended 
labours. i request his advice concerning the books i ought to 
procure. 

“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gain a 
disciple; and if your application equal your ability, i have no doubt of 
your success. chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the 
greatest improvement have been and may be made; it is on that account that 
i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not 
neglect the other branch of science. a man would make but a very sorry 
chemist if he attend to that department of human knowledge alone. if your 
wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty 
experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural 
philosophy, including mathematics.” 

he then took me into his laboratory and explain to me the use of his 
various machines, instruct me as to what i ought to procure and 
promising me the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in 
the science not to derange their mechanism. he also gave me the list of 
books which i had requested, and i took my leave. 

thus end a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny. 





chapter 4 

from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the 
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. 
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination, 
which modern inquire have written on these subjects. i attend the 
lecture and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the 
university, and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense 
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive 
physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in 
m. waldman i found a true friend. his gentle was never tinge by 
dogmatism, and his instruction were given with an air of frank and 
good nature that banish every idea of pedantry. in a thousand ways 
he smooth for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse 
inquiry clear and facile to my apprehension. my application was at 
first fluctuate and uncertain; it gain strength as i proceed and 
soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappear in the 
light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory. 

as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceive that my progress 
was rapid. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and 
my proficient that of the masters. professor krempe often ask me, 
with a sly smile, how corneliu agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman 
express the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. two years 
pass in this manner, during which i paid no visit to geneva, but was 
engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discovery which i 
hope to make. none but those who have experienced them can conceive 
of the enticement of science. in other study you go as far as 
other have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in 
a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder. 
a mind of moderate capacity which close pursue one study must 
infallibly arrive at great proficient in that study; and i, who 
continual sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was 
solely wrap up in this, improve so rapid that at the end of two 
years i made some discovery in the improvement of some chemical 
instruments, which procure me great esteem and admiration at the 
university. when i had arrive at this point and had become as well 
acquaint with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as 
depend on the lesson of any of the professor at ingolstadt, my 
residence there being no long conducive to my improvements, i thought 
of return to my friends and my native town, when an incident 
happen that protract my stay. 

one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attract my attention was 
the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endue with 
life. whence, i often ask myself, did the principle of life proceed? 
it was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a 
mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming 
acquainted, if cowardice or careless did not restrain our 
inquiries. i revolve these circumstances in my mind and determined 
thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branch of 
natural philosophy which relate to physiology. unless i had been 
animate by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this 
study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. to examine the 
cause of life, we must first have recourse to death. i became 
acquaint with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i 
must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body. 
in my education my father had taken the greatest precaution that my 
mind should be impress with no supernatural horrors. i do not ever 
remember to have tremble at a tale of superstition or to have fear 
the apparition of a spirit. dark had no effect upon my fancy, and 
a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of body deprived of 
life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become 
food for the worm. now i was led to examine the cause and progress of 
this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vault and 
charnel-houses. my attention was fixed upon every object the most 
insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. i saw how the 
fine form of man was degrade and wasted; i beheld the corruption of 
death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm 
inherit the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused, examine and 
analyse all the minutiae of causation, as exemplify in the change 
from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this 
dark a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and 
wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity 
of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprise that among so 
many men of genius who had direct their inquiry towards the same 
science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonish a 
secret. 

remember, i am not recording the vision of a madman. the sun do not 
more certainly shine in the heaven than that which i now affirm is 
true. some miracle might have produce it, yet the stage of the 
discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of 
incredible labour and fatigue, i succeed in discover the cause of 
generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestow 
animation upon lifeless matter. 

the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery 
soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in 
painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desire was the 
most gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so 
great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been 
progressive led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result. 
what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation 
of the world was now within my grasp. not that, like a magic scene, it 
all open upon me at once: the information i had obtain was of a 
nature rather to direct my endeavour so soon as i should point them 
towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already 
accomplished. i was like the arabia who had been bury with the dead 
and found a passage to life, aid only by one glimmer and seemingly 
ineffectual light. 

i see by your eager and the wonder and hope which your eyes 
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with 
which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patient until the end 
of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that 
subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was, 
to your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my 
precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquire of 
knowledge and how much happy that man is who believe his native town 
to be the world, than he who aspire to become greater than his nature 
will allow. 

when i found so astonish a power placed within my hands, i hesitate 
a long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it. 
although i possessed the capacity of bestow animation, yet to 
prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacy of 
fibres, muscles, and veins, still remain a work of inconceivable 
difficulty and labour. i doubt at first whether i should attempt the 
creation of a being like myself, or one of simple organization; but my 
imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to 
doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful 
as man. the material at present within my command hardly appear 
adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubt not that i should 
ultimately succeed. i prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my 
operation might be incessant baffled, and at last my work be 
imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day take 
place in science and mechanics, i was encourage to hope my present 
attempt would at least lay the foundations of future success. nor 
could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any 
argument of its impracticability. it was with these feelings that i 
began the creation of a human being. as the minute of the parts 
form a great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first 
intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, 
about eight feet in height, and proportion large. after have 
form this determination and have spent some month in successful 
collect and arrange my materials, i began. 

no one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like 
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death 
appear to me ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and 
pour a torrent of light into our dark world. a new species would bless 
me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent nature would 
owe their being to me. no father could claim the gratitude of his 
child so completely as i should deserve theirs. pursue these 
reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless 
matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible) 
renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. 

these thought support my spirits, while i pursue my undertaking 
with unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my 
person had become emaciate with confinement. sometimes, on the very 
brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the 
next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which i alone 
possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon 
gaze on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless 
eagerness, i pursue nature to her hiding-places. who shall conceive 
the horrors of my secret toil as i dabble among the unhallowed damp 
of the grave or torture the living animal to animate the lifeless 
clay? my limb now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but 
then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urge me forward; i seem 
to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. it was 
indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renew 
acute so soon as, the unnatural stimulus cease to operate, i had 
return to my old habits. i collected bone from charnel-houses and 
disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secret of the human 
frame. in a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, 
and separate from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, 
i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeball were start from 
their socket in attend to the detail of my employment. the 
dissect room and the slaughter-house furnish many of my materials; 
and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, 
whilst, still urge on by an eager which perpetual increased, i 
brought my work near to a conclusion. 

the summer month pass while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in 
one pursuit. it was a most beautiful season; never did the field 
bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vine yield a more luxuriant 
vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charm of nature. and the 
same feelings which made me neglect the scene around me cause me also 
to forget those friends who were so many mile absent, and whom i had 
not seen for so long a time. i knew my silence disquiet them, and i 
well remember the words of my father: “i know that while you are 
pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall 
hear regularly from you. you must pardon me if i regard any 
interrupt in your correspondence as a proof that your other duty 
are equally neglected.” 

i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but i could 
not tear my thought from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which 
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it 
were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection 
until the great object, which swallow up every habit of my nature, 
should be completed. 

i then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribe my neglect 
to vice or faulty on my part, but i am now convinced that he was 
justified in conceive that i should not be altogether free from 
blame. a human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and 
peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to 
disturb his tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge 
is an exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself 
has a tendency to weaken your affection and to destroy your taste for 
those simple pleasure in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that 
study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human 
mind. if this rule were always observed; if no man allow any pursuit 
whatsoever to interfere with the tranquill of his domestic 
affections, greece had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spare his 
country, america would have been discover more gradually, and the 
empire of mexico and peru had not been destroyed. 

but i forget that i am moralize in the most interesting part of my 
tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. 

my father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my 
silence by inquiring into my occupation more particularly than before. 
winter, spring, and summer pass away during my labours; but i did not 
watch the blossom or the expand leaves—sights which before always 
yield me supreme delight—so deep was i engross in my 
occupation. the leaves of that year had wither before my work drew near 
to a close, and now every day show me more plainly how well i had 
succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appear 
rather like one doom by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other 
unwholesome trade than an artist occupy by his favourite employment. 
every night i was oppress by a slow fever, and i became nervous to a most 
painful degree; the fall of a leaf startle me, and i shun my fellow 
creature as if i had been guilty of a crime. sometimes i grew alarm at 
the wreck i perceive that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone 
sustain me: my labour would soon end, and i believe that exercise and 
amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promise myself 
both of these when my creation should be complete. 





chapter 5 

it was on a dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment 
of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amount to agony, i 
collected the instrument of life around me, that i might infuse a 
spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was 
already one in the morning; the rain patter dismal against the 
panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the 
half-extinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature 
open; it breathe hard, and a convulsive motion agitate its limbs. 

how can i describe my emotion at this catastrophe, or how delineate 
the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavour to 
form? his limb were in proportion, and i had select his features as 
beautiful. beautiful! great god! his yellow skin scarcely cover 
the work of muscle and artery beneath; his hair was of a lustrous 
black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these 
luxuriance only form a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, 
that seem almost of the same colour as the dun-white socket in which 
they were set, his shrivel complexion and straight black lips. 

the different accident of life are not so changeable as the feelings 
of human nature. i had work hard for nearly two years, for the sole 
purpose of infuse life into an inanimate body. for this i had 
deprived myself of rest and health. i had desire it with an ardour 
that far exceed moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty 
of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust fill my 
heart. unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i 
rush out of the room and continue a long time traverse my 
bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude 
succeed to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the 
bed in my clothes, endeavour to seek a few moments of forgetfulness. 
but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest 
dreams. i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in 
the street of ingolstadt. delight and surprised, i embrace her, 
but as i imprint the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with 
the hue of death; her features appear to change, and i thought that i 
held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud envelop her 
form, and i saw the grave-worms crawl in the fold of the flannel. 
i start from my sleep with horror; a cold dew cover my forehead, my 
teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and 
yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window 
shutters, i beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom i had 
created. he held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they 
may be called, were fixed on me. his jaws opened, and he mutter some 
inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkle his cheeks. he might have 
spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretch out, seemingly to 
detain me, but i escape and rush downstairs. i took refuge in the 
courtyard belong to the house which i inhabited, where i remain 
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest 
agitation, listen attentively, catching and fear each sound as if 
it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i 
had so miserably given life. 

oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. a mummy 
again endue with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i 
had gaze on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those 
muscle and joint were render capable of motion, it became a thing 
such as even dante could not have conceived. 

i pass the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quick and 
hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly 
sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingle with 
this horror, i felt the bitter of disappointment; dream that had 
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a 
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! 

morning, dismal and wet, at length dawn and discover to my 
sleepless and ache eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple 
and clock, which indicate the sixth hour. the porter open the gate 
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issue into 
the streets, pace them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the 
wretch whom i fear every turning of the street would present to my 
view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but 
felt impel to hurry on, although drench by the rain which pour 
from a black and comfortless sky. 

i continue walking in this manner for some time, endeavour by 
bodily exercise to ease the load that weigh upon my mind. i 
traverse the street without any clear conception of where i was or 
what i was doing. my heart palpitate in the sickness of fear, and i 
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: 

like one who, on a lonely road, 
doth walk in fear and dread, 
and, have once turn round, walk on, 
and turn no more his head; 
because he know a frightful fiend 
doth close behind him tread. 

[coleridge’s “ancient mariner.”] 



continue thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various 
diligence and carriage usually stopped. here i paused, i knew not why; 
but i remain some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming 
towards me from the other end of the street. as it drew near i observe 
that it was the switzerland diligence; it stop just where i was standing, and 
on the door being opened, i perceive henry clerval, who, on seeing me, 
instantly sprung out. “my dear frankenstein,” exclaim he, 
“how glad i am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at 
the very moment of my alighting!” 

nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back 
to my thought my father, elizabeth, and all those scene of home so dear 
to my recollection. i grasp his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror 
and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, 
calm and serene joy. i welcome my friend, therefore, in the most cordial 
manner, and we walk towards my college. clerval continue talk for 
some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being 
permit to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily believe,” said 
he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all 
necessary knowledge was not comprise in the noble art of book-keeping; 
and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant 
answer to my unweary entreaty was the same as that of the dutch 
schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florin 
a year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.’ but his 
affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has 
permit me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of 
knowledge.” 

“it give me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left 
my father, brothers, and elizabeth.” 

“very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from 
you so seldom. by the by, i mean to lecture you a little upon their 
account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continue he, stopping 
short and gaze full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill 
you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watch for 
several nights.” 

“you have guess right; i have lately been so deep engaged in one 
occupation that i have not allow myself sufficient rest, as you see; 
but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employment are now at an 
end and that i am at length free.” 

i tremble excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to 
allude to, the occurrence of the preceding night. i walk with a 
quick pace, and we soon arrive at my college. i then reflected, and 
the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my 
apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. i dread to 
behold this monster, but i fear still more that henry should see him. 
entreat him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the 
stairs, i dart up towards my own room. my hand was already on the 
lock of the door before i recollect myself. i then paused, and a 
cold shiver came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as 
children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in 
wait for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. i step 
fearful in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also free 
from its hideous guest. i could hardly believe that so great a good 
fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy 
had indeed fled, i clap my hand for joy and ran down to clerval. 

we ascend into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; 
but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed 
me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse 
beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for a single instant in the same 
place; i jump over the chairs, clap my hands, and laugh aloud. 
clerval at first attribute my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival, 
but when he observe me more attentively, he saw a wild in my eyes 
for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless 
laughter frightened and astonish him. 

“my dear victor,” cry he, “what, for god’s sake, 
is the matter? do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the 
cause of all this?” 

“do not ask me,” cry i, putt my hand before my eyes, for i 
thought i saw the dread spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can 
tell. oh, save me! save me!” i imagine that the monster seize me; 
i struggle furiously and fell down in a fit. 

poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? a meeting, which he 
anticipate with such joy, so strange turn to bitterness. but i 
was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not 
recover my senses for a long, long time. 

this was the commencement of a nervous fever which confine me for 
several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i 
afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfit 
for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make 
elizabeth, he spare them this grief by conceal the extent of my 
disorder. he knew that i could not have a more kind and attentive 
nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he 
did not doubt that, instead of do harm, he perform the kindest 
action that he could towards them. 

but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and 
unremitting attention of my friend could have restore me to life. 
the form of the monster on whom i had bestow existence was for ever 
before my eyes, and i rave incessant concerning him. doubtless my 
words surprise henry; he at first believe them to be the wanderings 
of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinac with which i 
continual recur to the same subject persuade him that my disorder 
indeed owe its origin to some uncommon and terrible event. 

by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapse that alarm and 
grieve my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became 
capable of observing outward object with any kind of pleasure, i 
perceive that the fallen leaves had disappear and that the young 
bud were shoot forth from the tree that shade my window. it was 
a divine spring, and the season contribute greatly to my 
convalescence. i felt also sentiment of joy and affection revive in 
my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time i became as 
cheerful as before i was attack by the fatal passion. 

“dearest clerval,” exclaim i, “how kind, how very good 
you are to me. this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you 
promise yourself, has been consume in my sick room. how shall i ever 
repay you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i 
have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.” 

“you will repay me entire if you do not discompose yourself, but get 
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i 
may speak to you on one subject, may i not?” 

i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could he allude to an object on 
whom i dare not even think? 

“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observe my change of 
colour, “i will not mention it if it agitate you; but your father 
and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your 
own handwriting. they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at 
your long silence.” 

“is that all, my dear henry? how could you suppose that my first 
thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and 
who are so deserving of my love?” 

“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad 
to see a letter that has been lie here some days for you; it is from 
your cousin, i believe.” 





chapter 6 

clerval then put the following letter into my hands. it was from my 
own elizabeth: 

“my dearest cousin, 

“you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear 
kind henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account. you are 
forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear victor, 
is necessary to calm our apprehensions. for a long time i have thought 
that each post would bring this line, and my persuasion have 
restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to ingolstadt. i have 
prevent his encounter the inconvenience and perhaps danger of so 
long a journey, yet how often have i regret not being able to 
perform it myself! i figure to myself that the task of attend on 
your sickbed has devolve on some mercenary old nurse, who could never 
guess your wish nor minister to them with the care and affection of 
your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval write that indeed 
you are get better. i eager hope that you will confirm this 
intelligence soon in your own handwriting. 

“get well—and return to us. you will find a happy, cheerful home and 
friends who love you dearly. your father’s health is vigorous, and he 
ask but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a 
care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. how pleased you would 
be to remark the improvement of our ernest! he is now sixteen and full 
of activity and spirit. he is desirous to be a true switzerland and to enter 
into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his 
elder brother returns to us. my uncle is not pleased with the idea of 
a military career in a distant country, but ernest never had your 
powers of application. he looks upon study as an odious fetter; his 
time is spent in the open air, climb the hill or rowing on the 
lake. i fear that he will become an idle unless we yield the point 
and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected. 

“little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken 
place since you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they 
never change; and i think our placid home and our contented heart are 
regulate by the same immutable laws. my trifling occupation take up 
my time and amuse me, and i am reward for any exertion by seeing 
none but happy, kind face around me. since you left us, but one 
change has taken place in our little household. do you remember on 
what occasion justine moritz enter our family? probably you do not; 
i will relate her history, therefore in a few words. madame moritz, 
her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom justine was the 
third. this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but 
through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and 
after the death of m. moritz, treat her very ill. my aunt observe 
this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevail on her mother 
to allow her to live at our house. the republican institution of our 
country have produce simple and happy manners than those which 
prevail in the great monarchy that surround it. hence there is less 
distinction between the several class of its inhabitants; and the 
lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are 
more refined and moral. a servant in geneva do not mean the same 
thing as a servant in france and england. justine, thus received in 
our family, learned the duty of a servant, a condition which, in our 
fortunate country, do not include the idea of ignorance and a 
sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. 

“justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and i 
recollect you once remark that if you were in an ill humour, one 
glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that 
ariosto give concerning the beauty of angelica—she look so 
frank-hearted and happy. my aunt conceive a great attachment for her, 
by which she was induce to give her an education superior to that 
which she had at first intended. this benefit was fully repaid; 
justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not 
mean that she made any profession i never heard one pass her lips, but 
you could see by her eyes that she almost adore her protectress. 
although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, 
yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. she 
thought her the model of all excellence and endeavour to imitate her 
phraseology and manners, so that even now she often remind me of her. 

“when my dearest aunt die every one was too much occupy in their own 
grief to notice poor justine, who had attend her during her illness 
with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other 
trial were reserved for her. 

“one by one, her brother and sister died; and her mother, with the 
exception of her neglect daughter, was left childless. the 
conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the 
death of her favourite was a judgement from heaven to chastise her 
partiality. she was a roman catholic; and i believe her confessor 
confirmed the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, a few month 
after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was call home by her 
repentant mother. poor girl! she wept when she quit our house; she 
was much alter since the death of my aunt; grief had given soft 
and a winning mild to her manners, which had before been remarkable 
for vivacity. nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature 
to restore her gaiety. the poor woman was very vacillate in her 
repentance. she sometimes beg justine to forgive her unkindness, 
but much often accused her of have cause the death of her 
brother and sister. perpetual fret at length threw madame moritz 
into a decline, which at first increase her irritability, but she is 
now at peace for ever. she die on the first approach of cold weather, 
at the beginning of this last winter. justine has just return to us; 
and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is very clever and gentle, 
and extremely pretty; as i mention before, her mien and her 
expression continual remind me of my dear aunt. 

“i must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling 
william. i wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with 
sweet laugh blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. when he 
smiles, two little dimple appear on each cheek, which are rosy with 
health. he has already had one or two little _wives,_ but louisa biron 
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age. 

“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulge in a little 
gossip concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield 
has already received the congratulatory visit on her approach 
marriage with a young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly 
sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your 
favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffer several misfortune 
since the departure of clerval from geneva. but he has already 
recover his spirits, and is report to be on the point of marry a 
lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is a widow, and much 
old than manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with 
everybody. 

“i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety 
returns upon me as i conclude. write, dearest victor,—one line—one 
word will be a blessing to us. ten thousand thanks to henry for his 
kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely 
grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat 
you, write! 

“elizabeth lavenza. 


“geneva, march 18th, 17—.” 



“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed, when i had read her 
letter: “i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety 
they must feel.” i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigue me; but 
my convalescence had commenced, and proceed regularly. in another 
fortnight i was able to leave my chamber. 

one of my first duty on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the 
several professor of the university. in do this, i underwent a 
kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wound that my mind had 
sustained. ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the 
beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceive a violent antipathy even 
to the name of natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restore 
to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony 
of my nervous symptoms. henry saw this, and had remove all my 
apparatus from my view. he had also change my apartment; for he 
perceive that i had acquire a dislike for the room which had 
previous been my laboratory. but these care of clerval were made of 
no avail when i visit the professors. m. waldman inflict torture 
when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonish progress i 
had made in the sciences. he soon perceive that i dislike the 
subject; but not guess the real cause, he attribute my feelings to 
modesty, and change the subject from my improvement, to the science 
itself, with a desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing me out. what 
could i do? he meant to please, and he torment me. i felt as if he 
had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instrument which 
were to be afterwards use in putt me to a slow and cruel death. i 
writhe under his words, yet dare not exhibit the pain i felt. 
clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the 
sensation of others, decline the subject, alleging, in excuse, his 
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. i 
thank my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly 
that he was surprised, but he never attempt to draw my secret from 
me; and although i love him with a mixture of affection and reverence 
that knew no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in 
him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which 
i fear the detail to another would only impress more deeply. 

m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of 
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomium gave me even 
more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d—n 
the fellow!” cry he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you he has 
outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a 
youngster who, but a few years ago, believe in corneliu agrippa as firm 
as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if 
he is not soon pull down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay, 
ay,” continue he, observing my face expressive of suffering, 
“m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. 
young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was 
myself when young; but that wear out in a very short time.” 

m. krempe had now commence an eulogy on himself, which happily turn 
the conversation from a subject that was so annoy to me. 

clerval had never sympathise in my taste for natural science; and his 
literary pursuit differ wholly from those which had occupy me. he 
came to the university with the design of making himself complete 
master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for 
the plan of life he had marked out for himself. resolve to pursue no 
inglorious career, he turn his eyes toward the east, as afford 
scope for his spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit 
language engaged his attention, and i was easily induce to enter on 
the same studies. idle had ever been irksome to me, and now that i 
wish to fly from reflection, and hate my former studies, i felt 
great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not 
only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. i 
did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for 
i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary 
amusement. i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well 
repaid my labours. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy 
elevating, to a degree i never experienced in study the author of 
any other country. when you read their writings, life appear to 
consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smile and frown 
of a fair enemy, and the fire that consume your own heart. how 
different from the manly and heroic poetry of greece and rome! 

summer pass away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was 
fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delay by several 
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the road were deem impassable, 
and my journey was retarded until the ensue spring. i felt this 
delay very bitterly; for i long to see my native town and my beloved 
friends. my return had only been delay so long, from an 
unwilling to leave clerval in a strange place, before he had become 
acquaint with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent 
cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came 
its beauty compensate for its dilatoriness. 

the month of may had already commenced, and i expect the letter daily 
which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry propose a 
pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a 
personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i accede 
with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval 
had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature 
that i had taken among the scene of my native country. 

we pass a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits 
had long been restored, and they gain additional strength from the 
salubrious air i breathed, the natural incident of our progress, and 
the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded me from the 
intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and render me unsocial; but 
clerval call forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught 
me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful face of children. 
excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to 
elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own. a selfish 
pursuit had cramped and narrow me, until your gentle and 
affection warm and open my senses; i became the same happy creature 
who, a few years ago, love and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. 
when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestow on me the most 
delightful sensations. a serene sky and verdant field fill me with 
ecstasy. the present season was indeed divine; the flower of spring 
bloom in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. i 
was undisturbed by thought which during the preceding year had pressed 
upon me, notwithstanding my endeavour to throw them off, with an 
invincible burden. 

henry rejoice in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathise in my feelings: he 
exert himself to amuse me, while he express the sensation that fill 
his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly 
astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in 
imitation of the persian and arabic writers, he invent tale of wonderful 
fancy and passion. at other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew 
me out into arguments, which he support with great ingenuity. 

we return to our college on a sunday afternoon: the peasant were 
dancing, and every one we met appear gay and happy. my own spirits were 
high, and i bound along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. 





chapter 7 

on my return, i found the following letter from my father:— 

“my dear victor, 

“you have probably wait impatient for a letter to fix the date of 
your return to us; and i was at first tempt to write only a few 
lines, merely mention the day on which i should expect you. but 
that would be a cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be 
your surprise, my son, when you expect a happy and glad welcome, to 
behold, on the contrary, tear and wretchedness? and how, victor, can 
i relate our misfortune? absence cannot have render you callous to 
our joy and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent 
son? i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is 
impossible; even now your eye skim over the page to seek the words 
which are to convey to you the horrible tidings. 

“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smile delight and warm 
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, he is murdered! 

“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the 
circumstances of the transaction. 

“last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to 
walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged 
our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of 
returning; and then we discover that william and ernest, who had gone 
on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rest on a seat until 
they should return. presently ernest came, and enquire if we had seen 
his brother; he said, that he had been play with him, that william 
had run away to hide himself, and that he vain sought for him, and 
afterwards wait for a long time, but that he did not return. 

“this account rather alarm us, and we continue to search for him 
until night fell, when elizabeth conjecture that he might have 
return to the house. he was not there. we return again, with 
torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had 
lost himself, and was expose to all the damp and dew of night; 
elizabeth also suffer extreme anguish. about five in the morning i 
discover my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and 
active in health, stretch on the grass livid and motionless; the 
print of the murder’s finger was on his neck. 

“he was convey home, and the anguish that was visible in my 
countenance betray the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to 
see the corpse. at first i attempt to prevent her but she persisted, 
and enter the room where it lay, hasty examine the neck of the 
victim, and clasp her hand exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murder my 
darling child!’ 

“she fainted, and was restore with extreme difficulty. when she again 
lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same 
evening william had tease her to let him wear a very valuable 
miniature that she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and 
was doubtless the temptation which urge the murder to the deed. we 
have no trace of him at present, although our exertion to discover him 
are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william! 

“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weep 
continually, and accuse herself unjust as the cause of his death; 
her words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an 
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? 
your dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live 
to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling! 

“come, victor; not brood thought of vengeance against the assassin, 
but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of 
festering, the wound of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my 
friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not 
with hatred for your enemies. 

“your affectionate and afflict father, 

“alphonse frankenstein. 



“geneva, may 12th, 17—.” 



clerval, who had watch my countenance as i read this letter, was 
surprise to observe the despair that succeed the joy i at first 
express on receiving new from my friends. i threw the letter on the 
table, and cover my face with my hands. 

“my dear frankenstein,” exclaim henry, when he perceive me 
weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend, 
what has happened?” 

i motion him to take up the letter, while i walk up and down the 
room in the extremest agitation. tear also gush from the eyes of 
clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. 

“i can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he; 
“your disaster is irreparable. what do you intend to do?” 

“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.” 

during our walk, clerval endeavour to say a few words of consolation; 
he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he, 
“dear lovely child, he now sleep with his angel mother! who that had 
seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his 
untimely loss! to die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! how 
much more a murder that could destroy radiant innocence! poor little 
fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but 
he is at rest. the pang is over, his suffering are at an end for ever. 
a sod cover his gentle form, and he know no pain. he can no long 
be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable 
survivors.” 

clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words 
impress themselves on my mind and i remember them afterwards in 
solitude. but now, as soon as the horse arrived, i hurried into a 
cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. 

my journey was very melancholy. at first i wish to hurry on, for i long 
to console and sympathise with my love and sorrow friends; but when i 
drew near my native town, i slacken my progress. i could hardly sustain 
the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i pass through 
scene familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years. 
how alter every thing might be during that time! one sudden and 
desolate change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances 
might have by degree work other alterations, which, although they were 
done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcame me; i 
dare no advance, dread a thousand nameless evil that made me tremble, 
although i was unable to define them. 

i remain two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i 
contemplate the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the 
snowy mountains, “the palace of nature,” were not changed. by 
degree the calm and heavenly scene restore me, and i continue my journey 
towards geneva. 

the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrow as i 
approach my native town. i discover more distinct the black 
side of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. i wept like a 
child. “dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your 
wanderer? your summit are clear; the sky and lake are blue and 
placid. is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?” 

i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on 
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative 
happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved 
country! who but a native can tell the delight i took in again 
behold thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely 
lake! 

yet, as i drew near home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also 
closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still 
more gloomily. the picture appear a vast and dim scene of evil, and i 
foresaw obscure that i was destined to become the most wretched of human 
beings. alas! i prophesy truly, and fail only in one single 
circumstance, that in all the misery i imagine and dreaded, i did not 
conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure. 

it was completely dark when i arrive in the environs of geneva; the gate 
of the town were already shut; and i was oblige to pass the night at 
secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city. the sky 
was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolve to visit the spot 
where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the 
town, i was oblige to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at plainpalais. 
during this short voyage i saw the lightning play on the summit of mont 
blanc in the most beautiful figures. the storm appear to approach 
rapidly, and, on landing, i ascend a low hill, that i might observe its 
progress. it advanced; the heaven were clouded, and i soon felt the rain 
coming slow in large drops, but its violence quick increased. 

i quit my seat, and walk on, although the dark and storm 
increase every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash 
over my head. it was echo from salêve, the juras, and the alps of 
savoy; vivid flash of lightning dazzle my eyes, illuminating the 
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant 
every thing seem of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recover itself 
from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in 
switzerland, appear at once in various parts of the heavens. the 
most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the 
lake which lie between the promontory of belrive and the village of 
copêt. another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another 
darken and sometimes disclose the môle, a peaked mountain to the 
east of the lake. 

while i watch the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wander on with 
a hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasp my 
hands, and exclaim aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy 
funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceive in the 
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of tree near me; i stood 
fixed, gaze intently: i could not be mistaken. a flash of lightning 
illuminate the object, and discover its shape plainly to me; its 
gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belong 
to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy 
dæmon, to whom i had given life. what did he there? could he be (i 
shudder at the conception) the murder of my brother? no soon did that 
idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth 
chattered, and i was forced to lean against a tree for support. the figure 
pass me quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in human shape could 
have destroy the fair child. _he_ was the murderer! i could not 
doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the 
fact. i thought of pursue the devil; but it would have been in vain, for 
another flash discover him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly 
perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, a hill that bounds plainpalai on the 
south. he soon reach the summit, and disappeared. 

i remain motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still 
continued, and the scene was envelop in an impenetrable darkness. i 
revolve in my mind the event which i had until now sought to forget: 
the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of 
the works of my own hand at my bedside; its departure. two years had 
now nearly elapse since the night on which he first received life; and 
was this his first crime? alas! i had turn loose into the world a 
deprave wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not 
murder my brother? 

no one can conceive the anguish i suffer during the remainder of the 
night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not 
feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in 
scene of evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast 
among mankind, and endow with the will and power to effect purpose 
of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light 
of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced 
to destroy all that was dear to me. 

day dawned; and i direct my steps towards the town. the gate were 
open, and i hasten to my father’s house. my first thought was to 
discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be 
made. but i pause when i reflect on the story that i had to tell. a 
being whom i myself had formed, and endue with life, had met me at 
midnight among the precipice of an inaccessible mountain. i 
remember also the nervous fever with which i had been seize just at 
the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of 
delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that 
if any other had communicate such a relation to me, i should have 
look upon it as the ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature 
of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credit 
as to persuade my relative to commence it. and then of what use would 
be pursuit? who could arrest a creature capable of scale the 
overhang side of mont salêve? these reflection determined me, and 
i resolve to remain silent. 

it was about five in the morning when i enter my father’s house. i 
told the servant not to disturb the family, and went into the library 
to attend their usual hour of rising. 

six years had elapsed, pass in a dream but for one indelible trace, and i 
stood in the same place where i had last embrace my father before my 
departure for ingolstadt. beloved and venerable parent! he still remain 
to me. i gaze on the picture of my mother, which stood over the 
mantel-piece. it was an historical subject, paint at my father’s 
desire, and represent caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneel 
by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale; 
but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permit the 
sentiment of pity. below this picture was a miniature of william; and my 
tear flow when i look upon it. while i was thus engaged, ernest 
entered: he had heard me arrive, and hasten to welcome me: 
“welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you 
had come three month ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and 
delighted. you come to us now to share a misery which nothing can 
alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seem 
sink under his misfortune; and your persuasion will induce poor 
elizabeth to cease her vain and torment self-accusations.—poor 
william! he was our darling and our pride!” 

tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of mortal 
agony crept over my frame. before, i had only imagine the 
wretched of my desolate home; the reality came on me as a new, and 
a not less terrible, disaster. i try to calm ernest; i enquire more 
minutely concerning my father, and here i name my cousin. 

“she most of all,” said ernest, “requires consolation; she accused 
herself of have cause the death of my brother, and that made her 
very wretched. but since the murder has been discovered—” 

“the murder discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt 
to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the 
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw. i saw him too; he 
was free last night!” 

“i do not know what you mean,” reply my brother, in accent of 
wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made complete our misery. no 
one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be 
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who would credit 
that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, 
could sudden become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” 

“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is 
wrongfully; every one know that; no one believe it, surely, ernest?” 

“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have 
almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so 
confused, as to add to the evidence of fact a weight that, i fear, 
leaves no hope for doubt. but she will be try today, and you will 
then hear all.” 

he then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william 
had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confine to her 
bed for several days. during this interval, one of the servants, 
happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the 
murder, had discover in her pocket the picture of my mother, which 
had been judge to be the temptation of the murderer. the servant 
instantly show it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to 
any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, 
justine was apprehended. on being charged with the fact, the poor girl 
confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of 
manner. 

this was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i reply 
earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor, 
good justine, is innocent.” 

at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappy deep impress 
on his countenance, but he endeavour to welcome me cheerfully; and, 
after we had exchange our mournful greeting, would have introduce 
some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed, 
“good god, papa! victor say that he know who was the murder of 
poor william.” 

“we do also, unfortunately,” reply my father, “for indeed i had 
rather have been for ever ignorant than have discover so much 
depravity and ungratitude in one i value so highly.” 

“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.” 

“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be 
try today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.” 

this speech calm me. i was firm convinced in my own mind that 
justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i 
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be 
brought forward strong enough to convict her. my tale was not one to 
announce publicly; its astound horror would be look upon as 
madness by the vulgar. did any one indeed exist, except i, the 
creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the 
existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance 
which i had let loose upon the world? 

we were soon join by elizabeth. time had alter her since i last 
beheld her; it had endow her with lovely surpassing the beauty of 
her childish years. there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but 
it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect. 
she welcome me with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear 
cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. you perhaps will find some 
means to justify my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she 
be convict of crime? i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do 
upon my own. our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only 
lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely 
love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. if she is condemned, i 
never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am sure she will not; 
and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little 
william.” 

“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall 
be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheer by the assurance 
of her acquittal.” 

“how kind and generous you are! every one else believe in her guilt, 
and that made me wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to 
see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner render me 
hopeless and despairing.” she wept. 

“dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she 
is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the 
activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of 
partiality.” 





chapter 8 

we pass a few sad hour until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to 
commence. my father and the rest of the family being oblige to attend 
as witnesses, i accompany them to the court. during the whole of 
this wretched mockery of justice i suffer living torture. it was to 
be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless device would 
cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smile babe full of 
innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every 
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. 
justine also was a girl of merit and possessed quality which promise 
to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterate in an 
ignominious grave, and i the cause! a thousand times rather would i 
have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribe to justine, but i 
was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have 
been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have 
exculpate her who suffer through me. 

the appearance of justine was calm. she was dress in mourning, and 
her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her 
feelings, exquisite beautiful. yet she appear confident in 
innocence and did not tremble, although gaze on and execrate by 
thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have 
excited was obliterate in the mind of the spectator by the 
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she 
was tranquil, yet her tranquill was evidently constrained; and as 
her confusion had before been adduce as a proof of her guilt, she 
work up her mind to an appearance of courage. when she enter the 
court she threw her eyes round it and quick discover where we were 
seated. a tear seem to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quick 
recover herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seem to attest 
her utter guiltlessness. 

the trial began, and after the advocate against her had state the 
charge, several witness were called. several strange fact combine 
against her, which might have stagger anyone who had not such proof 
of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on 
which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been 
perceive by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the 
murder child had been afterwards found. the woman ask her what she 
did there, but she look very strange and only return a confuse 
and unintelligible answer. she return to the house about eight 
o’clock, and when one inquire where she had pass the night, she 
reply that she had been look for the child and demand earnest 
if anything had been heard concerning him. when shown the body, she 
fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. the 
picture was then produce which the servant had found in her pocket; 
and when elizabeth, in a falter voice, prove that it was the same 
which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round 
his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation fill the court. 

justine was call on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her 
countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery were strong 
expressed. sometimes she struggle with her tears, but when she was 
desire to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible 
although variable voice. 

“god knows,” she said, “how entire i am innocent. but i 
do not pretend that my protestation should acquit me; i rest my innocence 
on a plain and simple explanation of the fact which have been adduce 
against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my 
judge to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appear 
doubtful or suspicious.” 

she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had pass 
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the 
house of an aunt at chêne, a village situated at about a league from 
geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who ask 
her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. she was 
alarm by this account and pass several hour in look for him, 
when the gate of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain 
several hour of the night in a barn belong to a cottage, being 
unwill to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. most 
of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believe that 
she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke. 
it was dawn, and she quit her asylum, that she might again endeavour 
to find my brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay, 
it was without her knowledge. that she had been bewilder when 
question by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had pass 
a sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain. 
concerning the picture she could give no account. 

“i know,” continue the unhappy victim, “how heavy and 
fatally this one circumstance weigh against me, but i have no power of 
explain it; and when i have express my utter ignorance, i am only left 
to conjecture concerning the probability by which it might have been 
placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have no 
enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me 
wantonly. did the murder place it there? i know of no opportunity 
afford him for so doing; or, if i had, why should he have stolen the 
jewel, to part with it again so soon? 

“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see no room for 
hope. i beg permission to have a few witness examine concerning my 
character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed 
guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my 
innocence.” 

several witness were call who had known her for many years, and 
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they 
supposed her guilty render them timorous and unwill to come 
forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent 
disposition and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, 
when, although violent agitated, she desire permission to address 
the court. 

“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who 
was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have live 
with his parent ever since and even long before his birth. it may 
therefore be judge indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but 
when i see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her 
pretended friends, i wish to be allow to speak, that i may say what i 
know of her character. i am well acquaint with the accused. i have live 
in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly 
two years. during all that period she appear to me the most amiable and 
benevolent of human creatures. she nurse madame frankenstein, my aunt, in 
her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards 
attend her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited 
the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again live in my 
uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she was 
warm attach to the child who is now dead and act towards him like a 
most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that, 
notwithstanding all the evidence produce against her, i believe and rely 
on her perfect innocence. she had no temptation for such an action; as to 
the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnest desire it, 
i should have willing given it to her, so much do i esteem and value 
her.” 

a murmur of approbation follow elizabeth’s simple and powerful 
appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in 
favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turn with 
renew violence, charge her with the blackest ingratitude. she 
herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own 
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. i believe 
in her innocence; i knew it. could the dæmon who had (i did not for a 
minute doubt) murder my brother also in his hellish sport have 
betray the innocent to death and ignominy? i could not sustain the 
horror of my situation, and when i perceive that the popular voice and 
the countenance of the judge had already condemn my unhappy victim, 
i rush out of the court in agony. the torture of the accused did 
not equal mine; she was sustain by innocence, but the fang of 
remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold. 

i pass a night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to 
the court; my lip and throat were parched. i dare not ask the fatal 
question, but i was known, and the officer guess the cause of my 
visit. the ballot had been thrown; they were all black, and justine 
was condemned. 

i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before 
experienced sensation of horror, and i have endeavour to bestow upon 
them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the 
heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i 
address myself add that justine had already confessed her guilt. 
“that evidence,” he observed, “was hardly require in so glaring a 
case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judge like to 
condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so 
decisive.” 

this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? had 
my eyes deceive me? and was i really as mad as the whole world would 
believe me to be if i disclose the object of my suspicions? i 
hasten to return home, and elizabeth eager demand the result. 

“my cousin,” reply i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all 
judge had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty 
should escape. but she has confessed.” 

this was a dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had rely with firm upon 
justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall i 
ever again believe in human goodness? justine, whom i love and esteem as 
my sister, how could she put on those smile of innocence only to betray? 
her mild eyes seem incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has 
committed a murder.” 

soon after we heard that the poor victim had express a desire to see my 
cousin. my father wish her not to go but said that he left it to her own 
judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth, 
“i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany 
me; i cannot go alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet 
i could not refuse. 

we enter the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some 
straw at the farther end; her hand were manacled, and her head rest on 
her knees. she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with 
her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly. my 
cousin wept also. 

“oh, justine!” said she. “why did you rob me of my last consolation? 
i rely on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i 
was not so miserable as i am now.” 

“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also 
join with my enemy to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?” her 
voice was suffocate with sobs. 

“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “why do you kneel, 
if you are innocent? i am not one of your enemies, i believe you 
guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had 
yourself declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be 
assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a 
moment, but your own confession.” 

“i did confess, but i confessed a lie. i confessed, that i might 
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lie heavy at my heart than 
all my other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was 
condemned, my confessor has besiege me; he threaten and menaced, 
until i almost began to think that i was the monster that he said i 
was. he threaten excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if 
i continue obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all look 
on me as a wretch doom to ignominy and perdition. what could i do? 
in an evil hour i subscribe to a lie; and now only am i truly 
miserable.” 

she paused, weeping, and then continued, “i thought with horror, my 
sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed 
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable 
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. 
dear william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in 
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that console me, go as i 
am to suffer ignominy and death.” 

“oh, justine! forgive me for have for one moment distrust you. 
why did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. do not fear. i 
will proclaim, i will prove your innocence. i will melt the stony 
heart of your enemy by my tear and prayers. you shall not die! 
you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold! 
no! no! i never could survive so horrible a misfortune.” 

justine shook her head mournfully. “i do not fear to die,” she said; 
“that pang is past. god raise my weakness and give me courage to 
endure the worst. i leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember 
me and think of me as of one unjust condemned, i am resigned to the 
fate await me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to 
the will of heaven!” 

during this conversation i had retired to a corner of the prison room, 
where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair! 
who dare talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass 
the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such 
deep and bitter agony. i gnash my teeth and ground them together, 
utter a groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when 
she saw who it was, she approach me and said, “dear sir, you are very 
kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?” 

i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more 
convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when he heard that you 
had confessed, he did not credit it.” 

“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest 
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. how sweet is 
the affection of other to such a wretch as i am! it remove more than 
half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my 
innocence is acknowledge by you, dear lady, and your cousin.” 

thus the poor sufferer try to comfort other and herself. she indeed 
gain the resignation she desired. but i, the true murderer, felt the 
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allow of no hope or 
consolation. elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was 
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that pass over the fair 
moon, for a while hide but cannot tarnish its brightness. anguish and 
despair had penetrate into the core of my heart; i bore a hell within 
me which nothing could extinguish. we stay several hour with 
justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear 
herself away. “i wish,” cry she, “that i were to die with you; i 
cannot live in this world of misery.” 

justine assume an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty 
repressed her bitter tears. she embrace elizabeth and said in a voice 
of half-suppressed emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth, 
my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and 
preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever 
suffer! live, and be happy, and make other so.” 

and on the morrow justine died. elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence 
fail to move the judge from their settled conviction in the 
criminal of the saintly sufferer. my passionate and indignant 
appeal were lost upon them. and when i received their cold answer 
and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purpose 
avowal die away on my lips. thus i might proclaim myself a madman, 
but not revoke the sentence pass upon my wretched victim. she 
perish on the scaffold as a murderess! 

from the torture of my own heart, i turn to contemplate the deep and 
voiceless grief of my elizabeth. this also was my doing! and my 
father’s woe, and the desolate of that late so smile home all was 
the work of my thrice-accursed hands! ye weep, unhappy ones, but these 
are not your last tears! again shall you raise the funeral wail, and 
the sound of your lamentation shall again and again be heard! 
frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he 
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no 
thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirror also in your dear 
countenances, who would fill the air with blessing and spend his life 
in serving you—he bid you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond 
his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction 
pause before the peace of the grave have succeed to your sad torments! 

thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, 
i beheld those i love spend vain sorrow upon the grave of william and 
justine, the first hapless victim to my unhallowed arts. 





chapter 9 

nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have 
been work up by a quick succession of events, the dead calm of 
inaction and certainty which follow and deprive the soul both of hope 
and fear. justine died, she rested, and i was alive. the blood flow 
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my 
heart which nothing could remove. sleep flee from my eyes; i wander 
like an evil spirit, for i had committed deed of mischief beyond 
description horrible, and more, much more (i persuade myself) was yet 
behind. yet my heart overflow with kindness and the love of virtue. 
i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirst for the moment 
when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow 
beings. now all was blasted; instead of that serene of conscience 
which allow me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and 
from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seize by remorse and 
the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense torture 
such as no language can describe. 

this state of mind prey upon my health, which had perhaps never 
entire recover from the first shock it had sustained. i shun 
the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; 
solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude. 

my father observe with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition 
and habit and endeavour by argument deduce from the feelings of his 
serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and 
awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brood over me. 
“do you think, victor,” said he, “that i do not suffer 
also? no one could love a child more than i love your 
brother”—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—“but 
is it not a duty to the survivor that we should refrain from augment 
their unhappy by an appearance of immoderate grief? it is also a duty 
owe to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevent improvement or enjoyment, 
or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for 
society.” 

this advice, although good, was total inapplicable to my case; i 
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if 
remorse had not mingle its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my 
other sensations. now i could only answer my father with a look of 
despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view. 

about this time we retired to our house at belrive. this change was 
particularly agreeable to me. the shut of the gate regularly at 
ten o’clock and the impossible of remain on the lake after that 
hour had render our residence within the wall of geneva very irksome 
to me. i was now free. often, after the rest of the family had 
retired for the night, i took the boat and pass many hour upon the 
water. sometimes, with my sail set, i was carry by the wind; and 
sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to 
pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. i 
was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only 
unquiet thing that wander restless in a scene so beautiful and 
heavenly—if i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and 
interrupt croak was heard only when i approach the shore—often, 
i say, i was tempt to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters 
might close over me and my calamity for ever. but i was restrained, 
when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tender 
loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. i thought also of my 
father and survive brother; should i by my base desertion leave them 
expose and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose 
among them? 

at these moments i wept bitter and wish that peace would revisit my 
mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness. but that 
could not be. remorse extinguish every hope. i had been the author of 
unalterable evils, and i live in daily fear lest the monster whom i had 
create should perpetrate some new wickedness. i had an obscure feeling 
that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime, 
which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past. 
there was always scope for fear so long as anything i love remain 
behind. my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. when i thought of 
him i gnash my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardent wish to 
extinguish that life which i had so thoughtless bestowed. when i 
reflect on his crime and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds 
of moderation. i would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the 
andes, could i, when there, have precipitate him to their base. i wish 
to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his 
head and avenge the death of william and justine. 

our house was the house of mourning. my father’s health was deep 
shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth was sad and 
desponding; she no long took delight in her ordinary occupations; all 
pleasure seem to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tear she 
then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted 
and destroyed. she was no long that happy creature who in early youth 
wander with me on the bank of the lake and talk with ecstasy of our 
future prospects. the first of those sorrow which are sent to wean us from 
the earth had visit her, and its dim influence quench her dearest 
smiles. 

“when i reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of 
justine moritz, i no long see the world and its works as they before 
appear to me. before, i look upon the account of vice and 
injustice that i read in books or heard from other as tale of ancient 
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to 
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men 
appear to me as monster thirst for each other’s blood. yet i am 
certainly unjust. everybody believe that poor girl to be guilty; and 
if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assured 
she would have been the most deprave of human creatures. for the sake 
of a few jewels, to have murder the son of her benefactor and friend, 
a child whom she had nurse from its birth, and appear to love as if 
it had been her own! i could not consent to the death of any human 
being, but certainly i should have thought such a creature unfit to 
remain in the society of men. but she was innocent. i know, i feel 
she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirm me. 
alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can 
assure themselves of certain happiness? i feel as if i were walking on 
the edge of a precipice, towards which thousand are crowd and 
endeavour to plunge me into the abyss. william and justine were 
assassinated, and the murder escapes; he walk about the world free, 
and perhaps respected. but even if i were condemn to suffer on the 
scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change place with such a 
wretch.” 

i listen to this discourse with the extremest agony. i, not in deed, 
but in effect, was the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my 
countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “my dearest friend, you 
must calm yourself. these event have affected me, god know how 
deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are. there is an expression of 
despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that make me 
tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. remember the 
friends around you, who centre all their hope in you. have we lost 
the power of rendering you happy? ah! while we love, while we are 
true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native 
country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our 
peace?” 

and could not such words from her whom i fondly prize before every 
other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurk in my 
heart? even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at 
that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her. 

thus not the tender of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of 
heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accent of love were 
ineffectual. i was encompass by a cloud which no beneficial 
influence could penetrate. the wound deer drag its faint 
limb to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had 
pierce it, and to die, was but a type of me. 

sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelm me, but 
sometimes the whirlwind passion of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily 
exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable 
sensations. it was during an access of this kind that i sudden left 
my home, and bend my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought 
in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and 
my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. my wanderings were direct 
towards the valley of chamounix. i had visit it frequent during my 
boyhood. six years had pass since then: _i_ was a wreck, but nought 
had change in those savage and enduring scenes. 

i perform the first part of my journey on horseback. i afterwards 
hire a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive 
injury on these rugged roads. the weather was fine; it was about the 
middle of the month of august, nearly two month after the death of 
justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe. the 
weight upon my spirit was sensible lighten as i plunge yet deep in 
the ravine of arve. the immense mountain and precipice that overhung 
me on every side, the sound of the river rage among the rocks, and 
the dashing of the waterfall around spoke of a power mighty as 
omnipotence—and i cease to fear or to bend before any being less 
almighty than that which had create and rule the elements, here 
display in their most terrific guise. still, as i ascend higher, 
the valley assume a more magnificent and astonish character. 
ruin castle hanging on the precipice of piny mountains, the 
impetuous arve, and cottage every here and there peep forth from 
among the tree form a scene of singular beauty. but it was 
augment and render sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and 
shining pyramid and dome tower above all, as belong to another 
earth, the habitation of another race of beings. 

i pass the bridge of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river 
forms, open before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that 
overhang it. soon after, i enter the valley of chamounix. this 
valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and 
picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed. the 
high and snowy mountain were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no 
more ruin castle and fertile fields. immense glacier approach 
the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the fall avalanche and 
marked the smoke of its passage. mont blanc, the supreme and 
magnificent mont blanc, raise itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_, 
and its tremendous _dôme_ overlook the valley. 

a tingle long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this 
journey. some turn in the road, some new object sudden perceive and 
recognised, remind me of days gone by, and were associate with the 
lighthearte gaiety of boyhood. the very wind whisper in soothe 
accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more. then again the 
kindly influence cease to act—i found myself fetter again to grief 
and indulge in all the misery of reflection. then i spur on my 
animal, strive so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all, 
myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, i alight and threw myself on 
the grass, weigh down by horror and despair. 

at length i arrive at the village of chamounix. exhaustion succeed 
to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured. 
for a short space of time i remain at the window watch the pallid 
lightning that play above mont blanc and listen to the rush of 
the arve, which pursue its noisy way beneath. the same lull sound 
act as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head 
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed 
the give of oblivion. 





chapter 10 

i spent the following day roam through the valley. i stood beside 
the source of the arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that 
with slow pace is advance down from the summit of the hill to 
barricade the valley. the abrupt side of vast mountain were before 
me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shatter pine were 
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious 
presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawl 
wave or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the 
avalanche or the cracking, reverberate along the mountains, of the 
accumulate ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws, 
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in 
their hands. these sublime and magnificent scene afford me the 
greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving. they elevated me 
from all little of feeling, and although they did not remove my 
grief, they subdued and tranquillise it. in some degree, also, they 
divert my mind from the thought over which it had brood for the 
last month. i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, 
wait on and minister to by the assemble of grand shape which i 
had contemplate during the day. they congregate round me; the 
unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, 
and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soar amidst the clouds—they all 
gather round me and bade me be at peace. 

where had they flee when the next morning i awoke? all of 
soul-inspiriting flee with sleep, and dark melancholy cloud every 
thought. the rain was pour in torrents, and thick mists hid the 
summit of the mountains, so that i even saw not the face of those 
mighty friends. still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them 
in their cloudy retreats. what were rain and storm to me? my mule was 
brought to the door, and i resolve to ascend to the summit of 
montanvert. i remember the effect that the view of the tremendous 
and ever-moving glacier had produce upon my mind when i first saw it. 
it had then fill me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the 
soul and allow it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. 
the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the 
effect of solemnise my mind and cause me to forget the passing 
care of life. i determined to go without a guide, for i was well 
acquaint with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the 
solitary grandeur of the scene. 

the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short 
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicular of the 
mountain. it is a scene terrifically desolate. in a thousand spot 
the trace of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where tree lie 
broken and strew on the ground, some entire destroyed, other bent, 
leaning upon the jut rocks of the mountain or transverse upon 
other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersect by ravine 
of snow, down which stone continual roll from above; one of them is 
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speak 
in a loud voice, produce a concussion of air sufficient to draw 
destruction upon the head of the speaker. the pine are not tall or 
luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene. 
i look on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the river 
which ran through it and curling in thick wreath around the opposite 
mountains, whose summit were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain 
pour from the dark sky and add to the melancholy impression i 
received from the object around me. alas! why do man boast of 
sensibility superior to those apparent in the brute; it only render 
them more necessary beings. if our impulse were confine to hunger, 
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are move by 
every wind that blow and a chance word or scene that that word may 
convey to us. 

we rest; a dream has power to poison sleep. 
we rise; one wand’ring thought pollute the day. 
we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, 
embrace fond woe, or cast our care away; 
it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, 
the path of its departure still is free. 
man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; 
nought may endure but mutability! 



it was nearly noon when i arrive at the top of the ascent. for some 
time i sat upon the rock that overlook the sea of ice. a mist cover 
both that and the surrounding mountains. presently a breeze dissipated 
the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier. the surface is very 
uneven, rising like the wave of a trouble sea, descend low, and 
intersperse by rift that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a 
league in width, but i spent nearly two hour in crossing it. the 
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. from the side where i 
now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league; 
and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty. i remain in a recess 
of the rock, gaze on this wonderful and stupendous scene. the sea, 
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, 
whose aerial summit hung over its recesses. their icy and glittering 
peak shone in the sunlight over the clouds. my heart, which was 
before sorrowful, now swell with something like joy; i exclaimed, 
“wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow 
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, 
away from the joy of life.” 

as i said this i sudden beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, 
advance towards me with superhuman speed. he bound over the 
crevice in the ice, among which i had walk with caution; his 
stature, also, as he approached, seem to exceed that of man. i was 
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and i felt a faint seize me, 
but i was quick restore by the cold gale of the mountains. i 
perceived, as the shape came near (sight tremendous and abhorred!) 
that it was the wretch whom i had created. i tremble with rage and 
horror, resolve to wait his approach and then close with him in 
mortal combat. he approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, 
combine with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugly 
render it almost too horrible for human eyes. but i scarcely 
observe this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, 
and i recover only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious 
detest and contempt. 

“devil,” i exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do 
not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreak on your miserable head? 
begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust! and, 
oh! that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore 
those victim whom you have so diabolical murdered!” 

“i expect this reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the 
wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all 
living things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, 
to whom thou art bound by tie only dissoluble by the annihilate of 
one of us. you purpose to kill me. how dare you sport thus with life? 
do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of 
mankind. if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and 
you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it 
be satiate with the blood of your remain friends.” 

“abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the torture of hell are too 
mild a vengeance for thy crimes. wretched devil! you reproach me with 
your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i 
so negligent bestowed.” 

my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impel by all the 
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another. 

he easily elude me and said, 

“be calm! i entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred 
on my devoted head. have i not suffer enough, that you seek to 
increase my misery? life, although it may only be an accumulation of 
anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it. remember, thou hast made 
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my 
joint more supple. but i will not be tempt to set myself in 
opposition to thee. i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and 
docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part, 
the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every 
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy 
clemency and affection, is most due. remember that i am thy creature; 
i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou 
drivest from joy for no misdeed. everywhere i see bliss, from which i 
alone am irrevocable excluded. i was benevolent and good; misery made 
me a fiend. make me happy, and i shall again be virtuous.” 

“begone! i will not hear you. there can be no community between you 
and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, 
in which one must fall.” 

“how can i move thee? will no entreaty cause thee to turn a 
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implore thy goodness and 
compassion? believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glow 
with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone? you, my 
creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures, 
who owe me nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountain and 
dreary glacier are my refuge. i have wander here many days; the 
cave of ice, which i only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the 
only one which man do not grudge. these bleak sky i hail, for they 
are kind to me than your fellow beings. if the multitude of mankind 
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for 
my destruction. shall i not then hate them who abhor me? i will keep 
no terms with my enemies. i am miserable, and they shall share my 
wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver 
them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that 
not only you and your family, but thousand of others, shall be 
swallow up in the whirlwind of its rage. let your compassion be 
moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard 
that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve. 
but hear me. the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they 
are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. listen 
to me, frankenstein. you accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with 
a satisfy conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, praise the 
eternal justice of man! yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me, 
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.” 

“why do you call to my remembrance,” i rejoined, “circumstances of 
which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and 
author? cursed be the day, abhor devil, in which you first saw 
light! cursed (although i curse myself) be the hand that form you! 
you have made me wretched beyond expression. you have left me no power 
to consider whether i am just to you or not. begone! relieve me from 
the sight of your detest form.” 

“thus i relieve thee, my creator,” he said, and placed his hate hand 
before my eyes, which i flung from me with violence; “thus i take from 
thee a sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to me and grant 
me thy compassion. by the virtue that i once possessed, i demand this 
from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of 
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon 
the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descend 
to hide itself behind your snowy precipice and illuminate another 
world, you will have heard my story and can decide. on you it rests, 
whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless 
life, or become the scourge of your fellow creature and the author of 
your own speedy ruin.” 

as he said this he led the way across the ice; i followed. my heart 
was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weigh the 
various argument that he had use and determined at least to listen to 
his tale. i was partly urge by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my 
resolution. i had hitherto supposed him to be the murder of my 
brother, and i eager sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. 
for the first time, also, i felt what the duty of a creator towards 
his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i 
complain of his wickedness. these motive urge me to comply with 
his demand. we cross the ice, therefore, and ascend the opposite 
rock. the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we 
enter the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with a heavy 
heart and depressed spirits. but i consent to listen, and seating 
myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began 
his tale. 





chapter 11 

“it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original era of 
my being; all the event of that period appear confuse and indistinct. 
a strange multiplicity of sensation seize me, and i saw, felt, heard, 
and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before i 
learned to distinguish between the operation of my various senses. by 
degrees, i remember, a strong light pressed upon my nerves, so that i 
was oblige to shut my eyes. dark then came over me and trouble 
me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now 
suppose, the light pour in upon me again. i walk and, i believe, 
descended, but i presently found a great alteration in my sensations. 
before, dark and opaque body had surround me, impervious to my 
touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with 
no obstacle which i could not either surmount or avoid. the light 
became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat weary me as i 
walked, i sought a place where i could receive shade. this was the 
forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of a brook rest 
from my fatigue, until i felt torment by hunger and thirst. this 
rouse me from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berry which i 
found hanging on the tree or lie on the ground. i slake my thirst 
at the brook, and then lie down, was overcome by sleep. 

“it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it 
were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. before i had quit 
your apartment, on a sensation of cold, i had cover myself with some 
clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dew of 
night. i was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could 
distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, i sat 
down and wept. 

“soon a gentle light stole over the heaven and gave me a sensation of 
pleasure. i start up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the 
trees. [the moon] i gaze with a kind of wonder. it move slowly, 
but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries. 
i was still cold when under one of the tree i found a huge cloak, with 
which i cover myself, and sat down upon the ground. no distinct 
idea occupy my mind; all was confused. i felt light, and hunger, 
and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sound rang in my ears, and on 
all side various scent salute me; the only object that i could 
distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with 
pleasure. 

“several change of day and night passed, and the orb of night had 
greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensation from each 
other. i gradual saw plainly the clear stream that supply me with 
drink and the tree that shade me with their foliage. i was delight 
when i first discover that a pleasant sound, which often salute my 
ears, proceed from the throat of the little wing animal who had 
often intercept the light from my eyes. i began also to observe, 
with greater accuracy, the form that surround me and to perceive the 
boundary of the radiant roof of light which canopy me. sometimes i 
try to imitate the pleasant song of the bird but was unable. 
sometimes i wish to express my sensation in my own mode, but the 
uncouth and inarticulate sound which broke from me frightened me into 
silence again. 

“the moon had disappear from the night, and again, with a lessen 
form, show itself, while i still remain in the forest. my 
sensation had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every 
day additional ideas. my eyes became accustomed to the light and to 
perceive object in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from 
the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. i found that the 
sparrow utter none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and 
thrush were sweet and enticing. 

“one day, when i was oppress by cold, i found a fire which had been 
left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the 
warmth i experienced from it. in my joy i thrust my hand into the live 
embers, but quick drew it out again with a cry of pain. how strange, 
i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! i 
examine the material of the fire, and to my joy found it to be 
compose of wood. i quick collected some branches, but they were wet 
and would not burn. i was pained at this and sat still watch the 
operation of the fire. the wet wood which i had placed near the heat 
dry and itself became inflamed. i reflect on this, and by touching 
the various branches, i discover the cause and busy myself in 
collect a great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a 
plentiful supply of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with 
it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. i 
cover it careful with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branch 
upon it; and then, spread my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank 
into sleep. 

“it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire. 
i uncover it, and a gentle breeze quick fan it into a flame. i 
observe this also and contrived a fan of branches, which rouse the 
ember when they were nearly extinguished. when night came again i 
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that 
the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for i found 
some of the offal that the traveller had left had been roasted, and 
taste much more savoury than the berry i gather from the trees. i 
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, place it on 
the live embers. i found that the berry were spoil by this 
operation, and the nuts and roots much improved. 

“food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day 
searching in vain for a few acorn to assuage the pang of hunger. when 
i found this, i resolve to quit the place that i had hitherto 
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be 
more easily satisfied. in this emigrate i exceedingly lament the 
loss of the fire which i had obtain through accident and knew not how 
to reproduce it. i gave several hour to the serious consideration of 
this difficulty, but i was oblige to relinquish all attempt to supply 
it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood 
towards the setting sun. i pass three days in these ramble and at 
length discover the open country. a great fall of snow had taken 
place the night before, and the field were of one uniform white; the 
appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chill by the cold 
damp substance that cover the ground. 

“it was about seven in the morning, and i long to obtain food and 
shelter; at length i perceive a small hut, on a rising ground, which 
had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. this 
was a new sight to me, and i examine the structure with great 
curiosity. finding the door open, i entered. an old man sat in it, 
near a fire, over which he was prepare his breakfast. he turn on 
hearing a noise, and perceive me, shriek loudly, and quit the 
hut, ran across the field with a speed of which his debilitate form 
hardly appear capable. his appearance, different from any i had ever 
before seen, and his flight somewhat surprise me. but i was enchant 
by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not 
penetrate; the ground was dry; and it present to me then as exquisite 
and divine a retreat as pandæmonium appear to the dæmons of hell 
after their suffering in the lake of fire. i greedy devour the 
remnant of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consist of bread, cheese, 
milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like. then, overcome by 
fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep. 

“it was noon when i awoke, and allure by the warmth of the sun, which 
shone bright on the white ground, i determined to recommence my 
travels; and, deposit the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a 
wallet i found, i proceed across the field for several hours, until 
at sunset i arrive at a village. how miraculous did this appear! the 
huts, the neat cottages, and stately house engaged my admiration by 
turns. the vegetable in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw 
placed at the window of some of the cottages, allure my appetite. one 
of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within 
the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted. 
the whole village was roused; some fled, some attack me, until, 
grievous bruise by stone and many other kind of missile weapons, i 
escape to the open country and fearful took refuge in a low hovel, 
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palace i had 
beheld in the village. this hovel however, join a cottage of a neat 
and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i 
dare not enter it. my place of refuge was construct of wood, but so 
low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it. no wood, however, 
was placed on the earth, which form the floor, but it was dry; and 
although the wind enter it by innumerable chinks, i found it an 
agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. 

“here, then, i retreat and lay down happy to have found a shelter, 
however miserable, from the inclement of the season, and still more 
from the barbarous of man. as soon as morning dawn i crept from my 
kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could 
remain in the habitation i had found. it was situated against the back 
of the cottage and surround on the side which were expose by a pig 
sty and a clear pool of water. one part was open, and by that i had 
crept in; but now i cover every crevice by which i might be perceive 
with stone and wood, yet in such a manner that i might move them on 
occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoy came through the sty, and 
that was sufficient for me. 

“having thus arrange my dwelling and carpet it with clean straw, i 
retired, for i saw the figure of a man at a distance, and i remember 
too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. i 
had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf 
of coarse bread, which i purloined, and a cup with which i could drink 
more convenient than from my hand of the pure water which flow by 
my retreat. the floor was a little raised, so that it was kept 
perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was 
tolerably warm. 

“being thus provided, i resolve to reside in this hovel until 
something should occur which might alter my determination. it was 
indeed a paradise compare to the bleak forest, my former residence, 
the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. i ate my breakfast with 
pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little 
water when i heard a step, and look through a small chink, i beheld 
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. the 
girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found 
cottager and farmhouse servant to be. yet she was mean dressed, a 
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair 
hair was plait but not adorned: she look patient yet sad. i lost 
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she return bearing 
the pail, which was now partly fill with milk. as she walk along, 
seemingly incommode by the burden, a young man met her, whose 
countenance express a deep despondence. utter a few sound with 
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the 
cottage himself. she followed, and they disappeared. presently i saw 
the young man again, with some tool in his hand, cross the field 
behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the 
house and sometimes in the yard. 

“on examine my dwelling, i found that one of the window of the 
cottage had formerly occupy a part of it, but the pane had been 
fill up with wood. in one of these was a small and almost 
imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. 
through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewash and clean 
but very bare of furniture. in one corner, near a small fire, sat an 
old man, leaning his head on his hand in a disconsolate attitude. the 
young girl was occupy in arrange the cottage; but presently she 
took something out of a drawer, which employ her hands, and she sat 
down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play 
and to produce sound sweet than the voice of the thrush or the 
nightingale. it was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had 
never beheld aught beautiful before. the silver hair and benevolent 
countenance of the age cottager won my reverence, while the gentle 
manners of the girl entice my love. he play a sweet mournful air 
which i perceive drew tear from the eyes of his amiable companion, of 
which the old man took no notice, until she sob audibly; he then 
pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leave her work, knelt 
at his feet. he raise her and smile with such kindness and affection 
that i felt sensation of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were 
a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced, 
either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the 
window, unable to bear these emotions. 

“soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulder a 
load of wood. the girl met him at the door, help to relieve him of 
his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on 
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, 
and he show her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. she seem 
pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she 
placed in water, and then upon the fire. she afterwards continue her 
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appear busy 
employ in digging and pull up roots. after he had been employ 
thus about an hour, the young woman join him and they enter the 
cottage together. 

“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance 
of his companion he assume a more cheerful air, and they sat down to 
eat. the meal was quick dispatched. the young woman was again 
occupy in arrange the cottage, the old man walk before the 
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. 
nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent 
creatures. one was old, with silver hair and a countenance beam 
with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his 
figure, and his features were mould with the finest symmetry, yet his 
eyes and attitude express the utmost sad and despondency. the 
old man return to the cottage, and the youth, with tool different 
from those he had use in the morning, direct his steps across the 
fields. 

“night quick shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the 
cottager had a means of prolong light by the use of tapers, and was 
delight to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the 
pleasure i experienced in watch my human neighbours. in the evening 
the young girl and her companion were employ in various occupation 
which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the 
instrument which produce the divine sound that had enchant me in 
the morning. so soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play, 
but to utter sound that were monotonous, and neither resemble the 
harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the song of the birds; i since 
found that he read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the 
science of words or letters. 

“the family, after have been thus occupy for a short time, 
extinguish their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.” 





chapter 12 

“i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep. i thought of the 
occurrence of the day. what chiefly struck me was the gentle manners 
of these people, and i long to join them, but dare not. i 
remember too well the treatment i had suffer the night before from 
the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i 
might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would 
remain quiet in my hovel, watch and endeavour to discover the 
motive which influence their actions. 

“the cottager arose the next morning before the sun. the young woman 
arrange the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed 
after the first meal. 

“this day was pass in the same routine as that which precede it. 
the young man was constant employ out of doors, and the girl in 
various laborious occupation within. the old man, whom i soon 
perceive to be blind, employ his leisure hour on his instrument or 
in contemplation. nothing could exceed the love and respect which the 
younger cottager exhibit towards their venerable companion. they 
perform towards him every little office of affection and duty with 
gentleness, and he reward them by his benevolent smiles. 

“they were not entire happy. the young man and his companion often 
went apart and appear to weep. i saw no cause for their unhappiness, 
but i was deep affected by it. if such lovely creature were 
miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being, 
should be wretched. yet why were these gentle being unhappy? they 
possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every 
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands 
when hungry; they were dress in excellent clothes; and, still more, 
they enjoy one another’s company and speech, interchange each day 
looks of affection and kindness. what did their tear imply? did they 
really express pain? i was at first unable to solve these questions, 
but perpetual attention and time explain to me many appearances which 
were at first enigmatic. 

“a considerable period elapse before i discover one of the cause of 
the uneasy of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they 
suffer that evil in a very distressing degree. their nourishment 
consist entire of the vegetable of their garden and the milk of 
one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its master 
could scarcely procure food to support it. they often, i believe, 
suffer the pang of hunger very poignantly, especially the two 
younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old 
man when they reserved none for themselves. 

“this trait of kindness move me sensibly. i had been accustomed, 
during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own 
consumption, but when i found that in do this i inflict pain on 
the cottagers, i abstain and satisfy myself with berries, nuts, and 
roots which i gather from a neighbouring wood. 

“i discover also another means through which i was enable to assist 
their labours. i found that the youth spent a great part of each day 
in collect wood for the family fire, and during the night i often 
took his tools, the use of which i quick discovered, and brought home 
fire sufficient for the consumption of several days. 

“i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she 
open the door in the morning, appear greatly astonish on seeing a great 
pile of wood on the outside. she utter some words in a loud voice, and the 
youth join her, who also express surprise. i observed, with pleasure, 
that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repair the 
cottage and cultivate the garden. 

“by degree i made a discovery of still greater moment. i found that 
these people possessed a method of communicate their experience and 
feelings to one another by articulate sounds. i perceive that the words 
they spoke sometimes produce pleasure or pain, smile or sadness, in the 
mind and countenance of the hearers. this was indeed a godlike science, 
and i ardent desire to become acquaint with it. but i was baffle in 
every attempt i made for this purpose. their pronunciation was quick, and 
the words they uttered, not have any apparent connection with visible 
objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the 
mystery of their reference. by great application, however, and after have 
remain during the space of several revolution of the moon in my hovel, i 
discover the name that were given to some of the most familiar object of 
discourse; i learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and 
_wood._ i learned also the name of the cottager themselves. the youth 
and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only 
one, which was _father._ the girl was call _sister_ or 
_agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. i cannot 
describe the delight i felt when i learned the idea appropriate to each of 
these sound and was able to pronounce them. i distinguished several other 
words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good, 
dearest, unhappy._ 

“i spent the winter in this manner. the gentle manners and beauty of 
the cottager greatly endear them to me; when they were unhappy, i 
felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathise in their joys. i saw 
few human being besides them, and if any other happen to enter the 
cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhance to me the 
superior accomplishment of my friends. the old man, i could perceive, 
often endeavour to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that 
he call them, to cast off their melancholy. he would talk in a 
cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestow pleasure 
even upon me. agatha listen with respect, her eyes sometimes fill 
with tears, which she endeavour to wipe away unperceived; but i 
generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after 
have listen to the exhortation of her father. it was not thus 
with felix. he was always the saddest of the group, and even to my 
unpractised senses, he appear to have suffer more deep than his 
friends. but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more 
cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he address the old 
man. 

“i could mention innumerable instance which, although slight, marked 
the disposition of these amiable cottagers. in the midst of poverty 
and want, felix carry with pleasure to his sister the first little 
white flower that peep out from beneath the snowy ground. early in 
the morning, before she had risen, he clear away the snow that 
obstruct her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and 
brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual 
astonishment, he found his store always replenish by an invisible 
hand. in the day, i believe, he work sometimes for a neighbouring 
farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner, 
yet brought no wood with him. at other times he work in the garden, 
but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old 
man and agatha. 

“this reading had puzzle me extremely at first, but by degree i 
discover that he utter many of the same sound when he read as when 
he talked. i conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper sign 
for speech which he understood, and i ardent long to comprehend 
these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand 
the sound for which they stood as signs? i improved, however, 
sensible in this science, but not sufficient to follow up any kind of 
conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i 
easily perceive that, although i eager long to discover myself to 
the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become 
master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them 
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast 
perpetual present to my eyes had made me acquainted. 

“i had admire the perfect form of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, 
and delicate complexions; but how was i terrify when i view myself 
in a transparent pool! at first i start back, unable to believe that 
it was indeed i who was reflect in the mirror; and when i became 
fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was 
fill with the bitterest sensation of despondence and mortification. 
alas! i did not yet entire know the fatal effects of this miserable 
deformity. 

“as the sun became warm and the light of day longer, the snow 
vanished, and i beheld the bare tree and the black earth. from this 
time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indication of 
impending famine disappeared. their food, as i afterwards found, was 
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procure a sufficiency of it. 
several new kind of plant sprang up in the garden, which they 
dressed; and these sign of comfort increase daily as the season 
advanced. 

“the old man, leaning on his son, walk each day at noon, when it did 
not rain, as i found it was call when the heaven pour forth its 
waters. this frequent took place, but a high wind quick dry the 
earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. 

“my mode of life in my hovel was uniform. during the morning i 
attend the motions of the cottagers, and when they were disperse in 
various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in 
observing my friends. when they had retired to rest, if there was any 
moon or the night was star-light, i went into the wood and collected 
my own food and fuel for the cottage. when i returned, as often as it 
was necessary, i clear their path from the snow and perform those 
offices that i had seen done by felix. i afterwards found that these 
labours, perform by an invisible hand, greatly astonish them; and 
once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good 
spirit, wonderful_; but i did not then understand the signification 
of these terms. 

“my thought now became more active, and i long to discover the 
motive and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to 
know why felix appear so miserable and agatha so sad. i thought 
(foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to 
these deserving people. when i slept or was absent, the form of the 
venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix 
flit before me. i look upon them as superior being who would be 
the arbiter of my future destiny. i form in my imagination a 
thousand pictures of present myself to them, and their reception of 
me. i imagine that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle 
demeanour and conciliate words, i should first win their favour and 
afterwards their love. 

“these thought exhilarate me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to 
the acquire the art of language. my organ were indeed harsh, but 
supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their 
tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease. 
it was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose 
intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserve 
better treatment than blow and execration. 

“the pleasant shower and genial warmth of spring greatly alter the 
aspect of the earth. men who before this change seem to have been 
hid in cave disperse themselves and were employ in various arts of 
cultivation. the bird sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves 
began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happy earth! fit habitation 
for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and 
unwholesome. my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of 
nature; the past was blot from my memory, the present was tranquil, 
and the future gilded by bright ray of hope and anticipation of joy.” 





chapter 13 

“i now hasten to the more moving part of my story. i shall relate 
event that impress me with feelings which, from what i had been, 
have made me what i am. 

“spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the sky 
cloudless. it surprise me that what before was desert and gloomy 
should now bloom with the most beautiful flower and verdure. my 
senses were gratify and refresh by a thousand scent of delight and 
a thousand sight of beauty. 

“it was on one of these days, when my cottager periodical rest 
from labour—the old man play on his guitar, and the children 
listen to him—that i observe the countenance of felix was 
melancholy beyond expression; he sigh frequently, and once his father 
pause in his music, and i conjecture by his manner that he inquire 
the cause of his son’s sorrow. felix reply in a cheerful accent, and 
the old man was recommenc his music when someone tap at the door. 

“it was a lady on horseback, accompany by a country-man as a guide. 
the lady was dress in a dark suit and cover with a thick black 
veil. agatha ask a question, to which the stranger only reply by 
pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of felix. her voice was 
musical but unlike that of either of my friends. on hearing this word, 
felix came up hasty to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her 
veil, and i beheld a countenance of angel beauty and expression. her 
hair of a shining raven black, and curious braided; her eyes were 
dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular 
proportion, and her complexion wondrous fair, each cheek tinge with 
a lovely pink. 

“felix seem ravish with delight when he saw her, every trait of 
sorrow vanish from his face, and it instantly express a degree of 
ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believe it capable; his 
eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i 
thought him as beautiful as the stranger. she appear affected by 
different feelings; wipe a few tear from her lovely eyes, she held 
out her hand to felix, who kiss it rapturous and call her, as 
well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian. she did not appear to 
understand him, but smiled. he assist her to dismount, and 
dismiss her guide, conduct her into the cottage. some 
conversation took place between him and his father, and the young 
stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kiss his hand, 
but he raise her and embrace her affectionately. 

“i soon perceive that although the stranger utter articulate sound 
and appear to have a language of her own, she was neither understood 
by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made many sign which i 
did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffuse glad 
through the cottage, dispel their sorrow as the sun dissipate the 
morning mists. felix seem peculiarly happy and with smile of 
delight welcome his arabian. agatha, the ever-gentle agatha, kiss 
the hand of the lovely stranger, and point to her brother, made 
sign which appear to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she 
came. some hour pass thus, while they, by their countenances, 
express joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend. presently i 
found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger 
repeated after them, that she was endeavour to learn their language; 
and the idea instantly occur to me that i should make use of the 
same instruction to the same end. the stranger learned about twenty 
words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had 
before understood, but i profit by the others. 

“as night came on, agatha and the arabia retired early. when they 
separate felix kiss the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night 
sweet safie.’ he sat up much longer, converse with his father, and 
by the frequent repetition of her name i conjecture that their lovely 
guest was the subject of their conversation. i ardent desire to 
understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found 
it utterly impossible. 

“the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual 
occupation of agatha were finished, the arabia sat at the feet of the 
old man, and taking his guitar, play some airs so entrancing 
beautiful that they at once drew tear of sorrow and delight from my 
eyes. she sang, and her voice flow in a rich cadence, swelling or 
die away like a nightingale of the woods. 

“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first 
decline it. she play a simple air, and her voice accompany it in 
sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. the old 
man appear enrapture and said some words which agatha endeavour to 
explain to safie, and by which he appear to wish to express that she 
bestow on him the greatest delight by her music. 

“the days now pass as peaceable as before, with the sole alteration 
that joy had taken place of sad in the countenance of my friends. 
safie was always gay and happy; she and i improve rapid in the 
knowledge of language, so that in two month i began to comprehend most 
of the words utter by my protectors. 

“in the meanwhile also the black ground was cover with herbage, and 
the green bank intersperse with innumerable flowers, sweet to the 
scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; 
the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal 
ramble were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably 
shorten by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never 
venture abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same 
treatment i had formerly endure in the first village which i entered. 

“my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedy 
master the language; and i may boast that i improve more rapid than 
the arabian, who understood very little and converse in broken 
accents, whilst i comprehend and could imitate almost every word that 
was spoken. 

“while i improve in speech, i also learned the science of letters as 
it was taught to the stranger, and this open before me a wide field 
for wonder and delight. 

“the book from which felix instruct safie was volney’s _ruins 
of empires_. i should not have understood the purport of this book had not 
felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. he had chosen this 
work, he said, because the declamatory style was frame in imitation of the 
eastern authors. through this work i obtain a cursory knowledge of history 
and a view of the several empire at present existing in the world; it gave 
me an insight into the manners, governments, and religion of the different 
nation of the earth. i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous 
genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the war and wonderful virtue 
of the early romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the 
decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. i heard 
of the discovery of the america hemisphere and wept with safie over the 
hapless fate of its original inhabitants. 

“these wonderful narration inspired me with strange feelings. was 
man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so 
vicious and base? he appear at one time a mere scion of the evil 
principle and at another as all that can be conceive of noble and 
godlike. to be a great and virtuous man appear the highest honour 
that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on 
record have been, appear the lowest degradation, a condition more 
abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for a long time i 
could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or 
even why there were law and governments; but when i heard detail of 
vice and bloodshed, my wonder cease and i turn away with disgust and 
loathing. 

“every conversation of the cottager now open new wonders to me. 
while i listen to the instruction which felix bestow upon the 
arabian, the strange system of human society was explain to me. i 
heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid 
poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood. 

“the words induce me to turn towards myself. i learned that the 
possession most esteem by your fellow creature were high and 
unsullied descent united with riches. a man might be respect with 
only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered, 
except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doom to 
waste his powers for the profit of the chosen few! and what was i? of 
my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i 
possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. i was, besides, 
endue with a figure hideous deform and loathsome; i was not even 
of the same nature as man. i was more agile than they and could 
subsist upon coarse diet; i bore the extreme of heat and cold with 
less injury to my frame; my stature far exceed theirs. when i look 
around i saw and heard of none like me. was i, then, a monster, a blot 
upon the earth, from which all men flee and whom all men disowned? 

“i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflection inflict 
upon me; i try to dispel them, but sorrow only increase with 
knowledge. oh, that i had for ever remain in my native wood, nor 
known nor felt beyond the sensation of hunger, thirst, and heat! 

“of what a strange nature is knowledge! it cling to the mind when it 
has once seize on it like a lichen on the rock. i wish sometimes to 
shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one 
means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state 
which i fear yet did not understand. i admire virtue and good 
feelings and love the gentle manners and amiable quality of my 
cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except 
through means which i obtain by stealth, when i was unseen and 
unknown, and which rather increase than satisfy the desire i had of 
becoming one among my fellows. the gentle words of agatha and the 
animate smile of the charming arabia were not for me. the mild 
exhortation of the old man and the lively conversation of the love 
felix were not for me. miserable, unhappy wretch! 

“other lesson were impress upon me even more deeply. i heard of the 
difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the 
father dote on the smile of the infant, and the lively sally of the 
old child, how all the life and care of the mother were wrap up 
in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expand and gain 
knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationship which 
bind one human being to another in mutual bonds. 

“but where were my friends and relations? no father had watch my 
infant days, no mother had blessed me with smile and caresses; or if 
they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which i 
distinguished nothing. from my earliest remembrance i had been as i 
then was in height and proportion. i had never yet seen a being 
resemble me or who claim any intercourse with me. what was i? the 
question again recurred, to be answer only with groans. 

“i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to 
return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various 
feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminate 
in additional love and reverence for my protector (for so i loved, in 
an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).” 





chapter 14 

“some time elapse before i learned the history of my friends. it was 
one which could not fail to impress itself deep on my mind, unfold 
as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to 
one so utterly inexperienced as i was. 

“the name of the old man was de lacey. he was descended from a good 
family in france, where he had live for many years in affluence, 
respect by his superior and beloved by his equals. his son was bred 
in the service of his country, and agatha had rank with ladies of the 
highest distinction. a few month before my arrival they had live in 
a large and luxurious city call paris, surround by friends and 
possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or 
taste, accompany by a moderate fortune, could afford. 

“the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin. he was a 
turkey merchant and had inhabit paris for many years, when, for some 
reason which i could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government. 
he was seize and cast into prison the very day that safie arrive from 
constantinople to join him. he was try and condemn to death. the 
injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant; 
and it was judge that his religion and wealth rather than the crime 
allege against him had been the cause of his condemnation. 

“felix had accidental been present at the trial; his horror and 
indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the 
court. he made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then 
look around for the means. after many fruitless attempt to gain 
admittance to the prison, he found a strong grate window in an 
unguarded part of the building, which light the dungeon of the 
unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, wait in despair the 
execution of the barbarous sentence. felix visit the grate at night 
and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. the turk, 
amaze and delighted, endeavour to kindle the zeal of his deliver 
by promise of reward and wealth. felix reject his offer with 
contempt, yet when he saw the lovely safie, who was allow to visit 
her father and who by her gesture express her lively gratitude, the 
youth could not help own to his own mind that the captive possessed 
a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard. 

“the turk quick perceive the impression that his daughter had made 
on the heart of felix and endeavour to secure him more entire in 
his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he 
should be convey to a place of safety. felix was too delicate to 
accept this offer, yet he look forward to the probability of the 
event as to the consummation of his happiness. 

“during the ensue days, while the preparation were go forward for 
the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warm by several 
letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to 
express her thought in the language of her lover by the aid of an old 
man, a servant of her father who understood french. she thank him in 
the most ardent terms for his intended service towards her parent, and 
at the same time she gently deplore her own fate. 

“i have copy of these letters, for i found means, during my residence 
in the hovel, to procure the implement of writing; and the letters 
were often in the hand of felix or agatha. before i depart i will 
give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, 
as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat 
the substance of them to you. 

“safie related that her mother was a christian arab, seize and made a 
slave by the turks; recommend by her beauty, she had won the heart of 
the father of safie, who married her. the young girl spoke in high and 
enthusiast terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurn the 
bondage to which she was now reduced. she instruct her daughter in 
the tenet of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of 
intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female 
follower of muhammad. this lady died, but her lesson were indelible 
impress on the mind of safie, who sicken at the prospect of again 
return to asia and being immure within the wall of a harem, 
allow only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to 
the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand idea and a noble 
emulation for virtue. the prospect of marry a christian and 
remain in a country where women were allow to take a rank in 
society was enchanting to her. 

“the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night 
previous to it he quit his prison and before morning was distant 
many league from paris. felix had procure passport in the name of 
his father, sister, and himself. he had previous communicate his 
plan to the former, who aid the deceit by quit his house, under 
the pretence of a journey and conceal himself, with his daughter, in 
an obscure part of paris. 

“felix conduct the fugitive through france to lyon and across mont 
ceni to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable 
opportunity of passing into some part of the turkey dominions. 

“safie resolve to remain with her father until the moment of his 
departure, before which time the turk renew his promise that she 
should be united to his deliverer; and felix remain with them in 
expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoy the society 
of the arabian, who exhibit towards him the simplest and tenderest 
affection. they converse with one another through the means of an 
interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie 
sang to him the divine airs of her native country. 

“the turk allow this intimacy to take place and encourage the hope 
of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had form far other 
plans. he loathe the idea that his daughter should be united to a 
christian, but he fear the resentment of felix if he should appear 
lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliver 
if he should choose to betray him to the italy state which they 
inhabited. he revolve a thousand plan by which he should be enable 
to prolong the deceit until it might be no long necessary, and 
secret to take his daughter with him when he departed. his plan 
were facilitate by the news which arrive from paris. 

“the government of france were greatly enrage at the escape of their 
victim and spare no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. the 
plot of felix was quick discovered, and de lacey and agatha were 
thrown into prison. the news reach felix and rouse him from his 
dream of pleasure. his blind and age father and his gentle sister lay 
in a noisome dungeon while he enjoy the free air and the society of 
her whom he loved. this idea was torture to him. he quick arrange 
with the turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity 
for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a 
boarder at a convent at leghorn; and then, quit the lovely arabian, 
he hasten to paris and deliver himself up to the vengeance of the 
law, hope to free de lacey and agatha by this proceeding. 

“he did not succeed. they remain confine for five month before the 
trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune 
and condemn them to a perpetual exile from their native country. 

“they found a miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i 
discover them. felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for 
whom he and his family endure such unheard-of oppression, on 
discover that his deliver was thus reduce to poverty and ruin, 
became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quit italy with 
his daughter, insulting send felix a pittance of money to aid him, 
as he said, in some plan of future maintenance. 

“such were the event that prey on the heart of felix and render 
him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family. he could 
have endure poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his 
virtue, he glory in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss 
of his beloved safie were misfortune more bitter and irreparable. the 
arrival of the arabia now infuse new life into his soul. 

“when the news reach leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth 
and rank, the merchant command his daughter to think no more of her 
lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. the generous 
nature of safie was outrage by this command; she attempt to 
expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterate his 
tyrannical mandate. 

“a few days after, the turk enter his daughter’s apartment and told 
her hasty that he had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn 
had been divulge and that he should speedy be deliver up to the 
france government; he had consequently hire a vessel to convey him to 
constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. he 
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential 
servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his 
property, which had not yet arrive at leghorn. 

“when alone, safie resolve in her own mind the plan of conduct that it 
would become her to pursue in this emergency. a residence in turkey 
was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse 
to it. by some papers of her father which fell into her hand she 
heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where 
he then resided. she hesitate some time, but at length she form her 
determination. taking with her some jewel that belong to her and a 
sum of money, she quit italy with an attendant, a native of leghorn, 
but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for 
germany. 

“she arrive in safety at a town about twenty league from the cottage 
of de lacey, when her attendant fell dangerous ill. safie nurse her 
with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the 
arabia was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country 
and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. she fell, however, 
into good hands. the italy had mention the name of the spot for 
which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in 
which they had live took care that safie should arrive in safety at 
the cottage of her lover.” 





chapter 15 

“such was the history of my beloved cottagers. it impress me deeply. 
i learned, from the view of social life which it developed, to admire 
their virtue and to deprecate the vice of mankind. 

“as yet i look upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and 
generous were ever present before me, incite within me a desire to 
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable quality 
were call forth and displayed. but in give an account of the 
progress of my intellect, i must not omit a circumstance which occur 
in the beginning of the month of august of the same year. 

“one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i 
collected my own food and brought home fire for my protectors, i found on 
the ground a leathern portmanteau contain several articles of dress and 
some books. i eager seize the prize and return with it to my hovel. 
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i 
had acquire at the cottage; they consist of _paradise lost_, a volume 
of _plutarch’s lives_, and the _sorrows of werter_. the 
possession of these treasure gave me extreme delight; i now continual 
studied and exercise my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were 
employ in their ordinary occupations. 

“i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. they produce 
in me an infinity of new image and feelings, that sometimes raise me 
to ecstasy, but more frequent sunk me into the lowest dejection. in 
the _sorrows of werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting 
story, so many opinion are canvass and so many lights thrown upon 
what had hitherto been to me obscure subject that i found in it a 
never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. the gentle and 
domestic manners it described, combine with lofty sentiment and 
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accord 
well with my experience among my protector and with the wants which 
were for ever alive in my own bosom. but i thought wert himself a 
more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character 
contained no pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisition upon 
death and suicide were calculate to fill me with wonder. i did not 
pretend to enter into the merit of the case, yet i inclined towards 
the opinion of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely 
understanding it. 

“as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and 
condition. i found myself similar yet at the same time strange 
unlike to the being concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i 
was a listener. i sympathise with and partly understood them, but i 
was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none. 
‘the path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my 
annihilation. my person was hideous and my stature gigantic. what did 
this mean? who was i? what was i? whence did i come? what was my 
destination? these question continual recurred, but i was unable to 
solve them. 

“the volume of _plutarch’s lives_ which i possessed contained the 
history of the first founder of the ancient republics. this book 
had a far different effect upon me from the _sorrows of werter_. i 
learned from werter’s imagination despondent and gloom, but plutarch 
taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my 
own reflections, to admire and love the hero of past ages. many 
things i read surpass my understanding and experience. i had a very 
confuse knowledge of kingdoms, wide extent of country, mighty rivers, 
and boundless seas. but i was perfectly unacquainted with town and 
large assemblage of men. the cottage of my protector had been the 
only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book 
develop new and mighty scene of action. i read of men concerned 
in public affairs, governing or massacre their species. i felt the 
greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as 
far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they 
were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. induce by these 
feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa, 
solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulu and theseus. the 
patriarchal lives of my protector cause these impression to take a 
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had 
been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should 
have been imbue with different sensations. 

“but _paradise lost_ excited different and far deep emotions. i read 
it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as 
a true history. it move every feeling of wonder and awe that the 
picture of an omnipotent god war with his creature was capable of 
exciting. i often refer the several situations, as their similarity 
struck me, to my own. like adam, i was apparently united by no link to 
any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine 
in every other respect. he had come forth from the hand of god a 
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of 
his creator; he was allow to converse with and acquire knowledge from 
being of a superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone. 
many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for 
often, like him, when i view the bliss of my protectors, the bitter 
gall of envy rose within me. 

“another circumstance strengthen and confirmed these feelings. soon 
after my arrival in the hovel i discover some papers in the pocket of 
the dress which i had taken from your laboratory. at first i had 
neglect them, but now that i was able to decipher the character in 
which they were written, i began to study them with diligence. it was 
your journal of the four month that precede my creation. you 
minutely describe in these papers every step you took in the progress 
of your work; this history was mingle with account of domestic 
occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are. 
everything is related in them which bear reference to my accursed 
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgust circumstances 
which produce it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious 
and loathsome person is given, in language which paint your own 
horrors and render mine indelible. i sicken as i read. ‘hateful 
day when i received life!’ i exclaim in agony. ‘accursed creator! 
why did you form a monster so hideous that even _you_ turn from me in 
disgust? god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own 
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the 
very resemblance. satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire 
and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.’ 

“these were the reflection of my hour of despondent and solitude; 
but when i contemplate the virtue of the cottagers, their amiable and 
benevolent dispositions, i persuade myself that when they should 
become acquaint with my admiration of their virtue they would 
compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity. could they turn 
from their door one, however monstrous, who solicit their compassion 
and friendship? i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way 
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. i 
postpone this attempt for some month longer, for the importance 
attach to its success inspired me with a dread lest i should fail. 
besides, i found that my understanding improve so much with every 
day’s experience that i was unwill to commence this undertaking 
until a few more month should have add to my sagacity. 

“several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the 
presence of safie diffuse happiness among its inhabitants, and i also 
found that a greater degree of plenty reign there. felix and agatha 
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assist in 
their labour by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were 
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while 
mine became every day more tumultuous. increase of knowledge only 
discover to me more clearly what a wretched outcast i was. i 
cherish hope, it is true, but it vanish when i beheld my person 
reflect in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail 
image and that inconstant shade. 

“i endeavour to crush these fear and to fortify myself for the trial 
which in a few month i resolve to undergo; and sometimes i allow my 
thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the field of paradise, and 
dare to fancy amiable and lovely creature sympathise with my 
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angel countenance breathe 
smile of consolation. but it was all a dream; no eve soothe my 
sorrow nor share my thoughts; i was alone. i remember adam’s 
supplicate to his creator. but where was mine? he had abandoned me, 
and in the bitter of my heart i cursed him. 

“autumn pass thus. i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay 
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it 
had worn when i first beheld the wood and the lovely moon. yet i did 
not heed the bleak of the weather; i was better fitted by my 
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. but my chief 
delight were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay 
apparel of summer; when those desert me, i turn with more attention 
towards the cottagers. their happiness was not decrease by the 
absence of summer. they love and sympathise with one another; and 
their joys, depend on each other, were not interrupt by the 
casualty that took place around them. the more i saw of them, the 
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my 
heart yearn to be known and love by these amiable creatures; to see 
their sweet looks direct towards me with affection was the utmost 
limit of my ambition. i dare not think that they would turn them from 
me with disdain and horror. the poor that stop at their door were 
never driven away. i asked, it is true, for greater treasure than a 
little food or rest: i require kindness and sympathy; but i did not 
believe myself utterly unworthy of it. 

“the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the season had taken 
place since i awoke into life. my attention at this time was solely 
direct towards my plan of introduce myself into the cottage of my 
protectors. i revolve many projects, but that on which i finally 
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. 
i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideous of my 
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly 
beheld me. my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i 
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain 
the good will and mediate of the old de lacey, i might by his means 
be tolerate by my younger protectors. 

“one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strew the ground 
and diffuse cheerfulness, although it deny warmth, safie, agatha, 
and felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own 
desire, was left alone in the cottage. when his children had departed, 
he took up his guitar and play several mournful but sweet airs, more 
sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before. at first his 
countenance was illuminate with pleasure, but as he continued, 
thoughtful and sad succeeded; at length, lay aside the 
instrument, he sat absorb in reflection. 

“my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which 
would decide my hope or realise my fears. the servant were gone to a 
neighbouring fair. all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an 
excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceed to execute my plan, my 
limb fail me and i sank to the ground. again i rose, and exert 
all the firm of which i was master, remove the plank which i had 
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air revive 
me, and with renew determination i approach the door of their 
cottage. 

“i knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’ 

“i entered. ‘pardon this intrusion,’ said i; ‘i am 
a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you 
would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’ 

“‘enter,’ said de lacey, ‘and i will try in what 
manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are 
from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to 
procure food for you.’ 

“‘do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is 
warmth and rest only that i need.’ 

“i sat down, and a silence ensued. i knew that every minute was 
precious to me, yet i remain irresolute in what manner to commence 
the interview, when the old man address me. 

‘by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you 
french?’ 

“‘no; but i was educated by a france family and understand that 
language only. i am now go to claim the protection of some friends, 
whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.’ 

“‘are they germans?’ 

“‘no, they are french. but let us change the subject. i am an 
unfortunate and desert creature, i look around and i have no relation 
or friend upon earth. these amiable people to whom i go have never 
seen me and know little of me. i am full of fears, for if i fail 
there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.’ 

“‘do not despair. to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but 
the heart of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are 
full of brother love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes; 
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’ 

“‘they are kind—they are the most excellent creature in the world; 
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. i have good 
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree 
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice cloud their eyes, and where they 
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detest 
monster.’ 

“‘that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot 
you undeceive them?’ 

“‘i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i 
feel so many overwhelming terrors. i tender love these friends; i 
have, unknown to them, been for many month in the habit of daily 
kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and 
it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.’ 

“‘where do these friends reside?’ 

“‘near this spot.’ 

“the old man pause and then continued, ‘if you will unreserved 
confide to me the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in 
undeceive them. i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but 
there is something in your words which persuade me that you are 
sincere. i am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure 
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’ 

“‘excellent man! i thank you and accept your generous offer. you 
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid, 
i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow 
creatures.’ 

“‘heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal, for that can only 
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. i also am 
unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent; 
judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.’ 

“‘how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lip 
first have i heard the voice of kindness direct towards me; i shall 
be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assure me of success 
with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.’ 

“‘may i know the name and residence of those friends?’ 

“i paused. this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to 
rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. i struggle vain for 
firm sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroy all my 
remain strength; i sank on the chair and sob aloud. at that 
moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors. i had not a moment 
to lose, but seize the hand of the old man, i cried, ‘now is the 
time! save and protect me! you and your family are the friends whom i 
seek. do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’ 

“‘great god!’ exclaim the old man. ‘who are you?’ 

“at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and 
agatha entered. who can describe their horror and consternation on 
behold me? agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her 
friend, rush out of the cottage. felix dart forward, and with 
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knee i clung, in 
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violent 
with a stick. i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rend 
the antelope. but my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and 
i refrained. i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, 
overcome by pain and anguish, i quit the cottage, and in the general 
tumult escape unperceived to my hovel.” 





chapter 16 

“cursed, cursed creator! why did i live? why, in that instant, did i 
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wanton 
bestowed? i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my 
feelings were those of rage and revenge. i could with pleasure have 
destroy the cottage and its inhabitant and have glut myself with 
their shriek and misery. 

“when night came i quit my retreat and wander in the wood; and 
now, no long restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my 
anguish in fearful howlings. i was like a wild beast that had broken 
the toils, destroy the object that obstruct me and range 
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. oh! what a miserable 
night i passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare tree 
wave their branch above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird 
burst forth amidst the universal stillness. all, save i, were at rest 
or in enjoyment; i, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and 
finding myself unsympathised with, wish to tear up the trees, spread 
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoy 
the ruin. 

“but this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became 
fatigue with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in 
the sick impotence of despair. there was none among the myriad of men 
that exist who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness 
towards my enemies? no; from that moment i declared everlasting war 
against the species, and more than all, against him who had form me 
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. 

“the sun rose; i heard the voice of men and knew that it was 
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. accordingly i hid 
myself in some thick underwood, determine to devote the ensue hour 
to reflection on my situation. 

“the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restore me to some 
degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had pass at the 
cottage, i could not help believe that i had been too hasty in my 
conclusions. i had certainly act imprudently. it was apparent that 
my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a 
fool in have expose my person to the horror of his children. i 
ought to have familiarise the old de lacey to me, and by degree to 
have discover myself to the rest of his family, when they should have 
been prepared for my approach. but i did not believe my error to be 
irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolve to return to the 
cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my 
party. 

“these thought calm me, and in the afternoon i sank into a profound 
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visit by 
peaceful dreams. the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever 
acting before my eyes; the female were flying and the enrage felix 
tear me from his father’s feet. i awoke exhausted, and finding that 
it was already night, i crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in 
search of food. 

“when my hunger was appeased, i direct my steps towards the 
well-known path that conduct to the cottage. all there was at peace. 
i crept into my hovel and remain in silent expectation of the 
accustomed hour when the family arose. that hour passed, the sun 
mount high in the heavens, but the cottager did not appear. i 
tremble violently, apprehend some dreadful misfortune. the inside 
of the cottage was dark, and i heard no motion; i cannot describe the 
agony of this suspense. 

“presently two countrymen pass by, but pause near the cottage, they 
enter into conversation, use violent gesticulations; but i did not 
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country, 
which differ from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix 
approach with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that he had not 
quit the cottage that morning, and wait anxious to discover from 
his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances. 

“‘do you consider,’ said his companion to him, 
‘that you will be oblige to pay three months’ rent and to lose 
the produce of your garden? i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and 
i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your 
determination.’ 

“‘it is utterly useless,’ reply felix; ‘we can 
never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest 
danger, owe to the dreadful circumstance that i have related. my wife and 
my sister will never recover from their horror. i entreat you not to reason 
with me any more. take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this 
place.’ 

“felix tremble violent as he said this. he and his companion 
enter the cottage, in which they remain for a few minutes, and then 
departed. i never saw any of the family of de lacey more. 

“i continue for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of 
utter and stupid despair. my protector had departed and had broken 
the only link that held me to the world. for the first time the 
feelings of revenge and hatred fill my bosom, and i did not strive to 
control them, but allow myself to be borne away by the stream, i 
bent my mind towards injury and death. when i thought of my friends, 
of the mild voice of de lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the 
exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thought vanish and a gush of 
tear somewhat soothe me. but again when i reflect that they had 
spurn and desert me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to 
injure anything human, i turn my fury towards inanimate objects. as 
night advanced, i placed a variety of combustible around the cottage, 
and after have destroy every vestige of cultivation in the garden, 
i wait with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my 
operations. 

“as the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the wood and quick 
disperse the cloud that had loiter in the heavens; the blast tore 
along like a mighty avalanche and produce a kind of insanity in my 
spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. i light the 
dry branch of a tree and dance with fury around the devoted cottage, 
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon 
nearly touched. a part of its orb was at length hid, and i wave my 
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream i fire the straw, and heath, 
and bushes, which i had collected. the wind fan the fire, and the 
cottage was quick envelop by the flames, which clung to it and 
lick it with their forked and destroy tongues. 

“as soon as i was convinced that no assistance could save any part of 
the habitation, i quit the scene and sought for refuge in the woods. 

“and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps? i 
resolve to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hate 
and despised, every country must be equally horrible. at length the 
thought of you cross my mind. i learned from your papers that you 
were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness 
than to him who had given me life? among the lesson that felix had 
bestow upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from 
these the relative situation of the different country of the earth. 
you had mention geneva as the name of your native town, and towards 
this place i resolve to proceed. 

“but how was i to direct myself? i knew that i must travel in a 
southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my 
only guide. i did not know the name of the town that i was to pass 
through, nor could i ask information from a single human being; but i 
did not despair. from you only could i hope for succour, although 
towards you i felt no sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling, 
heartless creator! you had endow me with perception and passion 
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. 
but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i 
determined to seek that justice which i vain attempt to gain from 
any other being that wore the human form. 

“my travels were long and the suffering i endure intense. it was 
late in autumn when i quit the district where i had so long resided. 
i travelled only at night, fearful of encounter the visage of a 
human being. nature decay around me, and the sun became heatless; 
rain and snow pour around me; mighty river were frozen; the surface 
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found no shelter. oh, 
earth! how often did i imprecate curse on the cause of my being! the 
mild of my nature had fled, and all within me was turn to gall 
and bitterness. the near i approach to your habitation, the more 
deep did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindle in my heart. snow 
fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rest not. a few incident 
now and then direct me, and i possessed a map of the country; but i 
often wander wide from my path. the agony of my feelings allow me 
no respite; no incident occur from which my rage and misery could 
not extract its food; but a circumstance that happen when i arrive 
on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recover its warmth 
and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial 
manner the bitter and horror of my feelings. 

“i generally rest during the day and travelled only when i was 
secure by night from the view of man. one morning, however, finding 
that my path lay through a deep wood, i venture to continue my journey 
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring, 
cheer even me by the lovely of its sunshine and the balmy of 
the air. i felt emotion of gentle and pleasure, that had long 
appear dead, revive within me. half surprise by the novelty of 
these sensations, i allow myself to be borne away by them, and 
forget my solitude and deformity, dare to be happy. soft tear 
again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raise my humid eyes with 
thankful towards the blessed sun, which bestow such joy upon me. 

“i continue to wind among the path of the wood, until i came to its 
boundary, which was skirt by a deep and rapid river, into which many 
of the tree bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. 
here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard 
the sound of voices, that induce me to conceal myself under the shade 
of a cypress. i was scarcely hid when a young girl came running 
towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from 
someone in sport. she continue her course along the precipitous side 
of the river, when sudden her foot slipped, and she fell into the 
rapid stream. i rush from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, 
from the force of the current, save her and drag her to shore. she 
was senseless, and i endeavour by every means in my power to restore 
animation, when i was sudden interrupt by the approach of a rustic, 
who was probably the person from whom she had playful fled. on 
seeing me, he dart towards me, and tear the girl from my arms, 
hasten towards the deep parts of the wood. i follow speedily, i 
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aim a gun, 
which he carried, at my body and fired. i sank to the ground, and my 
injurer, with increase swiftness, escape into the wood. 

“this was then the reward of my benevolence! i had save a human being 
from destruction, and as a recompense i now writhe under the miserable 
pain of a wound which shatter the flesh and bone. the feelings of 
kindness and gentle which i had entertain but a few moments 
before gave place to hellish rage and gnash of teeth. inflamed by 
pain, i vow eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. but the 
agony of my wound overcame me; my pulse paused, and i fainted. 

“for some week i led a miserable life in the woods, endeavour to 
cure the wound which i had received. the ball had enter my shoulder, 
and i knew not whether it had remain there or pass through; at any 
rate i had no means of extract it. my suffering were augment 
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their 
infliction. my daily vow rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge, 
such as would alone compensate for the outrage and anguish i had 
endured. 

“after some week my wound healed, and i continue my journey. the 
labour i endure were no long to be alleviate by the bright sun or 
gentle breeze of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insult my 
desolate state and made me feel more painful that i was not made for 
the enjoyment of pleasure. 

“but my toils now drew near a close, and in two month from this time i 
reach the environs of geneva. 

“it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to a hiding-place among 
the field that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply 
to you. i was oppress by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to 
enjoy the gentle breeze of evening or the prospect of the sun setting 
behind the stupendous mountain of jura. 

“at this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection, 
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came 
running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportive of 
infancy. suddenly, as i gaze on him, an idea seize me that this 
little creature was unprejudiced and had live too short a time to have 
imbibe a horror of deformity. if, therefore, i could seize him and 
educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in 
this people earth. 

“urged by this impulse, i seize on the boy as he pass and drew him 
towards me. as soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hand before 
his eyes and utter a shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his 
face and said, ‘child, what is the meaning of this? i do not intend to 
hurt you; listen to me.’ 

“he struggle violently. ‘let me go,’ he cried; 
‘monster! ugly wretch! you wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. you 
are an ogre. let me go, or i will tell my papa.’ 

“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’ 

“‘hideous monster! let me go. my papa is a syndic—he is m. 
frankenstein—he will punish you. you dare not keep me.’ 

“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom i have 
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’ 

“the child still struggle and loaded me with epithet which carry 
despair to my heart; i grasp his throat to silence him, and in a 
moment he lay dead at my feet. 

“i gaze on my victim, and my heart swell with exultation and hellish 
triumph; clap my hands, i exclaimed, ‘i too can create desolation; 
my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and 
a thousand other misery shall torment and destroy him.’ 

“as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his 
breast. i took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. in spite 
of my malignity, it soften and attract me. for a few moments i 
gaze with delight on her dark eyes, fringe by deep lashes, and her 
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remember that i was 
for ever deprived of the delight that such beautiful creature could 
bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplate would, in 
regarding me, have change that air of divine benignity to one 
expressive of disgust and affright. 

“can you wonder that such thought transport me with rage? i only 
wonder that at that moment, instead of vent my sensation in 
exclamation and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the 
attempt to destroy them. 

“while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had 
committed the murder, and seek a more secluded hiding-place, i 
enter a barn which had appear to me to be empty. a woman was 
sleep on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her 
whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the 
lovely of youth and health. here, i thought, is one of those whose 
joy-imparting smile are bestow on all but me. and then i bent over 
her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would 
give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my 
beloved, awake!’ 

“the sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. should she 
indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? thus 
would she assured act if her darken eyes open and she beheld me. 
the thought was madness; it stir the fiend within me—not i, but 
she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever 
rob of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had 
its source in her; be hers the punishment! thanks to the lesson of 
felix and the sanguinary law of man, i had learned now to work 
mischief. i bent over her and placed the portrait secure in one of 
the fold of her dress. she move again, and i fled. 

“for some days i haunt the spot where these scene had taken place, 
sometimes wish to see you, sometimes resolve to quit the world and 
its misery for ever. at length i wander towards these mountains, 
and have range through their immense recesses, consume by a burning 
passion which you alone can gratify. we may not part until you have 
promise to comply with my requisition. i am alone and miserable; man 
will not associate with me; but one as deform and horrible as myself 
would not deny herself to me. my companion must be of the same species 
and have the same defects. this being you must create.” 





chapter 17 

the being finished speak and fixed his looks upon me in the 
expectation of a reply. but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to 
arrange my idea sufficient to understand the full extent of his 
proposition. he continued, 

“you must create a female for me with whom i can live in the 
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. this you alone 
can do, and i demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to 
concede.” 

the latter part of his tale had kindle anew in me the anger that had 
die away while he narrate his peaceful life among the cottagers, and 
as he said this i could no long suppress the rage that burn within 
me. 

“i do refuse it,” i replied; “and no torture shall ever extort a 
consent from me. you may render me the most miserable of men, but you 
shall never make me base in my own eyes. shall i create another like 
yourself, whose joint wicked might desolate the world. begone! i 
have answer you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.” 

“you are in the wrong,” reply the fiend; “and instead 
of threatening, i am content to reason with you. i am malicious because i 
am miserable. am i not shun and hate by all mankind? you, my creator, 
would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why i 
should pity man more than he pity me? you would not call it murder if you 
could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the 
work of your own hands. shall i respect man when he condemn me? let him 
live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would 
bestow every benefit upon him with tear of gratitude at his acceptance. 
but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barrier to our 
union. yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. i will 
revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and 
chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do i swear 
inextinguishable hatred. have a care; i will work at your destruction, nor 
finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of 
your birth.” 

a fiendish rage animate him as he said this; his face was wrinkle 
into contortion too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently 
he calm himself and proceeded— 

“i intended to reason. this passion is detriment to me, for you do 
not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. if any being felt 
emotion of benevolence towards me, i should return them a hundred and a 
hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake i would make peace with the 
whole kind! but i now indulge in dream of bliss that cannot be realised. 
what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand a creature of 
another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it 
is all that i can receive, and it shall content me. it is true, we shall be 
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more 
attach to one another. our lives will not be happy, but they will be 
harmless and free from the misery i now feel. oh! my creator, make me 
happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! let me see that i 
excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my 
request!” 

i was moved. i shudder when i thought of the possible consequence 
of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument. 
his tale and the feelings he now express prove him to be a creature 
of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion 
of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? he saw my change of 
feeling and continued, 

“if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see 
us again; i will go to the vast wild of south america. my food is not 
that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; 
acorn and berry afford me sufficient nourishment. my companion will 
be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare. 
we shall make our bed of dry leaves; the sun will shine on us as on 
man and will ripen our food. the picture i present to you is peaceful 
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the 
wanton of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been towards me, 
i now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment 
and persuade you to promise what i so ardent desire.” 

“you propose,” reply i, “to fly from the habitation of 
man, to dwell in those wild where the beast of the field will be your 
only companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, 
persevere in this exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and 
you will meet with their detestation; your evil passion will be renewed, 
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction. 
this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.” 

“how inconstant are your feelings! but a moment ago you were move by 
my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints? 
i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that 
with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and 
dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. my evil passion 
will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy! my life will flow quiet 
away, and in my die moments i shall not curse my maker.” 

his words had a strange effect upon me. i compassionate him and 
sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when i look upon him, when 
i saw the filthy mass that move and talked, my heart sicken and my 
feelings were alter to those of horror and hatred. i try to stifle 
these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i 
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which 
was yet in my power to bestow. 

“you swear,” i said, “to be harmless; but have you not 
already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust 
you? may not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by 
afford a wide scope for your revenge?” 

“how is this? i must not be trifle with, and i demand an answer. if 
i have no tie and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; 
the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall 
become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. my vice 
are the children of a forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtue will 
necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal. i shall feel 
the affection of a sensitive being and become link to the chain of 
existence and event from which i am now excluded.” 

i pause some time to reflect on all he had related and the various 
argument which he had employed. i thought of the promise of virtue which 
he had display on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight 
of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protector had 
manifest towards him. his power and threat were not omit in my 
calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glacier 
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridge of inaccessible precipice 
was a being possess faculty it would be vain to cope with. after a 
long pause of reflection i conclude that the justice due both to him and 
my fellow creature demand of me that i should comply with his request. 
turning to him, therefore, i said, 

“i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever, 
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall 
deliver into your hand a female who will accompany you in your exile.” 

“i swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of 
heaven, and by the fire of love that burn my heart, that if you grant my 
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. depart to your 
home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with 
unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall 
appear.” 

saying this, he sudden quit me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in 
my sentiments. i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than 
the flight of an eagle, and quick lost among the undulation of the 
sea of ice. 

his tale had occupy the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of 
the horizon when he departed. i knew that i ought to hasten my descent 
towards the valley, as i should soon be encompass in darkness; but my 
heart was heavy, and my steps slow. the labour of winding among the 
little path of the mountain and fix my feet firm as i advanced 
perplexed me, occupy as i was by the emotion which the occurrence 
of the day had produced. night was far advanced when i came to the 
halfway resting-place and seat myself beside the fountain. the stars 
shone at interval as the cloud pass from over them; the dark pine 
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the 
ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stir strange 
thought within me. i wept bitterly, and clasp my hand in agony, i 
exclaimed, “oh! stars and cloud and winds, ye are all about to mock 
me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as 
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.” 

these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you 
how the eternal twinkling of the stars weigh upon me and how i 
listen to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its 
way to consume me. 

morning dawn before i arrive at the village of chamounix; i took no 
rest, but return immediately to geneva. even in my own heart i could 
give no expression to my sensations—they weigh on me with a 
mountain’s weight and their excess destroy my agony beneath them. 
thus i return home, and enter the house, present myself to the 
family. my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i 
answer no question, scarcely did i speak. i felt as if i were placed 
under a ban—as if i had no right to claim their sympathies—as if 
never more might i enjoy companionship with them. yet even thus i 
love them to adoration; and to save them, i resolve to dedicate 
myself to my most abhor task. the prospect of such an occupation 
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, 
and that thought only had to me the reality of life. 





chapter 18 

day after day, week after week, pass away on my return to geneva; and 
i could not collect the courage to recommence my work. i fear the 
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my 
repugnance to the task which was enjoin me. i found that i could not 
compose a female without again devote several month to profound 
study and laborious disquisition. i had heard of some discovery 
have been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was 
material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtain my 
father’s consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to 
every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an 
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to 
me. a change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had 
hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when 
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. my 
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turn his thought 
towards the best method of eradicate the remains of my melancholy, 
which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devour 
black overcast the approach sunshine. at these moments i took 
refuge in the most perfect solitude. i pass whole days on the lake 
alone in a little boat, watch the cloud and listen to the 
ripple of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and 
bright sun seldom fail to restore me to some degree of composure, and 
on my return i met the salutation of my friends with a ready smile 
and a more cheerful heart. 

it was after my return from one of these ramble that my father, 
calling me aside, thus address me, 

“i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resume your former 
pleasure and seem to be return to yourself. and yet you are still 
unhappy and still avoid our society. for some time i was lost in 
conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, 
and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it. reserve on such a 
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.” 

i tremble violent at his exordium, and my father continued— 

“i confess, my son, that i have always look forward to your 
marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the 
stay of my decline years. you were attach to each other from your 
earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in disposition and 
tastes, entire suit to one another. but so blind is the experience of 
man that what i conceive to be the best assistant to my plan may have 
entire destroy it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any 
wish that she might become your wife. nay, you may have met with another 
whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to 
elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear 
to feel.” 

“my dear father, reassure yourself. i love my cousin tender and 
sincerely. i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my 
warmest admiration and affection. my future hope and prospects are 
entire bound up in the expectation of our union.” 

“the expression of your sentiment of this subject, my dear victor, 
give me more pleasure than i have for some time experienced. if you 
feel thus, we shall assured be happy, however present event may cast 
a gloom over us. but it is this gloom which appear to have taken so 
strong a hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate. tell me, 
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnise of the 
marriage. we have been unfortunate, and recent event have drawn us 
from that everyday tranquill befitting my years and infirmities. you 
are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent 
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future 
plan of honour and utility that you may have formed. do not suppose, 
however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on 
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. interpret my words 
with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and 
sincerity.” 

i listen to my father in silence and remain for some time incapable 
of offering any reply. i revolve rapid in my mind a multitude of 
thought and endeavour to arrive at some conclusion. alas! to me 
the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and 
dismay. i was bound by a solemn promise which i had not yet fulfill 
and dare not break, or if i did, what manifold misery might not 
impend over me and my devoted family! could i enter into a festival 
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the 
ground? i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with 
his mate before i allow myself to enjoy the delight of a union from 
which i expect peace. 

i remember also the necessity impose upon me of either journey to 
england or enter into a long correspondence with those philosopher 
of that country whose knowledge and discovery were of indispensable 
use to me in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtain 
the desire intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i 
had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my 
loathsome task in my father’s house while in habit of familiar 
intercourse with those i loved. i knew that a thousand fearful 
accident might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to 
thrill all connected with me with horror. i was aware also that i 
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the 
harrowing sensation that would possess me during the progress of my 
unearthly occupation. i must absent myself from all i love while thus 
employed. once commenced, it would quick be achieved, and i might be 
restore to my family in peace and happiness. my promise fulfilled, 
the monster would depart for ever. or (so my fond fancy imaged) some 
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my 
slavery for ever. 

these feelings dictate my answer to my father. i express a wish to 
visit england, but conceal the true reason of this request, i 
clothe my desire under a guise which excited no suspicion, while i 
urge my desire with an earnest that easily induce my father to 
comply. after so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that 
resemble madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find 
that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey, 
and he hope that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my 
return, have restore me entire to myself. 

the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or 
at most a year, was the period contemplated. one paternal kind 
precaution he had taken to ensure my have a companion. without 
previous communicate with me, he had, in concert with elizabeth, 
arrange that clerval should join me at strasburgh. this interfere 
with the solitude i covet for the prosecution of my task; yet at the 
commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be 
an impediment, and truly i rejoice that thus i should be save many 
hour of lonely, maddening reflection. nay, henry might stand between 
me and the intrusion of my foe. if i were alone, would he not at times 
force his abhor presence on me to remind me of my task or to 
contemplate its progress? 

to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union 
with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. my father’s 
age render him extremely averse to delay. for myself, there was one 
reward i promise myself from my detest toils—one consolation for my 
unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when, 
enfranchise from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and 
forget the past in my union with her. 

i now made arrangement for my journey, but one feeling haunt me 
which fill me with fear and agitation. during my absence i should 
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and 
unprotected from his attacks, exasperate as he might be by my 
departure. but he had promise to follow me wherever i might go, and 
would he not accompany me to england? this imagination was dreadful in 
itself, but soothe inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. 
i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of 
this might happen. but through the whole period during which i was the 
slave of my creature i allow myself to be govern by the impulse of 
the moment; and my present sensation strong intimate that the fiend 
would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his 
machinations. 

it was in the latter end of september that i again quit my native 
country. my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth 
therefore acquiesced, but she was fill with disquiet at the idea of 
my suffering, away from her, the inroad of misery and grief. it had 
been her care which provided me a companion in clerval—and yet a man 
is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s 
sedulous attention. she long to bid me hasten my return; a thousand 
conflict emotion render her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent 
farewell. 

i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly 
knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around. 
i remember only, and it was with a bitter anguish that i reflect on 
it, to order that my chemical instrument should be packed to go with 
me. fill with dreary imaginations, i pass through many beautiful 
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. i could 
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy 
me whilst they endured. 

after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traverse 
many leagues, i arrive at strasburgh, where i wait two days for 
clerval. he came. alas, how great was the contrast between us! he 
was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauty of the 
setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new 
day. he pointed out to me the shift colours of the landscape and 
the appearances of the sky. “this is what it is to live,” he cried; 
“now i enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are 
you despond and sorrowful!” in truth, i was occupy by gloomy 
thought and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden 
sunrise reflect in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more 
amuse with the journal of clerval, who observe the scenery with an 
eye of feeling and delight, than in listen to my reflections. i, a 
miserable wretch, haunt by a curse that shut up every avenue to 
enjoyment. 

we had agree to descend the rhine in a boat from strasburgh to 
rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london. during this 
voyage we pass many willowy island and saw several beautiful towns. 
we stay a day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from 
strasburgh, arrive at mainz. the course of the rhine below mainz 
become much more picturesque. the river descend rapid and wind 
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. we saw 
many ruin castle standing on the edge of precipices, surround by 
black woods, high and inaccessible. this part of the rhine, indeed, 
presents a singularly variegated landscape. in one spot you view 
rugged hills, ruin castle overlook tremendous precipices, with 
the dark rhine rush beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, 
flourish vineyard with green slope bank and a meander river 
and populous town occupy the scene. 

we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourer 
as we glide down the stream. even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits 
continual agitate by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased. i lay at the 
bottom of the boat, and as i gaze on the cloudless blue sky, i seem to 
drink in a tranquill to which i had long been a stranger. and if these 
were my sensations, who can describe those of henry? he felt as if he had 
been transport to fairy-land and enjoy a happiness seldom taste by 
man. “i have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scene 
of my own country; i have visit the lake of lucerne and uri, where the 
snowy mountain descend almost perpendicular to the water, casting black 
and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance 
were it not for the most verdant island that relieve the eye by their gay 
appearance; i have seen this lake agitate by a tempest, when the wind tore 
up whirlwind of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be 
on the great ocean; and the wave dash with fury the base of the mountain, 
where the priest and his mistress were overwhelm by an avalanche and 
where their die voice are still said to be heard amid the pause of the 
nightly wind; i have seen the mountain of la valais, and the pay de vaud; 
but this country, victor, please me more than all those wonders. the 
mountain of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a 
charm in the bank of this divine river that i never before saw equalled. 
look at that castle which overhang yon precipice; and that also on the 
island, almost conceal amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now 
that group of labourer coming from among their vines; and that village 
half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, surely the spirit that inhabit 
and guard this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who 
pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peak of the mountain of 
our own country.” 

clerval! beloved friend! even now it delight me to record your words and 
to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. he was a 
being form in the “very poetry of nature.” his wild and 
enthusiast imagination was chasten by the sensibility of his heart. his 
soul overflow with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that 
devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only 
in the imagination. but even human sympathies were not sufficient to 
satisfy his eager mind. the scenery of external nature, which other regard 
only with admiration, he love with ardour:— 

——the sound cataract 
haunt him like a passion: the tall rock, 
the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, 
their colours and their forms, were then to him 
an appetite; a feeling, and a love, 
that had no need of a remote charm, 
by thought supplied, or any interest 
unborrow’d from the eye. 

[wordsworth’s “tintern abbey”.] 



and where do he now exist? is this gentle and lovely being lost 
for ever? has this mind, so replete with ideas, imagination fanciful 
and magnificent, which form a world, whose existence depend on the 
life of its creator;—has this mind perished? do it now only exist 
in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divine wrought, and 
beam with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visit and 
console your unhappy friend. 

pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight 
tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart, 
overflow with the anguish which his remembrance creates. i will 
proceed with my tale. 

beyond cologne we descended to the plain of holland; and we resolve to 
post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of 
the river was too gentle to aid us. 

our journey here lost the interest arise from beautiful scenery, but we 
arrive in a few days at rotterdam, whence we proceed by sea to england. 
it was on a clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw 
the white cliff of britain. the bank of the thames present a new scene; 
they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the 
remembrance of some story. we saw tilbury fort and remember the spain 
armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—places which i had heard 
of even in my country. 

at length we saw the numerous steeple of london, st. paul’s towering 
above all, and the tower famed in english history. 





chapter 19 

london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several 
month in this wonderful and celebrated city. clerval desire the 
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourish at this 
time, but this was with me a secondary object; i was principally 
occupy with the means of obtain the information necessary for the 
completion of my promise and quick avail myself of the letters of 
introduction that i had brought with me, address to the most 
distinguished natural philosophers. 

if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness, 
it would have afford me inexpressible pleasure. but a blight had 
come over my existence, and i only visit these people for the sake of 
the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest 
was so terribly profound. company was irksome to me; when alone, i 
could fill my mind with the sight of heaven and earth; the voice of 
henry soothe me, and i could thus cheat myself into a transitory 
peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyous face brought back despair to 
my heart. i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my 
fellow men; this barrier was seal with the blood of william and 
justine, and to reflect on the event connected with those name fill 
my soul with anguish. 

but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive 
and anxious to gain experience and instruction. the difference of 
manners which he observe was to him an inexhaustible source of 
instruction and amusement. he was also pursue an object he had long 
had in view. his design was to visit india, in the belief that he had 
in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the view he had 
taken of its society, the means of material assist the progress of 
europe colonize and trade. in britain only could he further the 
execution of his plan. he was for ever busy, and the only check to his 
enjoyment was my sorrowful and dejected mind. i try to conceal this 
as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasure 
natural to one who was enter on a new scene of life, undisturbed by 
any care or bitter recollection. i often refuse to accompany him, 
allege another engagement, that i might remain alone. i now also 
began to collect the material necessary for my new creation, and this 
was to me like the torture of single drops of water continual fall 
on the head. every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme 
anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it cause my lip 
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate. 

after passing some month in london, we received a letter from a person in 
scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva. he mention the 
beauty of his native country and ask us if those were not sufficient 
allurement to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth, 
where he resided. clerval eager desire to accept this invitation, and i, 
although i abhor society, wish to view again mountain and stream and 
all the wondrous works with which nature adorn her chosen dwelling-places. 

we had arrive in england at the beginning of october, and it was now 
february. we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the 
north at the expiration of another month. in this expedition we did not 
intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford, 
matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolve to arrive at the completion of 
this tour about the end of july. i packed up my chemical instrument and 
the material i had collected, resolve to finish my labour in some 
obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland. 

we quit london on the 27th of march and remain a few days at 
windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. this was a new scene to us 
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herd of 
stately deer were all novelty to us. 

from thence we proceed to oxford. as we enter this city, our mind 
were fill with the remembrance of the event that had been transact 
there more than a century and a half before. it was here that charles 
i. had collected his forces. this city had remain faithful to him, 
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of 
parliament and liberty. the memory of that unfortunate king and his 
companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and 
son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they 
might be supposed to have inhabited. the spirit of elder days found a 
dwelling here, and we delight to trace its footsteps. if these 
feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of 
the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration. 
the college are ancient and picturesque; the street are almost 
magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flow beside it through meadow 
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, 
which reflect its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and 
domes, embosomed among age trees. 

i enjoy this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embitter both by the 
memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. i was form 
for peaceful happiness. during my youthful days discontent never 
visit my mind, and if i was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what 
is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in 
the production of man could always interest my heart and communicate 
elasticity to my spirits. but i am a blasted tree; the bolt has 
enter my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what 
i shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wreck humanity, 
pitiable to other and intolerable to myself. 

we pass a considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs 
and endeavour to identify every spot which might relate to the most 
animate epoch of english history. our little voyages of discovery 
were often prolonged by the successive object that present 
themselves. we visit the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the 
field on which that patriot fell. for a moment my soul was elevated 
from its debase and miserable fear to contemplate the divine idea 
of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sight were the monument 
and the remembrancers. for an instant i dare to shake off my chain 
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten 
into my flesh, and i sank again, tremble and hopeless, into my 
miserable self. 

we left oxford with regret and proceed to matlock, which was our next 
place of rest. the country in the neighbourhood of this village 
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but 
everything is on a lower scale, and the green hill want the crown of 
distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountain of my 
native country. we visit the wondrous cave and the little cabinet 
of natural history, where the curiosity are disposed in the same 
manner as in the collection at servox and chamounix. the latter name 
made me tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hasten to quit 
matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated. 

from derby, still journey northwards, we pass two month in 
cumberland and westmorland. i could now almost fancy myself among the 
switzerland mountains. the little patch of snow which yet linger on the 
northern side of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the 
rocky stream were all familiar and dear sight to me. here also we 
made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into 
happiness. the delight of clerval was proportion greater than 
mine; his mind expand in the company of men of talent, and he found 
in his own nature greater capacity and resources than he could have 
imagine himself to have possessed while he associate with his 
inferiors. “i could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among 
these mountain i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.” 

but he found that a traveller’s life is one that include much pain 
amidst its enjoyments. his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and 
when he begin to sink into repose, he find himself oblige to quit 
that on which he rest in pleasure for something new, which again 
engage his attention, and which also he forsake for other novelties. 

we had scarcely visit the various lake of cumberland and westmorland 
and conceive an affection for some of the inhabitant when the period 
of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them 
to travel on. for my own part i was not sorry. i had now neglect my 
promise for some time, and i fear the effects of the dæmon’s 
disappointment. he might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance 
on my relatives. this idea pursue me and torment me at every moment 
from which i might otherwise have snatch repose and peace. i wait 
for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delay i was 
miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrive and i 
saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dare to 
read and ascertain my fate. sometimes i thought that the fiend 
follow me and might expedite my remiss by murder my companion. 
when these thought possessed me, i would not quit henry for a moment, 
but follow him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancy rage of 
his destroyer. i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the 
consciousness of which haunt me. i was guiltless, but i had indeed 
drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime. 

i visit edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might 
have interested the most unfortunate being. clerval did not like it so well 
as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him. 
but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic 
castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthur’s 
seat, st. bernard’s well, and the pentland hills, compensate him for 
the change and fill him with cheerful and admiration. but i was 
impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey. 

we left edinburgh in a week, passing through coupar, st. andrew’s, and 
along the bank of the tay, to perth, where our friend expect us. 
but i was in no mood to laugh and talk with stranger or enter into 
their feelings or plan with the good humour expect from a guest; and 
accordingly i told clerval that i wish to make the tour of scotland 
alone. “do you,” said i, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our 
rendezvous. i may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with 
my motions, i entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short 
time; and when i return, i hope it will be with a lighter heart, more 
congenial to your own temper.” 

henry wish to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, cease to 
remonstrate. he entreat me to write often. “i had rather be with 
you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch 
people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return, 
that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in 
your absence.” 

have part from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of 
scotland and finish my work in solitude. i did not doubt but that the 
monster follow me and would discover himself to me when i should have 
finished, that he might receive his companion. 

with this resolution i traverse the northern highlands and fixed on one of 
the remotest of the orkney as the scene of my labours. it was a place 
fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high side were 
continual beaten upon by the waves. the soil was barren, scarcely 
afford pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its 
inhabitants, which consist of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limb 
gave token of their miserable fare. vegetable and bread, when they 
indulge in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procure from 
the mainland, which was about five mile distant. 

on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of 
these was vacant when i arrived. this i hired. it contained but two 
rooms, and these exhibit all the squalid of the most miserable 
penury. the thatch had fallen in, the wall were unplastered, and the 
door was off its hinges. i ordered it to be repaired, bought some 
furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have 
occasion some surprise had not all the senses of the cottager been 
benumbed by want and squalid poverty. as it was, i live ungazed at 
and unmolested, hardly thank for the pittance of food and clothes 
which i gave, so much do suffering blunt even the coarsest sensation 
of men. 

in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, 
when the weather permitted, i walk on the stony beach of the sea to 
listen to the wave as they roar and dashed at my feet. it was a 
monotonous yet ever-changing scene. i thought of switzerland; it was 
far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. its hill 
are cover with vines, and its cottage are scattered thick in the 
plains. its fair lake reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when 
trouble by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively 
infant when compare to the roaring of the giant ocean. 

in this manner i distribute my occupation when i first arrived, but 
as i proceed in my labour, it became every day more horrible and 
irksome to me. sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my 
laboratory for several days, and at other times i toil day and night 
in order to complete my work. it was, indeed, a filthy process in 
which i was engaged. during my first experiment, a kind of 
enthusiast frenzy had blind me to the horror of my employment; my 
mind was intent fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes 
were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now i went to it in 
cold blood, and my heart often sicken at the work of my hands. 

thus situated, employ in the most detest occupation, immerse in 
a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from 
the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i 
grew restless and nervous. every moment i fear to meet my 
persecutor. sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fear 
to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much 
dread to behold. i fear to wander from the sight of my fellow 
creature lest when alone he should come to claim his companion. 

in the mean time i work on, and my labour was already considerably 
advanced. i look towards its completion with a tremulous and eager 
hope, which i dare not trust myself to question but which was 
intermixe with obscure foreboding of evil that made my heart sicken 
in my bosom. 





chapter 20 

i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just 
rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i 
remain idle, in a pause of consideration of whether i should leave my 
labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention 
to it. as i sat, a train of reflection occur to me which led me to 
consider the effects of what i was now doing. three years before, i was 
engaged in the same manner and had create a fiend whose unparalleled 
barbarous had desolate my heart and fill it for ever with the bitterest 
remorse. i was now about to form another being of whose disposition i was 
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her 
mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. he had 
sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she 
had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and 
reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her 
creation. they might even hate each other; the creature who already live 
loathe his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence 
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? she also might turn 
with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him, 
and he be again alone, exasperate by the fresh provocation of being 
desert by one of his own species. 

even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, 
yet one of the first result of those sympathies for which the dæmon 
thirst would be children, and a race of devil would be propagate upon 
the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a 
condition precarious and full of terror. had i right, for my own benefit, 
to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? i had before been move 
by the sophism of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by 
his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wicked of my 
promise burst upon me; i shudder to think that future age might curse me 
as their pest, whose selfish had not hesitate to buy its own peace at 
the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race. 

i tremble and my heart fail within me, when, on look up, i saw by 
the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. a ghastly grin 
wrinkle his lip as he gaze on me, where i sat fulfill the task 
which he had allot to me. yes, he had follow me in my travels; he 
had loiter in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide 
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the 
fulfilment of my promise. 

as i look on him, his countenance express the utmost extent of 
malice and treachery. i thought with a sensation of madness on my 
promise of create another like to him, and tremble with passion, 
tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged. the wretch saw me 
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depend for 
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. 

i left the room, and lock the door, made a solemn vow in my own 
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with tremble steps, i 
sought my own apartment. i was alone; none were near me to dissipate 
the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most 
terrible reveries. 

several hour passed, and i remain near my window gaze on the sea; 
it was almost motionless, for the wind were hushed, and all nature 
repose under the eye of the quiet moon. a few fishing vessel alone 
speck the water, and now and then the gentle breeze waft the sound 
of voice as the fishermen call to one another. i felt the silence, 
although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear 
was sudden arrest by the paddle of oar near the shore, and a 
person landed close to my house. 

in a few minutes after, i heard the creak of my door, as if some one 
endeavour to open it softly. i tremble from head to foot; i felt a 
presentiment of who it was and wish to rouse one of the peasant who 
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation 
of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain 
endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. 

presently i heard the sound of footstep along the passage; the door 
opened, and the wretch whom i dread appeared. shut the door, he 
approach me and said in a smother voice, 

“you have destroy the work which you began; what is it that you 
intend? do you dare to break your promise? i have endure toil and misery; 
i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shore of the rhine, among 
its willow island and over the summit of its hills. i have dwelt many 
month in the heath of england and among the deserts of scotland. i have 
endure incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my 
hopes?” 

“begone! i do break my promise; never will i create another like 
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.” 

“slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have prove yourself 
unworthy of my condescension. remember that i have power; you believe 
yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of 
day will be hateful to you. you are my creator, but i am your master; 
obey!” 

“the hour of my irresolute is past, and the period of your power is 
arrived. your threat cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but 
they confirm me in a determination of not create you a companion in 
vice. shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon whose 
delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! i am firm, and your 
words will only exasperate my rage.” 

the monster saw my determination in my face and gnash his teeth in the 
impotence of anger. “shall each man,” cry he, “find a 
wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone? i had 
feelings of affection, and they were requite by detest and scorn. 
man! you may hate, but beware! your hour will pass in dread and misery, 
and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for 
ever. are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my 
wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but revenge 
remains—revenge, henceforth dear than light or food! i may die, but 
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gaze on your 
misery. beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful. i will watch with 
the wiliness of a snake, that i may sting with its venom. man, you shall 
repent of the injury you inflict.” 

“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sound of malice. 
i have declared my resolution to you, and i am no coward to bend 
beneath words. leave me; i am inexorable.” 

“it is well. i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your 
wedding-night.” 

i start forward and exclaimed, “villain! before you sign my 
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.” 

i would have seize him, but he elude me and quit the house with 
precipitation. in a few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot 
across the waters with an arrowy swift and was soon lost amidst the 
waves. 

all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. i burn with rage to 
pursue the murder of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. i 
walk up and down my room hasty and perturbed, while my imagination 
conjure up a thousand image to torment and sting me. why had i not 
follow him and closed with him in mortal strife? but i had suffer him 
to depart, and he had direct his course towards the mainland. i shudder 
to think who might be the next victim sacrifice to his insatiate revenge. 
and then i thought again of his words—“_i will be with you on 
your wedding-night._” that, then, was the period fixed for the 
fulfilment of my destiny. in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and 
extinguish his malice. the prospect did not move me to fear; yet when i 
thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tear and endless sorrow, when she 
should find her lover so barbarous snatch from her, tears, the first i 
had shed for many months, stream from my eyes, and i resolve not to fall 
before my enemy without a bitter struggle. 

the night pass away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became 
calmer, if it may be call calm when the violence of rage sink into 
the depths of despair. i left the house, the horrid scene of the last 
night’s contention, and walk on the beach of the sea, which i 
almost regard as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow 
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. i 
desire that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, 
but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. if i returned, it was to 
be sacrifice or to see those whom i most love die under the grasp of a 
dæmon whom i had myself created. 

i walk about the isle like a restless spectre, separate from all it 
love and miserable in the separation. when it became noon, and the 
sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpower by a deep 
sleep. i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves 
were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watch and misery. the sleep 
into which i now sank refresh me; and when i awoke, i again felt as 
if i belong to a race of human being like myself, and i began to 
reflect upon what had pass with greater composure; yet still the 
words of the fiend rang in my ear like a death-knell; they appear 
like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality. 

the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my 
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a 
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; 
it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreat me to 
join him. he said that he was wearing away his time fruitless where 
he was, that letters from the friends he had form in london desire 
his return to complete the negotiation they had enter into for his 
indian enterprise. he could not any long delay his departure; but as 
his journey to london might be followed, even soon than he now 
conjectured, by his long voyage, he entreat me to bestow as much of 
my society on him as i could spare. he besought me, therefore, to 
leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed 
southwards together. this letter in a degree recall me to life, and 
i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days. 

yet, before i departed, there was a task to perform, on which i shudder 
to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i 
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must 
handle those utensil the sight of which was sickening to me. the next 
morning, at daybreak, i summon sufficient courage and unlock the door 
of my laboratory. the remains of the half-finished creature, whom i had 
destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had 
mangle the living flesh of a human being. i pause to collect myself and 
then enter the chamber. with tremble hand i convey the instrument 
out of the room, but i reflect that i ought not to leave the relics of my 
work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly 
put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and lay them 
up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the 
meantime i sat upon the beach, employ in clean and arrange my 
chemical apparatus. 

nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place 
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. i had 
before regard my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with 
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if a film 
had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw 
clearly. the idea of renew my labour did not for one instant occur 
to me; the threat i had heard weigh on my thoughts, but i did not 
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. i had resolve in 
my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made 
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i 
banish from my mind every thought that could lead to a different 
conclusion. 

between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putt my 
basket aboard a little skiff, sail out about four mile from the shore. 
the scene was perfectly solitary; a few boat were return towards land, 
but i sail away from them. i felt as if i was about the commission of a 
dreadful crime and avoid with shudder anxiety any encounter with my 
fellow creatures. at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was 
sudden overspread by a thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of 
dark and cast my basket into the sea; i listen to the gurgle sound 
as it sank and then sail away from the spot. the sky became clouded, but 
the air was pure, although chill by the northeast breeze that was then 
rising. but it refresh me and fill me with such agreeable sensation 
that i resolve to prolong my stay on the water, and fix the rudder in a 
direct position, stretch myself at the bottom of the boat. cloud hid the 
moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its 
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lull me, and in a short time i 
slept soundly. 

i do not know how long i remain in this situation, but when i awoke i 
found that the sun had already mount considerably. the wind was high, and 
the wave continual threaten the safety of my little skiff. i found 
that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from 
which i had embarked. i endeavour to change my course but quick found 
that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly fill with 
water. thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. i 
confess that i felt a few sensation of terror. i had no compass with me 
and was so slender acquaint with the geography of this part of the 
world that the sun was of little benefit to me. i might be driven into the 
wide atlantic and feel all the torture of starvation or be swallow up in 
the immeasurable waters that roar and buffet around me. i had already 
been out many hour and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to 
my other sufferings. i look on the heavens, which were cover by cloud 
that flew before the wind, only to be replace by others; i look upon the 
sea; it was to be my grave. “fiend,” i exclaimed, “your 
task is already fulfilled!” i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and 
of clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his 
sanguinary and merciless passions. this idea plunge me into a reverie so 
despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of 
close before me for ever, i shudder to reflect on it. 

some hour pass thus; but by degrees, as the sun decline towards the 
horizon, the wind die away into a gentle breeze and the sea became 
free from breakers. but these gave place to a heavy swell; i felt sick 
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when sudden i saw a line of high 
land towards the south. 

almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endure 
for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rush like a flood of 
warm joy to my heart, and tear gush from my eyes. 

how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have 
of life even in the excess of misery! i construct another sail with a 
part of my dress and eager steer my course towards the land. it had a 
wild and rocky appearance, but as i approach near i easily perceive 
the trace of cultivation. i saw vessel near the shore and found myself 
sudden transport back to the neighbourhood of civilise man. i 
careful trace the winding of the land and hail a steeple which i at 
length saw issue from behind a small promontory. as i was in a state of 
extreme debility, i resolve to sail directly towards the town, as a place 
where i could most easily procure nourishment. fortunately i had money with 
me. as i turn the promontory i perceive a small neat town and a good 
harbour, which i entered, my heart bound with joy at my unexpected 
escape. 

as i was occupy in fix the boat and arrange the sails, several 
people crowded towards the spot. they seem much surprise at my 
appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whisper 
together with gesture that at any other time might have produce in me 
a slight sensation of alarm. as it was, i merely remark that they 
spoke english, and i therefore address them in that language. “my 
good friends,” said i, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of 
this town and inform me where i am?” 

“you will know that soon enough,” reply a man with a hoarse voice. 
“maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste, 
but you will not be consult as to your quarters, i promise you.” 

i was exceedingly surprise on receiving so rude an answer from a 
stranger, and i was also disconcert on perceive the frown and 
angry countenance of his companions. “why do you answer me so 
roughly?” i replied. “surely it is not the custom of englishmen to 
receive stranger so inhospitably.” 

“i do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the 
english may be, but it is the custom of the ireland to hate villains.” 

while this strange dialogue continued, i perceive the crowd rapid 
increase. their face express a mixture of curiosity and anger, which 
annoy and in some degree alarm me. i inquire the way to the inn, but 
no one replied. i then move forward, and a murmur sound arose from the 
crowd as they follow and surround me, when an ill-looking man 
approach tap me on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must 
follow me to mr. kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.” 

“who is mr. kirwin? why am i to give an account of myself? is not 
this a free country?” 

“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is a magistrate, 
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was 
found murder here last night.” 

this answer startle me, but i presently recover myself. i was innocent; 
that could easily be proved; accordingly i follow my conductor in silence 
and was led to one of the best house in the town. i was ready to sink from 
fatigue and hunger, but being surround by a crowd, i thought it politic 
to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construe into 
apprehension or conscious guilt. little did i then expect the calamity that 
was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair 
all fear of ignominy or death. 

i must pause here, for it require all my fortitude to recall the memory of 
the frightful event which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my 
recollection. 





chapter 21 

i was soon introduce into the presence of the magistrate, an old 
benevolent man with calm and mild manners. he look upon me, however, 
with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors, 
he ask who appear as witness on this occasion. 

about half a dozen men came forward; and, one being select by the 
magistrate, he depose that he had been out fishing the night before with 
his son and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock, 
they observe a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in 
for port. it was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did 
not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about 
two mile below. he walk on first, carry a part of the fishing tackle, 
and his companion follow him at some distance. as he was proceeding 
along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his 
length on the ground. his companion came up to assist him, and by the 
light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man, 
who was to all appearance dead. their first supposition was that it was the 
corpse of some person who had been drown and was thrown on shore by the 
waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even 
that the body was not then cold. they instantly carry it to the cottage 
of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it 
to life. it appear to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty 
years of age. he had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of 
any violence except the black mark of finger on his neck. 

the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but 
when the mark of the finger was mention i remember the murder of 
my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limb trembled, and a 
mist came over my eyes, which oblige me to lean on a chair for 
support. the magistrate observe me with a keen eye and of course drew 
an unfavourable augury from my manner. 

the son confirmed his father’s account, but when daniel nugent was 
call he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he 
saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore; 
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same 
boat in which i had just landed. 

a woman depose that she live near the beach and was standing at the door 
of her cottage, wait for the return of the fishermen, about an hour 
before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with 
only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse 
was afterwards found. 

another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen have brought the 
body into her house; it was not cold. they put it into a bed and 
rub it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was 
quite gone. 

several other men were examine concerning my landing, and they agree 
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it 
was very probable that i had beaten about for many hour and had been 
oblige to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed. 
besides, they observe that it appear that i had brought the body 
from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know 
the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance 
of the town of —— from the place where i had deposit the corpse. 

mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desire that i should be taken into 
the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observe what 
effect the sight of it would produce upon me. this idea was probably 
suggest by the extreme agitation i had exhibit when the mode of the 
murder had been described. i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate 
and several other persons, to the inn. i could not help being struck by the 
strange coincidence that had taken place during this eventful night; but, 
knowing that i had been converse with several person in the island i had 
inhabit about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly 
tranquil as to the consequence of the affair. 

i enter the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. how 
can i describe my sensation on behold it? i feel yet parch with 
horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shudder and 
agony. the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, 
pass like a dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry 
clerval stretch before me. i gasp for breath, and throw myself on 
the body, i exclaimed, “have my murderous machination deprived you 
also, my dearest henry, of life? two i have already destroyed; other 
victim await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my 
benefactor—” 

the human frame could no long support the agony that i endured, and 
i was carry out of the room in strong convulsions. 

a fever succeed to this. i lay for two month on the point of death; my 
ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i call myself the 
murder of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometimes i entreat my 
attendant to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was 
tormented; and at other i felt the finger of the monster already grasping 
my neck, and scream aloud with agony and terror. fortunately, as i spoke 
my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gesture and 
bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses. 

why did i not die? more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not 
sink into forgetful and rest? death snatch away many blooming 
children, the only hope of their doting parents; how many bride and 
youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the 
next a prey for worm and the decay of the tomb! of what material was i 
made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of 
the wheel, continual renew the torture? 

but i was doom to live and in two month found myself as awake from 
a dream, in a prison, stretch on a wretched bed, surround by 
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon. 
it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had 
forgotten the particulars of what had happen and only felt as if some 
great misfortune had sudden overwhelm me; but when i look around 
and saw the barred window and the squalid of the room in which i 
was, all flash across my memory and i groan bitterly. 

this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleep in a chair beside 
me. she was a hire nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her 
countenance express all those bad quality which often characterise 
that class. the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of 
person accustomed to see without sympathise in sight of misery. her 
tone express her entire indifference; she address me in english, 
and the voice struck me as one that i had heard during my sufferings. 

“are you better now, sir?” said she. 

i reply in the same language, with a feeble voice, “i believe i am; 
but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am 
still alive to feel this misery and horror.” 

“for that matter,” reply the old woman, “if you mean about the 
gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you 
were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you! however, that’s none 
of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty 
with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.” 

i turn with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a 
speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt 
languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. the whole series 
of my life appear to me as a dream; i sometimes doubt if indeed it 
were all true, for it never present itself to my mind with the force 
of reality. 

as the image that float before me became more distinct, i grew 
feverish; a dark pressed around me; no one was near me who soothe 
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand support me. the 
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared 
them for me; but utter careless was visible in the first, and the 
expression of brutality was strong marked in the visage of the 
second. who could be interested in the fate of a murder but the 
hangman who would gain his fee? 

these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had 
shown me extreme kindness. he had cause the best room in the prison 
to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who 
had provided a physician and a nurse. it is true, he seldom came to 
see me, for although he ardent desire to relieve the suffering of 
every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agony and 
miserable ravings of a murderer. he came, therefore, sometimes to see 
that i was not neglected, but his visit were short and with long 
intervals. 

one day, while i was gradual recovering, i was seat in a chair, my eyes 
half open and my cheek livid like those in death. i was overcome by gloom 
and misery and often reflect i had better seek death than desire to 
remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. at one time i 
considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the 
penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been. such were my 
thought when the door of my apartment was open and mr. kirwin entered. 
his countenance express sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to 
mine and address me in french, 

“i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to 
make you more comfortable?” 

“i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole 
earth there is no comfort which i am capable of receiving.” 

“i know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to 
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. but you will, i 
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can 
easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” 

“that is my least concern; i am, by a course of strange events, become 
the most miserable of mortals. persecute and torture as i am and 
have been, can death be any evil to me?” 

“nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the 
strange chance that have lately occurred. you were thrown, by some 
surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, 
seize immediately, and charged with murder. the first sight that was 
present to your eyes was the body of your friend, murder in so 
unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across 
your path.” 

as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endure on 
this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at 
the knowledge he seem to possess concerning me. i suppose some 
astonishment was exhibit in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hasten 
to say, 

“immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on 
your person were brought me, and i examine them that i might discover some 
trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune 
and illness. i found several letters, and, among others, one which i 
discover from its commencement to be from your father. i instantly wrote 
to geneva; nearly two month have elapse since the departure of my letter. 
but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any 
kind.” 

“this suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event; 
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am 
now to lament?” 

“your family is perfectly well,” said mr. kirwin with 
gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” 

i know not by what chain of thought the idea present itself, but it 
instantly dart into my mind that the murder had come to mock at my 
misery and taunt me with the death of clerval, as a new incite for 
me to comply with his hellish desires. i put my hand before my eyes, 
and cry out in agony, 

“oh! take him away! i cannot see him; for god’s sake, do not 
let him enter!” 

mr. kirwin regard me with a trouble countenance. he could not help 
regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in 
rather a severe tone, 

“i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father 
would have been welcome instead of inspire such violent repugnance.” 

“my father!” cry i, while every feature and every muscle was relax 
from anguish to pleasure. “is my father indeed come? how kind, how 
very kind! but where is he, why do he not hasten to me?” 

my change of manner surprise and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he 
thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium, 
and now he instantly resume his former benevolence. he rose and 
quit the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father enter it. 

nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the 
arrival of my father. i stretch out my hand to him and cried, 

“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?” 

my father calm me with assurance of their welfare and endeavoured, by 
dwelling on these subject so interesting to my heart, to raise my 
despond spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of 
cheerfulness. “what a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” 
said he, look mournful at the barred window and wretched appearance 
of the room. “you travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seem 
to pursue you. and poor clerval—” 

the name of my unfortunate and murder friend was an agitation too 
great to be endure in my weak state; i shed tears. 

“alas! yes, my father,” reply i; “some destiny of the 
most horrible kind hang over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i 
should have die on the coffin of henry.” 

we were not allow to converse for any length of time, for the 
precarious state of my health render every precaution necessary that 
could ensure tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insist that my 
strength should not be exhaust by too much exertion. but the 
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and i 
gradual recover my health. 

as my sickness quit me, i was absorb by a gloomy and black 
melancholy that nothing could dissipate. the image of clerval was 
for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. more than once the agitation 
into which these reflection threw me made my friends dread a dangerous 
relapse. alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detest a 
life? it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now 
drawing to a close. soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these 
throb and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bear 
me to the dust; and, in execute the award of justice, i shall also 
sink to rest. then the appearance of death was distant, although the 
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hour 
motionless and speechless, wish for some mighty revolution that 
might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins. 

the season of the assizes approached. i had already been three month 
in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a 
relapse, i was oblige to travel nearly a hundred mile to the country 
town where the court was held. mr. kirwin charged himself with every 
care of collect witness and arrange my defence. i was spare 
the disgrace of appear public as a criminal, as the case was not 
brought before the court that decide on life and death. the grand 
jury reject the bill, on its being prove that i was on the orkney 
island at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight 
after my removal i was liberated from prison. 

my father was enrapture on finding me free from the vexation of a 
criminal charge, that i was again allow to breathe the fresh 
atmosphere and permit to return to my native country. i did not 
participate in these feelings, for to me the wall of a dungeon or a 
palace were alike hateful. the cup of life was poison for ever, and 
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i 
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrate by 
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glare upon me. sometimes 
they were the expressive eyes of henry, languish in death, the dark 
orb nearly cover by the lid and the long black lash that fringe 
them; sometimes it was the watery, cloud eyes of the monster, as i 
first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt. 

my father try to awaken in me the feelings of affection. he talk 
of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but 
these words only drew deep groan from me. sometimes, indeed, i felt a 
wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved 
cousin or longed, with a devour _maladie du pays_, to see once more 
the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to me in early 
childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a 
prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and 
these fit were seldom interrupt but by paroxysm of anguish and 
despair. at these moments i often endeavour to put an end to the 
existence i loathed, and it require uncease attendance and vigilance 
to restrain me from commit some dreadful act of violence. 

yet one duty remain to me, the recollection of which finally 
triumph over my selfish despair. it was necessary that i should 
return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those 
i so fondly love and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any 
chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dare again to 
blast me by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to 
the existence of the monstrous image which i had endue with the 
mockery of a soul still more monstrous. my father still desire to 
delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a 
journey, for i was a shatter wreck—the shadow of a human being. my 
strength was gone. i was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day 
prey upon my waste frame. 

still, as i urge our leave ireland with such inquietude and impatience, 
my father thought it best to yield. we took our passage on board a vessel 
bound for havre-de-grace and sail with a fair wind from the ireland shores. 
it was midnight. i lay on the deck look at the stars and listen to 
the dashing of the waves. i hail the dark that shut ireland from my 
sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when i reflect that i should 
soon see geneva. the past appear to me in the light of a frightful dream; 
yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew me from the detest 
shore of ireland, and the sea which surround me, told me too forcibly 
that i was deceive by no vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest 
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. i 
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while reside 
with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for 
ingolstadt. i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on 
to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i call to mind the night in 
which he first lived. i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a 
thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly. 

ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking 
every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug 
only that i was enable to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of 
life. oppress by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now 
swallow double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did 
not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dream present a 
thousand object that scared me. towards morning i was possessed by a kind 
of nightmare; i felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free 
myself from it; groan and cries rang in my ears. my father, who was 
watch over me, perceive my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing wave 
were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of 
security, a feeling that a truce was establish between the present hour 
and the irresistible, disastrous future impart to me a kind of calm 
forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly 
susceptible. 





chapter 22 

the voyage came to an end. we landed, and proceed to paris. i soon 
found that i had overtax my strength and that i must repose before i 
could continue my journey. my father’s care and attention were 
indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my suffering and 
sought erroneous method to remedy the incurable ill. he wish me to 
seek amusement in society. i abhor the face of man. oh, not 
abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt 
attract even to the most repulsive among them, as to creature of an 
angel nature and celestial mechanism. but i felt that i had no right 
to share their intercourse. i had unchained an enemy among them whose 
joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they 
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know 
my unhallowed acts and the crime which had their source in me! 

my father yield at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by 
various argument to banish my despair. sometimes he thought that i 
felt deep the degrade of being oblige to answer a charge of 
murder, and he endeavour to prove to me the futility of pride. 

“alas! my father,” said i, “how little do you know me. 
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degrade if such 
a wretch as i felt pride. justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent 
as i, and she suffer the same charge; she die for it; and i am the cause 
of this—i murder her. william, justine, and henry—they all 
die by my hands.” 

my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same 
assertion; when i thus accused myself, he sometimes seem to desire an 
explanation, and at other he appear to consider it as the offspring of 
delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had present 
itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserve in my 
convalescence. i avoid explanation and maintain a continual silence 
concerning the wretch i had created. i had a persuasion that i should be 
supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chain my tongue. but, 
besides, i could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my 
hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmate of 
his breast. i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was 
silent when i would have given the world to have confide the fatal secret. 
yet, still, words like those i have record would burst uncontrollable 
from me. i could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part 
relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. 

upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, 
“my dearest victor, what infatuation is this? my dear son, i entreat 
you never to make such an assertion again.” 

“i am not mad,” i cry energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who 
have view my operations, can bear witness of my truth. i am the 
assassin of those most innocent victims; they die by my machinations. 
a thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have 
save their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not 
sacrifice the whole human race.” 

the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my idea were 
deranged, and he instantly change the subject of our conversation and 
endeavour to alter the course of my thoughts. he wish as much as 
possible to obliterate the memory of the scene that had taken place in 
ireland and never allude to them or suffer me to speak of my 
misfortunes. 

as time pass away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my 
heart, but i no long talk in the same incoherent manner of my own 
crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. by the utmost 
self-violence i curb the imperious voice of wretchedness, which 
sometimes desire to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners 
were calm and more compose than they had ever been since my journey 
to the sea of ice. 

a few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the 
following letter from elizabeth: 

“my dear friend, 

“it gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle 
dated at paris; you are no long at a formidable distance, and i may 
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. my poor cousin, how much you 
must have suffered! i expect to see you look even more ill than 
when you quit geneva. this winter has been pass most miserably, 
torture as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in 
your countenance and to find that your heart is not total void of 
comfort and tranquillity. 

“yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable 
a year ago, even perhaps augment by time. i would not disturb you at 
this period, when so many misfortune weigh upon you, but a 
conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure render 
some explanation necessary before we meet. 

explanation! you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain? if 
you really say this, my question are answer and all my doubt satisfied. 
but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet 
be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the 
case, i dare not any long postpone writing what, during your absence, i 
have often wish to express to you but have never had the courage to begin. 

“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of 
your parent ever since our infancy. we were told this when young, and 
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take 
place. we were affectionate playfellow during childhood, and, i 
believe, dear and value friends to one another as we grew older. but 
as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each 
other without desire a more intimate union, may not such also be our 
case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, i conjure you by our mutual 
happiness, with simple truth—do you not love another? 

“you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at 
ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last 
autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every 
creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our 
connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wish of 
your parents, although they oppose themselves to your inclinations. 
but this is false reasoning. i confess to you, my friend, that i love 
you and that in my airy dream of futurity you have been my constant 
friend and companion. but it is your happiness i desire as well as my 
own when i declare to you that our marriage would render me eternal 
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. even now 
i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest 
misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that 
love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. i, who 
have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your misery 
tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. ah! victor, be assured 
that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be 
made miserable by this supposition. be happy, my friend; and if you 
obey me in this one request, remain satisfy that nothing on earth 
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. 

“do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the 
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. my uncle 
will send me news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your 
lip when we meet, occasion by this or any other exertion of mine, i 
shall need no other happiness. 

“elizabeth lavenza. 



“geneva, may 18th, 17—” 



this letter revive in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of 
the fiend—“_i will be with you on your 
wedding-night!_” such was my sentence, and on that night would the 
dæmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of 
happiness which promise partly to console my sufferings. on that night he 
had determined to consummate his crime by my death. well, be it so; a 
deadly struggle would then assured take place, in which if he were 
victorious i should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. if he 
were vanquished, i should be a free man. alas! what freedom? such as the 
peasant enjoy when his family have been massacre before his eyes, his 
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turn adrift, homeless, 
penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in my 
elizabeth i possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of 
remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. 

sweet and beloved elizabeth! i read and reread her letter, and some 
soften feelings stole into my heart and dare to whisper paradisiacal 
dream of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the 
angel’s arm bare to drive me from all hope. yet i would die to make 
her happy. if the monster execute his threat, death was inevitable; yet, 
again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. my 
destruction might indeed arrive a few month sooner, but if my torture 
should suspect that i postpone it, influence by his menaces, he would 
surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. he had vow 
_to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that 
threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that 
he was not yet satiate with blood, he had murder clerval immediately 
after the enunciation of his threats. i resolved, therefore, that if my 
immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my 
father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life 
should not retard it a single hour. 

in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth. my letter was calm and 
affectionate. “i fear, my beloved girl,” i said, “little happiness 
remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centre in 
you. chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life 
and my endeavour for contentment. i have one secret, elizabeth, a 
dreadful one; when reveal to you, it will chill your frame with 
horror, and then, far from being surprise at my misery, you will only 
wonder that i survive what i have endured. i will confide this tale of 
misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place, 
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. but 
until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. this i most 
earnest entreat, and i know you will comply.” 

in about a week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we return 
to geneva. the sweet girl welcome me with warm affection, yet tear were 
in her eyes as she beheld my emaciate frame and feverish cheeks. i saw a 
change in her also. she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly 
vivace that had before charm me; but her gentle and soft looks of 
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i 
was. 

the tranquill which i now enjoy did not endure. memory brought madness 
with it, and when i thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed 
me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and 
despondent. i neither spoke nor look at anyone, but sat motionless, 
bewilder by the multitude of misery that overcame me. 

elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice 
would soothe me when transport by passion and inspire me with human 
feelings when sunk in torpor. she wept with me and for me. when reason 
returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with 
resignation. ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the 
guilty there is no peace. the agony of remorse poison the luxury there is 
otherwise sometimes found in indulge the excess of grief. 

soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with 
elizabeth. i remain silent. 

“have you, then, some other attachment?” 

“none on earth. i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with 
delight. let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate 
myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.” 

“my dear victor, do not speak thus. heavy misfortune have befallen 
us, but let us only cling close to what remains and transfer our love 
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circle will be 
small but bound close by the tie of affection and mutual misfortune. 
and when time shall have soften your despair, new and dear object of 
care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruel 
deprived.” 

such were the lesson of my father. but to me the remembrance of the 
threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had 
yet been in his deed of blood, i should almost regard him as 
invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words “_i shall be with 
you on your wedding-night_,” i should regard the threaten fate as 
unavoidable. but death was no evil to me if the loss of elizabeth were 
balanced with it, and i therefore, with a contented and even cheerful 
countenance, agree with my father that if my cousin would consent, the 
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined, 
the seal to my fate. 

great god! if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish 
intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banish myself 
for ever from my native country and wander a friendless outcast over 
the earth than have consent to this miserable marriage. but, as if 
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blind me to his real 
intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i 
hasten that of a far dear victim. 

as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or 
a prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me. but i conceal my 
feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smile and joy to the 
countenance of my father, but hardly deceive the ever-watchful and nice 
eye of elizabeth. she look forward to our union with placid contentment, 
not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortune had impressed, 
that what now appear certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate 
into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. 

preparation were made for the event, congratulatory visit were received, 
and all wore a smile appearance. i shut up, as well as i could, in my own 
heart the anxiety that prey there and enter with seeming earnest 
into the plan of my father, although they might only serve as the 
decoration of my tragedy. through my father’s exertion a part of 
the inheritance of elizabeth had been restore to her by the austria 
government. a small possession on the shore of como belong to her. it 
was agree that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa 
lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake 
near which it stood. 

in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the 
fiend should openly attack me. i carry pistol and a dagger 
constant about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and 
by these means gain a greater degree of tranquillity. indeed, as the 
period approached, the threat appear more as a delusion, not to be 
regard as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hope for 
in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed 
for its solemnise drew near and i heard it continual spoken of 
as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. 

elizabeth seem happy; my tranquil demeanour contribute greatly to 
calm her mind. but on the day that was to fulfil my wish and my 
destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervade her; 
and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had 
promise to reveal to her on the following day. my father was in the 
meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognise in 
the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. 

after the ceremony was perform a large party assemble at my 
father’s, but it was agree that elizabeth and i should commence our 
journey by water, sleep that night at evian and continue our 
voyage on the following day. the day was fair, the wind favourable; 
all smile on our nuptial embarkation. 

those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoy the 
feeling of happiness. we pass rapid along; the sun was hot, but we 
were sheltered from its ray by a kind of canopy while we enjoy the 
beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw 
mont salêve, the pleasant bank of montalègre, and at a distance, 
surmount all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy 
mountain that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coast the 
opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura oppose its dark side to the 
ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost 
insurmountable barrier to the invade who should wish to enslave it. 

i took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! if 
you knew what i have suffer and what i may yet endure, you would 
endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this 
one day at least permit me to enjoy.” 

“be happy, my dear victor,” reply elizabeth; “there is, i hope, 
nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not 
paint in my face, my heart is contented. something whisper to me 
not to depend too much on the prospect that is open before us, but i 
will not listen to such a sinister voice. observe how fast we move 
along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise 
above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more 
interesting. look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in 
the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lie at 
the bottom. what a divine day! how happy and serene all nature 
appears!” 

thus elizabeth endeavour to divert her thought and mine from all 
reflection upon melancholy subjects. but her temper was fluctuating; 
joy for a few instant shone in her eyes, but it continual gave place 
to distraction and reverie. 

the sun sank lower in the heavens; we pass the river drance and 
observe its path through the chasm of the higher and the glen of the 
lower hills. the alps here come close to the lake, and we approach 
the amphitheatre of mountain which form its eastern boundary. the 
spire of evian shone under the wood that surround it and the range 
of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung. 

the wind, which had hitherto carry us along with amazing rapidity, 
sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffle the water 
and cause a pleasant motion among the tree as we approach the 
shore, from which it waft the most delightful scent of flower and 
hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched 
the shore i felt those care and fear revive which soon were to clasp 
me and cling to me for ever. 





chapter 23 

it was eight o’clock when we landed; we walk for a short time on the 
shore, enjoy the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and 
contemplate the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscure 
in darkness, yet still display their black outlines. 

the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence 
in the west. the moon had reach her summit in the heaven and was 
beginning to descend; the cloud swept across it swift than the 
flight of the vulture and dim her rays, while the lake reflect the 
scene of the busy heavens, render still busy by the restless wave 
that were beginning to rise. sudden a heavy storm of rain descended. 

i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscure the 
shape of objects, a thousand fear arose in my mind. i was anxious 
and watchful, while my right hand grasp a pistol which was hidden in 
my bosom; every sound terrify me, but i resolve that i would sell my 
life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that 
of my adversary was extinguished. 

elizabeth observe my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence, 
but there was something in my glance which communicate terror to her, and 
trembling, she asked, “what is it that agitate you, my dear victor? 
what is it you fear?” 

“oh! peace, peace, my love,” reply i; “this night, and 
all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.” 

i pass an hour in this state of mind, when sudden i reflect how 
fearful the combat which i momentarily expect would be to my wife, 
and i earnest entreat her to retire, resolve not to join her 
until i had obtain some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy. 

she left me, and i continue some time walking up and down the passage 
of the house and inspect every corner that might afford a retreat to 
my adversary. but i discover no trace of him and was beginning to 
conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervene to prevent the 
execution of his menace when sudden i heard a shrill and dreadful 
scream. it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. as i 
heard it, the whole truth rush into my mind, my arms dropped, the 
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood 
trickle in my vein and tingle in the extremities of my limbs. this 
state last but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rush 
into the room. 

great god! why did i not then expire! why am i here to relate the 
destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? she was 
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down 
and her pale and distort features half cover by her hair. everywhere i 
turn i see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relax form flung 
by the murder on its bridal bier. could i behold this and live? alas! 
life is obstinate and cling closest where it is most hated. for a moment 
only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground. 

when i recover i found myself surround by the people of the inn; their 
countenance express a breathless terror, but the horror of other 
appear only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppress me. i 
escape from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my 
wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. she had been move from the 
posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon 
her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have 
supposed her asleep. i rush towards her and embrace her with ardour, but 
the deadly languor and cold of the limb told me that what i now held 
in my arms had cease to be the elizabeth whom i had love and cherished. 
the murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the 
breath had cease to issue from her lips. 

while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happen to look up. 
the window of the room had before been darkened, and i felt a kind of 
panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber. 
the shutter had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be 
described, i saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. 
a grin was on the face of the monster; he seem to jeer, as with his 
fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. i rush towards 
the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he elude me, 
leap from his station, and running with the swift of lightning, 
plunge into the lake. 

the report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. i pointed to 
the spot where he had disappeared, and we follow the track with 
boats; nets were cast, but in vain. after passing several hours, we 
return hopeless, most of my companion believe it to have been a 
form conjure up by my fancy. after have landed, they proceed to 
search the country, party go in different directions among the 
wood and vines. 

i attempt to accompany them and proceed a short distance from the 
house, but my head whirl round, my steps were like those of a drunken 
man, i fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film cover my 
eyes, and my skin was parch with the heat of fever. in this state i 
was carry back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had 
happened; my eyes wander round the room as if to seek something that 
i had lost. 

after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawl into the room 
where the corpse of my beloved lay. there were women weeping around; i 
hung over it and join my sad tear to theirs; all this time no 
distinct idea present itself to my mind, but my thought ramble to 
various subjects, reflect confused on my misfortune and their 
cause. i was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. the death 
of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly 
of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remain 
friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now 
might be writhe under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his 
feet. this idea made me shudder and recall me to action. i start 
up and resolve to return to geneva with all possible speed. 

there were no horse to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the 
wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it was 
hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night. i hire men 
to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from 
mental torment in bodily exercise. but the overflow misery i now felt, 
and the excess of agitation that i endure render me incapable of any 
exertion. i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way 
to every gloomy idea that arose. if i look up, i saw scene which were 
familiar to me in my happy time and which i had contemplate but the day 
before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. 
tear stream from my eyes. the rain had cease for a moment, and i saw 
the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hour before; they had 
then been observe by elizabeth. nothing is so painful to the human mind as 
a great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the cloud might lower, 
but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. a fiend had 
snatch from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been 
so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of 
man. 

but why should i dwell upon the incident that follow this last 
overwhelming event? mine has been a tale of horrors; i have reach their 
_acme_, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you. know 
that, one by one, my friends were snatch away; i was left desolate. my 
own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in a few words, what remains of 
my hideous narration. 

i arrive at geneva. my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk 
under the tidings that i bore. i see him now, excellent and venerable old 
man! his eyes wander in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their 
delight—his elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he dote on with 
all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, have 
few affections, cling more earnest to those that remain. cursed, cursed 
be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hair and doom him to waste 
in wretchedness! he could not live under the horrors that were accumulate 
around him; the spring of existence sudden gave way; he was unable to 
rise from his bed, and in a few days he die in my arms. 

what then became of me? i know not; i lost sensation, and chain and 
dark were the only object that pressed upon me. sometimes, 
indeed, i dreamt that i wander in flowery meadow and pleasant vale 
with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a 
dungeon. melancholy followed, but by degree i gain a clear 
conception of my misery and situation and was then release from my 
prison. for they had call me mad, and during many months, as i 
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation. 

liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had i not, as i 
awaken to reason, at the same time awaken to revenge. as the 
memory of past misfortune pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their 
cause—the monster whom i had created, the miserable dæmon whom i had 
sent abroad into the world for my destruction. i was possessed by a 
maddening rage when i thought of him, and desire and ardent pray 
that i might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal 
revenge on his cursed head. 

nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to 
reflect on the best means of secure him; and for this purpose, about 
a month after my release, i repair to a criminal judge in the town 
and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the 
destroyer of my family, and that i require him to exert his whole 
authority for the apprehension of the murderer. 

the magistrate listen to me with attention and kindness. “be 
assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertion on my part shall 
be spare to discover the villain.” 

“i thank you,” reply i; “listen, therefore, to the 
deposition that i have to make. it is indeed a tale so strange that i 
should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth 
which, however wonderful, forces conviction. the story is too connected to 
be mistaken for a dream, and i have no motive for falsehood.” my 
manner as i thus address him was impressive but calm; i had form in my 
own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose 
quiet my agony and for an interval reconcile me to life. i now related 
my history brief but with firm and precision, marking the dates with 
accuracy and never deviate into invective or exclamation. 

the magistrate appear at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continue 
he became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with 
horror; at other a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was paint 
on his countenance. 

when i had conclude my narration, i said, “this is the being whom i 
accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your 
whole power. it is your duty as a magistrate, and i believe and hope that 
your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those 
function on this occasion.” 

this address cause a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own 
auditor. he had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given 
to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was call upon 
to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity 
returned. he, however, answer mildly, “i would willing afford you 
every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appear to 
have powers which would put all my exertion to defiance. who can follow an 
animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit cave and den where 
no man would venture to intrude? besides, some month have elapse since 
the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he 
has wander or what region he may now inhabit.” 

“i do not doubt that he hover near the spot which i inhabit, and if 
he has indeed taken refuge in the alps, he may be hunt like the chamois 
and destroy as a beast of prey. but i perceive your thoughts; you do not 
credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the 
punishment which is his desert.” 

as i spoke, rage sparkle in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated. 
“you are mistaken,” said he. “i will exert myself, and if 
it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer 
punishment proportionate to his crimes. but i fear, from what you have 
yourself describe to be his properties, that this will prove 
impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should 
make up your mind to disappointment.” 

“that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail. my 
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be a vice, i 
confess that it is the devour and only passion of my soul. my rage 
is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turn 
loose upon society, still exists. you refuse my just demand; i have 
but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to 
his destruction.” 

i tremble with excess of agitation as i said this; there was a frenzy 
in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierce 
which the martyr of old are said to have possessed. but to a genevan 
magistrate, whose mind was occupy by far other idea than those of 
devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of 
madness. he endeavour to soothe me as a nurse do a child and 
revert to my tale as the effects of delirium. 

“man,” i cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of 
wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.” 

i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on 
some other mode of action. 





chapter 24 

my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was 
swallow up and lost. i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone 
endow me with strength and composure; it mould my feelings and 
allow me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise 
delirium or death would have been my portion. 

my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i 
was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became 
hateful. i provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewel 
which had belong to my mother, and departed. 

and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. i have 
traverse a vast portion of the earth and have endure all the hardship 
which traveller in deserts and barbarous country are wont to meet. how i 
have live i hardly know; many times have i stretch my failing limb upon 
the sandy plain and pray for death. but revenge kept me alive; i dare 
not die and leave my adversary in being. 

when i quit geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i 
might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. but my plan was unsettled, 
and i wander many hour round the confines of the town, uncertain 
what path i should pursue. as night approach i found myself at the 
entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father 
reposed. i enter it and approach the tomb which marked their 
graves. everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which 
were gently agitate by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the 
scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested 
observer. the spirits of the departed seem to flit around and to 
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the 
mourner. 

the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quick gave way to 
rage and despair. they were dead, and i lived; their murder also lived, 
and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence. i knelt on the grass 
and kiss the earth and with quiver lip exclaimed, “by the 
sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the 
deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, o night, and the 
spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who cause this misery, 
until he or i shall perish in mortal conflict. for this purpose i will 
preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun 
and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my 
eyes for ever. and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering 
minister of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. let the cursed 
and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now 
torment me.” 

i had begun my adjure with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me 
that the shades of my murder friends heard and approve my devotion, but 
the fury possessed me as i concluded, and rage choke my utterance. 

i was answer through the still of night by a loud and fiendish 
laugh. it rang on my ear long and heavily; the mountain re-echoed 
it, and i felt as if all hell surround me with mockery and laughter. 
surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have 
destroy my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i 
was reserved for vengeance. the laughter die away, when a well-known 
and abhor voice, apparently close to my ear, address me in an 
audible whisper, “i am satisfied, miserable wretch! you have 
determined to live, and i am satisfied.” 

i dart towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil 
elude my grasp. sudden the broad disk of the moon arose and shone 
full upon his ghastly and distort shape as he flee with more than 
mortal speed. 

i pursue him, and for many month this has been my task. guide by a 
slight clue, i follow the winding of the rhone, but vainly. the 
blue mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, i saw the fiend 
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the black sea. i 
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, i know not how. 

amidst the wild of tartary and russia, although he still evade me, i 
have ever follow in his track. sometimes the peasants, scared by 
this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, 
who fear that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die, 
left some mark to guide me. the snow descended on my head, and i saw 
the print of his huge step on the white plain. to you first enter 
on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand 
what i have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigue were the 
least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil 
and carry about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good 
follow and direct my steps and when i most murmur would sudden 
extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. sometimes, 
when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast 
was prepared for me in the desert that restore and inspirite me. the 
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasant of the country ate, but 
i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had 
invoke to aid me. often, when all was dry, the heaven cloudless, and 
i was parch by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the 
few drops that revive me, and vanish. 

i followed, when i could, the course of the rivers; but the dæmon 
generally avoid these, as it was here that the population of the 
country chiefly collected. in other place human being were seldom 
seen, and i generally subsist on the wild animal that cross my 
path. i had money with me and gain the friendship of the villager 
by distribute it; or i brought with me some food that i had killed, 
which, after taking a small part, i always present to those who had 
provided me with fire and utensil for cooking. 

my life, as it pass thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during 
sleep alone that i could taste joy. o blessed sleep! often, when most 
miserable, i sank to repose, and my dream lull me even to rapture. the 
spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of 
happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. deprived of 
this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships. during the day i was 
sustain and inspirite by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my 
friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent 
countenance of my father, heard the silver tone of my elizabeth’s 
voice, and beheld clerval enjoy health and youth. often, when weary by 
a toilsome march, i persuade myself that i was dream until night should 
come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest 
friends. what agonising fond did i feel for them! how did i cling to 
their dear forms, as sometimes they haunt even my waking hours, and 
persuade myself that they still lived! at such moments vengeance, that 
burn within me, die in my heart, and i pursue my path towards the 
destruction of the dæmon more as a task enjoin by heaven, as the 
mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the 
ardent desire of my soul. 

what his feelings were whom i pursue i cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he 
left mark in writing on the bark of the tree or cut in stone that guide 
me and instigate my fury. “my reign is not yet 
over”—these words were legible in one of these 
inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. follow me; i 
seek the everlasting ice of the north, where you will feel the misery of 
cold and frost, to which i am impassive. you will find near this place, if 
you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my 
enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable 
hour must you endure until that period shall arrive.” 

scoff devil! again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee, 
miserable fiend, to torture and death. never will i give up my search 
until he or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my 
elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the 
reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage! 

as i still pursue my journey to the northward, the snow thicken and the 
cold increase in a degree almost too severe to support. the peasant were 
shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy venture forth to 
seize the animal whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to 
seek for prey. the river were cover with ice, and no fish could be 
procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. 

the triumph of my enemy increase with the difficulty of my labours. one 
inscription that he left was in these words: “prepare! your toils 
only begin; wrap yourself in fur and provide food, for we shall soon enter 
upon a journey where your suffering will satisfy my everlasting 
hatred.” 

my courage and perseverance were invigorate by these scoff words; i 
resolve not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support 
me, i continue with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, 
until the ocean appear at a distance and form the utmost boundary 
of the horizon. oh! how unlike it was to the blue season of the 
south! cover with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by 
its superior wild and ruggedness. the greece wept for joy when 
they beheld the mediterranean from the hill of asia, and hail with 
rapture the boundary of their toils. i did not weep, but i knelt down 
and with a full heart thank my guide spirit for conduct me in 
safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, 
to meet and grapple with him. 

some week before this period i had procure a sledge and dogs and thus 
traverse the snow with inconceivable speed. i know not whether the 
fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had 
daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gain on him, so much so that 
when i first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and 
i hope to intercept him before he should reach the beach. with new 
courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrive at a wretched 
hamlet on the seashore. i inquire of the inhabitant concerning the 
fiend and gain accurate information. a gigantic monster, they said, 
had arrive the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, 
putt to flight the inhabitant of a solitary cottage through fear of 
his terrific appearance. he had carry off their store of winter 
food, and place it in a sledge, to draw which he had seize on a 
numerous drove of train dogs, he had harness them, and the same 
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursue his 
journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they 
conjecture that he must speedy be destroy by the break of the 
ice or frozen by the eternal frosts. 

on hearing this information i suffer a temporary access of despair. 
he had escape me, and i must commence a destructive and almost endless 
journey across the mountainous ice of the ocean, amidst cold that few 
of the inhabitant could long endure and which i, the native of a 
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea 
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance 
returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelm every other feeling. 
after a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hover 
round and instigate me to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey. 

i exchange my land-sledge for one fashion for the inequality of 
the frozen ocean, and purchase a plentiful stock of provisions, i 
departed from land. 

i cannot guess how many days have pass since then, but i have endure 
misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution 
burning within my heart could have enable me to support. immense and 
rugged mountain of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard 
the thunder of the ground sea, which threaten my destruction. but 
again the frost came and made the path of the sea secure. 

by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that 
i had pass three week in this journey; and the continual protraction 
of hope, return back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of 
despondent and grief from my eyes. despair had indeed almost secure 
her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery. once, after 
the poor animal that convey me had with incredible toil gain the 
summit of a slope ice mountain, and one, sink under his fatigue, 
died, i view the expanse before me with anguish, when sudden my eye 
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. i strained my sight to 
discover what it could be and utter a wild cry of ecstasy when i 
distinguished a sledge and the distort proportions of a well-known 
form within. oh! with what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! 
warm tear fill my eyes, which i hasty wipe away, that they might 
not intercept the view i had of the dæmon; but still my sight was 
dim by the burning drops, until, give way to the emotion that 
oppress me, i wept aloud. 

but this was not the time for delay; i disencumber the dogs of their 
dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an 
hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitter 
irksome to me, i continue my route. the sledge was still visible, nor 
did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short 
time some ice-rock conceal it with its intervene crags. i indeed 
perceptible gain on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, i 
beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bound within 
me. 

but now, when i appear almost within grasp of my foe, my hope were 
sudden extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had 
ever done before. a ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as 
the waters roll and swell beneath me, became every moment more ominous 
and terrific. i pressed on, but in vain. the wind arose; the sea roared; 
and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a 
tremendous and overwhelming sound. the work was soon finished; in a few 
minutes a tumultuous sea roll between me and my enemy, and i was left 
drift on a scattered piece of ice that was continual lessen and 
thus prepare for me a hideous death. 

in this manner many appalling hour passed; several of my dogs died, and i 
myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your 
vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hope of succour and life. 
i had no conception that vessel ever came so far north and was astound 
at the sight. i quick destroy part of my sledge to construct oars, and 
by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in 
the direction of your ship. i had determined, if you were go southwards, 
still to trust myself to the mercy of the sea rather than abandon my 
purpose. i hope to induce you to grant me a boat with which i could pursue 
my enemy. but your direction was northwards. you took me on board when my 
vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiply 
hardship into a death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. 

oh! when will my guide spirit, in conduct me to the dæmon, allow 
me the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and he yet live? if i do, 
swear to me, walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him 
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. and do i dare to ask of you to 
undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardship that i have undergone? 
no; i am not so selfish. yet, when i am dead, if he should appear, if 
the minister of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he 
shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulate 
woe and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. he is eloquent 
and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but 
trust him not. his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery 
and fiend-like malice. hear him not; call on the name of william, 
justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and 
thrust your sword into his heart. i will hover near and direct the 
steel aright. 

walton, _in continuation._ 


august 26th, 17—. 


you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not 
feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdle 
mine? sometimes, seize with sudden agony, he could not continue his 
tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, utter with 
difficulty the words so replete with anguish. his fine and lovely eyes 
were now light up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow 
and quench in infinite wretchedness. sometimes he command his 
countenance and tone and related the most horrible incident with a 
tranquil voice, suppress every mark of agitation; then, like a 
volcano burst forth, his face would sudden change to an expression 
of the wildest rage as he shriek out imprecation on his persecutor. 

his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth, 
yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which he show me, 
and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a 
greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, 
however earnest and connected. such a monster has, then, really existence! 
i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration. sometimes i 
endeavour to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his 
creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. 

“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither do your 
senseless curiosity lead you? would you also create for yourself and the 
world a demoniacal enemy? peace, peace! learn my misery and do not seek 
to increase your own.” 

frankenstein discover that i made note concerning his history; he ask 
to see them and then himself correct and augment them in many places, 
but principally in give the life and spirit to the conversation he held 
with his enemy. “since you have preserve my narration,” said 
he, “i would not that a mutilate one should go down to 
posterity.” 

thus has a week pass away, while i have listen to the strangest 
tale that ever imagination formed. my thought and every feeling of my 
soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale 
and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. i wish to soothe 
him, yet can i counsel one so infinite miserable, so destitute of 
every hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the only joy that he can 
now know will be when he compose his shatter spirit to peace and 
death. yet he enjoy one comfort, the offspring of solitude and 
delirium; he believe that when in dream he hold converse with his 
friends and derive from that communion consolation for his misery or 
excitement to his vengeance, that they are not the creation of his 
fancy, but the being themselves who visit him from the regions of a 
remote world. this faith give a solemnity to his reverie that render 
them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth. 

our conversation are not always confine to his own history and 
misfortunes. on every point of general literature he display 
unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. his 
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when he relate 
a pathetic incident or endeavour to move the passion of pity or love, 
without tears. what a glorious creature must he have been in the days 
of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! he seem 
to feel his own worth and the great of his fall. 

“when younger,” said he, “i believe myself destined for 
some great enterprise. my feelings are profound, but i possessed a cool 
of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. this sentiment of 
the worth of my nature support me when other would have been oppressed, 
for i deem it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talent that 
might be useful to my fellow creatures. when i reflect on the work i had 
completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational 
animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but 
this thought, which support me in the commencement of my career, now 
serve only to plunge me lower in the dust. all my speculation and hope 
are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspire to omnipotence, i am 
chain in an eternal hell. my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of 
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these quality i 
conceive the idea and execute the creation of a man. even now i cannot 
recollect without passion my reverie while the work was incomplete. i trod 
heaven in my thoughts, now exult in my powers, now burning with the idea 
of their effects. from my infancy i was imbue with high hope and a lofty 
ambition; but how am i sunk! oh! my friend, if you had known me as i once 
was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation. despondent 
rarely visit my heart; a high destiny seem to bear me on, until i fell, 
never, never again to rise.” 

must i then lose this admirable being? i have long for a friend; i have 
sought one who would sympathise with and love me. behold, on these desert 
sea i have found such a one, but i fear i have gain him only to know his 
value and lose him. i would reconcile him to life, but he repulse the idea. 

“i thank you, walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so 
miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new tie and fresh 
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? can any 
man be to me as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth? even 
where the affection are not strong move by any superior excellence, 
the companion of our childhood always possess a certain power over our 
mind which hardly any later friend can obtain. they know our 
infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, 
are never eradicated; and they can judge of our action with more 
certain conclusion as to the integrity of our motives. a sister or a 
brother can never, unless indeed such symptom have been shown early, 
suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, 
however strong he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be 
contemplate with suspicion. but i enjoy friends, dear not only 
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever 
i am, the soothe voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of 
clerval will be ever whisper in my ear. they are dead, and but one 
feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. if i 
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive 
utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it. but 
such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i 
gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfill and i may die.” 

my beloved sister, 

september 2d. 


i write to you, encompass by peril and ignorant whether i am ever 
doom to see again dear england and the dear friends that inhabit 
it. i am surround by mountain of ice which admit of no escape and 
threaten every moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellow whom i 
have persuade to be my companion look towards me for aid, but i have 
none to bestow. there is something terribly appalling in our 
situation, yet my courage and hope do not desert me. yet it is 
terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endanger 
through me. if we are lost, my mad scheme are the cause. 

and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my 
destruction, and you will anxious await my return. years will pass, and 
you will have visiting of despair and yet be torture by hope. oh! my 
beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, 
in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. but you have a husband 
and lovely children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so! 

my unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. he 
endeavour to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession 
which he valued. he remind me how often the same accident have 
happen to other navigator who have attempt this sea, and in spite 
of myself, he fill me with cheerful auguries. even the sailor feel 
the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no long despair; he 
rouse their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these 
vast mountain of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the 
resolution of man. these feelings are transitory; each day of 
expectation delay fill them with fear, and i almost dread a mutiny 
cause by this despair. 

september 5th. 


a scene has just pass of such uncommon interest that, although it is 
highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot 
forbear recording it. 

we are still surround by mountain of ice, still in imminent danger 
of being crush in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and many of 
my unfortunate comrade have already found a grave amidst this scene of 
desolation. frankenstein has daily decline in health; a feverish fire 
still glimmer in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when sudden 
rouse to any exertion, he speedy sink again into apparent 
lifelessness. 

i mention in my last letter the fear i entertain of a mutiny. 
this morning, as i sat watch the wan countenance of my friend—his 
eyes half closed and his limb hanging listlessly—i was rouse by half 
a dozen of the sailors, who demand admission into the cabin. they 
entered, and their leader address me. he told me that he and his 
companion had been chosen by the other sailor to come in deputation 
to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse. 
we were immure in ice and should probably never escape, but they 
fear that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free 
passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and 
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmount 
this. they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with a solemn 
promise that if the vessel should be free i would instantly direct my 
course southwards. 

this speech trouble me. i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceive 
the idea of return if set free. yet could i, in justice, or even in 
possibility, refuse this demand? i hesitate before i answered, when 
frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appear hardly 
to have force enough to attend, now rouse himself; his eyes sparkled, 
and his cheek flushed with momentary vigour. turning towards the men, 
he said, 

“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then, 
so easily turn from your design? did you not call this a glorious 
expedition? “and wherefore was it glorious? not because the way was 
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of danger and 
terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be call forth 
and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surround it, and 
these you were to brave and overcome. for this was it a glorious, for this 
was it an honourable undertaking. you were hereafter to be hail as the 
benefactor of your species, your name adore as belong to brave men 
who encounter death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now, 
behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first 
mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content 
to be hand down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and 
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and return to their warm 
firesides. why, that require not this preparation; ye need not have come 
thus far and drag your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove 
yourself cowards. oh! be men, or be more than men. be steady to your 
purpose and firm as a rock. this ice is not made of such stuff as your 
heart may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it 
shall not. do not return to your family with the stigma of disgrace 
marked on your brows. return as hero who have fought and conquer and 
who know not what it is to turn their back on the foe.” 

he spoke this with a voice so modulate to the different feelings express 
in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can 
you wonder that these men were moved? they look at one another and were 
unable to reply. i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had 
been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuous 
desire the contrary, but that i hope that, with reflection, their courage 
would return. 

they retired and i turn towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and 
almost deprived of life. 

how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than 
return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. yet i fear such will be my 
fate; the men, unsupported by idea of glory and honour, can never 
willing continue to endure their present hardships. 

september 7th. 


the die is cast; i have consent to return if we are not destroyed. 
thus are my hope blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back 
ignorant and disappointed. it require more philosophy than i possess 
to bear this injustice with patience. 

september 12th. 


it is past; i am return to england. i have lost my hope of utility 
and glory; i have lost my friend. but i will endeavour to detail these 
bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am waft 
towards england and towards you, i will not despond. 

september 9th, the ice began to move, and roaring like thunder were heard 
at a distance as the island split and cracked in every direction. we were 
in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief 
attention was occupy by my unfortunate guest whose illness increase in 
such a degree that he was entire confine to his bed. the ice cracked 
behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from 
the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly 
free. when the sailor saw this and that their return to their native 
country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, 
loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and ask the 
cause of the tumult. “they shout,” i said, “because they 
will soon return to england.” 

“do you, then, really return?” 

“alas! yes; i cannot withstand their demands. i cannot lead them 
unwilling to danger, and i must return.” 

“do so, if you will; but i will not. you may give up your purpose, but 
mine is assign to me by heaven, and i dare not. i am weak, but 
surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with 
sufficient strength.” saying this, he endeavour to spring from the 
bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. 

it was long before he was restored, and i often thought that life was 
entire extinct. at length he open his eyes; he breathe with 
difficulty and was unable to speak. the surgeon gave him a compose 
draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. in the meantime he 
told me that my friend had certainly not many hour to live. 

his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient. i sat 
by his bed, watch him; his eyes were closed, and i thought he slept; but 
presently he call to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, 
said, “alas! the strength i rely on is gone; i feel that i shall 
soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. think 
not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning 
hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself 
justified in desire the death of my adversary. during these last days i 
have been occupy in examine my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable. 
in a fit of enthusiast madness i create a rational creature and was 
bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and 
well-being. this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to 
that. my duty towards the being of my own species had greater claim to 
my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or 
misery. urge by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to 
create a companion for the first creature. he show unparalleled malignity 
and selfish in evil; he destroy my friends; he devoted to destruction 
being who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i 
know where this thirst for vengeance may end. miserable himself that he may 
render no other wretched, he ought to die. the task of his destruction was 
mine, but i have failed. when actuate by selfish and vicious motives, i 
ask you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now, 
when i am only induce by reason and virtue. 

“yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil 
this task; and now that you are return to england, you will have 
little chance of meeting with him. but the consideration of these 
points, and the well balance of what you may esteem your duties, i 
leave to you; my judgment and idea are already disturbed by the near 
approach of death. i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i 
may still be misle by passion. 

“that he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturb me; in 
other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the 
only happy one which i have enjoy for several years. the form of 
the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms. farewell, 
walton! seek happiness in tranquill and avoid ambition, even if it 
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguish yourself in 
science and discoveries. yet why do i say this? i have myself been 
blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.” 

his voice became faint as he spoke, and at length, exhaust by his 
effort, he sank into silence. about half an hour afterwards he 
attempt again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and 
his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiate of a gentle smile pass 
away from his lips. 

margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this 
glorious spirit? what can i say that will enable you to understand the 
depth of my sorrow? all that i should express would be inadequate and 
feeble. my tear flow; my mind is overshadow by a cloud of 
disappointment. but i journey towards england, and i may there find 
consolation. 

i am interrupted. what do these sound portend? it is midnight; the 
breeze blow fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. again there 
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it come from the cabin 
where the remains of frankenstein still lie. i must arise and examine. 
good night, my sister. 

great god! what a scene has just taken place! i am yet dizzy with the 
remembrance of it. i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail 
it; yet the tale which i have record would be incomplete without this 
final and wonderful catastrophe. 

i enter the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable 
friend. over him hung a form which i cannot find words to 
describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distort in its 
proportions. as he hung over the coffin, his face was conceal by long 
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and 
apparent texture like that of a mummy. when he heard the sound of my 
approach, he cease to utter exclamation of grief and horror and sprung 
towards the window. never did i behold a vision so horrible as his face, of 
such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. i shut my eyes involuntary and 
endeavour to recollect what were my duty with regard to this destroyer. 
i call on him to stay. 

he paused, look on me with wonder, and again turning towards the 
lifeless form of his creator, he seem to forget my presence, and 
every feature and gesture seem instigate by the wildest rage of some 
uncontrollable passion. 

“that is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “in his murder my 
crime are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its 
close! oh, frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what do it 
avail that i now ask thee to pardon me? i, who irretrievable destroy thee 
by destroy all thou lovedst. alas! he is cold, he cannot answer 
me.” 

his voice seem suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggest to 
me the duty of obey the die request of my friend in destroy his 
enemy, were now suspend by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. i 
approach this tremendous being; i dare not again raise my eyes to his 
face, there was something so scare and unearthly in his ugliness. i 
attempt to speak, but the words die away on my lips. the monster 
continue to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. at length i 
gather resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion. 

“your repentance,” i said, “is now superfluous. if you 
had listen to the voice of conscience and heed the sting of remorse 
before you had urge your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, 
frankenstein would yet have lived.” 

“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that i was then 
dead to agony and remorse? he,” he continued, point to the corpse, 
“he suffer not in the consummation of the deed. oh! not the 
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the 
lingering detail of its execution. a frightful selfish hurried me 
on, while my heart was poison with remorse. think you that the 
groan of clerval were music to my ears? my heart was fashion to be 
susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrench by misery to vice 
and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without 
torture such as you cannot even imagine. 

“after the murder of clerval i return to switzerland, heart-broken 
and overcome. i pity frankenstein; my pity amount to horror; i 
abhor myself. but when i discover that he, the author at once of 
my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dare to hope for 
happiness, that while he accumulate wretched and despair upon me 
he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passion from the 
indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter 
indignation fill me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. i 
recollect my threat and resolve that it should be accomplished. i 
knew that i was prepare for myself a deadly torture, but i was the 
slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detest yet could not 
disobey. yet when she died! nay, then i was not miserable. i had 
cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my 
despair. evil thenceforth became my good. urge thus far, i had no 
choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willing 
chosen. the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable 
passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!” 

i was at first touched by the expression of his misery; yet, when i call 
to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and 
persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my 
friend, indignation was rekindle within me. “wretch!” i said. 
“it is well that you come here to whine over the desolate that you 
have made. you throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are 
consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. hypocrite fiend! 
if he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would 
he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. it is not pity that you 
feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn 
from your power.” 

“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupt the being. 
“yet such must be the impression convey to you by what appear to 
be the purport of my actions. yet i seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. 
no sympathy may i ever find. when i first sought it, it was the love of 
virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being 
overflowed, that i wish to be participated. but now that virtue has 
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turn into 
bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy? i am 
content to suffer alone while my suffering shall endure; when i die, i am 
well satisfy that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. once 
my fancy was soothe with dream of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. once 
i false hope to meet with being who, pardon my outward form, would 
love me for the excellent quality which i was capable of unfolding. i was 
nourish with high thought of honour and devotion. but now crime has 
degrade me beneath the meanest animal. no guilt, no mischief, no 
malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. when i run over the 
frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same 
creature whose thought were once fill with sublime and transcendent 
vision of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. but it is even so; the 
fallen angel become a malignant devil. yet even that enemy of god and man 
had friends and associate in his desolation; i am alone. 

“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my 
crime and his misfortunes. but in the detail which he gave you of them 
he could not sum up the hour and month of misery which i endure 
waste in impotent passions. for while i destroy his hopes, i did 
not satisfy my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still 
i desire love and fellowship, and i was still spurned. was there no 
injustice in this? am i to be thought the only criminal, when all 
humankind sin against me? why do you not hate felix, who drove his 
friend from his door with contumely? why do you not execrate the rustic 
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? nay, these are virtuous 
and immaculate beings! i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an 
abortion, to be spurn at, and kicked, and trample on. even now my 
blood boil at the recollection of this injustice. 

“but it is true that i am a wretch. i have murder the lovely and 
the helpless; i have strangle the innocent as they slept and grasp to 
death his throat who never injure me or any other living thing. i have 
devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and 
admiration among men, to misery; i have pursue him even to that 
irremediable ruin. there he lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but 
your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself. i look on the 
hand which execute the deed; i think on the heart in which the 
imagination of it was conceive and long for the moment when these hand 
will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thought no more. 

“fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief. my work 
is nearly complete. neither yours nor any man’s death is need to 
consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, 
but it require my own. do not think that i shall be slow to perform this 
sacrifice. i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me 
thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall 
collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its 
remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would 
create such another as i have been. i shall die. i shall no long feel the 
agony which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet 
unquenched. he is dead who call me into being; and when i shall be no 
more, the very remembrance of us both will speedy vanish. i shall no 
long see the sun or stars or feel the wind play on my cheeks. light, 
feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my 
happiness. some years ago, when the image which this world afford first 
open upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the 
rustling of the leaves and the warble of the birds, and these were all to 
me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. pollute by 
crime and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in 
death? 

“farewell! i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these 
eyes will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! if thou wert yet alive 
and yet cherish a desire of revenge against me, it would be better 
satiate in my life than in my destruction. but it was not so; thou 
didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness; 
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not cease to think 
and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than 
that which i feel. blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to 
thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my 
wound until death shall close them for ever. 

“but soon,” he cry with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “i 
shall die, and what i now feel be no long felt. soon these burning 
misery will be extinct. i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphant and 
exult in the agony of the torture flames. the light of that conflagration 
will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. my spirit 
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus. 
farewell.” 

he sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft 
which lay close to the vessel. he was soon borne away by the wave and 
lost in dark and distance. 




end of the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein, by 
mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook frankenstein *** 

***** this file should be name 84-0.txt or 84-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/84/ 

produce by judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen, 
and david meltzer. html version by al haines. 
further correction by menno de leeuw. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 













