the project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka 
translate by david wyllie. 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

** this is a copyright project gutenberg ebook, detail below ** 
** please follow the copyright guidelines in this file. ** 


title: metamorphosis 

author: franz kafka 

translator: david wyllie 

release date: august 16, 2005 [ebook #5200] 
first posted: may 13, 2002 
last updated: may 20, 2012 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook metamorphosis *** 




copyright (c) 2002 david wyllie. 





metamorphosis 
franz kafka 

translate by david wyllie 



preface 


one morning, when gregor samsa woke from trouble dreams, he found 
himself transform in his bed into a horrible vermin. he lay on 
his armour-like back, and if he lift his head a little he could 
see his brown belly, slightly domed and divide by arch into stiff 
sections. the bedding was hardly able to cover it and seem ready 
to slide off any moment. his many legs, pitiful thin compare 
with the size of the rest of him, wave about helpless as he 
looked. 

"what's happen to me?" he thought. it wasn't a dream. his room, 
a proper human room although a little too small, lay peaceful 
between its four familiar walls. a collection of textile sample 
lay spread out on the table - samsa was a travel salesman - and 
above it there hung a picture that he had recently cut out of an 
illustrate magazine and house in a nice, gilded frame. it show 
a lady fitted out with a fur hat and fur boa who sat upright, 
raise a heavy fur muff that cover the whole of her lower arm 
towards the viewer. 

gregor then turn to look out the window at the dull weather. 
drops of rain could be heard hit the pane, which made him feel 
quite sad. "how about if i sleep a little bit long and forget all 
this nonsense", he thought, but that was something he was unable to 
do because he was use to sleep on his right, and in his present 
state couldn't get into that position. however hard he threw 
himself onto his right, he always roll back to where he was. he 
must have try it a hundred times, shut his eyes so that he 
wouldn't have to look at the flounder legs, and only stop when 
he began to feel a mild, dull pain there that he had never felt 
before. 

"oh, god", he thought, "what a strenuous career it is that i've 
chosen! travel day in and day out. do business like this 
take much more effort than do your own business at home, and on 
top of that there's the curse of travelling, worry about making 
train connections, bad and irregular food, contact with different 
people all the time so that you can never get to know anyone or 
become friendly with them. it can all go to hell!" he felt a 
slight itch up on his belly; pushed himself slow up on his back 
towards the headboard so that he could lift his head better; found 
where the itch was, and saw that it was cover with lot of little 
white spot which he didn't know what to make of; and when he try 
to feel the place with one of his leg he drew it quick back 
because as soon as he touched it he was overcome by a cold shudder. 

he slid back into his former position. "getting up early all the 
time", he thought, "it make you stupid. you've got to get enough 
sleep. other travel salesmen live a life of luxury. for 
instance, whenever i go back to the guest house during the morning 
to copy out the contract, these gentlemen are always still sitting 
there eat their breakfasts. i ought to just try that with my 
boss; i'd get kick out on the spot. but who knows, maybe that 
would be the best thing for me. if i didn't have my parent to 
think about i'd have given in my notice a long time ago, i'd have 
gone up to the boss and told him just what i think, tell him 
everything i would, let him know just what i feel. he'd fall right 
off his desk! and it's a funny sort of business to be sitting up 
there at your desk, talk down at your subordinate from up there, 
especially when you have to go right up close because the boss is 
hard of hearing. well, there's still some hope; once i've got the 
money together to pay off my parents' debt to him - another five or 
six years i suppose - that's definitely what i'll do. that's when 
i'll make the big change. first of all though, i've got to get up, 
my train leaves at five." 

and he look over at the alarm clock, ticking on the chest of 
drawers. "god in heaven!" he thought. it was half past six and the 
hand were quiet moving forwards, it was even later than half 
past, more like quarter to seven. had the alarm clock not rung? he 
could see from the bed that it had been set for four o'clock as it 
should have been; it certainly must have rung. yes, but was it 
possible to quiet sleep through that furniture-rattling noise? 
true, he had not slept peacefully, but probably all the more deep 
because of that. what should he do now? the next train went at 
seven; if he were to catch that he would have to rush like mad and 
the collection of sample was still not packed, and he did not at 
all feel particularly fresh and lively. and even if he did catch 
the train he would not avoid his boss's anger as the office 
assistant would have been there to see the five o'clock train go, he 
would have put in his report about gregor's not being there a long 
time ago. the office assistant was the boss's man, spineless, and 
with no understanding. what about if he report sick? but that 
would be extremely strained and suspicious as in fifteen years of 
service gregor had never once yet been ill. his boss would 
certainly come round with the doctor from the medical insurance 
company, accuse his parent of have a lazy son, and accept the 
doctor's recommendation not to make any claim as the doctor believe 
that no-one was ever ill but that many were workshy. and what's 
more, would he have been entire wrong in this case? gregor did in 
fact, apart from excessive sleepy after sleep for so long, 
feel completely well and even felt much hungry than usual. 

he was still hurried thinking all this through, unable to decide 
to get out of the bed, when the clock struck quarter to seven. 
there was a cautious knock at the door near his head. "gregor", 
somebody call - it was his mother - "it's quarter to seven. 
didn't you want to go somewhere?" that gentle voice! gregor was 
shock when he heard his own voice answering, it could hardly be 
recognise as the voice he had had before. as if from deep inside 
him, there was a painful and uncontrollable squeak mixed in with 
it, the words could be made out at first but then there was a sort 
of echo which made them unclear, leave the hearer unsure whether 
he had heard properly or not. gregor had want to give a full 
answer and explain everything, but in the circumstances contented 
himself with saying: "yes, mother, yes, thank-you, i'm get up 
now." the change in gregor's voice probably could not be notice 
outside through the wooden door, as his mother was satisfy with 
this explanation and shuffle away. but this short conversation 
made the other member of the family aware that gregor, against 
their expectations was still at home, and soon his father came 
knock at one of the side doors, gently, but with his fist. 
"gregor, gregor", he called, "what's wrong?" and after a short 
while he call again with a warning deep in his voice: "gregor! 
gregor!" at the other side door his sister came plaintively: 
"gregor? aren't you well? do you need anything?" gregor answer to 
both sides: "i'm ready, now", making an effort to remove all the 
strange from his voice by enunciate very careful and putt 
long pause between each, individual word. his father went back to 
his breakfast, but his sister whispered: "gregor, open the door, i 
beg of you." gregor, however, had no thought of opening the door, 
and instead congratulate himself for his cautious habit, acquire 
from his travelling, of lock all door at night even when he was 
at home. 

the first thing he want to do was to get up in peace without being 
disturbed, to get dressed, and most of all to have his breakfast. 
only then would he consider what to do next, as he was well aware 
that he would not bring his thought to any sensible conclusion by 
lie in bed. he remember that he had often felt a slight pain in 
bed, perhaps cause by lie awkwardly, but that had always turn 
out to be pure imagination and he wonder how his imagine would 
slow resolve themselves today. he did not have the slightest 
doubt that the change in his voice was nothing more than the first 
sign of a serious cold, which was an occupational hazard for 
travel salesmen. 

it was a simple matter to throw off the covers; he only had to blow 
himself up a little and they fell off by themselves. but it became 
difficult after that, especially as he was so exceptional broad. 
he would have use his arms and his hand to push himself up; but 
instead of them he only had all those little leg continuous 
moving in different directions, and which he was moreover unable to 
control. if he want to bend one of them, then that was the first 
one that would stretch itself out; and if he finally manage to do 
what he want with that leg, all the other seem to be set free 
and would move about painfully. "this is something that can't be 
done in bed", gregor said to himself, "so don't keep try to do 
it". 

the first thing he want to do was get the lower part of his body 
out of the bed, but he had never seen this lower part, and could not 
imagine what it look like; it turn out to be too hard to move; 
it went so slowly; and finally, almost in a frenzy, when he 
careless shove himself forward with all the force he could 
gather, he chose the wrong direction, hit hard against the lower 
bedpost, and learned from the burning pain he felt that the lower 
part of his body might well, at present, be the most sensitive. 

so then he try to get the top part of his body out of the bed 
first, careful turning his head to the side. this he manage 
quite easily, and despite its breadth and its weight, the bulk of 
his body eventually follow slow in the direction of the head. 
but when he had at last got his head out of the bed and into the 
fresh air it occur to him that if he let himself fall it would be 
a miracle if his head were not injured, so he became afraid to carry 
on push himself forward the same way. and he could not knock 
himself out now at any price; better to stay in bed than lose 
consciousness. 

it took just as much effort to get back to where he had been 
earlier, but when he lay there sighing, and was once more watch 
his leg as they struggle against each other even hard than 
before, if that was possible, he could think of no way of bring 
peace and order to this chaos. he told himself once more that it 
was not possible for him to stay in bed and that the most sensible 
thing to do would be to get free of it in whatever way he could at 
whatever sacrifice. at the same time, though, he did not forget to 
remind himself that calm consideration was much better than rush 
to desperate conclusions. at times like this he would direct his 
eyes to the window and look out as clearly as he could, but 
unfortunately, even the other side of the narrow street was 
envelop in morning fog and the view had little confidence or cheer 
to offer him. "seven o'clock, already", he said to himself when the 
clock struck again, "seven o'clock, and there's still a fog like 
this." and he lay there quiet a while longer, breathing lightly 
as if he perhaps expect the total still to bring things back 
to their real and natural state. 

but then he said to himself: "before it strike quarter past seven 
i'll definitely have to have got properly out of bed. and by then 
somebody will have come round from work to ask what's happen to me 
as well, as they open up at work before seven o'clock." and so he 
set himself to the task of swinging the entire length of his body 
out of the bed all at the same time. if he succeed in fall out 
of bed in this way and kept his head raise as he did so he could 
probably avoid injure it. his back seem to be quite hard, and 
probably nothing would happen to it fall onto the carpet. his 
main concern was for the loud noise he was bound to make, and which 
even through all the door would probably raise concern if not 
alarm. but it was something that had to be risked. 

when gregor was already stick half way out of the bed - the new 
method was more of a game than an effort, all he had to do was rock 
back and forth - it occur to him how simple everything would be 
if somebody came to help him. two strong people - he had his father 
and the maid in mind - would have been more than enough; they would 
only have to push their arms under the dome of his back, peel him 
away from the bed, bend down with the load and then be patient and 
careful as he swang over onto the floor, where, hopefully, the 
little leg would find a use. should he really call for help 
though, even apart from the fact that all the door were locked? 
despite all the difficulty he was in, he could not suppress a smile 
at this thought. 

after a while he had already move so far across that it would have 
been hard for him to keep his balance if he rock too hard. the 
time was now ten past seven and he would have to make a final 
decision very soon. then there was a ring at the door of the flat. 
"that'll be someone from work", he said to himself, and froze very 
still, although his little leg only became all the more lively as 
they dance around. for a moment everything remain quiet. 
"they're not opening the door", gregor said to himself, caught in 
some nonsensical hope. but then of course, the maid's firm steps 
went to the door as ever and open it. gregor only need to hear 
the visitor's first words of greeting and he knew who it was - the 
chief clerk himself. why did gregor have to be the only one 
condemn to work for a company where they immediately became highly 
suspicious at the slightest shortcoming? were all employees, every 
one of them, louts, was there not one of them who was faithful and 
devoted who would go so mad with pang of conscience that he 
couldn't get out of bed if he didn't spend at least a couple of 
hour in the morning on company business? was it really not enough 
to let one of the trainee make enquiry - assume enquiry were 
even necessary - did the chief clerk have to come himself, and did 
they have to show the whole, innocent family that this was so 
suspicious that only the chief clerk could be trust to have the 
wisdom to investigate it? and more because these thought had made 
him upset than through any proper decision, he swang himself with 
all his force out of the bed. there was a loud thump, but it wasn't 
really a loud noise. his fall was soften a little by the carpet, 
and gregor's back was also more elastic than he had thought, which 
made the sound muffle and not too noticeable. he had not held his 
head careful enough, though, and hit it as he fell; annoy and in 
pain, he turn it and rub it against the carpet. 

"something's fallen down in there", said the chief clerk in the room 
on the left. gregor try to imagine whether something of the sort 
that had happen to him today could ever happen to the chief clerk 
too; you had to concede that it was possible. but as if in gruff 
reply to this question, the chief clerk's firm footstep in his 
highly polish boots could now be heard in the adjoin room. 
from the room on his right, gregor's sister whisper to him to let 
him know: "gregor, the chief clerk is here." "yes, i know", said 
gregor to himself; but without daring to raise his voice loud enough 
for his sister to hear him. 

"gregor", said his father now from the room to his left, "the chief 
clerk has come round and wants to know why you didn't leave on the 
early train. we don't know what to say to him. and anyway, he 
wants to speak to you personally. so please open up this door. i'm 
sure he'll be good enough to forgive the untidy of your room." 
then the chief clerk call "good morning, mr. samsa". "he isn't 
well", said his mother to the chief clerk, while his father 
continue to speak through the door. "he isn't well, please believe 
me. why else would gregor have miss a train! the lad only ever 
think about the business. it nearly make me cross the way he 
never go out in the evenings; he's been in town for a week now but 
stay home every evening. he sit with us in the kitchen and just 
read the paper or study train timetables. his idea of relaxation 
is working with his fretsaw. he's made a little frame, for 
instance, it only took him two or three evenings, you'll be amaze 
how nice it is; it's hanging up in his room; you'll see it as soon 
as gregor open the door. anyway, i'm glad you're here; we wouldn't 
have been able to get gregor to open the door by ourselves; he's so 
stubborn; and i'm sure he isn't well, he said this morning that he 
is, but he isn't." "i'll be there in a moment", said gregor slow 
and thoughtfully, but without moving so that he would not miss any 
word of the conversation. "well i can't think of any other way of 
explain it, mrs. samsa", said the chief clerk, "i hope it's 
nothing serious. but on the other hand, i must say that if we 
people in commerce ever become slightly unwell then, fortunately or 
unfortunately as you like, we simply have to overcome it because of 
business considerations." "can the chief clerk come in to see you 
now then?", ask his father impatiently, knock at the door 
again. "no", said gregor. in the room on his right there follow 
a painful silence; in the room on his left his sister began to cry. 

so why did his sister not go and join the others? she had probably 
only just got up and had not even begun to get dressed. and why was 
she crying? was it because he had not got up, and had not let the 
chief clerk in, because he was in danger of lose his job and if 
that happen his boss would once more pursue their parent with the 
same demand as before? there was no need to worry about things like 
that yet. gregor was still there and had not the slightest 
intention of abandon his family. for the time being he just lay 
there on the carpet, and no-one who knew the condition he was in 
would seriously have expect him to let the chief clerk in. it was 
only a minor discourtesy, and a suitable excuse could easily be 
found for it later on, it was not something for which gregor could 
be sack on the spot. and it seem to gregor much more sensible 
to leave him now in peace instead of disturb him with talk at 
him and crying. but the other didn't know what was happening, they 
were worried, that would excuse their behaviour. 

the chief clerk now raise his voice, "mr. samsa", he call to him, 
"what is wrong? you barricade yourself in your room, give us no more 
than yes or no for an answer, you are cause serious and 
unnecessary concern to your parent and you fail - and i mention 
this just by the way - you fail to carry out your business duty in 
a way that is quite unheard of. i'm speak here on behalf of your 
parent and of your employer, and really must request a clear and 
immediate explanation. i am astonished, quite astonished. i 
thought i knew you as a calm and sensible person, and now you 
sudden seem to be showing off with peculiar whims. this morning, 
your employer did suggest a possible reason for your failure to 
appear, it's true - it had to do with the money that was recently 
entrust to you - but i came near to give him my word of honour 
that that could not be the right explanation. but now that i see 
your incomprehensible stubborn i no long feel any wish 
whatsoever to intercede on your behalf. and nor is your position 
all that secure. i had originally intended to say all this to you 
in private, but since you cause me to waste my time here for no good 
reason i don't see why your parent should not also learn of it. 
your turnover has been very unsatisfactory of late; i grant you that 
it's not the time of year to do especially good business, we 
recognise that; but there simply is no time of year to do no 
business at all, mr. samsa, we cannot allow there to be." 

"but sir", call gregor, beside himself and forget all else in 
the excitement, "i'll open up immediately, just a moment. i'm 
slightly unwell, an attack of dizziness, i haven't been able to get 
up. i'm still in bed now. i'm quite fresh again now, though. i'm 
just get out of bed. just a moment. be patient! it's not quite 
as easy as i'd thought. i'm quite alright now, though. it's 
shocking, what can sudden happen to a person! i was quite alright 
last night, my parent know about it, perhaps better than me, i had 
a small symptom of it last night already. they must have notice 
it. i don't know why i didn't let you know at work! but you always 
think you can get over an illness without stay at home. please, 
don't make my parent suffer! there's no basis for any of the 
accusation you're making; nobody's ever said a word to me about any 
of these things. maybe you haven't read the latest contract i sent 
in. i'll set off with the eight o'clock train, as well, these few 
hour of rest have given me strength. you don't need to wait, sir; 
i'll be in the office soon after you, and please be so good as to 
tell that to the boss and recommend me to him!" 

and while gregor gush out these words, hardly knowing what he was 
saying, he made his way over to the chest of drawers - this was 
easily done, probably because of the practise he had already had in 
bed - where he now try to get himself upright. he really did want 
to open the door, really did want to let them see him and to speak 
with the chief clerk; the other were being so insistent, and he was 
curious to learn what they would say when they caught sight of him. 
if they were shock then it would no long be gregor's 
responsibility and he could rest. if, however, they took everything 
calm he would still have no reason to be upset, and if he hurried 
he really could be at the station for eight o'clock. the first few 
times he try to climb up on the smooth chest of drawers he just 
slid down again, but he finally gave himself one last swing and 
stood there upright; the lower part of his body was in serious pain 
but he no long gave any attention to it. now he let himself fall 
against the back of a nearby chair and held tight to the edge of 
it with his little legs. by now he had also calm down, and kept 
quiet so that he could listen to what the chief clerk was saying. 

"did you understand a word of all that?" the chief clerk ask his 
parents, "surely he's not try to make fool of us". "oh, god!" 
call his mother, who was already in tears, "he could be seriously 
ill and we're making him suffer. grete! grete!" she then cried. 
"mother?" his sister call from the other side. they communicate 
across gregor's room. "you'll have to go for the doctor straight 
away. gregor is ill. quick, get the doctor. did you hear the way 
gregor spoke just now?" "that was the voice of an animal", said the 
chief clerk, with a calm that was in contrast with his mother's 
screams. "anna! anna!" his father call into the kitchen through 
the entrance hall, clap his hands, "get a locksmith here, now!" 
and the two girls, their skirt swishing, immediately ran out 
through the hall, wrench open the front door of the flat as they 
went. how had his sister manage to get dress so quickly? there 
was no sound of the door bang shut again; they must have left it 
open; people often do in home where something awful has happened. 

gregor, in contrast, had become much calmer. so they couldn't 
understand his words any more, although they seem clear enough to 
him, clear than before - perhaps his ear had become use to the 
sound. they had realised, though, that there was something wrong 
with him, and were ready to help. the first response to his 
situation had been confident and wise, and that made him feel 
better. he felt that he had been drawn back in among people, and 
from the doctor and the locksmith he expect great and surprising 
achievement - although he did not really distinguish one from the 
other. whatever was said next would be crucial, so, in order to 
make his voice as clear as possible, he cough a little, but taking 
care to do this not too loud as even this might well sound 
different from the way that a human cough and he was no long sure 
he could judge this for himself. meanwhile, it had become very 
quiet in the next room. perhaps his parent were sat at the table 
whisper with the chief clerk, or perhaps they were all pressed 
against the door and listening. 

gregor slow pushed his way over to the door with the chair. once 
there he let go of it and threw himself onto the door, holding 
himself upright against it use the adhesive on the tip of his 
legs. he rest there a little while to recover from the effort 
involved and then set himself to the task of turning the key in the 
lock with his mouth. he seemed, unfortunately, to have no proper 
teeth - how was he, then, to grasp the key? - but the lack of teeth 
was, of course, made up for with a very strong jaw; use the jaw, 
he really was able to start the key turning, ignore the fact that 
he must have been cause some kind of damage as a brown fluid came 
from his mouth, flow over the key and drip onto the floor. 
"listen", said the chief clerk in the next room, "he's turning the 
key." gregor was greatly encourage by this; but they all should 
have been calling to him, his father and his mother too: "well done, 
gregor", they should have cried, "keep at it, keep hold of the 
lock!" and with the idea that they were all excited following his 
efforts, he bit on the key with all his strength, pay no 
attention to the pain he was cause himself. as the key turn 
round he turn around the lock with it, only holding himself 
upright with his mouth, and hung onto the key or pushed it down 
again with the whole weight of his body as needed. the clear sound 
of the lock as it snap back was gregor's sign that he could break 
his concentration, and as he regain his breath he said to himself: 
"so, i didn't need the locksmith after all". then he lay his head on 
the handle of the door to open it completely. 

because he had to open the door in this way, it was already wide 
open before he could be seen. he had first to slow turn himself 
around one of the double doors, and he had to do it very careful 
if he did not want to fall flat on his back before enter the 
room. he was still occupy with this difficult movement, unable to 
pay attention to anything else, when he heard the chief clerk 
exclaim a loud "oh!", which sound like the sough of the wind. 
now he also saw him - he was the nearest to the door - his hand 
pressed against his open mouth and slow retreat as if driven by 
a steady and invisible force. gregor's mother, her hair still 
dishevelled from bed despite the chief clerk's being there, look 
at his father. then she unfold her arms, took two steps forward 
towards gregor and sank down onto the floor into her skirt that 
spread themselves out around her as her head disappear down onto 
her breast. his father look hostile, and clench his fist as if 
wanting to knock gregor back into his room. then he look 
uncertain round the living room, cover his eyes with his hand 
and wept so that his powerful chest shook. 

so gregor did not go into the room, but leant against the inside of 
the other door which was still held bolt in place. in this way 
only half of his body could be seen, along with his head above it 
which he leant over to one side as he peer out at the others. 
meanwhile the day had become much lighter; part of the endless, 
grey-black building on the other side of the street - which was a 
hospital - could be seen quite clearly with the austere and regular 
line of window piercing its facade; the rain was still 
falling, now throw down large, individual droplet which hit the 
ground one at a time. the washing up from breakfast lay on the 
table; there was so much of it because, for gregor's father, 
breakfast was the most important meal of the day and he would 
stretch it out for several hour as he sat reading a number of 
different newspapers. on the wall exactly opposite there was 
photograph of gregor when he was a lieutenant in the army, his sword 
in his hand and a carefree smile on his face as he call forth 
respect for his uniform and bearing. the door to the entrance hall 
was open and as the front door of the flat was also open he could 
see onto the landing and the stairs where they began their way down 
below. 

"now, then", said gregor, well aware that he was the only one to 
have kept calm, "i'll get dress straight away now, pack up my 
sample and set off. will you please just let me leave? you can 
see", he said to the chief clerk, "that i'm not stubborn and i 
like to do my job; being a commercial traveller is arduous but 
without travel i couldn't earn my living. so where are you 
going, in to the office? yes? will you report everything accurately, 
then? it's quite possible for someone to be temporary unable to 
work, but that's just the right time to remember what's been 
achieve in the past and consider that later on, once the difficulty 
has been removed, he will certainly work with all the more diligence 
and concentration. you're well aware that i'm seriously in debt to 
our employer as well as have to look after my parent and my 
sister, so that i'm trap in a difficult situation, but i will 
work my way out of it again. please don't make things any hard 
for me than they are already, and don't take side against me at the 
office. i know that nobody likes the travellers. they think we 
earn an enormous wage as well as have a soft time of it. that's 
just prejudice but they have no particular reason to think better of 
it. but you, sir, you have a better overview than the rest of the 
staff, in fact, if i can say this in confidence, a better overview 
than the boss himself - it's very easy for a businessman like him to 
make mistake about his employee and judge them more harsh than 
he should. and you're also well aware that we traveller spend 
almost the whole year away from the office, so that we can very 
easily fall victim to gossip and chance and groundless complaints, 
and it's almost impossible to defend yourself from that sort of 
thing, we don't usually even hear about them, or if at all it's when 
we arrive back home exhaust from a trip, and that's when we feel 
the harmful effects of what's been go on without even knowing 
what cause them. please, don't go away, at least first say 
something to show that you grant that i'm at least partly right!" 

but the chief clerk had turn away as soon as gregor had start to 
speak, and, with protrude lips, only stare back at him over his 
tremble shoulder as he left. he did not keep still for a moment 
while gregor was speaking, but move steady towards the door 
without taking his eyes off him. he move very gradually, as if 
there had been some secret prohibition on leave the room. it was 
only when he had reach the entrance hall that he made a sudden 
movement, drew his foot from the living room, and rush forward in 
a panic. in the hall, he stretch his right hand far out towards 
the stairway as if out there, there were some supernatural force 
wait to save him. 

gregor realise that it was out of the question to let the chief 
clerk go away in this mood if his position in the firm was not to be 
put into extreme danger. that was something his parent did not 
understand very well; over the years, they had become convinced that 
this job would provide for gregor for his entire life, and besides, 
they had so much to worry about at present that they had lost sight 
of any thought for the future. gregor, though, did think about the 
future. the chief clerk had to be held back, calm down, convinced 
and finally won over; the future of gregor and his family depend 
on it! if only his sister were here! she was clever; she was already 
in tear while gregor was still lie peaceful on his back. and 
the chief clerk was a lover of women, surely she could persuade him; 
she would close the front door in the entrance hall and talk him out 
of his shock state. but his sister was not there, gregor would 
have to do the job himself. and without considering that he still 
was not familiar with how well he could move about in his present 
state, or that his speech still might not - or probably would not - 
be understood, he let go of the door; pushed himself through the 
opening; try to reach the chief clerk on the landing who, 
ridiculously, was holding on to the banister with both hands; but 
gregor fell immediately over and, with a little scream as he sought 
something to hold onto, landed on his numerous little legs. hardly 
had that happen than, for the first time that day, he began to 
feel alright with his body; the little leg had the solid ground 
under them; to his pleasure, they did exactly as he told them; they 
were even making the effort to carry him where he want to go; and 
he was soon believe that all his sorrow would soon be finally at 
an end. he held back the urge to move but sway from side to side 
as he crouch there on the floor. his mother was not far away in 
front of him and seemed, at first, quite engross in herself, but 
then she sudden jump up with her arms outstretched and her 
finger spread shouting: "help, for pity's sake, help!" the way she 
held her head suggest she want to see gregor better, but the 
unthinking way she was hurry backwards show that she did not; 
she had forgotten that the table was behind her with all the 
breakfast things on it; when she reach the table she sat quick 
down on it without knowing what she was doing; without even seeming 
to notice that the coffee pot had been knock over and a gush of 
coffee was pour down onto the carpet. 

"mother, mother", said gregor gently, look up at her. he had 
completely forgotten the chief clerk for the moment, but could not 
help himself snap in the air with his jaws at the sight of the 
flow of coffee. that set his mother scream anew, she flee from 
the table and into the arms of his father as he rush towards her. 
gregor, though, had no time to spare for his parent now; the chief 
clerk had already reach the stairs; with his chin on the banister, 
he look back for the last time. gregor made a run for him; he 
want to be sure of reach him; the chief clerk must have 
expect something, as he leapt down several steps at once and 
disappeared; his shout resounding all around the staircase. the 
flight of the chief clerk seemed, unfortunately, to put gregor's 
father into a panic as well. until then he had been relatively self 
controlled, but now, instead of running after the chief clerk 
himself, or at least not impede gregor as he ran after him, 
gregor's father seize the chief clerk's stick in his right hand 
(the chief clerk had left it behind on a chair, along with his hat 
and overcoat), picked up a large newspaper from the table with his 
left, and use them to drive gregor back into his room, stamp his 
foot at him as he went. gregor's appeal to his father were of no 
help, his appeal were simply not understood, however much he humble 
turn his head his father merely stamp his foot all the harder. 
across the room, despite the chilly weather, gregor's mother had 
pull open a window, leant far out of it and pressed her hand to 
her face. a strong draught of air flew in from the street towards 
the stairway, the curtains flew up, the newspaper on the table 
flutter and some of them were blown onto the floor. nothing would 
stop gregor's father as he drove him back, making hiss noise at 
him like a wild man. gregor had never had any practice in moving 
backwards and was only able to go very slowly. if gregor had only 
been allow to turn round he would have been back in his room 
straight away, but he was afraid that if he took the time to do that 
his father would become impatient, and there was the threat of a 
lethal blow to his back or head from the stick in his father's hand 
any moment. eventually, though, gregor realise that he had no 
choice as he saw, to his disgust, that he was quite incapable of 
go backwards in a straight line; so he began, as quick as 
possible and with frequent anxious glance at his father, to turn 
himself round. it went very slowly, but perhaps his father was able 
to see his good intentions as he did nothing to hinder him, in fact 
now and then he use the tip of his stick to give directions from a 
distance as to which way to turn. if only his father would stop 
that unbearable hissing! it was making gregor quite confused. when 
he had nearly finished turning round, still listen to that 
hissing, he made a mistake and turn himself back a little the way 
he had just come. he was pleased when he finally had his head in 
front of the doorway, but then saw that it was too narrow, and his 
body was too broad to get through it without further difficulty. in 
his present mood, it obviously did not occur to his father to open 
the other of the double door so that gregor would have enough space 
to get through. he was merely fixed on the idea that gregor should 
be got back into his room as quick as possible. nor would he ever 
have allow gregor the time to get himself upright as preparation 
for get through the doorway. what he did, making more noise 
than ever, was to drive gregor forward all the hard as if there 
had been nothing in the way; it sound to gregor as if there was 
now more than one father behind him; it was not a pleasant 
experience, and gregor pushed himself into the doorway without 
regard for what might happen. one side of his body lift itself, 
he lay at an angle in the doorway, one flank scrape on the white 
door and was painful injured, leave vile brown fleck on it, 
soon he was stuck fast and would not have been able to move at all 
by himself, the little leg along one side hung quiver in the air 
while those on the other side were pressed painful against the 
ground. then his father gave him a hefty shove from behind which 
release him from where he was held and sent him flying, and heavy 
bleeding, deep into his room. the door was slam shut with the 
stick, then, finally, all was quiet. 



ii 


it was not until it was get dark that evening that gregor awoke 
from his deep and coma-like sleep. he would have woken soon 
afterwards anyway even if he hadn't been disturbed, as he had had 
enough sleep and felt fully rested. but he had the impression that 
some hurried steps and the sound of the door leading into the front 
room being careful shut had woken him. the light from the 
electric street lamp shone pale here and there onto the ceiling 
and tops of the furniture, but down below, where gregor was, it was 
dark. he pushed himself over to the door, feeling his way clumsy 
with his antennae - of which he was now beginning to learn the value 
- in order to see what had been happening there. the whole of his 
left side seem like one, painful stretch scar, and he limp 
badly on his two row of legs. one of the leg had been badly 
injure in the event of that morning - it was nearly a miracle that 
only one of them had been - and drag along lifelessly. 

it was only when he had reach the door that he realise what it 
actually was that had drawn him over to it; it was the smell of 
something to eat. by the door there was a dish fill with 
sweeten milk with little pieces of white bread floating in it. he 
was so pleased he almost laughed, as he was even hungry than he 
had been that morning, and immediately dip his head into the 
milk, nearly covering his eyes with it. but he soon drew his head 
back again in disappointment; not only did the pain in his tender 
left side make it difficult to eat the food - he was only able to 
eat if his whole body work together as a snuffle whole - but the 
milk did not taste at all nice. milk like this was normally his 
favourite drink, and his sister had certainly left it there for him 
because of that, but he turned, almost against his own will, away 
from the dish and crawl back into the centre of the room. 

through the crack in the door, gregor could see that the gas had 
been lit in the living room. his father at this time would normally 
be sat with his evening paper, reading it out in a loud voice to 
gregor's mother, and sometimes to his sister, but there was now not 
a sound to be heard. gregor's sister would often write and tell him 
about this reading, but maybe his father had lost the habit in 
recent times. it was so quiet all around too, even though there 
must have been somebody in the flat. "what a quiet life it is the 
family lead", said gregor to himself, and, gaze into the darkness, 
felt a great pride that he was able to provide a life like that in 
such a nice home for his sister and parents. but what now, if all 
this peace and wealth and comfort should come to a horrible and 
frighten end? that was something that gregor did not want to 
think about too much, so he start to move about, crawl up and 
down the room. 

once during that long evening, the door on one side of the room was 
open very slightly and hurried closed again; later on the door 
on the other side did the same; it seem that someone need to 
enter the room but thought better of it. gregor went and wait 
immediately by the door, resolve either to bring the timorous 
visitor into the room in some way or at least to find out who it 
was; but the door was open no more that night and gregor wait in 
vain. the previous morning while the door were lock everyone had 
want to get in there to him, but now, now that he had open up 
one of the door and the other had clearly been unlock some time 
during the day, no-one came, and the key were in the other sides. 

it was not until late at night that the gaslight in the living room 
was put out, and now it was easy to see that his parent and sister had 
stay awake all that time, as they all could be distinct heard as 
they went away together on tip-toe. it was clear that no-one would 
come into gregor's room any more until morning; that gave him plenty 
of time to think undisturbed about how he would have to re-arrange 
his life. for some reason, the tall, empty room where he was forced 
to remain made him feel uneasy as he lay there flat on the floor, 
even though he had been living in it for five years. hardly aware 
of what he was do other than a slight feeling of shame, he 
hurried under the couch. it pressed down on his back a little, and 
he was no long able to lift his head, but he nonetheless felt 
immediately at ease and his only regret was that his body was too 
broad to get it all underneath. 

he spent the whole night there. some of the time he pass in a 
light sleep, although he frequent woke from it in alarm because of 
his hunger, and some of the time was spent in worry and vague 
hope which, however, always led to the same conclusion: for the 
time being he must remain calm, he must show patience and the 
greatest consideration so that his family could bear the 
unpleasant that he, in his present condition, was forced to 
impose on them. 

gregor soon had the opportunity to test the strength of his 
decisions, as early the next morning, almost before the night had 
ended, his sister, nearly fully dressed, open the door from the 
front room and look anxious in. she did not see him straight 
away, but when she did notice him under the couch - he had to be 
somewhere, for god's sake, he couldn't have flown away - she was so 
shock that she lost control of herself and slam the door shut 
again from outside. but she seem to regret her behaviour, as she 
open the door again straight away and came in on tip-toe as if 
enter the room of someone seriously ill or even of a stranger. 
gregor had pushed his head forward, right to the edge of the couch, 
and watch her. would she notice that he had left the milk as it 
was, realise that it was not from any lack of hunger and bring him 
in some other food that was more suitable? if she didn't do it 
herself he would rather go hungry than draw her attention to it, 
although he did feel a terrible urge to rush forward from under the 
couch, throw himself at his sister's feet and beg her for something 
good to eat. however, his sister notice the full dish immediately 
and look at it and the few drops of milk splash around it with 
some surprise. she immediately picked it up - use a rag, 
not her bare hand - and carry it out. gregor was extremely 
curious as to what she would bring in its place, imagine the 
wildest possibilities, but he never could have guess what his 
sister, in her goodness, actually did bring. in order to test his 
taste, she brought him a whole selection of things, all spread out 
on an old newspaper. there were old, half-rotten vegetables; bone 
from the evening meal, cover in white sauce that had gone hard; a 
few raisin and almonds; some cheese that gregor had declared 
inedible two days before; a dry roll and some bread spread with 
butter and salt. as well as all that she had pour some water into 
the dish, which had probably been permanent set aside for gregor's 
use, and placed it beside them. then, out of consideration for 
gregor's feelings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of 
her, she hurried out again and even turn the key in the lock so 
that gregor would know he could make things as comfortable for 
himself as he liked. gregor's little leg whirred, at last he could 
eat. what's more, his injury must already have completely heal 
as he found no difficulty in moving. this amaze him, as more than 
a month early he had cut his finger slightly with a knife, he 
thought of how his finger had still hurt the day before yesterday. 
"am i less sensitive than i use to be, then?", he thought, and was 
already suck greedy at the cheese which had immediately, almost 
compellingly, attract him much more than the other food on the 
newspaper. quick one after another, his eyes water with 
pleasure, he consume the cheese, the vegetable and the sauce; the 
fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn't like at all, and even 
drag the things he did want to eat a little way away from them 
because he couldn't stand the smell. long after he had finished 
eat and lay lethargy in the same place, his sister slow turn 
the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should withdraw. he 
was immediately startled, although he had been half asleep, and he 
hurried back under the couch. but he need great self-control to 
stay there even for the short time that his sister was in the room, 
as eat so much food had round out his body a little and he 
could hardly breathe in that narrow space. half suffocating, he 
watch with bulge eyes as his sister unselfconscious took a 
broom and swept up the left-overs, mix them in with the food he 
had not even touched at all as if it could not be use any more. 
she quick drop it all into a bin, closed it with its wooden 
lid, and carry everything out. she had hardly turn her back 
before gregor came out again from under the couch and stretch 
himself. 

this was how gregor received his food each day now, once in the 
morning while his parent and the maid were still asleep, and the 
second time after everyone had eaten their meal at midday as his 
parent would sleep for a little while then as well, and gregor's 
sister would send the maid away on some errand. gregor's father and 
mother certainly did not want him to starve either, but perhaps it 
would have been more than they could stand to have any more 
experience of his feed than being told about it, and perhaps his 
sister want to spare them what distress she could as they were 
indeed suffering enough. 

it was impossible for gregor to find out what they had told the 
doctor and the locksmith that first morning to get them out of the 
flat. as nobody could understand him, nobody, not even his sister, 
thought that he could understand them, so he had to be content to 
hear his sister's sigh and appeal to the saint as she move about 
his room. it was only later, when she had become a little more use 
to everything - there was, of course, no question of her ever 
becoming fully use to the situation - that gregor would sometimes 
catch a friendly comment, or at least a comment that could be 
construe as friendly. "he's enjoy his dinner today", she might 
say when he had diligent clear away all the food left for him, 
or if he left most of it, which slow became more and more 
frequent, she would often say, sadly, "now everything's just been 
left there again". 

although gregor wasn't able to hear any news directly he did listen 
to much of what was said in the next rooms, and whenever he heard 
anyone speak he would scurry straight to the appropriate door and 
press his whole body against it. there was seldom any conversation, 
especially at first, that was not about him in some way, even if 
only in secret. for two whole days, all the talk at every mealtime 
was about what they should do now; but even between meal they spoke 
about the same subject as there were always at least two member of 
the family at home - nobody want to be at home by themselves and 
it was out of the question to leave the flat entire empty. and on 
the very first day the maid had fallen to her knee and beg 
gregor's mother to let her go without delay. it was not very clear 
how much she knew of what had happen but she left within a quarter 
of an hour, tearful thank gregor's mother for her dismissal as 
if she had done her an enormous service. she even swore 
emphatically not to tell anyone the slightest about what had 
happened, even though no-one had ask that of her. 

now gregor's sister also had to help his mother with the cooking; 
although that was not so much bother as no-one ate very much. 
gregor often heard how one of them would unsuccessful urge another 
to eat, and receive no more answer than "no thanks, i've had enough" 
or something similar. no-one drank very much either. his sister 
would sometimes ask his father whether he would like a beer, hope 
for the chance to go and fetch it herself. when his father then 
said nothing she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that 
she could send the housekeeper for it, but then his father would 
close the matter with a big, loud "no", and no more would be said. 

even before the first day had come to an end, his father had 
explain to gregor's mother and sister what their finances and 
prospects were. now and then he stood up from the table and took 
some receipt or document from the little cash box he had save from 
his business when it had collapse five years earlier. gregor heard 
how he open the complicated lock and then closed it again after he 
had taken the item he wanted. what he heard his father say was some 
of the first good news that gregor heard since he had first been 
incarcerate in his room. he had thought that nothing at all 
remain from his father's business, at least he had never told him 
anything different, and gregor had never ask him about it anyway. 
their business misfortune had reduce the family to a state of total 
despair, and gregor's only concern at that time had been to arrange 
things so that they could all forget about it as quick as 
possible. so then he start working especially hard, with a fiery 
vigour that raise him from a junior salesman to a travel 
representative almost overnight, bring with it the chance to earn 
money in quite different ways. gregor convert his success at work 
straight into cash that he could lay on the table at home for the 
benefit of his astonish and delight family. they had been good 
times and they had never come again, at least not with the same 
splendour, even though gregor had later earn so much that he was 
in a position to bear the costs of the whole family, and did bear 
them. they had even got use to it, both gregor and the family, 
they took the money with gratitude and he was glad to provide it, 
although there was no long much warm affection given in return. 
gregor only remain close to his sister now. unlike him, she was 
very fond of music and a gifted and expressive violinist, it was his 
secret plan to send her to the conservatory next year even though it 
would cause great expense that would have to be made up for in some 
other way. during gregor's short periods in town, conversation with 
his sister would often turn to the conservatory but it was only ever 
mention as a lovely dream that could never be realised. their 
parent did not like to hear this innocent talk, but gregor thought 
about it quite hard and decided he would let them know what he 
plan with a grand announcement of it on christmas day. 

that was the sort of total pointless thing that went through his 
mind in his present state, pressed upright against the door and 
listening. there were times when he simply became too tired to 
continue listening, when his head would fall weary against the 
door and he would pull it up again with a start, as even the 
slightest noise he cause would be heard next door and they would 
all go silent. "what's that he's do now", his father would say 
after a while, clearly have gone over to the door, and only then 
would the interrupt conversation slow be taken up again. 

when explain things, his father repeated himself several times, 
partly because it was a long time since he had been occupy with 
these matter himself and partly because gregor's mother did not 
understand everything the first time. from these repeated explanation 
gregor learned, to his pleasure, that despite all their misfortune 
there was still some money available from the old days. it was not 
a lot, but it had not been touched in the meantime and some interest 
had accumulated. besides that, they had not been use up all the 
money that gregor had been bring home every month, keeping only a 
little for himself, so that that, too, had been accumulating. 
behind the door, gregor nod with enthusiasm in his pleasure at 
this unexpected thrift and caution. he could actually have use 
this surplus money to reduce his father's debt to his boss, and the 
day when he could have free himself from that job would have come 
much closer, but now it was certainly better the way his father had 
done things. 

this money, however, was certainly not enough to enable the family 
to live off the interest; it was enough to maintain them for, 
perhaps, one or two years, no more. that's to say, it was money 
that should not really be touched but set aside for emergencies; 
money to live on had to be earned. his father was healthy but old, 
and lacking in self confidence. during the five years that he had 
not been working - the first holiday in a life that had been full of 
strain and no success - he had put on a lot of weight and become 
very slow and clumsy. would gregor's elderly mother now have to go 
and earn money? she suffer from asthma and it was a strain for her 
just to move about the home, every other day would be spent 
struggle for breath on the sofa by the open window. would his 
sister have to go and earn money? she was still a child of 
seventeen, her life up till then had been very enviable, consist 
of wearing nice clothes, sleep late, helping out in the business, 
join in with a few modest pleasure and most of all play the 
violin. whenever they began to talk of the need to earn money, 
gregor would always first let go of the door and then throw himself 
onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he became quite hot with 
shame and regret. 

he would often lie there the whole night through, not sleep a 
wink but scratch at the leather for hour on end. or he might go 
to all the effort of push a chair to the window, climb up onto 
the sill and, prop up in the chair, leaning on the window to 
stare out of it. he had use to feel a great sense of freedom from 
do this, but do it now was obviously something more remember 
than experienced, as what he actually saw in this way was becoming 
less distinct every day, even things that were quite near; he had 
use to curse the ever-present view of the hospital across the 
street, but now he could not see it at all, and if he had not known 
that he live in charlottenstrasse, which was a quiet street despite 
being in the middle of the city, he could have thought that he was 
look out the window at a barren waste where the grey sky and the 
grey earth mingle inseparably. his observant sister only need to 
notice the chair twice before she would always push it back to its 
exact position by the window after she had tidy up the room, and 
even left the inner pane of the window open from then on. 

if gregor had only been able to speak to his sister and thank her 
for all that she had to do for him it would have been easy for him 
to bear it; but as it was it cause him pain. his sister, 
naturally, try as far as possible to pretend there was nothing 
burdensome about it, and the long it went on, of course, the 
better she was able to do so, but as time went by gregor was also 
able to see through it all so much better. it had even become very 
unpleasant for him, now, whenever she enter the room. no soon 
had she come in than she would quick close the door as a 
precaution so that no-one would have to suffer the view into 
gregor's room, then she would go straight to the window and pull it 
hurried open almost as if she were suffocating. even if it was 
cold, she would stay at the window breathing deep for a little 
while. she would alarm gregor twice a day with this running about 
and noise making; he would stay under the couch shiver the whole 
while, knowing full well that she would certainly have like to 
spare him this ordeal, but it was impossible for her to be in the 
same room with him with the window closed. 

one day, about a month after gregor's transformation when his sister 
no long had any particular reason to be shock at his appearance, 
she came into the room a little early than usual and found him 
still staring out the window, motionless, and just where he would be 
most horrible. in itself, his sister's not coming into the room 
would have been no surprise for gregor as it would have been 
difficult for her to immediately open the window while he was still 
there, but not only did she not come in, she went straight back and 
closed the door behind her, a stranger would have thought he had 
threaten her and try to bite her. gregor went straight to hide 
himself under the couch, of course, but he had to wait until midday 
before his sister came back and she seem much more uneasy than 
usual. it made him realise that she still found his appearance 
unbearable and would continue to do so, she probably even had to 
overcome the urge to flee when she saw the little bit of him that 
protrude from under the couch. one day, in order to spare her even 
this sight, he spent four hour carry the bedsheet over to the 
couch on his back and arrange it so that he was completely cover 
and his sister would not be able to see him even if she bent down. 
if she did not think this sheet was necessary then all she had to do 
was take it off again, as it was clear enough that it was no 
pleasure for gregor to cut himself off so completely. she left the 
sheet where it was. gregor even thought he glimpse a look of 
gratitude one time when he careful look out from under the sheet 
to see how his sister like the new arrangement. 

for the first fourteen days, gregor's parent could not bring 
themselves to come into the room to see him. he would often hear 
them say how they appreciate all the new work his sister was do 
even though, before, they had seen her as a girl who was somewhat 
useless and frequent been annoy with her. but now the two of 
them, father and mother, would often both wait outside the door of 
gregor's room while his sister tidy up in there, and as soon as 
she went out again she would have to tell them exactly how 
everything looked, what gregor had eaten, how he had behave this 
time and whether, perhaps, any slight improvement could be seen. 
his mother also want to go in and visit gregor relatively soon but 
his father and sister at first persuade her against it. gregor 
listen very close to all this, and approve fully. later, 
though, she had to be held back by force, which made her call out: 
"let me go and see gregor, he is my unfortunate son! can't you 
understand i have to see him?", and gregor would think to himself 
that maybe it would be better if his mother came in, not every day 
of course, but one day a week, perhaps; she could understand 
everything much better than his sister who, for all her courage, was 
still just a child after all, and really might not have had an 
adult's appreciation of the burdensome job she had taken on. 

gregor's wish to see his mother was soon realised. out of 
consideration for his parents, gregor want to avoid being seen at 
the window during the day, the few square meter of the floor did 
not give him much room to crawl about, it was hard to just lie 
quiet through the night, his food soon stop give him any 
pleasure at all, and so, to entertain himself, he got into the habit 
of crawl up and down the wall and ceiling. he was especially 
fond of hanging from the ceiling; it was quite different from lie 
on the floor; he could breathe more freely; his body had a light 
swing to it; and up there, relax and almost happy, it might happen 
that he would surprise even himself by letting go of the ceiling and 
landing on the floor with a crash. but now, of course, he had far 
better control of his body than before and, even with a fall as 
great as that, cause himself no damage. very soon his sister 
notice gregor's new way of entertaining himself - he had, after 
all, left trace of the adhesive from his feet as he crawl about - 
and got it into her head to make it as easy as possible for him by 
remove the furniture that got in his way, especially the chest of 
drawers and the desk. now, this was not something that she would be 
able to do by herself; she did not dare to ask for help from her 
father; the sixteen year old maid had carry on brave since the 
cook had left but she certainly would not have help in this, she 
had even ask to be allow to keep the kitchen lock at all times 
and never to have to open the door unless it was especially 
important; so his sister had no choice but to choose some time when 
gregor's father was not there and fetch his mother to help her. as 
she approach the room, gregor could hear his mother express her 
joy, but once at the door she went silent. first, of course, his 
sister came in and look round to see that everything in the room 
was alright; and only then did she let her mother enter. gregor had 
hurried pull the sheet down lower over the couch and put more 
fold into it so that everything really look as if it had just 
been thrown down by chance. gregor also refrained, this time, from 
spy out from under the sheet; he gave up the chance to see his 
mother until later and was simply glad that she had come. "you can 
come in, he can't be seen", said his sister, obviously leading her 
in by the hand. the old chest of drawers was too heavy for a pair 
of feeble women to be heave about, but gregor listen as they 
pushed it from its place, his sister always taking on the heaviest 
part of the work for herself and ignore her mother's warning that 
she would strain herself. this last a very long time. after 
labour at it for fifteen minutes or more his mother said it would 
be better to leave the chest where it was, for one thing it was too 
heavy for them to get the job finished before gregor's father got 
home and leave it in the middle of the room it would be in his way 
even more, and for another thing it wasn't even sure that taking the 
furniture away would really be any help to him. she thought just 
the opposite; the sight of the bare wall sadden her right to her 
heart; and why wouldn't gregor feel the same way about it, he'd been 
use to this furniture in his room for a long time and it would make 
him feel abandoned to be in an empty room like that. then, quietly, 
almost whisper as if wanting gregor (whose whereabouts she did 
not know) to hear not even the tone of her voice, as she was 
convinced that he did not understand her words, she add "and by 
taking the furniture away, won't it seem like we're showing that 
we've given up all hope of improvement and we're abandon him to 
cope for himself? i think it'd be best to leave the room exactly the 
way it was before so that when gregor come back to us again he'll 
find everything unchanged and he'll be able to forget the time in 
between all the easier". 

hearing these words from his mother made gregor realise that the 
lack of any direct human communication, along with the monotonous 
life led by the family during these two months, must have made him 
confuse - he could think of no other way of explain to himself 
why he had seriously want his room empty out. had he really 
want to transform his room into a cave, a warm room fitted out 
with the nice furniture he had inherited? that would have let him 
crawl around unimpeded in any direction, but it would also have let 
him quick forget his past when he had still been human. he had 
come very close to forgetting, and it had only been the voice of his 
mother, unheard for so long, that had shaken him out of it. nothing 
should be removed; everything had to stay; he could not do without 
the good influence the furniture had on his condition; and if the 
furniture made it difficult for him to crawl about mindless that 
was not a loss but a great advantage. 

his sister, unfortunately, did not agree; she had become use to the 
idea, not without reason, that she was gregor's spokesman to his 
parent about the things that concerned him. this meant that his 
mother's advice now was sufficient reason for her to insist on 
remove not only the chest of drawers and the desk, as she had 
thought at first, but all the furniture apart from the all-important 
couch. it was more than childish perversity, of course, or the 
unexpected confidence she had recently acquired, that made her 
insist; she had indeed notice that gregor need a lot of room to 
crawl about in, whereas the furniture, as far as anyone could see, 
was of no use to him at all. girl of that age, though, do become 
enthusiast about things and feel they must get their way whenever 
they can. perhaps this was what tempt grete to make gregor's 
situation seem even more shocking than it was so that she could do 
even more for him. grete would probably be the only one who would 
dare enter a room dominate by gregor crawl about the bare wall 
by himself. 

so she refuse to let her mother dissuade her. gregor's mother 
already look uneasy in his room, she soon stop speak and 
help gregor's sister to get the chest of drawers out with what 
strength she had. the chest of drawers was something that gregor 
could do without if he had to, but the writing desk had to stay. 
hardly had the two women pushed the chest of drawers, groaning, out 
of the room than gregor poke his head out from under the couch to 
see what he could do about it. he meant to be as careful and 
considerate as he could, but, unfortunately, it was his mother who 
came back first while grete in the next room had her arms round the 
chest, push and pull at it from side to side by herself 
without, of course, moving it an inch. his mother was not use to 
the sight of gregor, he might have made her ill, so gregor hurried 
backwards to the far end of the couch. in his startlement, though, 
he was not able to prevent the sheet at its front from moving a 
little. it was enough to attract his mother's attention. she stood 
very still, remain there a moment, and then went back out to 
grete. 

gregor kept try to assure himself that nothing unusual was 
happening, it was just a few pieces of furniture being move after 
all, but he soon had to admit that the women go to and fro, their 
little call to each other, the scrape of the furniture on the 
floor, all these things made him feel as if he were being assail 
from all sides. with his head and leg pull in against him and 
his body pressed to the floor, he was forced to admit to himself 
that he could not stand all of this much longer. they were empty 
his room out; taking away everything that was dear to him; they had 
already taken out the chest contain his fretsaw and other tools; 
now they threaten to remove the writing desk with its place 
clearly worn into the floor, the desk where he had done his homework 
as a business trainee, at high school, even while he had been at 
infant school--he really could not wait any long to see whether 
the two women's intentions were good. he had nearly forgotten they 
were there anyway, as they were now too tired to say anything while 
they work and he could only hear their feet as they step 
heavy on the floor. 

so, while the women were leant against the desk in the other room 
catching their breath, he sally out, change direction four times 
not knowing what he should save first before his attention was 
sudden caught by the picture on the wall - which was already 
denude of everything else that had been on it - of the lady dress 
in copious fur. he hurried up onto the picture and pressed himself 
against its glass, it held him firm and felt good on his hot 
belly. this picture at least, now total cover by gregor, would 
certainly be taken away by no-one. he turn his head to face the 
door into the living room so that he could watch the women when they 
came back. 

they had not allow themselves a long rest and came back quite 
soon; grete had put her arm around her mother and was nearly 
carry her. "what shall we take now, then?", said grete and 
look around. her eyes met those of gregor on the wall. perhaps 
only because her mother was there, she remain calm, bent her face 
to her so that she would not look round and said, albeit hurried 
and with a tremor in her voice: "come on, let's go back in the 
living room for a while?" gregor could see what grete had in mind, 
she want to take her mother somewhere safe and then chase him down 
from the wall. well, she could certainly try it! he sat unyield 
on his picture. he would rather jump at grete's face. 

but grete's words had made her mother quite worried, she step to 
one side, saw the enormous brown patch against the flower of the 
wallpaper, and before she even realise it was gregor that she saw 
screamed: "oh god, oh god!" arms outstretched, she fell onto the 
couch as if she had given up everything and stay there immobile. 
"gregor!" shout his sister, glower at him and shake her fist. 
that was the first word she had spoken to him directly since his 
transformation. she ran into the other room to fetch some kind of 
smell salts to bring her mother out of her faint; gregor want 
to help too - he could save his picture later, although he stuck 
fast to the glass and had to pull himself off by force; then he, 
too, ran into the next room as if he could advise his sister like in 
the old days; but he had to just stand behind her do nothing; she 
was look into various bottles, he startle her when she turn 
round; a bottle fell to the ground and broke; a splinter cut 
gregor's face, some kind of caustic medicine splash all over him; 
now, without delay any longer, grete took hold of all the bottle 
she could and ran with them in to her mother; she slam the door 
shut with her foot. so now gregor was shut out from his mother, 
who, because of him, might be near to death; he could not open the 
door if he did not want to chase his sister away, and she had to 
stay with his mother; there was nothing for him to do but wait; and, 
oppress with anxiety and self-reproach, he began to crawl about, 
he crawl over everything, walls, furniture, ceiling, and finally 
in his confusion as the whole room began to spin around him he fell 
down into the middle of the dinner table. 

he lay there for a while, numb and immobile, all around him it was 
quiet, maybe that was a good sign. then there was someone at the 
door. the maid, of course, had lock herself in her kitchen so 
that grete would have to go and answer it. his father had arrive 
home. "what's happened?" were his first words; grete's appearance 
must have made everything clear to him. she answer him with 
subdued voice, and openly pressed her face into his chest: "mother's 
fainted, but she's better now. gregor got out." "just as i 
expected", said his father, "just as i always said, but you women 
wouldn't listen, would you." it was clear to gregor that grete had 
not said enough and that his father took it to mean that something 
bad had happened, that he was responsible for some act of violence. 
that meant gregor would now have to try to calm his father, as he 
did not have the time to explain things to him even if that had been 
possible. so he flee to the door of his room and pressed himself 
against it so that his father, when he came in from the hall, could 
see straight away that gregor had the best intentions and would go 
back into his room without delay, that it would not be necessary to 
drive him back but that they had only to open the door and he would 
disappear. 

his father, though, was not in the mood to notice subtlety like 
that; "ah!", he shout as he came in, sound as if he were both 
angry and glad at the same time. gregor drew his head back from the 
door and lift it towards his father. he really had not imagine 
his father the way he stood there now; of late, with his new habit 
of crawl about, he had neglect to pay attention to what was 
go on the rest of the flat the way he had done before. he really 
ought to have expect things to have changed, but still, still, was 
that really his father? the same tired man as use to be lay 
there entomb in his bed when gregor came back from his business 
trips, who would receive him sitting in the armchair in his 
nightgown when he came back in the evenings; who was hardly even 
able to stand up but, as a sign of his pleasure, would just raise 
his arms and who, on the couple of times a year when they went for a 
walk together on a sunday or public holiday wrap up tight in 
his overcoat between gregor and his mother, would always labour his 
way forward a little more slow than them, who were already walking 
slow for his sake; who would place his stick down careful and, 
if he want to say something would invariable stop and gather his 
companion around him. he was standing up straight enough now; 
dress in a smart blue uniform with gold buttons, the sort worn by 
the employee at the banking institute; above the high, stiff collar 
of the coat his strong double-chin emerged; under the bushy 
eyebrows, his piercing, dark eyes look out fresh and alert; his 
normally unkempt white hair was comb down painful close to his 
scalp. he took his cap, with its gold monogram from, probably, some 
bank, and threw it in an arc right across the room onto the sofa, 
put his hand in his trouser pockets, push back the bottom of his 
long uniform coat, and, with look of determination, walk towards 
gregor. he probably did not even know himself what he had in mind, 
but nonetheless lift his feet unusually high. gregor was amaze 
at the enormous size of the sole of his boots, but waste no time 
with that - he knew full well, right from the first day of his new 
life, that his father thought it necessary to always be extremely 
strict with him. and so he ran up to his father, stop when his 
father stopped, scurry forward again when he moved, even 
slightly. in this way they went round the room several times 
without anything decisive happening, without even give the 
impression of a chase as everything went so slowly. gregor remain 
all this time on the floor, largely because he fear his father 
might see it as especially provoking if he flee onto the wall or 
ceiling. whatever he did, gregor had to admit that he certainly 
would not be able to keep up this running about for long, as for 
each step his father took he had to carry out countless movements. 
he became noticeable short of breath, even in his early life his 
lung had not been very reliable. now, as he lurch about in his 
effort to muster all the strength he could for running he could 
hardly keep his eyes open; his thought became too slow for him to 
think of any other way of saving himself than running; he almost 
forgot that the wall were there for him to use although, here, they 
were conceal behind careful carve furniture full of notch and 
protrusion - then, right beside him, lightly tossed, something flew 
down and roll in front of him. it was an apple; then another one 
immediately flew at him; gregor froze in shock; there was no long 
any point in running as his father had decided to bombard him. he 
had fill his pocket with fruit from the bowl on the sideboard and 
now, without even taking the time for careful aim, threw one apple 
after another. these little, red apple roll about on the floor, 
knock into each other as if they had electric motors. an apple 
thrown without much force glance against gregor's back and slid off 
without do any harm. another one however, immediately following 
it, hit square and lodge in his back; gregor want to drag 
himself away, as if he could remove the surprising, the incredible 
pain by change his position; but he felt as if nail to the spot 
and spread himself out, all his senses in confusion. the last thing 
he saw was the door of his room being pull open, his sister was 
screaming, his mother ran out in front of her in her blouse (as his 
sister had taken off some of her clothes after she had faint to 
make it easy for her to breathe), she ran to his father, her 
skirt unfastened and slide one after another to the ground, 
stumble over the skirt she pushed herself to his father, her arms 
around him, unite herself with him total - now gregor lost his 
ability to see anything - her hand behind his father's head beg 
him to spare gregor's life. 



iii 


no-one dare to remove the apple lodge in gregor's flesh, so it 
remain there as a visible reminder of his injury. he had suffer 
it there for more than a month, and his condition seem serious 
enough to remind even his father that gregor, despite his current 
sad and revolting form, was a family member who could not be treat 
as an enemy. on the contrary, as a family there was a duty to 
swallow any revulsion for him and to be patient, just to be patient. 

because of his injuries, gregor had lost much of his mobility - 
probably permanently. he had been reduce to the condition of an 
ancient invalid and it took him long, long minutes to crawl across 
his room - crawl over the ceiling was out of the question - but 
this deteriorate in his condition was fully (in his opinion) made 
up for by the door to the living room being left open every evening. 
he got into the habit of close watch it for one or two hour 
before it was open and then, lie in the dark of his room 
where he could not be seen from the living room, he could watch the 
family in the light of the dinner table and listen to their 
conversation - with everyone's permission, in a way, and thus quite 
different from before. 

they no long held the lively conversation of early times, of 
course, the one that gregor always thought about with longing when 
he was tired and get into the damp bed in some small hotel room. 
all of them were usually very quiet nowadays. soon after dinner, 
his father would go to sleep in his chair; his mother and sister 
would urge each other to be quiet; his mother, bent deep under the 
lamp, would sew fancy underwear for a fashion shop; his sister, who 
had taken a sales job, learned shorthand and france in the evenings 
so that she might be able to get a better position later on. 
sometimes his father would wake up and say to gregor's mother 
"you're do so much sewing again today!", as if he did not know 
that he had been doze - and then he would go back to sleep again 
while mother and sister would exchange a tired grin. 

with a kind of stubbornness, gregor's father refuse to take his 
uniform off even at home; while his nightgown hung unused on its peg 
gregor's father would slumber where he was, fully dressed, as if 
always ready to serve and expect to hear the voice of his 
superior even here. the uniform had not been new to start with, but 
as a result of this it slow became even shabby despite the 
effort of gregor's mother and sister to look after it. gregor 
would often spend the whole evening look at all the stain on 
this coat, with its gold buttons always kept polish and shiny, 
while the old man in it would sleep, highly uncomfortable but 
peaceful. 

as soon as it struck ten, gregor's mother would speak gently to his 
father to wake him and try to persuade him to go to bed, as he 
couldn't sleep properly where he was and he really had to get his 
sleep if he was to be up at six to get to work. but since he had 
been in work he had become more obstinate and would always insist on 
stay long at the table, even though he regularly fell asleep 
and it was then hard than ever to persuade him to exchange the 
chair for his bed. then, however much mother and sister would 
importune him with little reproach and warning he would keep 
slow shake his head for a quarter of an hour with his eyes 
closed and refuse to get up. gregor's mother would tug at his 
sleeve, whisper endearment into his ear, gregor's sister would 
leave her work to help her mother, but nothing would have any effect 
on him. he would just sink deep into his chair. only when the 
two women took him under the arms he would abrupt open his eyes, 
look at them one after the other and say: "what a life! this is what 
peace i get in my old age!" and support by the two women he would 
lift himself up careful as if he were carry the greatest load 
himself, let the women take him to the door, send them off and carry 
on by himself while gregor's mother would throw down her needle and 
his sister her pen so that they could run after his father and 
continue being of help to him. 

who, in this tired and overwork family, would have had time to 
give more attention to gregor than was absolutely necessary? the 
household budget became even smaller; so now the maid was dismissed; 
an enormous, thick-boned charwoman with white hair that flap 
around her head came every morning and evening to do the heaviest 
work; everything else was look after by gregor's mother on top of 
the large amount of sewing work she did. gregor even learned, 
listen to the evening conversation about what price they had 
hope for, that several item of jewellery belong to the family 
had been sold, even though both mother and sister had been very fond 
of wearing them at function and celebrations. but the loudest 
complaint was that although the flat was much too big for their 
present circumstances, they could not move out of it, there was no 
imaginable way of transfer gregor to the new address. he could 
see quite well, though, that there were more reason than 
consideration for him that made it difficult for them to move, it 
would have been quite easy to transport him in any suitable crate 
with a few air hole in it; the main thing holding the family back 
from their decision to move was much more to do with their total 
despair, and the thought that they had been struck with a misfortune 
unlike anything experienced by anyone else they knew or were related 
to. they carry out absolutely everything that the world expect 
from poor people, gregor's father brought bank employee their 
breakfast, his mother sacrifice herself by washing clothes for 
strangers, his sister ran back and forth behind her desk at the 
behest of the customers, but they just did not have the strength to 
do any more. and the injury in gregor's back began to hurt as much 
as when it was new. after they had come back from taking his father 
to bed gregor's mother and sister would now leave their work where 
it was and sit close together, cheek to cheek; his mother would 
point to gregor's room and say "close that door, grete", and then, 
when he was in the dark again, they would sit in the next room and 
their tear would mingle, or they would simply sit there staring 
dry-eyed at the table. 

gregor hardly slept at all, either night or day. sometimes he would 
think of taking over the family's affairs, just like before, the 
next time the door was opened; he had long forgotten about his boss 
and the chief clerk, but they would appear again in his thoughts, 
the salesmen and the apprentices, that stupid teaboy, two or three 
friends from other businesses, one of the chambermaid from a 
provincial hotel, a tender memory that appear and disappear 
again, a cashier from a hat shop for whom his attention had been 
serious but too slow, - all of them appear to him, mixed together 
with stranger and other he had forgotten, but instead of helping 
him and his family they were all of them inaccessible, and he was 
glad when they disappeared. other times he was not at all in the 
mood to look after his family, he was fill with simple rage about 
the lack of attention he was shown, and although he could think of 
nothing he would have wanted, he made plan of how he could get into 
the pantry where he could take all the things he was entitle to, 
even if he was not hungry. gregor's sister no long thought about 
how she could please him but would hurried push some food or other 
into his room with her foot before she rush out to work in the 
morning and at midday, and in the evening she would sweep it away 
again with the broom, indifferent as to whether it had been eaten or 
- more often than not - had been left total untouched. she still 
clear up the room in the evening, but now she could not have been 
any quick about it. smear of dirt were left on the walls, here 
and there were little balls of dust and filth. at first, gregor 
went into one of the worst of these place when his sister arrive 
as a reproach to her, but he could have stay there for week 
without his sister do anything about it; she could see the dirt 
as well as he could but she had simply decided to leave him to it. 
at the same time she became touchy in a way that was quite new for 
her and which everyone in the family understood - clean up 
gregor's room was for her and her alone. gregor's mother did once 
thorough clean his room, and need to use several bucketful of 
water to do it - although that much damp also made gregor ill 
and he lay flat on the couch, bitter and immobile. but his mother 
was to be punish still more for what she had done, as hardly had 
his sister arrive home in the evening than she notice the change 
in gregor's room and, highly aggrieved, ran back into the living 
room where, despite her mother raise and implore hands, she 
broke into convulsive tears. her father, of course, was startle 
out of his chair and the two parent look on astonish and 
helpless; then they, too, became agitated; gregor's father, standing 
to the right of his mother, accused her of not leave the clean 
of gregor's room to his sister; from her left, gregor's sister 
scream at her that she was never to clean gregor's room again; 
while his mother try to draw his father, who was beside himself 
with anger, into the bedroom; his sister, quake with tears, 
thump on the table with her small fists; and gregor hiss in 
anger that no-one had even thought of close the door to save him 
the sight of this and all its noise. 

gregor's sister was exhaust from go out to work, and look 
after gregor as she had done before was even more work for her, but 
even so his mother ought certainly not to have taken her place. 
gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neglected. now, though, 
the charwoman was here. this elderly widow, with a robust bone 
structure that made her able to withstand the hardest of things in 
her long life, wasn't really repel by gregor. just by chance one 
day, rather than any real curiosity, she open the door to gregor's 
room and found herself face to face with him. he was taken total 
by surprise, no-one was chase him but he began to rush to and fro 
while she just stood there in amaze with her hand cross in 
front of her. from then on she never fail to open the door 
slightly every evening and morning and look brief in on him. at 
first she would call to him as she did so with words that she 
probably considered friendly, such as "come on then, you old 
dung-beetle!", or "look at the old dung-beetle there!" gregor never 
respond to being spoken to in that way, but just remain where he 
was without moving as if the door had never even been opened. if 
only they had told this charwoman to clean up his room every day 
instead of letting her disturb him for no reason whenever she felt 
like it! one day, early in the morning while a heavy rain struck the 
windowpanes, perhaps indicate that spring was coming, she began to 
speak to him in that way once again. gregor was so resentful of it 
that he start to move toward her, he was slow and infirm, but it 
was like a kind of attack. instead of being afraid, the charwoman 
just lift up one of the chair from near the door and stood there 
with her mouth open, clearly intend not to close her mouth until 
the chair in her hand had been slam down into gregor's back. 
"aren't you coming any closer, then?", she ask when gregor turn 
round again, and she calm put the chair back in the corner. 

gregor had almost entire stop eating. only if he happen to 
find himself next to the food that had been prepared for him he 
might take some of it into his mouth to play with it, leave it there 
a few hour and then, more often than not, spit it out again. at 
first he thought it was distress at the state of his room that 
stop him eating, but he had soon got use to the change made 
there. they had got into the habit of putt things into this room 
that they had no room for anywhere else, and there were now many 
such things as one of the rooms in the flat had been rent out to 
three gentlemen. these earnest gentlemen - all three of them had 
full beards, as gregor learned peer through the crack in the door 
one day - were painful insistent on things' being tidy. this 
meant not only in their own room but, since they had taken a room in 
this establishment, in the entire flat and especially in the 
kitchen. unnecessary clutter was something they could not tolerate, 
especially if it was dirty. they had moreover brought most of their 
own furnishings and equipment with them. for this reason, many 
things had become superfluous which, although they could not be 
sold, the family did not wish to discard. all these things found 
their way into gregor's room. the dustbin from the kitchen found 
their way in there too. the charwoman was always in a hurry, and 
anything she couldn't use for the time being she would just chuck in 
there. he, fortunately, would usually see no more than the object 
and the hand that held it. the woman most likely meant to fetch the 
things back out again when she had time and the opportunity, or to 
throw everything out in one go, but what actually happen was that 
they were left where they landed when they had first been thrown 
unless gregor made his way through the junk and move it somewhere 
else. at first he move it because, with no other room free where 
he could crawl about, he was forced to, but later on he came to 
enjoy it although moving about in that way left him sad and tired to 
death, and he would remain immobile for hour afterwards. 

the gentlemen who rent the room would sometimes take their evening 
meal at home in the living room that was use by everyone, and so 
the door to this room was often kept closed in the evening. but 
gregor found it easy to give up have the door open, he had, after 
all, often fail to make use of it when it was open and, without 
the family have notice it, lain in his room in its darkest 
corner. one time, though, the charwoman left the door to the living 
room slightly open, and it remain open when the gentlemen who 
rent the room came in in the evening and the light was put on. 
they sat up at the table where, formerly, gregor had taken his meal 
with his father and mother, they unfold the serviette and picked 
up their knives and forks. gregor's mother immediately appear in 
the doorway with a dish of meat and soon behind her came his sister 
with a dish pile high with potatoes. the food was steaming, and 
fill the room with its smell. the gentlemen bent over the dishes 
set in front of them as if they want to test the food before 
eat it, and the gentleman in the middle, who seem to count as 
an authority for the other two, did indeed cut off a piece of meat 
while it was still in its dish, clearly wish to establish whether 
it was sufficient cook or whether it should be sent back to the 
kitchen. it was to his satisfaction, and gregor's mother and 
sister, who had been look on anxiously, began to breathe again 
and smiled. 

the family themselves ate in the kitchen. nonetheless, gregor's 
father came into the living room before he went into the kitchen, 
bowed once with his cap in his hand and did his round of the table. 
the gentlemen stood as one, and mumble something into their beards. 
then, once they were alone, they ate in near perfect silence. it 
seem remarkable to gregor that above all the various noise of 
eat their chew teeth could still be heard, as if they had 
want to show gregor that you need teeth in order to eat and it was 
not possible to perform anything with jaws that are toothless 
however nice they might be. "i'd like to eat something", said 
gregor anxiously, "but not anything like they're eating. they do 
feed themselves. and here i am, dying!" 

throughout all this time, gregor could not remember have heard the 
violin being played, but this evening it began to be heard from the 
kitchen. the three gentlemen had already finished their meal, the 
one in the middle had produce a newspaper, given a page to each of 
the others, and now they leant back in their chair reading them and 
smoking. when the violin began play they became attentive, stood 
up and went on tip-toe over to the door of the hallway where they 
stood pressed against each other. someone must have heard them in 
the kitchen, as gregor's father call out: "is the play perhaps 
unpleasant for the gentlemen? we can stop it straight away." "on 
the contrary", said the middle gentleman, "would the young lady not 
like to come in and play for us here in the room, where it is, after 
all, much more cosy and comfortable?" "oh yes, we'd love to", 
call back gregor's father as if he had been the violin player 
himself. the gentlemen step back into the room and waited. 
gregor's father soon appear with the music stand, his mother with 
the music and his sister with the violin. she calm prepared 
everything for her to begin playing; his parents, who had never 
rent a room out before and therefore show an exaggerate 
courtesy towards the three gentlemen, did not even dare to sit on 
their own chairs; his father leant against the door with his right 
hand pushed in between two buttons on his uniform coat; his mother, 
though, was offer a seat by one of the gentlemen and sat - leave 
the chair where the gentleman happen to have placed it - out of 
the way in a corner. 

his sister began to play; father and mother paid close attention, 
one on each side, to the movements of her hands. drawn in by the 
playing, gregor had dare to come forward a little and already had 
his head in the living room. before, he had taken great pride in 
how considerate he was but now it hardly occur to him that he had 
become so thoughtless about the others. what's more, there was now 
all the more reason to keep himself hidden as he was cover in the 
dust that lay everywhere in his room and flew up at the slightest 
movement; he carry threads, hairs, and remains of food about on 
his back and sides; he was much too indifferent to everything now to 
lay on his back and wipe himself on the carpet like he had use to 
do several times a day. and despite this condition, he was not too 
shy to move forward a little onto the immaculate floor of the living 
room. 

no-one notice him, though. the family was total preoccupied with 
the violin playing; at first, the three gentlemen had put their 
hand in their pocket and come up far too close behind the music 
stand to look at all the note being played, and they must have 
disturbed gregor's sister, but soon, in contrast with the family, 
they withdrew back to the window with their head sunk and talk 
to each other at half volume, and they stay by the window while 
gregor's father observe them anxiously. it really now seem very 
obvious that they had expect to hear some beautiful or 
entertaining violin play but had been disappointed, that they had 
had enough of the whole performance and it was only now out of 
polite that they allow their peace to be disturbed. it was 
especially unnerving, the way they all blew the smoke from their 
cigarette upwards from their mouth and noses. yet gregor's sister 
was play so beautifully. her face was leant to one side, 
following the lines of music with a careful and melancholy 
expression. gregor crawl a little further forward, keeping his 
head close to the ground so that he could meet her eyes if the 
chance came. was he an animal if music could captivate him so? it 
seem to him that he was being shown the way to the unknown 
nourishment he had been yearning for. he was determined to make his 
way forward to his sister and tug at her skirt to show her she might 
come into his room with her violin, as no-one appreciate her 
play here as much as he would. he never want to let her out of 
his room, not while he lived, anyway; his shocking appearance 
should, for once, be of some use to him; he want to be at every 
door of his room at once to hiss and spit at the attackers; his 
sister should not be forced to stay with him, though, but stay of 
her own free will; she would sit beside him on the couch with her 
ear bent down to him while he told her how he had always intended to 
send her to the conservatory, how he would have told everyone about 
it last christmas - had christmas really come and gone already? - if 
this misfortune hadn't got in the way, and refuse to let anyone 
dissuade him from it. on hearing all this, his sister would break 
out in tear of emotion, and gregor would climb up to her shoulder 
and kiss her neck, which, since she had been go out to work, she 
had kept free without any necklace or collar. 

"mr. samsa!", shout the middle gentleman to gregor's father, 
pointing, without waste any more words, with his forefinger at 
gregor as he slow move forward. the violin went silent, the 
middle of the three gentlemen first smile at his two friends, 
shake his head, and then look back at gregor. his father seem 
to think it more important to calm the three gentlemen before 
driving gregor out, even though they were not at all upset and 
seem to think gregor was more entertaining than the violin play 
had been. he rush up to them with his arms spread out and 
attempt to drive them back into their room at the same time as 
try to block their view of gregor with his body. now they did 
become a little annoyed, and it was not clear whether it was his 
father's behaviour that annoy them or the dawn realisation that 
they had had a neighbour like gregor in the next room without 
knowing it. they ask gregor's father for explanations, raise 
their arms like he had, tug excited at their beard and move 
back towards their room only very slowly. meanwhile gregor's sister 
had overcome the despair she had fallen into when her play was 
sudden interrupted. she had let her hand drop and let violin and 
bow hang limp for a while but continue to look at the music as if 
still playing, but then she sudden pull herself together, lay 
the instrument on her mother's lap who still sat laborious 
struggle for breath where she was, and ran into the next room 
which, under pressure from her father, the three gentlemen were more 
quick moving toward. under his sister's experienced hand, the 
pillow and cover on the bed flew up and were put into order and 
she had already finished making the bed and slip out again 
before the three gentlemen had reach the room. gregor's father 
seem so obsess with what he was do that he forgot all the 
respect he owe to his tenants. he urge them and pressed them 
until, when he was already at the door of the room, the middle of 
the three gentlemen shout like thunder and stamp his foot and 
thereby brought gregor's father to a halt. "i declare here and 
now", he said, raise his hand and glancing at gregor's mother and 
sister to gain their attention too, "that with regard to the 
repugnant conditions that prevail in this flat and with this family" 
- here he look brief but decisive at the floor - "i give 
immediate notice on my room. for the days that i have been living 
here i will, of course, pay nothing at all, on the contrary i will 
consider whether to proceed with some kind of action for damages 
from you, and believe me it would be very easy to set out the 
grounds for such an action." he was silent and look straight 
ahead as if wait for something. and indeed, his two friends 
join in with the words: "and we also give immediate notice." with 
that, he took hold of the door handle and slam the door. 

gregor's father stagger back to his seat, feeling his way with his 
hands, and fell into it; it look as if he was stretch himself 
out for his usual evening nap but from the uncontroll way his head 
kept nod it could be seen that he was not sleep at all. 
throughout all this, gregor had lain still where the three gentlemen 
had first seen him. his disappointment at the failure of his plan, 
and perhaps also because he was weak from hunger, made it impossible 
for him to move. he was sure that everyone would turn on him any 
moment, and he waited. he was not even startle out of this state 
when the violin on his mother's lap fell from her tremble finger 
and landed loud on the floor. 

"father, mother", said his sister, hit the table with her hand 
as introduction, "we can't carry on like this. maybe you can't see 
it, but i can. i don't want to call this monster my brother, all i 
can say is: we have to try and get rid of it. we've done all that's 
humanly possible to look after it and be patient, i don't think 
anyone could accuse us of do anything wrong." 

"she's absolutely right", said gregor's father to himself. his 
mother, who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to 
cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a derange 
expression in her eyes. 

gregor's sister rush to his mother and put her hand on her 
forehead. her words seem to give gregor's father some more 
definite ideas. he sat upright, play with his uniform cap between 
the plate left by the three gentlemen after their meal, and 
occasional look down at gregor as he lay there immobile. 

"we have to try and get rid of it", said gregor's sister, now 
speak only to her father, as her mother was too occupy with 
cough to listen, "it'll be the death of both of you, i can see it 
coming. we can't all work as hard as we have to and then come home 
to be torture like this, we can't endure it. i can't endure it any 
more." and she broke out so heavy in tear that they flow down 
the face of her mother, and she wipe them away with mechanical hand 
movements. 

"my child", said her father with sympathy and obvious understanding, 
"what are we to do?" 

his sister just shrug her shoulder as a sign of the helpless 
and tear that had taken hold of her, displace her early 
certainty. 

"if he could just understand us", said his father almost as a 
question; his sister shook her hand vigorous through her tear as 
a sign that of that there was no question. 

"if he could just understand us", repeated gregor's father, close 
his eyes in acceptance of his sister's certainty that that was quite 
impossible, "then perhaps we could come to some kind of arrangement 
with him. but as it is ..." 

"it's got to go", shout his sister, "that's the only way, father. 
you've got to get rid of the idea that that's gregor. we've only 
harm ourselves by believe it for so long. how can that be 
gregor? if it were gregor he would have seen long ago that it's not 
possible for human being to live with an animal like that and he 
would have gone of his own free will. we wouldn't have a brother 
any more, then, but we could carry on with our lives and remember 
him with respect. as it is this animal is persecute us, it's 
driven out our tenants, it obviously wants to take over the whole 
flat and force us to sleep on the streets. father, look, just 
look", she sudden screamed, "he's start again!" in her alarm, 
which was total beyond gregor's comprehension, his sister even 
abandoned his mother as she pushed herself vigorous out of her 
chair as if more willing to sacrifice her own mother than stay 
anywhere near gregor. she rush over to behind her father, who had 
become excited merely because she was and stood up half raise his 
hand in front of gregor's sister as if to protect her. 

but gregor had had no intention of frighten anyone, least of all 
his sister. all he had done was begin to turn round so that he 
could go back into his room, although that was in itself quite 
startle as his pain-wracked condition meant that turning round 
require a great deal of effort and he was use his head to help 
himself do it, repeatedly raise it and striking it against the 
floor. he stop and look round. they seem to have realise 
his good intention and had only been alarm briefly. now they all 
look at him in unhappy silence. his mother lay in her chair with 
her leg stretch out and pressed against each other, her eyes 
nearly closed with exhaustion; his sister sat next to his father 
with her arms around his neck. 

"maybe now they'll let me turn round", thought gregor and went back 
to work. he could not help pant loud with the effort and had 
sometimes to stop and take a rest. no-one was making him rush any 
more, everything was left up to him. as soon as he had finally 
finished turning round he began to move straight ahead. he was 
amaze at the great distance that separate him from his room, and 
could not understand how he had cover that distance in his weak 
state a little while before and almost without notice it. he 
concentrated on crawl as fast as he could and hardly notice that 
there was not a word, not any cry, from his family to distract him. 
he did not turn his head until he had reach the doorway. he did 
not turn it all the way round as he felt his neck becoming stiff, 
but it was nonetheless enough to see that nothing behind him had 
changed, only his sister had stood up. with his last glance he saw 
that his mother had now fallen completely asleep. 

he was hardly inside his room before the door was hurried shut, 
bolt and locked. the sudden noise behind gregor so startle him 
that his little leg collapse under him. it was his sister who had 
been in so much of a rush. she had been standing there wait and 
sprung forward lightly, gregor had not heard her coming at all, and 
as she turn the key in the lock she said loud to her parent "at 
last!". 

"what now, then?", gregor ask himself as he look round in the 
darkness. he soon made the discovery that he could no long move 
at all. this was no surprise to him, it seem rather that being 
able to actually move around on those spindly little leg until then 
was unnatural. he also felt relatively comfortable. it is true 
that his entire body was aching, but the pain seem to be slow 
get weak and weak and would finally disappear altogether. 
he could already hardly feel the decay apple in his back or the 
inflamed area around it, which was entire cover in white dust. 
he thought back of his family with emotion and love. if it was 
possible, he felt that he must go away even more strong than his 
sister. he remain in this state of empty and peaceful ruminate 
until he heard the clock tower strike three in the morning. he 
watch as it slow began to get light everywhere outside the 
window too. then, without his willing it, his head sank down 
completely, and his last breath flow weak from his nostrils. 

when the cleaner came in early in the morning - they'd often ask 
her not to keep slam the door but with her strength and in her 
hurry she still did, so that everyone in the flat knew when she'd 
arrive and from then on it was impossible to sleep in peace - she 
made her usual brief look in on gregor and at first found nothing 
special. she thought he was lay there so still on purpose, 
play the martyr; she attribute all possible understanding to 
him. she happen to be holding the long broom in her hand, so she 
try to tickle gregor with it from the doorway. when she had no 
success with that she try to make a nuisance of herself and poke 
at him a little, and only when she found she could shove him across 
the floor with no resistance at all did she start to pay attention. 
she soon realise what had really happened, open her eyes wide, 
whistle to herself, but did not waste time to yank open the bedroom 
door and shout loud into the dark of the bedrooms: "come and 
'ave a look at this, it's dead, just lie there, stone dead!" 

mr. and mrs. samsa sat upright there in their marriage bed and had 
to make an effort to get over the shock cause by the cleaner before 
they could grasp what she was saying. but then, each from his own 
side, they hurried out of bed. mr. samsa threw the blanket over his 
shoulders, mrs. samsa just came out in her nightdress; and that is 
how they went into gregor's room. on the way they open the door 
to the living room where grete had been sleep since the three 
gentlemen had move in; she was fully dress as if she had never 
been asleep, and the pale of her face seem to confirm this. 
"dead?", ask mrs. samsa, look at the charwoman enquiringly, 
even though she could have checked for herself and could have known 
it even without checking. "that's what i said", reply the 
cleaner, and to prove it she gave gregor's body another shove with 
the broom, send it sideways across the floor. mrs. samsa made a 
movement as if she want to hold back the broom, but did not 
complete it. "now then", said mr. samsa, "let's give thanks to god 
for that". he cross himself, and the three women follow his 
example. grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said: 
"just look how thin he was. he didn't eat anything for so long. 
the food came out again just the same as when it went in". gregor's 
body was indeed completely dry up and flat, they had not seen it 
until then, but now he was not lift up on his little legs, nor did 
he do anything to make them look away. 

"grete, come with us in here for a little while", said mrs. samsa 
with a pained smile, and grete follow her parent into the bedroom 
but not without look back at the body. the cleaner shut the door 
and open the window wide. although it was still early in the 
morning the fresh air had something of warmth mixed in with it. it 
was already the end of march, after all. 

the three gentlemen step out of their room and look round in 
amaze for their breakfasts; they had been forgotten about. 
"where is our breakfast?", the middle gentleman ask the cleaner 
irritably. she just put her finger on her lip and made a quick and 
silent sign to the men that they might like to come into gregor's 
room. they did so, and stood around gregor's corpse with their 
hand in the pocket of their well-worn coats. it was now quite 
light in the room. 

then the door of the bedroom open and mr. samsa appear in his 
uniform with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other. all 
of them had been crying a little; grete now and then pressed her 
face against her father's arm. 

"leave my home. now!", said mr. samsa, indicate the door and 
without letting the women from him. "what do you mean?", ask the 
middle of the three gentlemen somewhat disconcerted, and he smile 
sweetly. the other two held their hand behind their back and 
continual rub them together in gleeful anticipation of a loud 
quarrel which could only end in their favour. "i mean just what i 
said", answer mr. samsa, and, with his two companions, went in a 
straight line towards the man. at first, he stood there still, 
look at the ground as if the contents of his head were 
rearrange themselves into new positions. "alright, we'll go 
then", he said, and look up at mr. samsa as if he had been 
sudden overcome with humility and want permission again from 
mr. samsa for his decision. mr. samsa merely open his eyes wide 
and brief nod to him several times. at that, and without 
delay, the man actually did take long stride into the front 
hallway; his two friends had stop rubbing their hand some time 
before and had been listen to what was being said. now they 
jump off after their friend as if taken with a sudden fear that 
mr. samsa might go into the hallway in front of them and break the 
connection with their leader. once there, all three took their hat 
from the stand, took their sticks from the holder, bowed without a 
word and left the premises. mr. samsa and the two women follow 
them out onto the landing; but they had had no reason to mistrust 
the men's intentions and as they lean over the landing they saw how 
the three gentlemen made slow but steady progress down the many 
steps. as they turn the corner on each floor they disappear and 
would reappear a few moments later; the further down they went, the 
more that the samsa family lost interest in them; when a butcher's 
boy, proud of posture with his tray on his head, pass them on his 
way up and came near than they were, mr. samsa and the women came 
away from the landing and went, as if relieved, back into the flat. 

they decided the best way to make use of that day was for relaxation 
and to go for a walk; not only had they earn a break from work but 
they were in serious need of it. so they sat at the table and wrote 
three letters of excusal, mr. samsa to his employers, mrs. samsa 
to her contractor and grete to her principal. the cleaner came in 
while they were writing to tell them she was going, she'd finished 
her work for that morning. the three of them at first just nod 
without look up from what they were writing, and it was only when 
the cleaner still did not seem to want to leave that they look up 
in irritation. "well?", ask mr. samsa. the charwoman stood in 
the doorway with a smile on her face as if she had some tremendous 
good news to report, but would only do it if she was clearly ask 
to. the almost vertical little ostrich feather on her hat, which 
had been a source of irritation to mr. samsa all the time she had 
been working for them, sway gently in all directions. "what is it 
you want then?", ask mrs. samsa, whom the cleaner had the most 
respect for. "yes", she answered, and broke into a friendly laugh 
that made her unable to speak straight away, "well then, that thing 
in there, you needn't worry about how you're go to get rid of it. 
that's all been sort out." mrs. samsa and grete bent down over 
their letters as if intent on continue with what they were 
writing; mr. samsa saw that the cleaner want to start describe 
everything in detail but, with outstretched hand, he made it quite 
clear that she was not to. so, as she was prevent from telling 
them all about it, she sudden remember what a hurry she was in 
and, clearly peeved, call out "cheerio then, everyone", turn 
round sharp and left, slam the door terribly as she went. 

"tonight she get sacked", said mr. samsa, but he received no reply 
from either his wife or his daughter as the charwoman seem to have 
destroy the peace they had only just gained. they got up and went 
over to the window where they remain with their arms around each 
other. mr. samsa twist round in his chair to look at them and sat 
there watch for a while. then he call out: "come here, then. 
let's forget about all that old stuff, shall we. come and give me a 
bit of attention". the two women immediately did as he said, 
hurry over to him where they kiss him and hug him and then 
they quick finished their letters. 

after that, the three of them left the flat together, which was 
something they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the 
open country outside the town. they had the tram, fill with warm 
sunshine, all to themselves. leant back comfortable on their seats, 
they discuss their prospects and found that on close examination 
they were not at all bad - until then they had never ask each 
other about their work but all three had job which were very good 
and held particularly good promise for the future. the greatest 
improvement for the time being, of course, would be achieve quite 
easily by moving house; what they need now was a flat that was 
small and cheap than the current one which had been chosen by 
gregor, one that was in a better location and, most of all, more 
practical. all the time, grete was becoming livelier. with all the 
worry they had been have of late her cheek had become pale, but, 
while they were talking, mr. and mrs. samsa were struck, almost 
simultaneously, with the thought of how their daughter was 
blossom into a well built and beautiful young lady. they became 
quieter. just from each other's glance and almost without knowing 
it they agree that it would soon be time to find a good man for 
her. and, as if in confirmation of their new dream and good 
intentions, as soon as they reach their destination grete was the 
first to get up and stretch out her young body. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of metamorphosis, by franz kafka 
translate by david wyllie. 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook metamorphosis *** 

***** this file should be name 5200.txt or 5200.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/5/2/0/5200/ 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 
this particular work is one of the few copyright individual works 
included with the permission of the copyright holder. information on 
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use 
impose by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is,' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
