the project gutenberg ebook of carmilla, by j. sheridan lefanu 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: carmilla 

author: j. sheridan lefanu 

release date: november 7, 2003 [ebook #10007] 
[date last updated: december 1, 2004] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook carmilla *** 




produce by suzanne shell, sjaani and pg distribute proofread 




carmilla 

j. sheridan lefanu 

1872 



prologue 
preface 
_upon a paper attach to the narrative which follows, doctor hesseliu 
has written a rather elaborate note, which he accompany with a 
reference to his essay on the strange subject which the ms. illuminates. 

this mysterious subject he treats, in that essay, with his usual 
learning and acumen, and with remarkable direct and condensation. it 
will form but one volume of the series of that extraordinary man's 
collected papers. 

as i publish the case, in this volume, simply to interest the "laity," i 
shall forestall the intelligent lady, who relate it, in nothing; and 
after due consideration, i have determined, therefore, to abstain from 
present any précis of the learned doctor's reasoning, or extract from 
his statement on a subject which he describe as "involving, not 
improbably, some of the profoundest arcana of our dual existence, and 
its intermediates." 

i was anxious on discover this paper, to reopen the correspondence 
commence by doctor hesselius, so many years before, with a person so 
clever and careful as his informant seem to have been. much to my 
regret, however, i found that she had die in the interval. 

she, probably, could have add little to the narrative _which she 
communicate in the following pages, with, so far as i can pronounce, 
such conscientious particularity_. 



i 

_an early fright_ 

in styria, we, though by no means magnificent people, inhabit a castle, 
or schloss. a small income, in that part of the world, go a great way. 
eight or nine hundred a year do wonders. scanty enough ours would 
have answer among wealthy people at home. my father is english, and i 
bear an english name, although i never saw england. but here, in this 
lonely and primitive place, where everything is so marvelous cheap, i 
really don't see how ever so much more money would at all material add 
to our comforts, or even luxuries. 

my father was in the austria service, and retired upon a pension and 
his patrimony, and purchase this feudal residence, and the small estate 
on which it stands, a bargain. 

nothing can be more picturesque or solitary. it stand on a slight 
eminence in a forest. the road, very old and narrow, pass in front of 
its drawbridge, never raise in my time, and its moat, stock with 
perch, and sail over by many swans, and floating on its surface white 
fleet of water lilies. 

over all this the schloss show its many-windowed front; its towers, 
and its gothic chapel. 

the forest open in an irregular and very picturesque glade before its 
gate, and at the right a steep gothic bridge carry the road over a 
stream that wind in deep shadow through the wood. i have said that this 
is a very lonely place. judge whether i say truth. look from the hall 
door towards the road, the forest in which our castle stand extend 
fifteen mile to the right, and twelve to the left. the nearest 
inhabit village is about seven of your english mile to the left. the 
nearest inhabit schloss of any historic associations, is that of old 
general spielsdorf, nearly twenty mile away to the right. 

i have said "the nearest _inhabited_ village," because there is, only 
three mile westward, that is to say in the direction of general 
spielsdorf's schloss, a ruin village, with its quaint little church, 
now roofless, in the aisle of which are the molder tomb of the proud 
family of karnstein, now extinct, who once own the equally desolate 
chateau which, in the thick of the forest, overlook the silent ruins 
of the town. 

respecting the cause of the desertion of this striking and melancholy 
spot, there is a legend which i shall relate to you another time. 

i must tell you now, how very small is the party who constitute the 
inhabitant of our castle. i don't include servants, or those dependent 
who occupy rooms in the building attach to the schloss. listen, and 
wonder! my father, who is the kindest man on earth, but grow old; and 
i, at the date of my story, only nineteen. eight years have pass 
since then. 

i and my father constitute the family at the schloss. my mother, a 
styrian lady, die in my infancy, but i had a good-natured governess, 
who had been with me from, i might almost say, my infancy. i could not 
remember the time when her fat, benignant face was not a familiar 
picture in my memory. 

this was madame perrodon, a native of berne, whose care and good nature 
now in part supply to me the loss of my mother, whom i do not even 
remember, so early i lost her. she made a third at our little dinner 
party. there was a fourth, mademoiselle de lafontaine, a lady such as 
you term, i believe, a "finishing governess." she spoke france and 
german, madame perrodon france and broken english, to which my father 
and i add english, which, partly to prevent its becoming a lost 
language among us, and partly from patriotic motives, we spoke every 
day. the consequence was a babel, at which stranger use to laugh, and 
which i shall make no attempt to reproduce in this narrative. and there 
were two or three young lady friends besides, pretty nearly of my own 
age, who were occasional visitors, for long or short terms; and 
these visit i sometimes returned. 

these were our regular social resources; but of course there were chance 
visit from "neighbors" of only five or six league distance. my life 
was, notwithstanding, rather a solitary one, i can assure you. 

my gouvernante had just so much control over me as you might conjecture 
such sage person would have in the case of a rather spoil girl, whose 
only parent allow her pretty nearly her own way in everything. 

the first occurrence in my existence, which produce a terrible 
impression upon my mind, which, in fact, never has been effaced, was one 
of the very earliest incident of my life which i can recollect. some 
people will think it so trifling that it should not be record here. 
you will see, however, by-and-by, why i mention it. the nursery, as it 
was called, though i had it all to myself, was a large room in the upper 
story of the castle, with a steep oak roof. i can't have been more than 
six years old, when one night i awoke, and look round the room from 
my bed, fail to see the nursery maid. neither was my nurse there; and 
i thought myself alone. i was not frightened, for i was one of those 
happy children who are studious kept in ignorance of ghost stories, of 
fairy tales, and of all such lore as make us cover up our head when 
the door crack suddenly, or the flicker of an expire candle make the 
shadow of a bedpost dance upon the wall, near to our faces. i was 
vex and insult at finding myself, as i conceived, neglected, and i 
began to whimper, preparatory to a hearty bout of roaring; when to my 
surprise, i saw a solemn, but very pretty face look at me from the 
side of the bed. it was that of a young lady who was kneeling, with her 
hand under the coverlet. i look at her with a kind of pleased wonder, 
and cease whimpering. she caress me with her hands, and lay down 
beside me on the bed, and drew me towards her, smiling; i felt 
immediately delightful soothed, and fell asleep again. i was waken 
by a sensation as if two needle ran into my breast very deep at the 
same moment, and i cry loudly. the lady start back, with her eyes 
fixed on me, and then slip down upon the floor, and, as i thought, 
hid herself under the bed. 

i was now for the first time frightened, and i yell with all my might 
and main. nurse, nursery maid, housekeeper, all came running in, and 
hearing my story, they made light of it, soothe me all they could 
meanwhile. but, child as i was, i could perceive that their face were 
pale with an unwonted look of anxiety, and i saw them look under the 
bed, and about the room, and peep under table and pluck open cupboards; 
and the housekeeper whisper to the nurse: "lay your hand along that 
hollow in the bed; someone _did_ lie there, so sure as you did not; the 
place is still warm." 

i remember the nursery maid pet me, and all three examine my 
chest, where i told them i felt the puncture, and pronounce that there 
was no sign visible that any such thing had happen to me. 

the housekeeper and the two other servant who were in charge of the 
nursery, remain sitting up all night; and from that time a servant 
always sat up in the nursery until i was about fourteen. 

i was very nervous for a long time after this. a doctor was call in, 
he was pallid and elderly. how well i remember his long saturnine face, 
slightly pit with smallpox, and his chestnut wig. for a good while, 
every second day, he came and gave me medicine, which of course i hated. 

the morning after i saw this apparition i was in a state of terror, and 
could not bear to be left alone, daylight though it was, for a moment. 

i remember my father coming up and standing at the bedside, and talk 
cheerfully, and ask the nurse a number of questions, and laugh 
very heartily at one of the answers; and pat me on the shoulder, and 
kiss me, and telling me not to be frightened, that it was nothing but 
a dream and could not hurt me. 

but i was not comforted, for i knew the visit of the strange woman was 
_not_ a dream; and i was _awfully_ frightened. 

i was a little console by the nursery maid's assure me that it was 
she who had come and look at me, and lain down beside me in the bed, 
and that i must have been half-dreaming not to have known her face. but 
this, though support by the nurse, did not quite satisfy me. 

i remembered, in the course of that day, a venerable old man, in a black 
cassock, coming into the room with the nurse and housekeeper, and 
talk a little to them, and very kindly to me; his face was very sweet 
and gentle, and he told me they were go to pray, and join my hand 
together, and desire me to say, softly, while they were praying, "lord 
hear all good prayer for us, for jesus' sake." i think these were the 
very words, for i often repeated them to myself, and my nurse use for 
years to make me say them in my prayers. 

i remember so well the thoughtful sweet face of that white-haired old 
man, in his black cassock, as he stood in that rude, lofty, brown room, 
with the clumsy furniture of a fashion three hundred years old about 
him, and the scanty light enter its shadowy atmosphere through the 
small lattice. he kneeled, and the three women with him, and he pray 
aloud with an earnest quaver voice for, what appear to me, a long 
time. i forget all my life preceding that event, and for some time after 
it is all obscure also, but the scene i have just describe stand out 
vivid as the isolated pictures of the phantasmagoria surround 
by darkness. 



ii 

_a guest_ 

i am now go to tell you something so strange that it will require all 
your faith in my veracity to believe my story. it is not only true, 
nevertheless, but truth of which i have been an eyewitness. 

it was a sweet summer evening, and my father ask me, as he sometimes 
did, to take a little ramble with him along that beautiful forest vista 
which i have mention as lie in front of the schloss. 

"general spielsdorf cannot come to us so soon as i had hoped," said my 
father, as we pursue our walk. 

he was to have paid us a visit of some weeks, and we had expect his 
arrival next day. he was to have brought with him a young lady, his 
niece and ward, mademoiselle rheinfeldt, whom i had never seen, but whom 
i had heard describe as a very charming girl, and in whose society i 
had promise myself many happy days. i was more disappointed than a 
young lady living in a town, or a bustle neighborhood can possibly 
imagine. this visit, and the new acquaintance it promised, had furnish 
my day dream for many weeks. 

"and how soon do he come?" i asked. 

"not till autumn. not for two months, i dare say," he answered. "and i 
am very glad now, dear, that you never knew mademoiselle rheinfeldt." 

"and why?" i asked, both mortify and curious. 

"because the poor young lady is dead," he replied. "i quite forgot i had 
not told you, but you were not in the room when i received the general's 
letter this evening." 

i was very much shocked. general spielsdorf had mention in his first 
letter, six or seven week before, that she was not so well as he would 
wish her, but there was nothing to suggest the remotest suspicion 
of danger. 

"here is the general's letter," he said, hand it to me. "i am afraid 
he is in great affliction; the letter appear to me to have been written 
very nearly in distraction." 

we sat down on a rude bench, under a group of magnificent lime trees. 
the sun was setting with all its melancholy splendor behind the sylvan 
horizon, and the stream that flow beside our home, and pass under the 
steep old bridge i have mentioned, wound through many a group of noble 
trees, almost at our feet, reflect in its current the fade crimson 
of the sky. general spielsdorf's letter was so extraordinary, so 
vehement, and in some place so self-contradictory, that i read it twice 
over--the second time aloud to my father--and was still unable to 
account for it, except by supposing that grief had unsettled his mind. 

it said "i have lost my darling daughter, for as such i love her. 
during the last days of dear bertha's illness i was not able to write 
to you. 

"before then i had no idea of her danger. i have lost her, and now learn 
_all_, too late. she die in the peace of innocence, and in the glorious 
hope of a blessed futurity. the fiend who betray our infatuated 
hospitality has done it all. i thought i was receiving into my house 
innocence, gaiety, a charming companion for my lost bertha. heavens! 
what a fool have i been! 

"i thank god my child die without a suspicion of the cause of her 
sufferings. she is gone without so much as conjecture the nature of 
her illness, and the accursed passion of the agent of all this misery. i 
devote my remain days to track and extinguish a monster. i am 
told i may hope to accomplish my righteous and merciful purpose. at 
present there is scarcely a gleam of light to guide me. i curse my 
conceited incredulity, my despicable affectation of superiority, my 
blindness, my obstinacy--all--too late. i cannot write or talk 
collected now. i am distracted. so soon as i shall have a little 
recovered, i mean to devote myself for a time to enquiry, which may 
possibly lead me as far as vienna. some time in the autumn, two month 
hence, or early if i live, i will see you--that is, if you permit me; 
i will then tell you all that i scarce dare put upon paper now. 
farewell. pray for me, dear friend." 

in these terms end this strange letter. though i had never seen bertha 
rheinfeldt my eyes fill with tear at the sudden intelligence; i was 
startled, as well as profound disappointed. 

the sun had now set, and it was twilight by the time i had return the 
general's letter to my father. 

it was a soft clear evening, and we loitered, speculate upon the 
possible meaning of the violent and incoherent sentence which i had 
just been reading. we had nearly a mile to walk before reach the road 
that pass the schloss in front, and by that time the moon was shining 
brilliantly. at the drawbridge we met madame perrodon and mademoiselle 
de lafontaine, who had come out, without their bonnets, to enjoy the 
exquisite moonlight. 

we heard their voice gabble in animate dialogue as we approached. we 
join them at the drawbridge, and turn about to admire with them the 
beautiful scene. 

the glade through which we had just walk lay before us. at our left 
the narrow road wound away under clump of lordly trees, and was lost to 
sight amid the thicken forest. at the right the same road cross the 
steep and picturesque bridge, near which stand a ruin tower which 
once guarded that pass; and beyond the bridge an abrupt eminence rises, 
cover with trees, and showing in the shadow some grey 
ivy-clustered rocks. 

over the sward and low grounds a thin film of mist was steal like 
smoke, marking the distance with a transparent veil; and here and there 
we could see the river faint flash in the moonlight. 

no softer, sweet scene could be imagined. the news i had just heard 
made it melancholy; but nothing could disturb its character of profound 
serenity, and the enchant glory and vague of the prospect. 

my father, who enjoy the picturesque, and i, stood look in silence 
over the expanse beneath us. the two good governesses, standing a little 
way behind us, discourse upon the scene, and were eloquent upon 
the moon. 

madame perrodon was fat, middle-aged, and romantic, and talk and 
sigh poetically. mademoiselle de lafontaine--in right of her father 
who was a german, assume to be psychological, metaphysical, and 
something of a mystic--now declared that when the moon shone with a 
light so intense it was well known that it indicate a special spiritual 
activity. the effect of the full moon in such a state of brilliancy was 
manifold. it act on dreams, it act on lunacy, it act on nervous 
people, it had marvelous physical influence connected with life. 
mademoiselle related that her cousin, who was mate of a merchant ship, 
have taken a nap on deck on such a night, lie on his back, with his 
face full in the light on the moon, had wakened, after a dream of an old 
woman claw him by the cheek, with his features horrible drawn to one 
side; and his countenance had never quite recover its equilibrium. 

"the moon, this night," she said, "is full of idyll and magnetic 
influence--and see, when you look behind you at the front of the schloss 
how all its window flash and twinkle with that silvery splendor, as if 
unseen hand had light up the rooms to receive fairy guests." 

there are indolent style of the spirits in which, indisposed to talk 
ourselves, the talk of other is pleasant to our listless ears; and i 
gaze on, pleased with the tinkle of the ladies' conversation. 

"i have got into one of my mope mood tonight," said my father, after 
a silence, and quote shakespeare, whom, by way of keeping up our 
english, he use to read aloud, he said: 

"'in truth i know not why i am so sad. 
it weary me: you say it weary you; 
but how i got it--came by it.' 

"i forget the rest. but i feel as if some great misfortune were hanging 
over us. i suppose the poor general's afflict letter has had something 
to do with it." 

at this moment the unwonted sound of carriage wheels and many hoof upon 
the road, arrest our attention. 

they seem to be approach from the high ground overlook the 
bridge, and very soon the equipage emerge from that point. two horsemen 
first cross the bridge, then came a carriage drawn by four horses, and 
two men rode behind. 

it seem to be the travel carriage of a person of rank; and we were 
all immediately absorb in watch that very unusual spectacle. it 
became, in a few moments, greatly more interesting, for just as the 
carriage had pass the summit of the steep bridge, one of the leaders, 
taking fright, communicate his panic to the rest, and after a plunge or 
two, the whole team broke into a wild gallop together, and dashing 
between the horsemen who rode in front, came thundering along the road 
towards us with the speed of a hurricane. 

the excitement of the scene was made more painful by the clear, 
long-drawn scream of a female voice from the carriage window. 

we all advanced in curiosity and horror; me rather in silence, the rest 
with various ejaculation of terror. 

our suspense did not last long. just before you reach the castle 
drawbridge, on the route they were coming, there stand by the roadside 
a magnificent lime tree, on the other stand an ancient stone cross, at 
sight of which the horses, now go at a pace that was perfectly 
frightful, swerve so as to bring the wheel over the project roots 
of the tree. 

i knew what was coming. i cover my eyes, unable to see it out, and 
turn my head away; at the same moment i heard a cry from my lady 
friends, who had gone on a little. 

curiosity open my eyes, and i saw a scene of utter confusion. two of 
the horse were on the ground, the carriage lay upon its side with two 
wheels in the air; the men were busy remove the traces, and a lady 
with a commanding air and figure had got out, and stood with clasp 
hands, raise the handkerchief that was in them every now and then 
to her eyes. 

through the carriage door was now lift a young lady, who appear to 
be lifeless. my dear old father was already beside the elder lady, with 
his hat in his hand, evidently tender his aid and the resources of 
his schloss. the lady did not appear to hear him, or to have eyes for 
anything but the slender girl who was being placed against the slope 
of the bank. 

i approached; the young lady was apparently stunned, but she was 
certainly not dead. my father, who pique himself on being something of 
a physician, had just had his finger on her wrist and assured the lady, 
who declared herself her mother, that her pulse, though faint and 
irregular, was undoubted still distinguishable. the lady clasp her 
hand and look upward, as if in a momentary transport of gratitude; 
but immediately she broke out again in that theatrical way which is, i 
believe, natural to some people. 

she was what is call a fine look woman for her time of life, and 
must have been handsome; she was tall, but not thin, and dress in 
black velvet, and look rather pale, but with a proud and commanding 
countenance, though now agitate strangely. 

"who was ever being so born to calamity?" i heard her say, with clasp 
hands, as i came up. "here am i, on a journey of life and death, in 
prosecute which to lose an hour is possibly to lose all. my child will 
not have recover sufficient to resume her route for who can say how 
long. i must leave her: i cannot, dare not, delay. how far on, sir, can 
you tell, is the nearest village? i must leave her there; and shall not 
see my darling, or even hear of her till my return, three month hence." 

i pluck my father by the coat, and whisper earnest in his ear: 
"oh! papa, pray ask her to let her stay with us--it would be so 
delightful. do, pray." 

"if madame will entrust her child to the care of my daughter, and of her 
good gouvernante, madame perrodon, and permit her to remain as our 
guest, under my charge, until her return, it will confer a distinction 
and an obligation upon us, and we shall treat her with all the care and 
devotion which so sacred a trust deserves." 

"i cannot do that, sir, it would be to task your kindness and chivalry 
too cruelly," said the lady, distractedly. 

"it would, on the contrary, be to confer on us a very great kindness at 
the moment when we most need it. my daughter has just been disappointed 
by a cruel misfortune, in a visit from which she had long anticipate a 
great deal of happiness. if you confide this young lady to our care it 
will be her best consolation. the nearest village on your route is 
distant, and afford no such inn as you could think of place your 
daughter at; you cannot allow her to continue her journey for any 
considerable distance without danger. if, as you say, you cannot suspend 
your journey, you must part with her tonight, and nowhere could you do 
so with more honest assurance of care and tender than here." 

there was something in this lady's air and appearance so distinguished 
and even imposing, and in her manner so engaging, as to impress one, 
quite apart from the dignity of her equipage, with a conviction that she 
was a person of consequence. 

by this time the carriage was replace in its upright position, and the 
horses, quite tractable, in the trace again. 

the lady threw on her daughter a glance which i fancy was not quite so 
affectionate as one might have anticipate from the beginning of the 
scene; then she beckon slightly to my father, and withdrew two or 
three steps with him out of hearing; and talk to him with a fixed and 
stern countenance, not at all like that with which she had 
hitherto spoken. 

i was fill with wonder that my father did not seem to perceive the 
change, and also unspeakable curious to learn what it could be that she 
was speaking, almost in his ear, with so much earnest and rapidity. 

two or three minutes at most i think she remain thus employed, then 
she turned, and a few steps brought her to where her daughter lay, 
support by madame perrodon. she kneel beside her for a moment and 
whispered, as madame supposed, a little benediction in her ear; then 
hasty kiss her she step into her carriage, the door was closed, 
the footmen in stately livery jump up behind, the outrider spur 
on, the postilion cracked their whips, the horse plunge and broke 
sudden into a furious canter that threaten soon again to become a 
gallop, and the carriage whirl away, follow at the same rapid pace 
by the two horsemen in the rear. 



iii 

_we compare notes_ 

we follow the _cortege_ with our eyes until it was swift lost to 
sight in the misty wood; and the very sound of the hoof and the wheels 
die away in the silent night air. 

nothing remain to assure us that the adventure had not been an 
illusion of a moment but the young lady, who just at that moment open 
her eyes. i could not see, for her face was turn from me, but she 
raise her head, evidently look about her, and i heard a very sweet 
voice ask complainingly, "where is mamma?" 

our good madame perrodon answer tenderly, and add some comfortable 
assurances. 

i then heard her ask: 

"where am i? what is this place?" and after that she said, "i don't see 
the carriage; and matska, where is she?" 

madame answer all her question in so far as she understood them; and 
gradual the young lady remember how the misadventure came about, and 
was glad to hear that no one in, or in attendance on, the carriage was 
hurt; and on learning that her mamma had left her here, till her return 
in about three months, she wept. 

i was go to add my consolation to those of madame perrodon when 
mademoiselle de lafontaine placed her hand upon my arm, saying: 

"don't approach, one at a time is as much as she can at present converse 
with; a very little excitement would possibly overpower her now." 

as soon as she is comfortable in bed, i thought, i will run up to her 
room and see her. 

my father in the meantime had sent a servant on horseback for the 
physician, who live about two league away; and a bedroom was being 
prepared for the young lady's reception. 

the stranger now rose, and leaning on madame's arm, walk slow over 
the drawbridge and into the castle gate. 

in the hall, servant wait to receive her, and she was conduct 
forthwith to her room. the room we usually sat in as our drawing room is 
long, have four windows, that look over the moat and drawbridge, 
upon the forest scene i have just described. 

it is furnish in old carve oak, with large carve cabinets, and the 
chair are cushion with crimson utrecht velvet. the wall are cover 
with tapestry, and surround with great gold frames, the figures being 
as large as life, in ancient and very curious costume, and the subject 
represent are hunting, hawking, and generally festive. it is not too 
stately to be extremely comfortable; and here we had our tea, for with 
his usual patriotic leaning he insist that the national beverage 
should make its appearance regularly with our coffee and chocolate. 

we sat here this night, and with candle lighted, were talk over the 
adventure of the evening. 

madame perrodon and mademoiselle de lafontaine were both of our party. 
the young stranger had hardly lain down in her bed when she sank into a 
deep sleep; and those ladies had left her in the care of a servant. 

"how do you like our guest?" i asked, as soon as madame entered. "tell 
me all about her?" 

"i like her extremely," answer madame, "she is, i almost think, the 
prettiest creature i ever saw; about your age, and so gentle and nice." 

"she is absolutely beautiful," threw in mademoiselle, who had peep for 
a moment into the stranger's room. 

"and such a sweet voice!" add madame perrodon. 

"did you remark a woman in the carriage, after it was set up again, who 
did not get out," inquire mademoiselle, "but only look from 
the window?" 

"no, we had not seen her." 

then she describe a hideous black woman, with a sort of colored turban 
on her head, and who was gaze all the time from the carriage window, 
nod and grin derisive towards the ladies, with gleam eyes 
and large white eyeballs, and her teeth set as if in fury. 

"did you remark what an ill-looking pack of men the servant were?" 
ask madame. 

"yes," said my father, who had just come in, "ugly, hang-dog look 
fellow as ever i beheld in my life. i hope they mayn't rob the poor 
lady in the forest. they are clever rogues, however; they got everything 
to rights in a minute." 

"i dare say they are worn out with too long traveling," said madame. 

"besides look wicked, their face were so strange lean, and dark, 
and sullen. i am very curious, i own; but i dare say the young lady will 
tell you all about it tomorrow, if she is sufficient recovered." 

"i don't think she will," said my father, with a mysterious smile, and a 
little nod of his head, as if he knew more about it than he care 
to tell us. 

this made us all the more inquisitive as to what had pass between him 
and the lady in the black velvet, in the brief but earnest interview 
that had immediately precede her departure. 

we were scarcely alone, when i entreat him to tell me. he did not need 
much pressing. 

"there is no particular reason why i should not tell you. she express 
a reluctance to trouble us with the care of her daughter, saying she was 
in delicate health, and nervous, but not subject to any kind of 
seizure--she volunteer that--nor to any illusion; being, in fact, 
perfectly sane." 

"how very odd to say all that!" i interpolated. "it was so unnecessary." 

"at all event it _was_ said," he laughed, "and as you wish to know all 
that passed, which was indeed very little, i tell you. she then said, 'i 
am making a long journey of _vital_ importance--she emphasize the 
word--rapid and secret; i shall return for my child in three months; in 
the meantime, she will be silent as to who we are, whence we come, and 
whither we are traveling.' that is all she said. she spoke very pure 
french. when she said the word 'secret,' she pause for a few seconds, 
look sternly, her eyes fixed on mine. i fancy she make a great point 
of that. you saw how quick she was gone. i hope i have not done a very 
foolish thing, in taking charge of the young lady." 

for my part, i was delighted. i was longing to see and talk to her; and 
only wait till the doctor should give me leave. you, who live in 
towns, can have no idea how great an event the introduction of a new 
friend is, in such a solitude as surround us. 

the doctor did not arrive till nearly one o'clock; but i could no more 
have gone to my bed and slept, than i could have overtaken, on foot, the 
carriage in which the princess in black velvet had driven away. 

when the physician came down to the drawing room, it was to report very 
favorable upon his patient. she was now sitting up, her pulse quite 
regular, apparently perfectly well. she had sustain no injury, and the 
little shock to her nerves had pass away quite harmlessly. there could 
be no harm certainly in my seeing her, if we both wish it; and, with 
this permission i sent, forthwith, to know whether she would allow me to 
visit her for a few minutes in her room. 

the servant return immediately to say that she desire nothing more. 

you may be sure i was not long in avail myself of this permission. 

our visitor lay in one of the handsomest rooms in the schloss. it was, 
perhaps, a little stately. there was a somber piece of tapestry opposite 
the foot of the bed, represent cleopatra with the asp to her bosom; 
and other solemn classic scene were displayed, a little faded, upon the 
other walls. but there was gold carving, and rich and varied color 
enough in the other decoration of the room, to more than redeem the 
gloom of the old tapestry. 

there were candle at the bedside. she was sitting up; her slender 
pretty figure envelop in the soft silk dressing gown, embroider with 
flowers, and line with thick quilted silk, which her mother had thrown 
over her feet as she lay upon the ground. 

what was it that, as i reach the bedside and had just begun my little 
greeting, struck me dumb in a moment, and made me recoil a step or two 
from before her? i will tell you. 

i saw the very face which had visit me in my childhood at night, which 
remain so fixed in my memory, and on which i had for so many years so 
often ruminate with horror, when no one suspect of what i 
was thinking. 

it was pretty, even beautiful; and when i first beheld it, wore the 
same melancholy expression. 

but this almost instantly light into a strange fixed smile of 
recognition. 

there was a silence of fully a minute, and then at length she spoke; i 
could not. 

"how wonderful!" she exclaimed. "twelve years ago, i saw your face in a 
dream, and it has haunt me ever since." 

"wonderful indeed!" i repeated, overcome with an effort the horror 
that had for a time suspend my utterances. "twelve years ago, in 
vision or reality, i certainly saw you. i could not forget your face. it 
has remain before my eyes ever since." 

her smile had softened. whatever i had fancy strange in it, was gone, 
and it and her dimple cheek were now delightful pretty and 
intelligent. 

i felt reassured, and continue more in the vein which hospitality 
indicated, to bid her welcome, and to tell her how much pleasure her 
accidental arrival had given us all, and especially what a happiness it 
was to me. 

i took her hand as i spoke. i was a little shy, as lonely people are, 
but the situation made me eloquent, and even bold. she pressed my hand, 
she laid hers upon it, and her eyes glowed, as, look hasty into 
mine, she smile again, and blushed. 

she answer my welcome very prettily. i sat down beside her, still 
wondering; and she said: 

"i must tell you my vision about you; it is so very strange that you and 
i should have had, each of the other so vivid a dream, that each should 
have seen, i you and you me, look as we do now, when of course we 
both were mere children. i was a child, about six years old, and i awoke 
from a confuse and trouble dream, and found myself in a room, unlike 
my nursery, wainscot clumsy in some dark wood, and with cupboard 
and bedsteads, and chairs, and bench placed about it. the bed were, 
i thought, all empty, and the room itself without anyone but myself in 
it; and i, after look about me for some time, and admire especially 
an iron candlestick with two branches, which i should certainly know 
again, crept under one of the bed to reach the window; but as i got 
from under the bed, i heard someone crying; and look up, while i was 
still upon my knees, i saw you--most assured you--as i see you now; a 
beautiful young lady, with golden hair and large blue eyes, and 
lips--your lips--you as you are here. 

"your looks won me; i climb on the bed and put my arms about you, and 
i think we both fell asleep. i was arouse by a scream; you were sitting 
up screaming. i was frightened, and slip down upon the ground, and, 
it seem to me, lost consciousness for a moment; and when i came to 
myself, i was again in my nursery at home. your face i have never 
forgotten since. i could not be misle by mere resemblance. _you are_ 
the lady whom i saw then." 

it was now my turn to relate my corresponding vision, which i did, to 
the undisguised wonder of my new acquaintance. 

"i don't know which should be most afraid of the other," she said, again 
smiling--"if you were less pretty i think i should be very much afraid 
of you, but being as you are, and you and i both so young, i feel only 
that i have made your acquaintance twelve years ago, and have already a 
right to your intimacy; at all event it do seem as if we were 
destined, from our earliest childhood, to be friends. i wonder whether 
you feel as strange drawn towards me as i do to you; i have never had 
a friend--shall i find one now?" she sighed, and her fine dark eyes 
gaze passionately on me. 

now the truth is, i felt rather unaccountable towards the beautiful 
stranger. i did feel, as she said, "drawn towards her," but there was 
also something of repulsion. in this ambiguous feeling, however, the 
sense of attraction immensely prevailed. she interested and won me; she 
was so beautiful and so indescribable engaging. 

i perceive now something of languor and exhaustion steal over her, 
and hasten to bid her good night. 

"the doctor thinks," i added, "that you ought to have a maid to sit up 
with you tonight; one of ours is waiting, and you will find her a very 
useful and quiet creature." 

"how kind of you, but i could not sleep, i never could with an attendant 
in the room. i shan't require any assistance--and, shall i confess my 
weakness, i am haunt with a terror of robbers. our house was rob 
once, and two servant murdered, so i always lock my door. it has become 
a habit--and you look so kind i know you will forgive me. i see there is 
a key in the lock." 

she held me close in her pretty arms for a moment and whisper in my 
ear, "good night, darling, it is very hard to part with you, but good 
night; tomorrow, but not early, i shall see you again." 

she sank back on the pillow with a sigh, and her fine eyes follow me 
with a fond and melancholy gaze, and she murmur again "good night, 
dear friend." 

young people like, and even love, on impulse. i was flatter by the 
evident, though as yet undeserved, fond she show me. i like the 
confidence with which she at once received me. she was determined that 
we should be very near friends. 

next day came and we met again. i was delight with my companion; that 
is to say, in many respects. 

her looks lost nothing in daylight--she was certainly the most beautiful 
creature i had ever seen, and the unpleasant remembrance of the face 
present in my early dream, had lost the effect of the first unexpected 
recognition. 

she confessed that she had experienced a similar shock on seeing me, and 
precisely the same faint antipathy that had mingle with my admiration 
of her. we now laugh together over our momentary horrors. 



iv 

_her habits--a saunter_ 

i told you that i was charm with her in most particulars. 

there were some that did not please me so well. 

she was above the middle height of women. i shall begin by describe 
her. 

she was slender, and wonderful graceful. except that her movements 
were languid--very languid--indeed, there was nothing in her appearance 
to indicate an invalid. her complexion was rich and brilliant; her 
features were small and beautiful formed; her eyes large, dark, and 
lustrous; her hair was quite wonderful, i never saw hair so 
magnificent thick and long when it was down about her shoulders; i 
have often placed my hand under it, and laugh with wonder at its 
weight. it was exquisite fine and soft, and in color a rich very dark 
brown, with something of gold. i love to let it down, tumble with its 
own weight, as, in her room, she lay back in her chair talk in her 
sweet low voice, i use to fold and braid it, and spread it out and 
play with it. heavens! if i had but known all! 

i said there were particulars which did not please me. i have told you 
that her confidence won me the first night i saw her; but i found that 
she exercise with respect to herself, her mother, her history, 
everything in fact connected with her life, plans, and people, an ever 
wakeful reserve. i dare say i was unreasonable, perhaps i was wrong; i 
dare say i ought to have respect the solemn injunction laid upon my 
father by the stately lady in black velvet. but curiosity is a restless 
and unscrupulous passion, and no one girl can endure, with patience, 
that hers should be baffle by another. what harm could it do anyone to 
tell me what i so ardent desire to know? had she no trust in my good 
sense or honor? why would she not believe me when i assured her, so 
solemnly, that i would not divulge one syllable of what she told me to 
any mortal breathing. 

there was a coldness, it seem to me, beyond her years, in her smile 
melancholy persistent refusal to afford me the least ray of light. 

i cannot say we quarrel upon this point, for she would not quarrel 
upon any. it was, of course, very unfair of me to press her, very 
ill-bred, but i really could not help it; and i might just as well have 
let it alone. 

what she did tell me amounted, in my unconscionable estimation--to 
nothing. 

it was all sum up in three very vague disclosures: 

first--her name was carmilla. 

second--her family was very ancient and noble. 

third--her home lay in the direction of the west. 

she would not tell me the name of her family, nor their armorial 
bearings, nor the name of their estate, nor even that of the country 
they live in. 

you are not to suppose that i worried her incessant on these subjects. 
i watch opportunity, and rather insinuate than urge my inquiries. 
once or twice, indeed, i did attack her more directly. but no matter 
what my tactics, utter failure was invariable the result. reproach and 
caress were all lost upon her. but i must add this, that her evasion 
was conduct with so pretty a melancholy and deprecation, with so many, 
and even passionate declaration of her liking for me, and trust in my 
honor, and with so many promise that i should at last know all, that i 
could not find it in my heart long to be offend with her. 

she use to place her pretty arms about my neck, draw me to her, and 
lay her cheek to mine, murmur with her lip near my ear, "dearest, 
your little heart is wounded; think me not cruel because i obey the 
irresistible law of my strength and weakness; if your dear heart is 
wounded, my wild heart bleed with yours. in the rapture of my enormous 
humiliate i live in your warm life, and you shall die--die, sweet 
die--into mine. i cannot help it; as i draw near to you, you, in your 
turn, will draw near to others, and learn the rapture of that cruelty, 
which yet is love; so, for a while, seek to know no more of me and mine, 
but trust me with all your loving spirit." 

and when she had spoken such a rhapsody, she would press me more close 
in her tremble embrace, and her lip in soft kiss gently glow 
upon my cheek. 

her agitation and her language were unintelligible to me. 

from these foolish embraces, which were not of very frequent occurrence, 
i must allow, i use to wish to extricate myself; but my energy seem 
to fail me. her murmur words sound like a lullaby in my ear, and 
soothe my resistance into a trance, from which i only seem to recover 
myself when she withdrew her arms. 

in these mysterious mood i did not like her. i experienced a strange 
tumultuous excitement that was pleasurable, ever and anon, mingle with 
a vague sense of fear and disgust. i had no distinct thought about her 
while such scene lasted, but i was conscious of a love grow into 
adoration, and also of abhorrence. this i know is paradox, but i can 
make no other attempt to explain the feeling. 

i now write, after an interval of more than ten years, with a tremble 
hand, with a confuse and horrible recollection of certain occurrence 
and situations, in the ordeal through which i was unconscious passing; 
though with a vivid and very sharp remembrance of the main current of 
my story. 

but, i suspect, in all lives there are certain emotional scenes, those 
in which our passion have been most wildly and terribly roused, that 
are of all other the most vague and dim remembered. 

sometimes after an hour of apathy, my strange and beautiful companion 
would take my hand and hold it with a fond pressure, renew again and 
again; blush softly, gaze in my face with languid and burning eyes, 
and breathing so fast that her dress rose and fell with the tumultuous 
respiration. it was like the ardor of a lover; it embarrass me; it was 
hateful and yet over-powering; and with gloat eyes she drew me to 
her, and her hot lip traveled along my cheek in kisses; and she would 
whisper, almost in sobs, "you are mine, you _shall_ be mine, you and i 
are one for ever." then she had thrown herself back in her chair, with 
her small hand over her eyes, leave me trembling. 

"are we related," i use to ask; "what can you mean by all this? i 
remind you perhaps of someone whom you love; but you must not, i hate 
it; i don't know you--i don't know myself when you look so and talk so." 

she use to sigh at my vehemence, then turn away and drop my hand. 

respecting these very extraordinary manifestation i strove in vain to 
form any satisfactory theory--i could not refer them to affectation or 
trick. it was unmistakable the momentary break out of suppress 
instinct and emotion. was she, notwithstanding her mother's volunteer 
denial, subject to brief visitation of insanity; or was there here a 
disguise and a romance? i had read in old storybook of such things. 
what if a boyish lover had found his way into the house, and sought to 
prosecute his suit in masquerade, with the assistance of a clever old 
adventuress. but there were many things against this hypothesis, highly 
interesting as it was to my vanity. 

i could boast of no little attention such as masculine gallantry 
delight to offer. between these passionate moments there were long 
interval of commonplace, of gaiety, of brood melancholy, during 
which, except that i detect her eyes so full of melancholy fire, 
following me, at times i might have been as nothing to her. except in 
these brief periods of mysterious excitement her ways were girlish; and 
there was always a languor about her, quite incompatible with a 
masculine system in a state of health. 

in some respects her habit were odd. perhaps not so singular in the 
opinion of a town lady like you, as they appear to us rustic people. 
she use to come down very late, generally not till one o'clock, she 
would then take a cup of chocolate, but eat nothing; we then went out 
for a walk, which was a mere saunter, and she seemed, almost 
immediately, exhausted, and either return to the schloss or sat on one 
of the bench that were placed, here and there, among the trees. this 
was a bodily languor in which her mind did not sympathize. she was 
always an animate talker, and very intelligent. 

she sometimes allude for a moment to her own home, or mention an 
adventure or situation, or an early recollection, which indicate a 
people of strange manners, and describe customs of which we knew 
nothing. i gather from these chance hint that her native country was 
much more remote than i had at first fancied. 

as we sat thus one afternoon under the tree a funeral pass us by. it 
was that of a pretty young girl, whom i had often seen, the daughter of 
one of the ranger of the forest. the poor man was walking behind the 
coffin of his darling; she was his only child, and he look quite 
heartbroken. 

peasant walking two-and-two came behind, they were singing a funeral 
hymn. 

i rose to mark my respect as they passed, and join in the hymn they 
were very sweet singing. 

my companion shook me a little roughly, and i turn surprised. 

she said brusquely, "don't you perceive how discordant that is?" 

"i think it very sweet, on the contrary," i answered, vex at the 
interruption, and very uncomfortable, lest the people who compose the 
little procession should observe and resent what was passing. 

i resumed, therefore, instantly, and was again interrupted. "you pierce 
my ears," said carmilla, almost angrily, and stopping her ear with her 
tiny fingers. "besides, how can you tell that your religion and mine are 
the same; your form wound me, and i hate funerals. what a fuss! why you 
must die--_everyone_ must die; and all are happy when they do. 
come home." 

"my father has gone on with the clergyman to the churchyard. i thought 
you knew she was to be bury today." 

"she? i don't trouble my head about peasants. i don't know who she is," 
answer carmilla, with a flash from her fine eyes. 

"she is the poor girl who fancy she saw a ghost a fortnight ago, and 
has been die ever since, till yesterday, when she expired." 

"tell me nothing about ghosts. i shan't sleep tonight if you do." 

"i hope there is no plague or fever coming; all this looks very like 
it," i continued. "the swineherd's young wife die only a week ago, and 
she thought something seize her by the throat as she lay in her bed, 
and nearly strangle her. papa say such horrible fancies do accompany 
some form of fever. she was quite well the day before. she sank 
afterwards, and die before a week." 

"well, _her_ funeral is over, i hope, and _her_ hymn sung; and our ear 
shan't be torture with that discord and jargon. it has made me nervous. 
sit down here, beside me; sit close; hold my hand; press it 
hard-hard-harder." 

we had move a little back, and had come to another seat. 

she sat down. her face underwent a change that alarm and even 
terrify me for a moment. it darkened, and became horrible livid; her 
teeth and hand were clenched, and she frown and compress her lips, 
while she stare down upon the ground at her feet, and tremble all over 
with a continue shudder as irrepressible as ague. all her energy 
seem strained to suppress a fit, with which she was then breathless 
tugging; and at length a low convulsive cry of suffering broke from her, 
and gradual the hysteria subsided. "there! that come of strangle 
people with hymns!" she said at last. "hold me, hold me still. it is 
passing away." 

and so gradual it did; and perhaps to dissipate the somber impression 
which the spectacle had left upon me, she became unusually animate and 
chatty; and so we got home. 

this was the first time i had seen her exhibit any define symptom of 
that delicacy of health which her mother had spoken of. it was the first 
time, also, i had seen her exhibit anything like temper. 

both pass away like a summer cloud; and never but once afterwards did 
i witness on her part a momentary sign of anger. i will tell you how 
it happened. 

she and i were look out of one of the long drawing room windows, when 
there enter the courtyard, over the drawbridge, a figure of a wanderer 
whom i knew very well. he use to visit the schloss generally twice 
a year. 

it was the figure of a hunchback, with the sharp lean features that 
generally accompany deformity. he wore a pointed black beard, and he was 
smile from ear to ear, showing his white fangs. he was dress in 
buff, black, and scarlet, and cross with more strap and belt than i 
could count, from which hung all manner of things. behind, he carry a 
magic lantern, and two boxes, which i well knew, in one of which was a 
salamander, and in the other a mandrake. these monster use to make my 
father laugh. they were compound of parts of monkeys, parrots, 
squirrels, fish, and hedgehogs, dry and stitch together with great 
neat and startle effect. he had a fiddle, a box of conjure 
apparatus, a pair of foil and mask attach to his belt, several other 
mysterious case dangle about him, and a black staff with copper 
ferrule in his hand. his companion was a rough spare dog, that follow 
at his heels, but stop short, suspicious at the drawbridge, and in 
a little while began to howl dismally. 

in the meantime, the mountebank, standing in the midst of the courtyard, 
raise his grotesque hat, and made us a very ceremonious bow, pay his 
compliments very voluble in execrable french, and germany not 
much better. 

then, disengage his fiddle, he began to scrape a lively air to which 
he sang with a merry discord, dance with ludicrous airs and activity, 
that made me laugh, in spite of the dog's howling. 

then he advanced to the window with many smile and salutations, and 
his hat in his left hand, his fiddle under his arm, and with a fluency 
that never took breath, he gabble a long advertisement of all his 
accomplishments, and the resources of the various arts which he placed 
at our service, and the curiosity and entertainment which it was in 
his power, at our bidding, to display. 

"will your ladyship be pleased to buy an amulet against the oupire, 
which is go like the wolf, i hear, through these woods," he said 
drop his hat on the pavement. "they are die of it right and left 
and here is a charm that never fails; only pin to the pillow, and you 
may laugh in his face." 

these charm consist of oblong slips of vellum, with cabalistic 
cipher and diagram upon them. 

carmilla instantly purchase one, and so did i. 

he was look up, and we were smile down upon him, amused; at least, 
i can answer for myself. his piercing black eye, as he look up in our 
faces, seem to detect something that fixed for a moment his curiosity. 
in an instant he unroll a leather case, full of all manner of odd 
little steel instruments. 

"see here, my lady," he said, display it, and address me, "i 
profess, among other things less useful, the art of dentistry. plague 
take the dog!" he interpolated. "silence, beast! he howl so that your 
ladyship can scarcely hear a word. your noble friend, the young lady at 
your right, has the sharpest tooth,--long, thin, pointed, like an awl, 
like a needle; ha, ha! with my sharp and long sight, as i look up, i 
have seen it distinctly; now if it happen to hurt the young lady, and i 
think it must, here am i, here are my file, my punch, my nippers; i will 
make it round and blunt, if her ladyship pleases; no long the tooth of 
a fish, but of a beautiful young lady as she is. hey? is the young lady 
displeased? have i been too bold? have i offend her?" 

the young lady, indeed, look very angry as she drew back from the 
window. 

"how dare that mountebank insult us so? where is your father? i shall 
demand redress from him. my father would have had the wretch tie up to 
the pump, and flog with a cart whip, and burnt to the bone with the 
cattle brand!" 

she retired from the window a step or two, and sat down, and had hardly 
lost sight of the offender, when her wrath subside as sudden as it 
had risen, and she gradual recover her usual tone, and seem to 
forget the little hunchback and his follies. 

my father was out of spirits that evening. on coming in he told us that 
there had been another case very similar to the two fatal one which had 
lately occurred. the sister of a young peasant on his estate, only a 
mile away, was very ill, had been, as she describe it, attack very 
nearly in the same way, and was now slow but steady sinking. 

"all this," said my father, "is strict refer to natural causes. 
these poor people infect one another with their superstitions, and so 
repeat in imagination the image of terror that have infest their 
neighbors." 

"but that very circumstance frighten one horribly," said carmilla. 

"how so?" inquire my father. 

"i am so afraid of fancy i see such things; i think it would be as 
bad as reality." 

"we are in god's hands: nothing can happen without his permission, and 
all will end well for those who love him. he is our faithful creator; he 
has made us all, and will take care of us." 

"creator! _nature!_" said the young lady in answer to my gentle father. 
"and this disease that invade the country is natural. nature. all 
things proceed from nature--don't they? all things in the heaven, in the 
earth, and under the earth, act and live as nature ordains? i 
think so." 

"the doctor said he would come here today," said my father, after a 
silence. "i want to know what he think about it, and what he think we 
had better do." 

"doctors never did me any good," said carmilla. 

"then you have been ill?" i asked. 

"more ill than ever you were," she answered. 

"long ago?" 

"yes, a long time. i suffer from this very illness; but i forget all 
but my pain and weakness, and they were not so bad as are suffer in 
other diseases." 

"you were very young then?" 

"i dare say, let us talk no more of it. you would not wound a friend?" 

she look languid in my eyes, and pass her arm round my waist 
lovingly, and led me out of the room. my father was busy over some 
papers near the window. 

"why do your papa like to frighten us?" said the pretty girl with a 
sigh and a little shudder. 

"he doesn't, dear carmilla, it is the very furthest thing from his 
mind." 

"are you afraid, dearest?" 

"i should be very much if i fancy there was any real danger of my 
being attack as those poor people were." 

"you are afraid to die?" 

"yes, every one is." 

"but to die as lovers may--to die together, so that they may live 
together. 

"girls are caterpillar while they live in the world, to be finally 
butterfly when the summer comes; but in the meantime there are grub 
and larvae, don't you see--each with their peculiar propensities, 
necessity and structure. so say monsieur buffon, in his big book, in 
the next room." 

later in the day the doctor came, and was closet with papa for some 
time. 

he was a skilful man, of sixty and upwards, he wore powder, and shave 
his pale face as smooth as a pumpkin. he and papa emerge from the room 
together, and i heard papa laugh, and say as they came out: 

"well, i do wonder at a wise man like you. what do you say to 
hippogriff and dragons?" 

the doctor was smiling, and made answer, shake his head-- 

"nevertheless life and death are mysterious states, and we know little 
of the resources of either." 

and so they walk on, and i heard no more. i did not then know what the 
doctor had been broaching, but i think i guess it now. 



v 

_a wonderful likeness_ 

this evening there arrive from gratz the grave, dark-faced son of the 
picture cleaner, with a horse and cart laden with two large packing 
cases, have many pictures in each. it was a journey of ten leagues, 
and whenever a messenger arrive at the schloss from our little capital 
of gratz, we use to crowd about him in the hall, to hear the news. 

this arrival create in our secluded quarters quite a sensation. the 
case remain in the hall, and the messenger was taken charge of by the 
servant till he had eaten his supper. then with assistants, and armed 
with hammer, rip chisel, and turnscrew, he met us in the hall, where 
we had assemble to witness the unpack of the cases. 

carmilla sat look listless on, while one after the other the old 
pictures, nearly all portraits, which had undergone the process of 
renovation, were brought to light. my mother was of an old hungary 
family, and most of these pictures, which were about to be restore to 
their places, had come to us through her. 

my father had a list in his hand, from which he read, as the artist 
rummage out the corresponding numbers. i don't know that the pictures 
were very good, but they were, undoubtedly, very old, and some of them 
very curious also. they had, for the most part, the merit of being now 
seen by me, i may say, for the first time; for the smoke and dust of 
time had all but obliterate them. 

"there is a picture that i have not seen yet," said my father. "in one 
corner, at the top of it, is the name, as well as i could read, 'marcia 
karnstein,' and the date '1698'; and i am curious to see how it has 
turn out." 

i remember it; it was a small picture, about a foot and a half high, 
and nearly square, without a frame; but it was so blacken by age that 
i could not make it out. 

the artist now produce it, with evident pride. it was quite beautiful; 
it was startling; it seem to live. it was the effigy of carmilla! 

"carmilla, dear, here is an absolute miracle. here you are, living, 
smiling, ready to speak, in this picture. isn't it beautiful, papa? and 
see, even the little mole on her throat." 

my father laughed, and said "certainly it is a wonderful likeness," but 
he look away, and to my surprise seem but little struck by it, and 
went on talk to the picture cleaner, who was also something of an 
artist, and discourse with intelligence about the portrait or other 
works, which his art had just brought into light and color, while i was 
more and more lost in wonder the more i look at the picture. 

"will you let me hang this picture in my room, papa?" i asked. 

"certainly, dear," said he, smiling, "i'm very glad you think it so 
like. it must be pretty even than i thought it, if it is." 

the young lady did not acknowledge this pretty speech, did not seem to 
hear it. she was leaning back in her seat, her fine eyes under their 
long lash gaze on me in contemplation, and she smile in a kind 
of rapture. 

"and now you can read quite plainly the name that is written in the 
corner. it is not marcia; it looks as if it was done in gold. the name 
is mircalla, countess karnstein, and this is a little coronet over and 
underneath a.d. 1698. i am descended from the karnsteins; that is, 
mamma was." 

"ah!" said the lady, languidly, "so am i, i think, a very long descent, 
very ancient. are there any karnstein living now?" 

"none who bear the name, i believe. the family were ruined, i believe, 
in some civil wars, long ago, but the ruins of the castle are only about 
three mile away." 

"how interesting!" she said, languidly. "but see what beautiful 
moonlight!" she glance through the hall door, which stood a little 
open. "suppose you take a little ramble round the court, and look down 
at the road and river." 

"it is so like the night you came to us," i said. 

she sighed; smiling. 

she rose, and each with her arm about the other's waist, we walk out 
upon the pavement. 

in silence, slow we walk down to the drawbridge, where the beautiful 
landscape open before us. 

"and so you were thinking of the night i came here?" she almost 
whispered. 

"are you glad i came?" 

"delighted, dear carmilla," i answered. 

"and you ask for the picture you think like me, to hang in your room," 
she murmur with a sigh, as she drew her arm close about my waist, and 
let her pretty head sink upon my shoulder. "how romantic you are, 
carmilla," i said. "whenever you tell me your story, it will be made up 
chiefly of some one great romance." 

she kiss me silently. 

"i am sure, carmilla, you have been in love; that there is, at this 
moment, an affair of the heart go on." 

"i have been in love with no one, and never shall," she whispered, 
"unless it should be with you." 

how beautiful she look in the moonlight! 

shy and strange was the look with which she quick hid her face in my 
neck and hair, with tumultuous sighs, that seem almost to sob, and 
pressed in mine a hand that trembled. 

her soft cheek was glowing against mine. "darling, darling," she 
murmured, "i live in you; and you would die for me, i love you so." 

i start from her. 

she was gaze on me with eyes from which all fire, all meaning had 
flown, and a face colorless and apathetic. 

"is there a chill in the air, dear?" she said drowsily. "i almost 
shiver; have i been dreaming? let us come in. come; come; come in." 

"you look ill, carmilla; a little faint. you certainly must take some 
wine," i said. 

"yes. i will. i'm better now. i shall be quite well in a few minutes. 
yes, do give me a little wine," answer carmilla, as we approach 
the door. 

"let us look again for a moment; it is the last time, perhaps, i shall 
see the moonlight with you." 

"how do you feel now, dear carmilla? are you really better?" i asked. 

i was beginning to take alarm, lest she should have been stricken with 
the strange epidemic that they said had invade the country about us. 

"papa would be grieve beyond measure," i added, "if he thought you were 
ever so little ill, without immediately letting us know. we have a very 
skilful doctor near us, the physician who was with papa today." 

"i'm sure he is. i know how kind you all are; but, dear child, i am 
quite well again. there is nothing ever wrong with me, but a 
little weakness. 

"people say i am languid; i am incapable of exertion; i can scarcely walk 
as far as a child of three years old: and every now and then the little 
strength i have falters, and i become as you have just seen me. but 
after all i am very easily set up again; in a moment i am perfectly 
myself. see how i have recovered." 

so, indeed, she had; and she and i talk a great deal, and very 
animate she was; and the remainder of that evening pass without any 
recurrence of what i call her infatuations. i mean her crazy talk and 
looks, which embarrassed, and even frightened me. 

but there occur that night an event which gave my thought quite a 
new turn, and seem to startle even carmilla's languid nature into 
momentary energy. 



vi 

_a very strange agony_ 

when we got into the drawing room, and had sat down to our coffee and 
chocolate, although carmilla did not take any, she seem quite herself 
again, and madame, and mademoiselle de lafontaine, join us, and made a 
little card party, in the course of which papa came in for what he 
call his "dish of tea." 

when the game was over he sat down beside carmilla on the sofa, and 
ask her, a little anxiously, whether she had heard from her mother 
since her arrival. 

she answer "no." 

he then ask whether she knew where a letter would reach her at 
present. 

"i cannot tell," she answer ambiguously, "but i have been thinking of 
leave you; you have been already too hospitable and too kind to me. i 
have given you an infinity of trouble, and i should wish to take a 
carriage tomorrow, and post in pursuit of her; i know where i shall 
ultimately find her, although i dare not yet tell you." 

"but you must not dream of any such thing," exclaim my father, to my 
great relief. "we can't afford to lose you so, and i won't consent to 
your leave us, except under the care of your mother, who was so good 
as to consent to your remain with us till she should herself return. 
i should be quite happy if i knew that you heard from her: but this 
evening the account of the progress of the mysterious disease that has 
invade our neighborhood, grow even more alarming; and my beautiful 
guest, i do feel the responsibility, unaided by advice from your mother, 
very much. but i shall do my best; and one thing is certain, that you 
must not think of leave us without her distinct direction to that 
effect. we should suffer too much in parting from you to consent to 
it easily." 

"thank you, sir, a thousand times for your hospitality," she answered, 
smile bashfully. "you have all been too kind to me; i have seldom been 
so happy in all my life before, as in your beautiful chateau, under your 
care, and in the society of your dear daughter." 

so he gallantly, in his old-fashioned way, kiss her hand, smile and 
pleased at her little speech. 

i accompany carmilla as usual to her room, and sat and chat with 
her while she was prepare for bed. 

"do you think," i said at length, "that you will ever confide fully in 
me?" 

she turn round smiling, but made no answer, only continue to smile on 
me. 

"you won't answer that?" i said. "you can't answer pleasantly; i ought 
not to have ask you." 

"you were quite right to ask me that, or anything. you do not know how 
dear you are to me, or you could not think any confidence too great to 
look for. but i am under vows, no nun half so awfully, and i dare not 
tell my story yet, even to you. the time is very near when you shall 
know everything. you will think me cruel, very selfish, but love is 
always selfish; the more ardent the more selfish. how jealous i am you 
cannot know. you must come with me, loving me, to death; or else hate me 
and still come with me, and _hating_ me through death and after. there 
is no such word as indifference in my apathetic nature." 

"now, carmilla, you are go to talk your wild nonsense again," i said 
hastily. 

"not i, silly little fool as i am, and full of whim and fancies; for 
your sake i'll talk like a sage. were you ever at a ball?" 

"no; how you do run on. what is it like? how charming it must be." 

"i almost forget, it is years ago." 

i laughed. 

"you are not so old. your first ball can hardly be forgotten yet." 

"i remember everything about it--with an effort. i see it all, as divers 
see what is go on above them, through a medium, dense, rippling, but 
transparent. there occur that night what has confuse the picture, 
and made its colours faint. i was all but assassinate in my bed, 
wound here," she touched her breast, "and never was the same since." 

"were you near dying?" 

"yes, very--a cruel love--strange love, that would have taken my life. 
love will have its sacrifices. no sacrifice without blood. let us go to 
sleep now; i feel so lazy. how can i get up just now and lock my door?" 

she was lie with her tiny hand bury in her rich wavy hair, under 
her cheek, her little head upon the pillow, and her glittering eyes 
follow me wherever i moved, with a kind of shy smile that i could 
not decipher. 

i bid her good night, and crept from the room with an uncomfortable 
sensation. 

i often wonder whether our pretty guest ever said her prayers. i 
certainly had never seen her upon her knees. in the morning she never 
came down until long after our family prayer were over, and at night 
she never left the drawing room to attend our brief evening prayer 
in the hall. 

if it had not been that it had casual come out in one of our careless 
talks that she had been baptised, i should have doubt her being a 
christian. religion was a subject on which i had never heard her speak a 
word. if i had known the world better, this particular neglect or 
antipathy would not have so much surprise me. 

the precaution of nervous people are infectious, and person of a like 
temperament are pretty sure, after a time, to imitate them. i had 
adopt carmilla's habit of lock her bedroom door, have taken into 
my head all her whimsical alarm about midnight invade and prowl 
assassins. i had also adopt her precaution of making a brief search 
through her room, to satisfy herself that no lurk assassin or robber 
was "ensconced." 

these wise measure taken, i got into my bed and fell asleep. a light 
was burning in my room. this was an old habit, of very early date, and 
which nothing could have tempt me to dispense with. 

thus fortify i might take my rest in peace. but dream come through 
stone walls, light up dark rooms, or darken light ones, and their 
person make their exit and their entrance as they please, and laugh 
at locksmiths. 

i had a dream that night that was the beginning of a very strange agony. 

i cannot call it a nightmare, for i was quite conscious of being asleep. 

but i was equally conscious of being in my room, and lie in bed, 
precisely as i actually was. i saw, or fancy i saw, the room and its 
furniture just as i had seen it last, except that it was very dark, and 
i saw something moving round the foot of the bed, which at first i 
could not accurate distinguish. but i soon saw that it was a 
sooty-black animal that resemble a monstrous cat. it appear to me 
about four or five feet long for it measured fully the length of the 
hearthrug as it pass over it; and it continue to-ing and fro-ing with 
the lithe, sinister restless of a beast in a cage. i could not cry 
out, although as you may suppose, i was terrified. its pace was grow 
faster, and the room rapid dark and darker, and at length so dark 
that i could no long see anything of it but its eyes. i felt it spring 
lightly on the bed. the two broad eyes approach my face, and sudden 
i felt a sting pain as if two large needle darted, an inch or two 
apart, deep into my breast. i wake with a scream. the room was light 
by the candle that burnt there all through the night, and i saw a female 
figure standing at the foot of the bed, a little at the right side. it 
was in a dark loose dress, and its hair was down and cover its 
shoulders. a block of stone could not have been more still. there was 
not the slightest stir of respiration. as i stare at it, the figure 
appear to have change its place, and was now near the door; then, 
close to it, the door opened, and it pass out. 

i was now relieved, and able to breathe and move. my first thought was 
that carmilla had been play me a trick, and that i had forgotten to 
secure my door. i hasten to it, and found it lock as usual on the 
inside. i was afraid to open it--i was horrified. i sprang into my bed 
and cover my head up in the bedclothes, and lay there more dead than 
alive till morning. 



vii 

_descending_ 

it would be vain my attempt to tell you the horror with which, even 
now, i recall the occurrence of that night. it was no such transitory 
terror as a dream leaves behind it. it seem to deepen by time, and 
communicate itself to the room and the very furniture that had 
encompass the apparition. 

i could not bear next day to be alone for a moment. i should have told 
papa, but for two opposite reasons. at one time i thought he would laugh 
at my story, and i could not bear its being treat as a jest; and at 
another i thought he might fancy that i had been attack by the 
mysterious complaint which had invade our neighborhood. i had myself no 
misgiving of the kind, and as he had been rather an invalid for some 
time, i was afraid of alarm him. 

i was comfortable enough with my good-natured companions, madame 
perrodon, and the vivacious mademoiselle lafontaine. they both perceive 
that i was out of spirits and nervous, and at length i told them what 
lay so heavy at my heart. 

mademoiselle laughed, but i fancy that madame perrodon look anxious. 

"by-the-by," said mademoiselle, laughing, "the long lime tree walk, 
behind carmilla's bedroom window, is haunted!" 

"nonsense!" exclaim madame, who probably thought the theme rather 
inopportune, "and who tell that story, my dear?" 

"martin say that he came up twice, when the old yard gate was being 
repaired, before sunrise, and twice saw the same female figure walking 
down the lime tree avenue." 

"so he well might, as long as there are cow to milk in the river 
fields," said madame. 

"i daresay; but martin choose to be frightened, and never did i see 
fool more frightened." 

"you must not say a word about it to carmilla, because she can see down 
that walk from her room window," i interposed, "and she is, if possible, 
a greater coward than i." 

carmilla came down rather later than usual that day. 

"i was so frightened last night," she said, so soon as were together, 
"and i am sure i should have seen something dreadful if it had not been 
for that charm i bought from the poor little hunchback whom i call 
such hard names. i had a dream of something black coming round my bed, 
and i awoke in a perfect horror, and i really thought, for some seconds, 
i saw a dark figure near the chimney-piece, but i felt under my pillow 
for my charm, and the moment my finger touched it, the figure 
disappeared, and i felt quite certain, only that i had it by me, that 
something frightful would have made its appearance, and, perhaps, 
throttle me, as it did those poor people we heard of. 

"well, listen to me," i began, and recount my adventure, at the 
recital of which she appear horrified. 

"and had you the charm near you?" she asked, earnestly. 

"no, i had drop it into a china vase in the drawing room, but i shall 
certainly take it with me tonight, as you have so much faith in it." 

at this distance of time i cannot tell you, or even understand, how i 
overcame my horror so effectually as to lie alone in my room that night. 
i remember distinct that i pin the charm to my pillow. i fell 
asleep almost immediately, and slept even more sound than usual 
all night. 

next night i pass as well. my sleep was delightful deep and 
dreamless. 

but i waken with a sense of lassitude and melancholy, which, however, 
did not exceed a degree that was almost luxurious. 

"well, i told you so," said carmilla, when i describe my quiet sleep, 
"i had such delightful sleep myself last night; i pin the charm to 
the breast of my nightdress. it was too far away the night before. i am 
quite sure it was all fancy, except the dreams. i use to think that 
evil spirits made dreams, but our doctor told me it is no such thing. 
only a fever passing by, or some other malady, as they often do, he 
said, knock at the door, and not being able to get in, pass on, with 
that alarm." 

"and what do you think the charm is?" said i. 

"it has been fumigate or immerse in some drug, and is an antidote 
against the malaria," she answered. 

"then it acts only on the body?" 

"certainly; you don't suppose that evil spirits are frightened by bit 
of ribbon, or the perfume of a druggist's shop? no, these complaints, 
wandering in the air, begin by try the nerves, and so infect the 
brain, but before they can seize upon you, the antidote repel them. 
that i am sure is what the charm has done for us. it is nothing magical, 
it is simply natural." 

i should have been happy if i could have quite agree with carmilla, 
but i did my best, and the impression was a little lose its force. 

for some nights i slept profoundly; but still every morning i felt the 
same lassitude, and a languor weigh upon me all day. i felt myself a 
change girl. a strange melancholy was steal over me, a melancholy 
that i would not have interrupted. dim thought of death began to open, 
and an idea that i was slow sink took gentle, and, somehow, not 
unwelcome, possession of me. if it was sad, the tone of mind which this 
induce was also sweet. 

whatever it might be, my soul acquiesce in it. 

i would not admit that i was ill, i would not consent to tell my papa, 
or to have the doctor sent for. 

carmilla became more devoted to me than ever, and her strange paroxysm 
of languid adoration more frequent. she use to gloat on me with 
increase ardor the more my strength and spirits waned. this always 
shock me like a momentary glare of insanity. 

without knowing it, i was now in a pretty advanced stage of the 
strangest illness under which mortal ever suffered. there was an 
unaccountable fascination in its early symptom that more than 
reconcile me to the incapacitate effect of that stage of the malady. 
this fascination increase for a time, until it reach a certain point, 
when gradual a sense of the horrible mingle itself with it, 
deepening, as you shall hear, until it discolor and pervert the 
whole state of my life. 

the first change i experienced was rather agreeable. it was very near 
the turning point from which began the descent of avernus. 

certain vague and strange sensation visit me in my sleep. the 
prevailing one was of that pleasant, peculiar cold thrill which we feel 
in bathing, when we move against the current of a river. this was soon 
accompany by dream that seem interminable, and were so vague that 
i could never recollect their scenery and persons, or any one connected 
portion of their action. but they left an awful impression, and a sense 
of exhaustion, as if i had pass through a long period of great mental 
exertion and danger. 

after all these dream there remain on waking a remembrance of have 
been in a place very nearly dark, and of have spoken to people whom i 
could not see; and especially of one clear voice, of a female's, very 
deep, that spoke as if at a distance, slowly, and produce always the 
same sensation of indescribable solemnity and fear. sometimes there came 
a sensation as if a hand was drawn soft along my cheek and neck. 
sometimes it was as if warm lip kiss me, and long and long and 
more loving as they reach my throat, but there the caress fixed 
itself. my heart beat faster, my breathing rose and fell rapid and 
full drawn; a sobbing, that rose into a sense of strangulation, 
supervened, and turn into a dreadful convulsion, in which my senses 
left me and i became unconscious. 

it was now three week since the commencement of this unaccountable 
state. 

my suffering had, during the last week, told upon my appearance. i had 
grown pale, my eyes were dilate and darken underneath, and the 
languor which i had long felt began to display itself in my countenance. 

my father ask me often whether i was ill; but, with an obstinacy which 
now seem to me unaccountable, i persist in assure him that i was 
quite well. 

in a sense this was true. i had no pain, i could complain of no bodily 
derangement. my complaint seem to be one of the imagination, or the 
nerves, and, horrible as my suffering were, i kept them, with a morbid 
reserve, very nearly to myself. 

it could not be that terrible complaint which the peasant call the 
oupire, for i had now been suffering for three weeks, and they were 
seldom ill for much more than three days, when death put an end to 
their miseries. 

carmilla complain of dream and feverish sensations, but by no means 
of so alarm a kind as mine. i say that mine were extremely alarming. 
had i been capable of comprehend my condition, i would have invoke 
aid and advice on my knees. the narcotic of an unsuspected influence was 
acting upon me, and my perception were benumbed. 

i am go to tell you now of a dream that led immediately to an odd 
discovery. 

one night, instead of the voice i was accustomed to hear in the dark, i 
heard one, sweet and tender, and at the same time terrible, which said, 
"your mother warn you to beware of the assassin." at the same time a 
light unexpected sprang up, and i saw carmilla, standing, near the 
foot of my bed, in her white nightdress, bathed, from her chin to her 
feet, in one great stain of blood. 

i waken with a shriek, possessed with the one idea that carmilla was 
being murdered. i remember spring from my bed, and my next 
recollection is that of standing on the lobby, crying for help. 

madame and mademoiselle came scurry out of their rooms in alarm; a 
lamp burn always on the lobby, and seeing me, they soon learned the 
cause of my terror. 

i insist on our knock at carmilla's door. our knock was 
unanswered. 

it soon became a pounding and an uproar. we shriek her name, but all 
was vain. 

we all grew frightened, for the door was locked. we hurried back, in 
panic, to my room. there we rang the bell long and furiously. if my 
father's room had been at that side of the house, we would have call 
him up at once to our aid. but, alas! he was quite out of hearing, and 
to reach him involved an excursion for which we none of us had courage. 

servants, however, soon came running up the stairs; i had got on my 
dressing gown and slipper meanwhile, and my companion were already 
similarly furnished. recognize the voice of the servant on the 
lobby, we sally out together; and have renewed, as fruitlessly, our 
summons at carmilla's door, i ordered the men to force the lock. they 
did so, and we stood, holding our lights aloft, in the doorway, and so 
stare into the room. 

we call her by name; but there was still no reply. we look round the 
room. everything was undisturbed. it was exactly in the state in which i 
had left it on bidding her good night. but carmilla was gone. 



viii 

_search_ 

at sight of the room, perfectly undisturbed except for our violent 
entrance, we began to cool a little, and soon recover our senses 
sufficient to dismiss the men. it had struck mademoiselle that 
possibly carmilla had been waken by the uproar at her door, and in her 
first panic had jump from her bed, and hid herself in a press, or 
behind a curtain, from which she could not, of course, emerge until the 
majordomo and his myrmidon had withdrawn. we now recommence our 
search, and began to call her name again. 

it was all to no purpose. our perplexity and agitation increased. we 
examine the windows, but they were secured. i implore of carmilla, if 
she had conceal herself, to play this cruel trick no longer--to come 
out and to end our anxieties. it was all useless. i was by this time 
convinced that she was not in the room, nor in the dressing room, the 
door of which was still lock on this side. she could not have pass 
it. i was utterly puzzled. had carmilla discover one of those secret 
passage which the old housekeeper said were known to exist in the 
schloss, although the tradition of their exact situation had been lost? 
a little time would, no doubt, explain all--utterly perplexed as, for 
the present, we were. 

it was past four o'clock, and i prefer passing the remain hour of 
dark in madame's room. daylight brought no solution of the 
difficulty. 

the whole household, with my father at its head, was in a state of 
agitation next morning. every part of the chateau was searched. the 
grounds were explored. no trace of the missing lady could be discovered. 
the stream was about to be dragged; my father was in distraction; what a 
tale to have to tell the poor girl's mother on her return. i, too, was 
almost beside myself, though my grief was quite of a different kind. 

the morning was pass in alarm and excitement. it was now one o'clock, 
and still no tidings. i ran up to carmilla's room, and found her 
standing at her dressing table. i was astounded. i could not believe my 
eyes. she beckon me to her with her pretty finger, in silence. her 
face express extreme fear. 

i ran to her in an ecstasy of joy; i kiss and embrace her again and 
again. i ran to the bell and rang it vehemently, to bring other to the 
spot who might at once relieve my father's anxiety. 

"dear carmilla, what has become of you all this time? we have been in 
agony of anxiety about you," i exclaimed. "where have you been? how 
did you come back?" 

"last night has been a night of wonders," she said. 

"for mercy's sake, explain all you can." 

"it was past two last night," she said, "when i went to sleep as usual 
in my bed, with my door locked, that of the dressing room, and that 
opening upon the gallery. my sleep was uninterrupted, and, so far as i 
know, dreamless; but i woke just now on the sofa in the dressing room 
there, and i found the door between the rooms open, and the other door 
forced. how could all this have happen without my being wakened? it 
must have been accompany with a great deal of noise, and i am 
particularly easily wakened; and how could i have been carry out of my 
bed without my sleep have been interrupted, i whom the slightest stir 
startles?" 

by this time, madame, mademoiselle, my father, and a number of the 
servant were in the room. carmilla was, of course, overwhelm with 
inquiries, congratulations, and welcomes. she had but one story to tell, 
and seem the least able of all the party to suggest any way of 
account for what had happened. 

my father took a turn up and down the room, thinking. i saw carmilla's 
eye follow him for a moment with a sly, dark glance. 

when my father had sent the servant away, mademoiselle have gone in 
search of a little bottle of valerian and salvolatile, and there being 
no one now in the room with carmilla, except my father, madame, and 
myself, he came to her thoughtfully, took her hand very kindly, led her 
to the sofa, and sat down beside her. 

"will you forgive me, my dear, if i risk a conjecture, and ask a 
question?" 

"who can have a better right?" she said. "ask what you please, and i 
will tell you everything. but my story is simply one of bewilder and 
darkness. i know absolutely nothing. put any question you please, but 
you know, of course, the limitation mamma has placed me under." 

"perfectly, my dear child. i need not approach the topic on which she 
desire our silence. now, the marvel of last night consist in your 
have been remove from your bed and your room, without being wakened, 
and this removal have occur apparently while the window were still 
secured, and the two door lock upon the inside. i will tell you my 
theory and ask you a question." 

carmilla was leaning on her hand dejectedly; madame and i were 
listen breathlessly. 

"now, my question is this. have you ever been suspect of walking in 
your sleep?" 

"never, since i was very young indeed." 

"but you did walk in your sleep when you were young?" 

"yes; i know i did. i have been told so often by my old nurse." 

my father smile and nodded. 

"well, what has happen is this. you got up in your sleep, unlock the 
door, not leave the key, as usual, in the lock, but taking it out and 
lock it on the outside; you again took the key out, and carry it 
away with you to some one of the five-and-twenty rooms on this floor, or 
perhaps upstairs or downstairs. there are so many rooms and closets, so 
much heavy furniture, and such accumulation of lumber, that it would 
require a week to search this old house thoroughly. do you see, now, 
what i mean?" 

"i do, but not all," she answered. 

"and how, papa, do you account for her finding herself on the sofa in 
the dressing room, which we had search so carefully?" 

"she came there after you had search it, still in her sleep, and at 
last awoke spontaneously, and was as much surprise to find herself 
where she was as any one else. i wish all mystery were as easily and 
innocent explain as yours, carmilla," he said, laughing. "and so we 
may congratulate ourselves on the certainty that the most natural 
explanation of the occurrence is one that involve no drugging, no 
tamper with locks, no burglars, or poisoners, or witches--nothing 
that need alarm carmilla, or anyone else, for our safety." 

carmilla was look charmingly. nothing could be more beautiful than 
her tints. her beauty was, i think, enhance by that graceful languor 
that was peculiar to her. i think my father was silent contrast her 
looks with mine, for he said: 

"i wish my poor laura was look more like herself"; and he sighed. 

so our alarm were happily ended, and carmilla restore to her friends. 



ix 

_the doctor_ 

as carmilla would not hear of an attendant sleep in her room, my 
father arrange that a servant should sleep outside her door, so that 
she would not attempt to make another such excursion without being 
arrest at her own door. 

that night pass quietly; and next morning early, the doctor, whom my 
father had sent for without telling me a word about it, arrive to 
see me. 

madame accompany me to the library; and there the grave little doctor, 
with white hair and spectacles, whom i mention before, was wait to 
receive me. 

i told him my story, and as i proceed he grew grave and graver. 

we were standing, he and i, in the recess of one of the windows, facing 
one another. when my statement was over, he lean with his shoulder 
against the wall, and with his eyes fixed on me earnestly, with an 
interest in which was a dash of horror. 

after a minute's reflection, he ask madame if he could see my father. 

he was sent for accordingly, and as he entered, smiling, he said: 

"i dare say, doctor, you are go to tell me that i am an old fool for 
have brought you here; i hope i am." 

but his smile fade into shadow as the doctor, with a very grave face, 
beckon him to him. 

he and the doctor talk for some time in the same recess where i had 
just confer with the physician. it seem an earnest and 
argumentative conversation. the room is very large, and i and madame 
stood together, burning with curiosity, at the farther end. not a word 
could we hear, however, for they spoke in a very low tone, and the deep 
recess of the window quite conceal the doctor from view, and very 
nearly my father, whose foot, arm, and shoulder only could we see; and 
the voice were, i suppose, all the less audible for the sort of closet 
which the thick wall and window formed. 

after a time my father's face look into the room; it was pale, 
thoughtful, and, i fancied, agitated. 

"laura, dear, come here for a moment. madame, we shan't trouble you, the 
doctor says, at present." 

accordingly i approached, for the first time a little alarmed; for, 
although i felt very weak, i did not feel ill; and strength, one always 
fancies, is a thing that may be picked up when we please. 

my father held out his hand to me, as i drew near, but he was look at 
the doctor, and he said: 

"it certainly is very odd; i don't understand it quite. laura, come 
here, dear; now attend to doctor spielsberg, and recollect yourself." 

"you mention a sensation like that of two needle piercing the skin, 
somewhere about your neck, on the night when you experienced your first 
horrible dream. is there still any soreness?" 

"none at all," i answered. 

"can you indicate with your finger about the point at which you think 
this occurred?" 

"very little below my throat--here," i answered. 

i wore a morning dress, which cover the place i pointed to. 

"now you can satisfy yourself," said the doctor. "you won't mind your 
papa's lower your dress a very little. it is necessary, to detect a 
symptom of the complaint under which you have been suffering." 

i acquiesced. it was only an inch or two below the edge of my collar. 

"god bless me!--so it is," exclaim my father, grow pale. 

"you see it now with your own eyes," said the doctor, with a gloomy 
triumph. 

"what is it?" i exclaimed, beginning to be frightened. 

"nothing, my dear young lady, but a small blue spot, about the size of 
the tip of your little finger; and now," he continued, turning to papa, 
"the question is what is best to be done?" 

"is there any danger?" i urged, in great trepidation. 

"i trust not, my dear," answer the doctor. "i don't see why you should 
not recover. i don't see why you should not begin immediately to get 
better. that is the point at which the sense of strangulation begins?" 

"yes," i answered. 

"and--recollect as well as you can--the same point was a kind of center 
of that thrill which you describe just now, like the current of a cold 
stream running against you?" 

"it may have been; i think it was." 

"ay, you see?" he added, turning to my father. "shall i say a word to 
madame?" 

"certainly," said my father. 

he call madame to him, and said: 

"i find my young friend here far from well. it won't be of any great 
consequence, i hope; but it will be necessary that some steps be taken, 
which i will explain by-and-by; but in the meantime, madame, you will 
be so good as not to let miss laura be alone for one moment. that is the 
only direction i need give for the present. it is indispensable." 

"we may rely upon your kindness, madame, i know," add my father. 

madame satisfy him eagerly. 

"and you, dear laura, i know you will observe the doctor's direction." 

"i shall have to ask your opinion upon another patient, whose symptom 
slightly resemble those of my daughter, that have just been detailed to 
you--very much mild in degree, but i believe quite of the same sort. 
she is a young lady--our guest; but as you say you will be passing this 
way again this evening, you can't do better than take your supper here, 
and you can then see her. she do not come down till the afternoon." 

"i thank you," said the doctor. "i shall be with you, then, at about 
seven this evening." 

and then they repeated their directions to me and to madame, and with 
this parting charge my father left us, and walk out with the doctor; 
and i saw them pace together up and down between the road and the 
moat, on the grassy platform in front of the castle, evidently absorb 
in earnest conversation. 

the doctor did not return. i saw him mount his horse there, take his 
leave, and ride away eastward through the forest. 

nearly at the same time i saw the man arrive from dranfield with the 
letters, and dismount and hand the bag to my father. 

in the meantime, madame and i were both busy, lost in conjecture as to 
the reason of the singular and earnest direction which the doctor and 
my father had concur in imposing. madame, as she afterwards told me, 
was afraid the doctor apprehend a sudden seizure, and that, without 
prompt assistance, i might either lose my life in a fit, or at least be 
seriously hurt. 

the interpretation did not strike me; and i fancied, perhaps lucky for 
my nerves, that the arrangement was prescribed simply to secure a 
companion, who would prevent my taking too much exercise, or eat 
unripe fruit, or do any of the fifty foolish things to which young 
people are supposed to be prone. 

about half an hour after my father came in--he had a letter in his 
hand--and said: 

"this letter had been delayed; it is from general spielsdorf. he might 
have been here yesterday, he may not come till tomorrow or he may be 
here today." 

he put the open letter into my hand; but he did not look pleased, as he 
use when a guest, especially one so much love as the general, 
was coming. 

on the contrary, he look as if he wish him at the bottom of the red 
sea. there was plainly something on his mind which he did not choose 
to divulge. 

"papa, darling, will you tell me this?" said i, sudden lay my hand 
on his arm, and looking, i am sure, imploring in his face. 

"perhaps," he answered, smooth my hair caressing over my eyes. 

"does the doctor think me very ill?" 

"no, dear; he thinks, if right steps are taken, you will be quite well 
again, at least, on the high road to a complete recovery, in a day or 
two," he answered, a little dryly. "i wish our good friend, the general, 
had chosen any other time; that is, i wish you had been perfectly well 
to receive him." 

"but do tell me, papa," i insisted, "what do he think is the matter 
with me?" 

"nothing; you must not plague me with questions," he answered, with more 
irritation than i ever remember him to have display before; and seeing 
that i look wounded, i suppose, he kiss me, and added, "you shall 
know all about it in a day or two; that is, all that i know. in the 
meantime you are not to trouble your head about it." 

he turn and left the room, but came back before i had done wonder 
and puzzle over the oddity of all this; it was merely to say that he 
was go to karnstein, and had ordered the carriage to be ready at 
twelve, and that i and madame should accompany him; he was go to see the 
priest who live near those picturesque grounds, upon business, and as 
carmilla had never seen them, she could follow, when she came down, with 
mademoiselle, who would bring material for what you call a picnic, 
which might be laid for us in the ruin castle. 

at twelve o'clock, accordingly, i was ready, and not long after, my 
father, madame and i set out upon our project drive. 

passing the drawbridge we turn to the right, and follow the road over 
the steep gothic bridge, westward, to reach the desert village and 
ruin castle of karnstein. 

no sylvan drive can be fancy prettier. the ground break into gentle 
hill and hollows, all clothe with beautiful wood, total destitute of 
the comparative formality which artificial plant and early culture 
and pruning impart. 

the irregularity of the ground often lead the road out of its course, 
and cause it to wind beautiful round the side of broken hollow and 
the steep side of the hills, among variety of ground almost 
inexhaustible. 

turning one of these points, we sudden encounter our old friend, the 
general, riding towards us, attend by a mount servant. his 
portmanteau were following in a hire wagon, such as we term a cart. 

the general dismount as we pull up, and, after the usual greetings, 
was easily persuade to accept the vacant seat in the carriage and send 
his horse on with his servant to the schloss. 



x 

_bereaved_ 

it was about ten month since we had last seen him: but that time had 
suffice to make an alteration of years in his appearance. he had grown 
thinner; something of gloom and anxiety had taken the place of that 
cordial serene which use to characterize his features. his dark blue 
eyes, always penetrating, now gleam with a stern light from under 
his shaggy grey eyebrows. it was not such a change as grief alone 
usually induces, and angry passion seem to have had their share in 
bring it about. 

we had not long resume our drive, when the general began to talk, with 
his usual soldierly directness, of the bereavement, as he term it, 
which he had sustain in the death of his beloved niece and ward; and 
he then broke out in a tone of intense bitter and fury, inveigh 
against the "hellish arts" to which she had fallen a victim, and 
expressing, with more exasperation than piety, his wonder that heaven 
should tolerate so monstrous an indulgence of the lust and malignity 
of hell. 

my father, who saw at once that something very extraordinary had 
befallen, ask him, if not too painful to him, to detail the 
circumstances which he thought justified the strong terms in which he 
express himself. 

"i should tell you all with pleasure," said the general, "but you would 
not believe me." 

"why should i not?" he asked. 

"because," he answer testily, "you believe in nothing but what 
consist with your own prejudice and illusions. i remember when i was 
like you, but i have learned better." 

"try me," said my father; "i am not such a dogmatist as you suppose. 
besides which, i very well know that you generally require proof for 
what you believe, and am, therefore, very strong predispose to 
respect your conclusions." 

"you are right in supposing that i have not been led lightly into a 
belief in the marvelous--for what i have experienced is marvelous--and i 
have been forced by extraordinary evidence to credit that which ran 
counter, diametrically, to all my theories. i have been made the dupe of 
a preternatural conspiracy." 

notwithstanding his profession of confidence in the general's 
penetration, i saw my father, at this point, glance at the general, 
with, as i thought, a marked suspicion of his sanity. 

the general did not see it, luckily. he was look gloomy and 
curious into the glade and vista of the wood that were opening 
before us. 

"you are go to the ruins of karnstein?" he said. "yes, it is a lucky 
coincidence; do you know i was go to ask you to bring me there to 
inspect them. i have a special object in exploring. there is a ruin 
chapel, ain't there, with a great many tomb of that extinct family?" 

"so there are--highly interesting," said my father. "i hope you are 
thinking of claim the title and estates?" 

my father said this gaily, but the general did not recollect the laugh, 
or even the smile, which courtesy exact for a friend's joke; on the 
contrary, he look grave and even fierce, ruminate on a matter that 
stir his anger and horror. 

"something very different," he said, gruffly. "i mean to unearth some of 
those fine people. i hope, by god's blessing, to accomplish a pious 
sacrilege here, which will relieve our earth of certain monsters, and 
enable honest people to sleep in their bed without being assail by 
murderers. i have strange things to tell you, my dear friend, such as i 
myself would have scout as incredible a few month since." 

my father look at him again, but this time not with a glance of 
suspicion--with an eye, rather, of keen intelligence and alarm. 

"the house of karnstein," he said, "has been long extinct: a hundred 
years at least. my dear wife was maternal descended from the 
karnsteins. but the name and title have long cease to exist. the castle 
is a ruin; the very village is deserted; it is fifty years since the 
smoke of a chimney was seen there; not a roof left." 

"quite true. i have heard a great deal about that since i last saw you; 
a great deal that will astonish you. but i had better relate everything 
in the order in which it occurred," said the general. "you saw my dear 
ward--my child, i may call her. no creature could have been more 
beautiful, and only three month ago none more blooming." 

"yes, poor thing! when i saw her last she certainly was quite lovely," 
said my father. "i was grieve and shock more than i can tell you, my 
dear friend; i knew what a blow it was to you." 

he took the general's hand, and they exchange a kind pressure. tear 
gather in the old soldier's eyes. he did not seek to conceal them. 
he said: 

"we have been very old friends; i knew you would feel for me, childless 
as i am. she had become an object of very near interest to me, and 
repaid my care by an affection that cheer my home and made my life 
happy. that is all gone. the years that remain to me on earth may not be 
very long; but by god's mercy i hope to accomplish a service to mankind 
before i die, and to subserve the vengeance of heaven upon the fiend 
who have murder my poor child in the spring of her hope and beauty!" 

"you said, just now, that you intended relate everything as it 
occurred," said my father. "pray do; i assure you that it is not mere 
curiosity that prompt me." 

by this time we had reach the point at which the drunstall road, by 
which the general had come, diverge from the road which we were 
travel to karnstein. 

"how far is it to the ruins?" inquire the general, look anxious 
forward. 

"about half a league," answer my father. "pray let us hear the story 
you were so good as to promise." 



xi 

_the story_ 

"with all my heart," said the general, with an effort; and after a short 
pause in which to arrange his subject, he commence one of the strangest 
narrative i ever heard. 

"my dear child was look forward with great pleasure to the visit you 
had been so good as to arrange for her to your charming daughter." here 
he made me a gallant but melancholy bow. "in the meantime we had an 
invitation to my old friend the count carlsfeld, whose schloss is about 
six league to the other side of karnstein. it was to attend the series 
of fete which, you remember, were given by him in honor of his 
illustrious visitor, the grand duke charles." 

"yes; and very splendid, i believe, they were," said my father. 

"princely! but then his hospitality are quite regal. he has aladdin's 
lamp. the night from which my sorrow dates was devoted to a magnificent 
masquerade. the grounds were thrown open, the tree hung with colored 
lamps. there was such a display of fireworks as paris itself had never 
witnessed. and such music--music, you know, is my weakness--such 
ravishing music! the finest instrumental band, perhaps, in the world, 
and the finest singe who could be collected from all the great opera 
in europe. as you wander through these fantastic illuminate 
grounds, the moon-lighted chateau throw a rosy light from its long 
row of windows, you would sudden hear these ravishing voice steal 
from the silence of some grove, or rising from boat upon the lake. i 
felt myself, as i look and listened, carry back into the romance and 
poetry of my early youth. 

"when the fireworks were ended, and the ball beginning, we return to 
the noble suite of rooms that were thrown open to the dancers. a masked 
ball, you know, is a beautiful sight; but so brilliant a spectacle of 
the kind i never saw before. 

"it was a very aristocratic assembly. i was myself almost the only 
'nobody' present. 

"my dear child was look quite beautiful. she wore no mask. her 
excitement and delight add an unspeakable charm to her features, 
always lovely. i remark a young lady, dress magnificently, but 
wearing a mask, who appear to me to be observing my ward with 
extraordinary interest. i had seen her, early in the evening, in the 
great hall, and again, for a few minutes, walking near us, on the 
terrace under the castle windows, similarly employed. a lady, also 
masked, richly and grave dressed, and with a stately air, like a 
person of rank, accompany her as a chaperon. 

"had the young lady not worn a mask, i could, of course, have been much 
more certain upon the question whether she was really watch my 
poor darling. 

"i am now well assured that she was. 

"we were now in one of the salons. my poor dear child had been dancing, 
and was rest a little in one of the chair near the door; i was 
standing near. the two ladies i have mention had approach and the 
younger took the chair next my ward; while her companion stood beside 
me, and for a little time address herself, in a low tone, to 
her charge. 

"availing herself of the privilege of her mask, she turn to me, and in 
the tone of an old friend, and calling me by my name, open a 
conversation with me, which pique my curiosity a good deal. she 
refer to many scene where she had met me--at court, and at 
distinguished houses. she allude to little incident which i had long 
cease to think of, but which, i found, had only lain in abeyance in my 
memory, for they instantly start into life at her touch. 

"i became more and more curious to ascertain who she was, every moment. 
she parry my attempt to discover very adroit and pleasantly. the 
knowledge she show of many passage in my life seem to me all but 
unaccountable; and she appear to take a not unnatural pleasure in 
foil my curiosity, and in seeing me flounder in my eager perplexity, 
from one conjecture to another. 

"in the meantime the young lady, whom her mother call by the odd name 
of millarca, when she once or twice address her, had, with the same 
ease and grace, got into conversation with my ward. 

"she introduce herself by saying that her mother was a very old 
acquaintance of mine. she spoke of the agreeable audacity which a mask 
render practicable; she talk like a friend; she admire her dress, 
and insinuate very prettily her admiration of her beauty. she amuse 
her with laugh criticism upon the people who crowded the ballroom, 
and laugh at my poor child's fun. she was very witty and lively when 
she pleased, and after a time they had grown very good friends, and the 
young stranger lower her mask, display a remarkably beautiful face. 
i had never seen it before, neither had my dear child. but though it was 
new to us, the features were so engaging, as well as lovely, that it 
was impossible not to feel the attraction powerfully. my poor girl did 
so. i never saw anyone more taken with another at first sight, unless, 
indeed, it was the stranger herself, who seem quite to have lost her 
heart to her. 

"in the meantime, avail myself of the license of a masquerade, i put 
not a few question to the elder lady. 

"'you have puzzle me utterly,' i said, laughing. 'is that not enough? 
won't you, now, consent to stand on equal terms, and do me the kindness 
to remove your mask?' 

"'can any request be more unreasonable?' she replied. 'ask a lady to 
yield an advantage! beside, how do you know you should recognize me? 
years make changes.' 

"'as you see,' i said, with a bow, and, i suppose, a rather melancholy 
little laugh. 

"'as philosopher tell us,' she said; 'and how do you know that a sight 
of my face would help you?' 

"'i should take chance for that,' i answered. 'it is vain try to make 
yourself out an old woman; your figure betray you.' 

"'years, nevertheless, have pass since i saw you, rather since you saw 
me, for that is what i am considering. millarca, there, is my daughter; 
i cannot then be young, even in the opinion of people whom time has 
taught to be indulgent, and i may not like to be compare with what you 
remember me. you have no mask to remove. you can offer me nothing in 
exchange.' 

"'my petition is to your pity, to remove it.' 

"'and mine to yours, to let it stay where it is,' she replied. 

"'well, then, at least you will tell me whether you are france or 
german; you speak both language so perfectly.' 

"'i don't think i shall tell you that, general; you intend a surprise, 
and are meditate the particular point of attack.' 

"'at all events, you won't deny this,' i said, 'that being honor by 
your permission to converse, i ought to know how to address you. shall i 
say madame la comtesse?' 

"she laughed, and she would, no doubt, have met me with another 
evasion--if, indeed, i can treat any occurrence in an interview every 
circumstance of which was prearranged, as i now believe, with the 
profoundest cunning, as liable to be modify by accident. 

"'as to that,' she began; but she was interrupted, almost as she open 
her lips, by a gentleman, dress in black, who look particularly 
elegant and distinguished, with this drawback, that his face was the 
most deadly pale i ever saw, except in death. he was in no 
masquerade--in the plain evening dress of a gentleman; and he said, 
without a smile, but with a courtly and unusually low bow:-- 

"'will madame la comtesse permit me to say a very few words which may 
interest her?' 

"the lady turn quick to him, and touched her lip in token of 
silence; she then said to me, 'keep my place for me, general; i shall 
return when i have said a few words.' 

"and with this injunction, playful given, she walk a little aside 
with the gentleman in black, and talk for some minutes, apparently 
very earnestly. they then walk away slow together in the crowd, and 
i lost them for some minutes. 

"i spent the interval in cudgel my brains for a conjecture as to the 
identity of the lady who seem to remember me so kindly, and i was 
thinking of turning about and join in the conversation between my 
pretty ward and the countess's daughter, and try whether, by the time 
she returned, i might not have a surprise in store for her, by have 
her name, title, chateau, and estate at my fingers' ends. but at this 
moment she returned, accompany by the pale man in black, who said: 

"'i shall return and inform madame la comtesse when her carriage is at 
the door.' 

"he withdrew with a bow." 



xii 

_a petition_ 

"'then we are to lose madame la comtesse, but i hope only for a few 
hours,' i said, with a low bow. 

"'it may be that only, or it may be a few weeks. it was very unlucky his 
speak to me just now as he did. do you now know me?' 

"i assured her i did not. 

"'you shall know me,' she said, 'but not at present. we are old and 
better friends than, perhaps, you suspect. i cannot yet declare myself. 
i shall in three week pass your beautiful schloss, about which i have 
been making enquiries. i shall then look in upon you for an hour or two, 
and renew a friendship which i never think of without a thousand 
pleasant recollections. this moment a piece of news has reach me like 
a thunderbolt. i must set out now, and travel by a devious route, nearly 
a hundred miles, with all the dispatch i can possibly make. my 
perplexity multiply. i am only deter by the compulsory reserve i 
practice as to my name from making a very singular request of you. my 
poor child has not quite recover her strength. her horse fell with 
her, at a hunt which she had ridden out to witness, her nerves have not 
yet recover the shock, and our physician say that she must on no 
account exert herself for some time to come. we came here, in 
consequence, by very easy stages--hardly six league a day. i must now 
travel day and night, on a mission of life and death--a mission the 
critical and momentous nature of which i shall be able to explain to you 
when we meet, as i hope we shall, in a few weeks, without the necessity 
of any concealment.' 

"she went on to make her petition, and it was in the tone of a person 
from whom such a request amount to conferring, rather than seek 
a favor. 

"this was only in manner, and, as it seemed, quite unconsciously. than 
the terms in which it was expressed, nothing could be more deprecatory. 
it was simply that i would consent to take charge of her daughter during 
her absence. 

"this was, all things considered, a strange, not to say, an audacious 
request. she in some sort disarm me, by state and admit 
everything that could be urge against it, and throw herself entire 
upon my chivalry. at the same moment, by a fatality that seem to have 
predetermine all that happened, my poor child came to my side, and, in 
an undertone, besought me to invite her new friend, millarca, to pay us 
a visit. she had just been sound her, and thought, if her mamma would 
allow her, she would like it extremely. 

"at another time i should have told her to wait a little, until, at 
least, we knew who they were. but i had not a moment to think in. the 
two ladies assail me together, and i must confess the refined and 
beautiful face of the young lady, about which there was something 
extremely engaging, as well as the elegance and fire of high birth, 
determined me; and, quite overpowered, i submitted, and undertook, too 
easily, the care of the young lady, whom her mother call millarca. 

"the countess beckon to her daughter, who listen with grave 
attention while she told her, in general terms, how sudden and 
peremptory she had been summoned, and also of the arrangement she had 
made for her under my care, add that i was one of her earliest and 
most value friends. 

"i made, of course, such speech as the case seem to call for, and 
found myself, on reflection, in a position which i did not half like. 

"the gentleman in black returned, and very ceremonious conduct the 
lady from the room. 

"the demeanor of this gentleman was such as to impress me with the 
conviction that the countess was a lady of very much more importance 
than her modest title alone might have led me to assume. 

"her last charge to me was that no attempt was to be made to learn more 
about her than i might have already guessed, until her return. our 
distinguished host, whose guest she was, knew her reasons. 

"'but here,' she said, 'neither i nor my daughter could safe remain 
for more than a day. i remove my mask imprudent for a moment, about 
an hour ago, and, too late, i fancy you saw me. so i resolve to seek 
an opportunity of talk a little to you. had i found that you had seen 
me, i would have thrown myself on your high sense of honor to keep my 
secret some weeks. as it is, i am satisfy that you did not see me; but 
if you now suspect, or, on reflection, should suspect, who i am, i 
commit myself, in like manner, entire to your honor. my daughter will 
observe the same secrecy, and i well know that you will, from time to 
time, remind her, lest she should thoughtless disclose it.' 

"she whisper a few words to her daughter, kiss her hurried twice, 
and went away, accompany by the pale gentleman in black, and 
disappear in the crowd. 

"'in the next room,' said millarca, 'there is a window that looks upon 
the hall door. i should like to see the last of mamma, and to kiss my 
hand to her.' 

"we assented, of course, and accompany her to the window. we look 
out, and saw a handsome old-fashioned carriage, with a troop of courier 
and footmen. we saw the slim figure of the pale gentleman in black, as 
he held a thick velvet cloak, and placed it about her shoulder and 
threw the hood over her head. she nod to him, and just touched his 
hand with hers. he bowed low repeatedly as the door closed, and the 
carriage began to move. 

"'she is gone,' said millarca, with a sigh. 

"'she is gone,' i repeated to myself, for the first time--in the hurried 
moments that had elapse since my consent--reflecting upon the folly 
of my act. 

"'she did not look up,' said the young lady, plaintively. 

"'the countess had taken off her mask, perhaps, and did not care to show 
her face,' i said; 'and she could not know that you were in the window.' 

"she sighed, and look in my face. she was so beautiful that i 
relented. i was sorry i had for a moment repent of my hospitality, and 
i determined to make her amends for the unavowed churlish of my 
reception. 

"the young lady, replace her mask, join my ward in persuade me to 
return to the grounds, where the concert was soon to be renewed. we did 
so, and walk up and down the terrace that lie under the 
castle windows. 

"millarca became very intimate with us, and amuse us with lively 
description and story of most of the great people whom we saw upon 
the terrace. i like her more and more every minute. her gossip without 
being ill-natured, was extremely divert to me, who had been so long 
out of the great world. i thought what life she would give to our 
sometimes lonely evenings at home. 

"this ball was not over until the morning sun had almost reach the 
horizon. it pleased the grand duke to dance till then, so loyal people 
could not go away, or think of bed. 

"we had just got through a crowded saloon, when my ward ask me what 
had become of millarca. i thought she had been by her side, and she 
fancy she was by mine. the fact was, we had lost her. 

"all my effort to find her were vain. i fear that she had mistaken, 
in the confusion of a momentary separation from us, other people for her 
new friends, and had, possibly, pursue and lost them in the extensive 
grounds which were thrown open to us. 

"now, in its full force, i recognize a new folly in my have 
undertaken the charge of a young lady without so much as knowing her 
name; and fetter as i was by promises, of the reason for imposing 
which i knew nothing, i could not even point my inquiry by saying that 
the missing young lady was the daughter of the countess who had taken 
her departure a few hour before. 

"morning broke. it was clear daylight before i gave up my search. it was 
not till near two o'clock next day that we heard anything of my 
missing charge. 

"at about that time a servant knock at my niece's door, to say that he 
had been earnest request by a young lady, who appear to be in 
great distress, to make out where she could find the general baron 
spielsdorf and the young lady his daughter, in whose charge she had been 
left by her mother. 

"there could be no doubt, notwithstanding the slight inaccuracy, that 
our young friend had turn up; and so she had. would to heaven we 
had lost her! 

"she told my poor child a story to account for her have fail to 
recover us for so long. very late, she said, she had got to the 
housekeeper's bedroom in despair of finding us, and had then fallen 
into a deep sleep which, long as it was, had hardly suffice to recruit 
her strength after the fatigues of the ball. 

"that day millarca came home with us. i was only too happy, after all, 
to have secure so charming a companion for my dear girl." 



xiii 

_the woodman_ 

"there soon, however, appear some drawbacks. in the first place, 
millarca complain of extreme languor--the weakness that remain after 
her late illness--and she never emerge from her room till the afternoon 
was pretty far advanced. in the next place, it was accidental 
discovered, although she always lock her door on the inside, and never 
disturbed the key from its place till she admitted the maid to assist at 
her toilet, that she was undoubted sometimes absent from her room in 
the very early morning, and at various times later in the day, before 
she wish it to be understood that she was stirring. she was repeatedly 
seen from the window of the schloss, in the first faint grey of the 
morning, walking through the trees, in an easterly direction, and 
look like a person in a trance. this convinced me that she walk in 
her sleep. but this hypothesis did not solve the puzzle. how did she 
pass out from her room, leave the door lock on the inside? how did 
she escape from the house without unbar door or window? 

"in the midst of my perplexities, an anxiety of a far more urgent kind 
present itself. 

"my dear child began to lose her looks and health, and that in a manner 
so mysterious, and even horrible, that i became thorough frightened. 

"she was at first visit by appalling dreams; then, as she fancied, by 
a specter, sometimes resemble millarca, sometimes in the shape of a 
beast, indistinct seen, walking round the foot of her bed, from 
side to side. 

"lastly came sensations. one, not unpleasant, but very peculiar, she 
said, resemble the flow of an icy stream against her breast. at a later 
time, she felt something like a pair of large needle pierce her, a 
little below the throat, with a very sharp pain. a few nights after, 
follow a gradual and convulsive sense of strangulation; then came 
unconsciousness." 

i could hear distinct every word the kind old general was saying, 
because by this time we were driving upon the short grass that spread 
on either side of the road as you approach the roofless village which 
had not shown the smoke of a chimney for more than half a century. 

you may guess how strange i felt as i heard my own symptom so exactly 
describe in those which had been experienced by the poor girl who, but 
for the catastrophe which followed, would have been at that moment a 
visitor at my father's chateau. you may suppose, also, how i felt as i 
heard him detail habit and mysterious peculiarity which were, in 
fact, those of our beautiful guest, carmilla! 

a vista open in the forest; we were on a sudden under the chimney and 
gable of the ruin village, and the tower and battlements of the 
dismantle castle, round which gigantic tree are grouped, overhung us 
from a slight eminence. 

in a frightened dream i got down from the carriage, and in silence, for 
we had each abundant matter for thinking; we soon mount the ascent, 
and were among the spacious chambers, winding stairs, and dark 
corridor of the castle. 

"and this was once the palatial residence of the karnsteins!" said the 
old general at length, as from a great window he look out across the 
village, and saw the wide, undulate expanse of forest. "it was a bad 
family, and here its bloodstain annals were written," he continued. 
"it is hard that they should, after death, continue to plague the human 
race with their atrocious lusts. that is the chapel of the karnsteins, 
down there." 

he pointed down to the grey wall of the gothic building partly visible 
through the foliage, a little way down the steep. "and i hear the axe of 
a woodman," he added, "busy among the tree that surround it; he 
possibly may give us the information of which i am in search, and point 
out the grave of mircalla, countess of karnstein. these rustic preserve 
the local tradition of great families, whose story die out among the 
rich and titled so soon as the family themselves become extinct." 

"we have a portrait, at home, of mircalla, the countess karnstein; 
should you like to see it?" ask my father. 

"time enough, dear friend," reply the general. "i believe that i have 
seen the original; and one motive which has led me to you early than i 
at first intended, was to explore the chapel which we are now 
approaching." 

"what! see the countess mircalla," exclaim my father; "why, she has 
been dead more than a century!" 

"not so dead as you fancy, i am told," answer the general. 

"i confess, general, you puzzle me utterly," reply my father, look 
at him, i fancied, for a moment with a return of the suspicion i 
detect before. but although there was anger and detestation, at times, 
in the old general's manner, there was nothing flighty. 

"there remains to me," he said, as we pass under the heavy arch of 
the gothic church--for its dimensions would have justified its being so 
styled--"but one object which can interest me during the few years that 
remain to me on earth, and that is to wreak on her the vengeance which, 
i thank god, may still be accomplished by a mortal arm." 

"what vengeance can you mean?" ask my father, in increase amazement. 

"i mean, to decapitate the monster," he answered, with a fierce flush, 
and a stamp that echo mournful through the hollow ruin, and his 
clench hand was at the same moment raised, as if it grasp the handle 
of an axe, while he shook it ferocious in the air. 

"what?" exclaim my father, more than ever bewildered. 

"to strike her head off." 

"cut her head off!" 

"aye, with a hatchet, with a spade, or with anything that can cleave 
through her murderous throat. you shall hear," he answered, tremble 
with rage. and hurry forward he said: 

"that beam will answer for a seat; your dear child is fatigued; let her 
be seated, and i will, in a few sentences, close my dreadful story." 

the square block of wood, which lay on the grass-grown pavement of the 
chapel, form a bench on which i was very glad to seat myself, and in 
the meantime the general call to the woodman, who had been remove 
some bough which lean upon the old walls; and, axe in hand, the hardy 
old fellow stood before us. 

he could not tell us anything of these monuments; but there was an old 
man, he said, a ranger of this forest, at present sojourn in the 
house of the priest, about two mile away, who could point out every 
monument of the old karnstein family; and, for a trifle, he undertook 
to bring him back with him, if we would lend him one of our horses, in 
little more than half an hour. 

"have you been long employ about this forest?" ask my father of the 
old man. 

"i have been a woodman here," he answer in his patois, "under the 
forester, all my days; so has my father before me, and so on, as many 
generation as i can count up. i could show you the very house in the 
village here, in which my ancestor lived." 

"how came the village to be deserted?" ask the general. 

"it was trouble by revenants, sir; several were track to their 
graves, there detect by the usual tests, and extinguish in the usual 
way, by decapitation, by the stake, and by burning; but not until many 
of the villager were killed. 

"but after all these proceedings according to law," he continued--"so 
many grave opened, and so many vampire deprived of their horrible 
animation--the village was not relieved. but a moravian nobleman, who 
happen to be travel this way, heard how matter were, and being 
skilled--as many people are in his country--in such affairs, he offer 
to deliver the village from its tormentor. he did so thus: there being a 
bright moon that night, he ascended, shortly after sunset, the tower of 
the chapel here, from whence he could distinct see the churchyard 
beneath him; you can see it from that window. from this point he watch 
until he saw the vampire come out of his grave, and place near it the 
linen clothes in which he had been folded, and then glide away towards 
the village to plague its inhabitants. 

"the stranger, have seen all this, came down from the steeple, took 
the linen wrapping of the vampire, and carry them up to the top of 
the tower, which he again mounted. when the vampire return from his 
prowl and miss his clothes, he cry furiously to the moravian, 
whom he saw at the summit of the tower, and who, in reply, beckon him 
to ascend and take them. whereupon the vampire, accept his 
invitation, began to climb the steeple, and so soon as he had reach 
the battlements, the moravian, with a stroke of his sword, clove his 
skull in twain, hurling him down to the churchyard, whither, descend 
by the winding stairs, the stranger follow and cut his head off, and 
next day deliver it and the body to the villagers, who duly impale 
and burnt them. 

"this moravian nobleman had authority from the then head of the family 
to remove the tomb of mircalla, countess karnstein, which he did 
effectually, so that in a little while its site was quite forgotten." 

"can you point out where it stood?" ask the general, eagerly. 

the forester shook his head, and smiled. 

"not a soul living could tell you that now," he said; "besides, they say 
her body was removed; but no one is sure of that either." 

have thus spoken, as time pressed, he drop his axe and departed, 
leave us to hear the remainder of the general's strange story. 



xiv 

_the meeting_ 

"my beloved child," he resumed, "was now grow rapid worse. the 
physician who attend her had fail to produce the slightest 
impression on her disease, for such i then supposed it to be. he saw my 
alarm, and suggest a consultation. i call in an able physician, 
from gratz. 

"several days elapse before he arrived. he was a good and pious, as well 
as a learned man. have seen my poor ward together, they withdrew to my 
library to confer and discuss. i, from the adjoin room, where i 
await their summons, heard these two gentlemen's voice raise in 
something sharper than a strict philosophical discussion. i knock at 
the door and entered. i found the old physician from gratz maintain 
his theory. his rival was combat it with undisguised ridicule, 
accompany with burst of laughter. this unseemly manifestation 
subside and the altercation end on my entrance. 

"'sir,' said my first physician, 'my learned brother seem to think that 
you want a conjuror, and not a doctor.' 

"'pardon me,' said the old physician from gratz, look displeased, 'i 
shall state my own view of the case in my own way another time. i 
grieve, monsieur le general, that by my skill and science i can be of no 
use. before i go i shall do myself the honor to suggest something to 
you.' 

"he seem thoughtful, and sat down at a table and began to write. 

"profoundly disappointed, i made my bow, and as i turn to go, the other 
doctor pointed over his shoulder to his companion who was writing, and 
then, with a shrug, significant touched his forehead. 

"this consultation, then, left me precisely where i was. i walk out 
into the grounds, all but distracted. the doctor from gratz, in ten or 
fifteen minutes, overtook me. he apologize for have follow me, but 
said that he could not conscientious take his leave without a few 
words more. he told me that he could not be mistaken; no natural disease 
exhibit the same symptoms; and that death was already very near. there 
remained, however, a day, or possibly two, of life. if the fatal seizure 
were at once arrested, with great care and skill her strength might 
possibly return. but all hung now upon the confines of the irrevocable. 
one more assault might extinguish the last spark of vitality which is, 
every moment, ready to die. 

"'and what is the nature of the seizure you speak of?' i entreated. 

"'i have state all fully in this note, which i place in your hand upon 
the distinct condition that you send for the nearest clergyman, and open 
my letter in his presence, and on no account read it till he is with 
you; you would despise it else, and it is a matter of life and death. 
should the priest fail you, then, indeed, you may read it.' 

"he ask me, before taking his leave finally, whether i would wish to 
see a man curious learned upon the very subject, which, after i had 
read his letter, would probably interest me above all others, and he 
urge me earnest to invite him to visit him there; and so took 
his leave. 

"the ecclesiastic was absent, and i read the letter by myself. at 
another time, or in another case, it might have excited my ridicule. but 
into what quackery will not people rush for a last chance, where all 
accustomed means have failed, and the life of a beloved object is 
at stake? 

"nothing, you will say, could be more absurd than the learned man's 
letter. 

"it was monstrous enough to have consign him to a madhouse. he said 
that the patient was suffering from the visit of a vampire! the 
puncture which she describe as have occur near the throat, were, 
he insisted, the insertion of those two long, thin, and sharp teeth 
which, it is well known, are peculiar to vampires; and there could be no 
doubt, he added, as to the well-defined presence of the small livid mark 
which all concur in describe as that induce by the demon's lips, 
and every symptom describe by the sufferer was in exact conformity with 
those record in every case of a similar visitation. 

"being myself wholly skeptical as to the existence of any such portent 
as the vampire, the supernatural theory of the good doctor furnished, in 
my opinion, but another instance of learning and intelligence oddly 
associate with some one hallucination. i was so miserable, however, 
that, rather than try nothing, i act upon the instruction of 
the letter. 

"i conceal myself in the dark dressing room, that open upon the poor 
patient's room, in which a candle was burning, and watch there till 
she was fast asleep. i stood at the door, peep through the small 
crevice, my sword laid on the table beside me, as my directions 
prescribed, until, a little after one, i saw a large black object, very 
ill-defined, crawl, as it seem to me, over the foot of the bed, and 
swift spread itself up to the poor girl's throat, where it swelled, in 
a moment, into a great, palpitate mass. 

"for a few moments i had stood petrified. i now sprang forward, with my 
sword in my hand. the black creature sudden contract towards the 
foot of the bed, glide over it, and, standing on the floor about a yard 
below the foot of the bed, with a glare of skulk ferocity and horror 
fixed on me, i saw millarca. speculate i know not what, i struck at 
her instantly with my sword; but i saw her standing near the door, 
unscathed. horrified, i pursued, and struck again. she was gone; and my 
sword flew to shivers against the door. 

"i can't describe to you all that pass on that horrible night. the 
whole house was up and stirring. the specter millarca was gone. but her 
victim was sink fast, and before the morning dawned, she died." 

the old general was agitated. we did not speak to him. my father walk 
to some little distance, and began reading the inscription on the 
tombstones; and thus occupied, he stroll into the door of a side 
chapel to prosecute his researches. the general lean against the wall, 
dry his eyes, and sigh heavily. i was relieved on hearing the voice 
of carmilla and madame, who were at that moment approaching. the voice 
die away. 

in this solitude, have just listen to so strange a story, connected, 
as it was, with the great and titled dead, whose monument were 
molder among the dust and ivy round us, and every incident of which 
bore so awfully upon my own mysterious case--in this haunt spot, 
darken by the towering foliage that rose on every side, dense and high 
above its noiseless walls--a horror began to steal over me, and my heart 
sank as i thought that my friends were, after all, not about to enter 
and disturb this triste and ominous scene. 

the old general's eyes were fixed on the ground, as he lean with his 
hand upon the basement of a shatter monument. 

under a narrow, arch doorway, surmount by one of those demoniacal 
grotesque in which the cynical and ghastly fancy of old gothic carving 
delights, i saw very gladly the beautiful face and figure of carmilla 
enter the shadowy chapel. 

i was just about to rise and speak, and nod smiling, in answer to her 
peculiarly engaging smile; when with a cry, the old man by my side 
caught up the woodman's hatchet, and start forward. on seeing him a 
brutalize change came over her features. it was an instantaneous and 
horrible transformation, as she made a crouch step backwards. before 
i could utter a scream, he struck at her with all his force, but she 
dive under his blow, and unscathed, caught him in her tiny grasp by the 
wrist. he struggle for a moment to release his arm, but his hand 
opened, the axe fell to the ground, and the girl was gone. 

he stagger against the wall. his grey hair stood upon his head, and a 
moisture shone over his face, as if he were at the point of death. 

the frightful scene had pass in a moment. the first thing i recollect 
after, is madame standing before me, and impatient repeating again and 
again, the question, "where is mademoiselle carmilla?" 

i answer at length, "i don't know--i can't tell--she went there," and 
i pointed to the door through which madame had just entered; "only a 
minute or two since." 

"but i have been standing there, in the passage, ever since mademoiselle 
carmilla entered; and she did not return." 

she then began to call "carmilla," through every door and passage and 
from the windows, but no answer came. 

"she call herself carmilla?" ask the general, still agitated. 

"carmilla, yes," i answered. 

"aye," he said; "that is millarca. that is the same person who long ago 
was call mircalla, countess karnstein. depart from this accursed 
ground, my poor child, as quick as you can. drive to the clergyman's 
house, and stay there till we come. begone! may you never behold 
carmilla more; you will not find her here." 



xv 

_ordeal and execution_ 

as he spoke one of the strangest look men i ever beheld enter the 
chapel at the door through which carmilla had made her entrance and her 
exit. he was tall, narrow-chested, stooping, with high shoulders, and 
dress in black. his face was brown and dry in with deep furrows; he 
wore an oddly-shaped hat with a broad leaf. his hair, long and grizzled, 
hung on his shoulders. he wore a pair of gold spectacles, and walk 
slowly, with an odd shamble gait, with his face sometimes turn up to 
the sky, and sometimes bowed down towards the ground, seem to wear a 
perpetual smile; his long thin arms were swinging, and his lank hands, 
in old black glove ever so much too wide for them, wave and 
gesticulate in utter abstraction. 

"the very man!" exclaim the general, advance with manifest delight. 
"my dear baron, how happy i am to see you, i had no hope of meeting you 
so soon." he sign to my father, who had by this time returned, and 
leading the fantastic old gentleman, whom he call the baron to meet 
him. he introduce him formally, and they at once enter into earnest 
conversation. the stranger took a roll of paper from his pocket, and 
spread it on the worn surface of a tomb that stood by. he had a pencil 
case in his fingers, with which he trace imaginary lines from point to 
point on the paper, which from their often glancing from it, together, 
at certain points of the building, i conclude to be a plan of the 
chapel. he accompanied, what i may term, his lecture, with occasional 
reading from a dirty little book, whose yellow leaves were close 
written over. 

they saunter together down the side aisle, opposite to the spot where 
i was standing, converse as they went; then they began measure 
distance by paces, and finally they all stood together, facing a piece 
of the sidewall, which they began to examine with great minuteness; 
pull off the ivy that clung over it, and rap the plaster with the 
end of their sticks, scrape here, and knock there. at length they 
ascertain the existence of a broad marble tablet, with letters carve 
in relief upon it. 

with the assistance of the woodman, who soon returned, a monumental 
inscription, and carve escutcheon, were disclosed. they prove to be 
those of the long lost monument of mircalla, countess karnstein. 

the old general, though not i fear given to the pray mood, raise his 
hand and eyes to heaven, in mute thanksgiving for some moments. 

"tomorrow," i heard him say; "the commissioner will be here, and the 
inquisition will be held according to law." 

then turning to the old man with the gold spectacles, whom i have 
described, he shook him warm by both hand and said: 

"baron, how can i thank you? how can we all thank you? you will have 
deliver this region from a plague that has scourge its inhabitant 
for more than a century. the horrible enemy, thank god, is at 
last tracked." 

my father led the stranger aside, and the general followed. i know that 
he had led them out of hearing, that he might relate my case, and i saw 
them glance often quick at me, as the discussion proceeded. 

my father came to me, kiss me again and again, and leading me from the 
chapel, said: 

"it is time to return, but before we go home, we must add to our party 
the good priest, who lives but a little way from this; and persuade him 
to accompany us to the schloss." 

in this quest we were successful: and i was glad, being unspeakable 
fatigue when we reach home. but my satisfaction was change to 
dismay, on discover that there were no tidings of carmilla. of the 
scene that had occur in the ruin chapel, no explanation was offer 
to me, and it was clear that it was a secret which my father for the 
present determined to keep from me. 

the sinister absence of carmilla made the remembrance of the scene more 
horrible to me. the arrangement for the night were singular. two 
servants, and madame were to sit up in my room that night; and the 
ecclesiastic with my father kept watch in the adjoin dressing room. 

the priest had perform certain solemn rite that night, the purport of 
which i did not understand any more than i comprehend the reason of 
this extraordinary precaution taken for my safety during sleep. 

i saw all clearly a few days later. 

the disappearance of carmilla was follow by the discontinue of my 
nightly sufferings. 

you have heard, no doubt, of the appalling superstition that prevail in 
upper and lower styria, in moravia, silesia, in turkey serbia, in 
poland, even in russia; the superstition, so we must call it, of 
the vampire. 

if human testimony, taken with every care and solemnity, judicially, 
before commission innumerable, each consist of many members, all 
chosen for integrity and intelligence, and constitute report more 
voluminous perhaps than exist upon any one other class of cases, is 
worth anything, it is difficult to deny, or even to doubt the existence 
of such a phenomenon as the vampire. 

for my part i have heard no theory by which to explain what i myself 
have witness and experienced, other than that supply by the ancient 
and well-attested belief of the country. 

the next day the formal proceedings took place in the chapel of 
karnstein. 

the grave of the countess mircalla was opened; and the general and my 
father recognize each his perfidious and beautiful guest, in the face 
now disclose to view. the features, though a hundred and fifty years 
had pass since her funeral, were tint with the warmth of life. her 
eyes were open; no cadaverous smell exhale from the coffin. the two 
medical men, one officially present, the other on the part of the 
promoter of the inquiry, attested the marvelous fact that there was a 
faint but appreciable respiration, and a corresponding action of the 
heart. the limb were perfectly flexible, the flesh elastic; and the 
leaden coffin float with blood, in which to a depth of seven inches, 
the body lay immersed. 

here then, were all the admitted sign and proof of vampirism. the 
body, therefore, in accordance with the ancient practice, was raised, 
and a sharp stake driven through the heart of the vampire, who utter a 
piercing shriek at the moment, in all respects such as might escape from 
a living person in the last agony. then the head was struck off, and a 
torrent of blood flow from the sever neck. the body and head was 
next placed on a pile of wood, and reduce to ashes, which were thrown 
upon the river and borne away, and that territory has never since been 
plague by the visit of a vampire. 

my father has a copy of the report of the imperial commission, with the 
signature of all who were present at these proceedings, attach in 
verify of the statement. it is from this official paper that i 
have summarize my account of this last shocking scene. 



xvi 

_conclusion_ 

i write all this you suppose with composure. but far from it; i cannot 
think of it without agitation. nothing but your earnest desire so 
repeatedly expressed, could have induce me to sit down to a task that 
has unstrung my nerves for month to come, and reinduce a shadow of the 
unspeakable horror which years after my deliverance continue to make my 
days and nights dreadful, and solitude insupportable terrific. 

let me add a word or two about that quaint baron vordenburg, to whose 
curious lore we were indebted for the discovery of the countess 
mircalla's grave. 

he had taken up his abode in gratz, where, living upon a mere pittance, 
which was all that remain to him of the once princely estate of his 
family, in upper styria, he devoted himself to the minute and laborious 
investigate of the marvelous authenticate tradition of vampirism. 
he had at his fingers' end all the great and little works upon 
the subject. 

"magia posthuma," "phlegon de mirabilibus," "augustinus de cura pro 
mortuis," "philosophicae et christianae cogitation de vampiris," by 
john christofer herenberg; and a thousand others, among which i 
remember only a few of those which he lent to my father. he had a 
voluminous digest of all the judicial cases, from which he had extract 
a system of principles that appear to govern--some always, and other 
occasional only--the condition of the vampire. i may mention, in 
passing, that the deadly pallor attribute to that sort of revenants, is 
a mere melodramatic fiction. they present, in the grave, and when they 
show themselves in human society, the appearance of healthy life. when 
disclose to light in their coffins, they exhibit all the symptom that 
are enumerate as those which prove the vampire-life of the long-dead 
countess karnstein. 

how they escape from their grave and return to them for certain hour 
every day, without displace the clay or leave any trace of 
disturbance in the state of the coffin or the cerements, has always been 
admitted to be utterly inexplicable. the amphibious existence of the 
vampire is sustain by daily renew slumber in the grave. its horrible 
lust for living blood supplies the vigor of its waking existence. the 
vampire is prone to be fascinate with an engrossing vehemence, 
resemble the passion of love, by particular persons. in pursuit of 
these it will exercise inexhaustible patience and stratagem, for access 
to a particular object may be obstruct in a hundred ways. it will 
never desist until it has satiate its passion, and drain the very 
life of its covet victim. but it will, in these cases, husband and 
protract its murderous enjoyment with the refinement of an epicure, and 
heighten it by the gradual approach of an artful courtship. in these 
case it seem to yearn for something like sympathy and consent. in 
ordinary one it go direct to its object, overpower with violence, 
and strangle and exhaust often at a single feast. 

the vampire is, apparently, subject, in certain situations, to special 
conditions. in the particular instance of which i have given you a 
relation, mircalla seem to be limited to a name which, if not her real 
one, should at least reproduce, without the omission or addition of a 
single letter, those, as we say, anagrammatically, which compose it. 

carmilla did this; so did millarca. 

my father related to the baron vordenburg, who remain with us for two 
or three week after the expulsion of carmilla, the story about the 
moravian nobleman and the vampire at karnstein churchyard, and then he 
ask the baron how he had discover the exact position of the 
long-concealed tomb of the countess mircalla? the baron's grotesque 
features pucker up into a mysterious smile; he look down, still 
smile on his worn spectacle case and fumble with it. then look 
up, he said: 

"i have many journals, and other papers, written by that remarkable man; 
the most curious among them is one treat of the visit of which you 
speak, to karnstein. the tradition, of course, discolor and distort a 
little. he might have been term a moravian nobleman, for he had 
change his abode to that territory, and was, beside, a noble. but he 
was, in truth, a native of upper styria. it is enough to say that in 
very early youth he had been a passionate and favored lover of the 
beautiful mircalla, countess karnstein. her early death plunge him into 
inconsolable grief. it is the nature of vampire to increase and 
multiply, but according to an ascertain and ghostly law. 

"assume, at starting, a territory perfectly free from that pest. how 
do it begin, and how do it multiply itself? i will tell you. a 
person, more or less wicked, put an end to himself. a suicide, under 
certain circumstances, become a vampire. that specter visit living 
people in their slumbers; they die, and almost invariably, in the grave, 
develop into vampires. this happen in the case of the beautiful 
mircalla, who was haunt by one of those demons. my ancestor, 
vordenburg, whose title i still bear, soon discover this, and in the 
course of the study to which he devoted himself, learned a great 
deal more. 

"among other things, he conclude that suspicion of vampir would 
probably fall, soon or later, upon the dead countess, who in life had 
been his idol. he conceive a horror, be she what she might, of her 
remains being profane by the outrage of a posthumous execution. he has 
left a curious paper to prove that the vampire, on its expulsion from 
its amphibious existence, is project into a far more horrible life; 
and he resolve to save his once beloved mircalla from this. 

"he adopt the stratagem of a journey here, a pretended removal of her 
remains, and a real obliterate of her monument. when age had stolen 
upon him, and from the vale of years, he look back on the scene he 
was leaving, he considered, in a different spirit, what he had done, and 
a horror took possession of him. he made the tracing and note which 
have guide me to the very spot, and drew up a confession of the 
deception that he had practiced. if he had intended any further action 
in this matter, death prevent him; and the hand of a remote descendant 
has, too late for many, direct the pursuit to the lair of the beast." 

we talk a little more, and among other things he said was this: 

"one sign of the vampire is the power of the hand. the slender hand of 
mircalla closed like a vice of steel on the general's wrist when he 
raise the hatchet to strike. but its power is not confine to its 
grasp; it leaves a numb in the limb it seizes, which is slowly, if 
ever, recover from." 

the following spring my father took me a tour through italy. we remain 
away for more than a year. it was long before the terror of recent 
event subsided; and to this hour the image of carmilla returns to 
memory with ambiguous alternations--sometimes the playful, languid, 
beautiful girl; sometimes the writhe fiend i saw in the ruin church; 
and often from a reverie i have started, fancy i heard the light step 
of carmilla at the drawing room door. 

* * * * * 

other books by j. sheridan lefanu 

the cock and anchor 
torlogh o'brien 
the house by the churchyard 
uncle sila 
checkmate 
carmilla 
the wyvern mystery 
guy deverell 
ghost story and tale of mystery 
the chronicle of golden friar 
in a glass dark 
the purcell papers 
the watch and other weird story 
a chronicle of golden friar and other story 
madam growl's ghost and other tale of mystery 
green tea and other story 
sheridan lefanu: the diabolic genius 
best ghost story of j.s. lefanu 
the best horror story 
the vampire lovers and other story 
ghost story and mystery 
the hour after midnight 
j.s. lefanu: ghost story and mystery 
ghost and horror story 
green tea and other ghost stone 
carmilla and other classic tale of mystery 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of carmilla, by j. sheridan lefanu 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook carmilla *** 

***** this file should be name 10007-8.txt or 10007-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/0/10007/ 

produce by suzanne shell, sjaani and pg distribute proofread 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use & redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is," with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

