the project gutenberg ebook, the castle of otranto, by horace walpole, 
edit by henry morley 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 





title: the castle of otranto 


author: horace walpole 

editor: henry morley 

release date: may 5, 2012 [ebook #696] 
[this file was first post on october 22, 1996] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the castle of otranto*** 


transcribe from the 1901 cassell and company edition by david price, 
email ccx074@pglaf.org 

cassell’s national library 
(new series) 

* * * * * 





the 
castle of otranto. 


* * * * * 

by 
horace walpole. 

[picture: decorative graphic] 

cassell and company, limited 
_london_, _paris_, _new york & melbourne_ 
1901 




introduction 
preface 

horace walpole was the youngest son of sir robert walpole, the great 
statesman, who die earl of orford. he was born in 1717, the year in 
which his father resigned office, remain in opposition for almost 
three years before his return to a long tenure of power. horace walpole 
was educated at eton, where he form a school friendship with thomas 
gray, who was but a few month older. in 1739 gray was 
travelling-companion with walpole in france and italy until they differ 
and parted; but the friendship was afterwards renewed, and remain firm 
to the end. horace walpole went from eton to king’s college, cambridge, 
and enter parliament in 1741, the year before his father’s final 
resignation and acceptance of an earldom. his way of life was made easy 
to him. as usher of the exchequer, comptroller of the pipe, and clerk of 
the estreat in the exchequer, he received nearly two thousand a year for 
do nothing, live with his father, and amuse himself. 

horace walpole idled, and amuse himself with the small life of the 
fashionable world to which he was proud of belonging, though he had a 
quick eye for its vanities. he had social wit, and like to put it to 
small uses. but he was not an empty idler, and there were season when 
he could become a sharp judge of himself. “i am sensible,” he wrote to 
his most intimate friend, “i am sensible of have more folly and 
weakness and few real good quality than most men. i sometimes 
reflect on this, though, i own, too seldom. i always want to begin 
acting like a man, and a sensible one, which i think i might be if i 
would.” he had deep home affections, and, under many polite 
affectations, plenty of good sense. 

horace walpole’s father die in 1745. the eldest son, who succeed to 
the earldom, die in 1751, and left a son, george, who was for a time 
insane, and live until 1791. as george left no child, the title and 
estate pass to horace walpole, then seventy-four years old, and the 
only uncle who survived. horace walpole thus became earl of orford, 
during the last six years of his life. as to the title, he said that he 
felt himself being call name in his old age. he die unmarried, in 
the year 1797, at the age of eighty. 

he had turn his house at strawberry hill, by the thames, near 
twickenham, into a gothic villa—eighteenth-century gothic—and amuse 
himself by spend freely upon its adornment with such things as were 
then fashionable as object of taste. but he delight also in his 
flower and his trellis of roses, and the quiet thames. when confine 
by gout to his london house in arlington street, flower from strawberry 
hill and a bird were necessary consolations. he set up also at 
strawberry hill a private printing press, at which he print his friend 
gray’s poems, also in 1758 his own “catalogue of the royal and noble 
author of england,” and five volumes of “anecdotes of painting in 
england,” between 1762 and 1771. 

horace walpole produce _the castle of otranto_ in 1765, at the mature 
age of forty-eight. it was suggest by a dream from which he said he 
wake one morning, and of which “all i could recover was, that i had 
thought myself in an ancient castle (a very natural dream for a head like 
mine, fill with gothic story), and that on the uppermost banister of a 
great staircase i saw a gigantic hand in armour. in the evening i sat 
down and began to write, without knowing in the least what i intended to 
say or relate.” so began the tale which professed to be translate by 
“william marshal, gentleman, from the italy of onuphro muralto, canon 
of the church of st. nicholas, at otranto.” it was written in two 
months. walpole’s friend gray report to him that at cambridge the book 
made “some of them cry a little, and all in general afraid to go to bed 
o’ nights.” _the castle of otranto_ was, in its own way, an early sign 
of the reaction towards romance in the latter part of the last century. 
this give it interest. but it has had many followers, and the hardy 
modern reader, when he read’s gray’s note from cambridge, needs to be 
remind of its date. 

h. m. 




preface to the first edition. 


the following work was found in the library of an ancient catholic family 
in the north of england. it was print at naples, in the black letter, 
in the year 1529. how much soon it was written do not appear. the 
principal incident are such as were believe in the darkest age of 
christianity; but the language and conduct have nothing that savour of 
barbarism. the style is the purest italian. 

if the story was written near the time when it is supposed to have 
happened, it must have been between 1095, the era of the first crusade, 
and 1243, the date of the last, or not long afterwards. there is no 
other circumstance in the work that can lead us to guess at the period in 
which the scene is laid: the name of the actor are evidently 
fictitious, and probably disguise on purpose: yet the spain name of 
the domestic seem to indicate that this work was not compose until the 
establishment of the arragonian kings in naples had made spain 
appellation familiar in that country. the beauty of the diction, and 
the zeal of the author (moderated, however, by singular judgment) concur 
to make me think that the date of the composition was little antecedent 
to that of the impression. letters were then in their most flourish 
state in italy, and contribute to dispel the empire of superstition, at 
that time so forcibly attack by the reformers. it is not unlikely that 
an artful priest might endeavour to turn their own arms on the 
innovators, and might avail himself of his abilities as an author to 
confirm the populace in their ancient error and superstitions. if this 
was his view, he has certainly act with signal address. such a work as 
the following would enslave a hundred vulgar mind beyond half the books 
of controversy that have been written from the days of luther to the 
present hour. 

this solution of the author’s motive is, however, offer as a mere 
conjecture. whatever his view were, or whatever effects the execution 
of them might have, his work can only be laid before the public at 
present as a matter of entertainment. even as such, some apology for it 
is necessary. miracles, visions, necromancy, dreams, and other 
preternatural events, are exploded now even from romances. that was not 
the case when our author wrote; much less when the story itself is 
supposed to have happened. belief in every kind of prodigy was so 
establish in those dark ages, that an author would not be faithful to 
the manners of the times, who should omit all mention of them. he is not 
bound to believe them himself, but he must represent his actor as 
believe them. 

if this air of the miraculous is excused, the reader will find nothing 
else unworthy of his perusal. allow the possibility of the facts, and 
all the actor comport themselves as person would do in their situation. 
there is no bombast, no similes, flowers, digressions, or unnecessary 
descriptions. everything tend directly to the catastrophe. never is 
the reader’s attention relaxed. the rule of the drama are almost 
observe throughout the conduct of the piece. the character are well 
drawn, and still better maintained. terror, the author’s principal 
engine, prevent the story from ever languishing; and it is so often 
contrast by pity, that the mind is kept up in a constant vicissitude of 
interesting passions. 

some person may perhaps think the character of the domestic too little 
serious for the general cast of the story; but besides their opposition 
to the principal personages, the art of the author is very observable in 
his conduct of the subalterns. they discover many passage essential to 
the story, which could not be well brought to light but by their 
_naïveté_ and simplicity. in particular, the womanish terror and foible 
of bianca, in the last chapter, conduce essentially towards advance the 
catastrophe. 

it is natural for a translator to be prejudiced in favour of his adopt 
work. more impartial reader may not be so much struck with the beauty 
of this piece as i was. yet i am not blind to my author’s defects. i 
could wish he had ground his plan on a more useful moral than this: 
that “the sin of father are visit on their children to the third and 
fourth generation.” i doubt whether, in his time, any more than at 
present, ambition curb its appetite of dominion from the dread of so 
remote a punishment. and yet this moral is weaken by that less direct 
insinuation, that even such anathema may be divert by devotion to st. 
nicholas. here the interest of the monk plainly get the better of the 
judgment of the author. however, with all its faults, i have no doubt 
but the english reader will be pleased with a sight of this performance. 
the piety that reign throughout, the lesson of virtue that are 
inculcated, and the rigid purity of the sentiments, exempt this work from 
the censure to which romance are but too liable. should it meet with 
the success i hope for, i may be encourage to reprint the original 
italian, though it will tend to depreciate my own labour. our language 
falls far short of the charm of the italian, both for variety and 
harmony. the latter is peculiarly excellent for simple narrative. it is 
difficult in english to relate without fall too low or rising too 
high; a fault obviously occasion by the little care taken to speak pure 
language in common conversation. every italy or frenchman of any rank 
pique himself on speak his own tongue correct and with choice. i 
cannot flatter myself with have done justice to my author in this 
respect: his style is as elegant as his conduct of the passion is 
masterly. it is a pity that he did not apply his talent to what they 
were evidently proper for—the theatre. 

i will detain the reader no longer, but to make one short remark. though 
the machinery is invention, and the name of the actor imaginary, i 
cannot but believe that the groundwork of the story is found on truth. 
the scene is undoubted laid in some real castle. the author seem 
frequently, without design, to describe particular parts. “the chamber,” 
say he, “on the right hand;” “the door on the left hand;” “the distance 
from the chapel to conrad’s apartment:” these and other passage are 
strong presumption that the author had some certain building in his eye. 
curious persons, who have leisure to employ in such researches, may 
possibly discover in the italy writer the foundation on which our 
author has built. if a catastrophe, at all resemble that which he 
describes, is believe to have given rise to this work, it will 
contribute to interest the reader, and will make the “castle of otranto” 
a still more moving story. 




sonnet to the right honourable lady mary coke. 


the gentle maid, whose hapless tale 
these melancholy page speak; 
say, gracious lady, shall she fail 
to draw the tear adown thy cheek? 

no; never was thy pity breast 
insensible to human woes; 
tender, tho’ firm, it melt distrest 
for weakness it never knows. 

oh! guard the marvel i relate 
of fell ambition scourg’d by fate, 
from reason’s peevish blame. 
blest with thy smile, my dauntless sail 
i dare expand to fancy’s gale, 
for sure thy smile are fame. 

h. w. 




chapter i. 


manfred, prince of otranto, had one son and one daughter: the latter, a 
most beautiful virgin, age eighteen, was call matilda. conrad, the 
son, was three years younger, a homely youth, sickly, and of no promising 
disposition; yet he was the darling of his father, who never show any 
symptom of affection to matilda. manfre had contract a marriage for 
his son with the marquis of vicenza’s daughter, isabella; and she had 
already been deliver by her guardian into the hand of manfred, that 
he might celebrate the wedding as soon as conrad’s infirm state of health 
would permit. 

manfred’s impatience for this ceremonial was remark by his family and 
neighbours. the former, indeed, apprehend the severity of their 
prince’s disposition, did not dare to utter their surmise on this 
precipitation. hippolita, his wife, an amiable lady, did sometimes 
venture to represent the danger of marry their only son so early, 
considering his great youth, and greater infirmities; but she never 
received any other answer than reflection on her own sterility, who had 
given him but one heir. his tenant and subject were less cautious in 
their discourses. they attribute this hasty wedding to the prince’s 
dread of seeing accomplished an ancient prophecy, which was said to have 
pronounced that the castle and lordship of otranto “should pass from the 
present family, whenever the real owner should be grown too large to 
inhabit it.” it was difficult to make any sense of this prophecy; and 
still less easy to conceive what it had to do with the marriage in 
question. yet these mysteries, or contradictions, did not make the 
populace adhere the less to their opinion. 

young conrad’s birthday was fixed for his espousals. the company was 
assemble in the chapel of the castle, and everything ready for beginning 
the divine office, when conrad himself was missing. manfred, impatient 
of the least delay, and who had not observe his son retire, despatch 
one of his attendant to summon the young prince. the servant, who had 
not stay long enough to have cross the court to conrad’s apartment, 
came running back breathless, in a frantic manner, his eyes staring, and 
foam at the mouth. he said nothing, but pointed to the court. 

the company were struck with terror and amazement. the princess 
hippolita, without knowing what was the matter, but anxious for her son, 
swoon away. manfred, less apprehensive than enrage at the 
procrastinate of the nuptials, and at the folly of his domestic, ask 
imperious what was the matter? the fellow made no answer, but 
continue point towards the courtyard; and at last, after repeated 
question put to him, cry out, “oh! the helmet! the helmet!” 

in the meantime, some of the company had run into the court, from whence 
was heard a confuse noise of shrieks, horror, and surprise. manfred, 
who began to be alarm at not seeing his son, went himself to get 
information of what occasion this strange confusion. matilda remain 
endeavour to assist her mother, and isabella stay for the same 
purpose, and to avoid showing any impatience for the bridegroom, for 
whom, in truth, she had conceive little affection. 

the first thing that struck manfred’s eyes was a group of his servant 
endeavour to raise something that appear to him a mountain of sable 
plumes. he gaze without believe his sight. 

“what are ye doing?” cry manfred, wrathfully; “where is my son?” 

a volley of voice replied, “oh! my lord! the prince! the prince! the 
helmet! the helmet!” 

shock with these lamentable sounds, and dread he knew not what, he 
advanced hastily,—but what a sight for a father’s eyes!—he beheld his 
child dashed to pieces, and almost bury under an enormous helmet, an 
hundred times more large than any casque ever made for human being, and 
shade with a proportion quantity of black feathers. 

the horror of the spectacle, the ignorance of all around how this 
misfortune had happened, and above all, the tremendous phenomenon before 
him, took away the prince’s speech. yet his silence last long than 
even grief could occasion. he fixed his eyes on what he wish in vain 
to believe a vision; and seem less attentive to his loss, than bury 
in meditation on the stupendous object that had occasion it. he 
touched, he examine the fatal casque; nor could even the bleeding 
mangle remains of the young prince divert the eyes of manfre from the 
portent before him. 

all who had known his partial fond for young conrad, were as much 
surprise at their prince’s insensibility, as thunderstruck themselves at 
the miracle of the helmet. they convey the disfigure corpse into the 
hall, without receiving the least direction from manfred. as little was 
he attentive to the ladies who remain in the chapel. on the contrary, 
without mention the unhappy princesses, his wife and daughter, the 
first sound that drop from manfred’s lip were, “take care of the 
lady isabella.” 

the domestics, without observing the singular of this direction, were 
guide by their affection to their mistress, to consider it as peculiarly 
address to her situation, and flew to her assistance. they convey 
her to her chamber more dead than alive, and indifferent to all the 
strange circumstances she heard, except the death of her son. 

matilda, who dote on her mother, smother her own grief and amazement, 
and thought of nothing but assist and comfort her afflict parent. 
isabella, who had been treat by hippolita like a daughter, and who 
return that tender with equal duty and affection, was scarce less 
assiduous about the princess; at the same time endeavour to partake 
and lessen the weight of sorrow which she saw matilda strove to suppress, 
for whom she had conceive the warmest sympathy of friendship. yet her 
own situation could not help finding its place in her thoughts. she felt 
no concern for the death of young conrad, except commiseration; and she 
was not sorry to be deliver from a marriage which had promise her 
little felicity, either from her destined bridegroom, or from the severe 
temper of manfred, who, though he had distinguished her by great 
indulgence, had imprint her mind with terror, from his causeless rigour 
to such amiable princess as hippolita and matilda. 

while the ladies were convey the wretched mother to her bed, manfre 
remain in the court, gaze on the ominous casque, and regardless of 
the crowd which the strange of the event had now assemble around 
him. the few words he articulated, tend solely to inquiries, whether 
any man knew from whence it could have come? nobody could give him the 
least information. however, as it seem to be the sole object of his 
curiosity, it soon became so to the rest of the spectators, whose 
conjecture were as absurd and improbable, as the catastrophe itself was 
unprecedented. in the midst of their senseless guesses, a young peasant, 
whom rumour had drawn thither from a neighbouring village, observe that 
the miraculous helmet was exactly like that on the figure in black marble 
of alfonso the good, one of their former princes, in the church of st. 
nicholas. 

“villain! what sayest thou?” cry manfred, start from his trance in 
a tempest of rage, and seize the young man by the collar; “how darest 
thou utter such treason? thy life shall pay for it.” 

the spectators, who as little comprehend the cause of the prince’s fury 
as all the rest they had seen, were at a loss to unravel this new 
circumstance. the young peasant himself was still more astonished, not 
conceive how he had offend the prince. yet recollect himself, 
with a mixture of grace and humility, he disengaged himself from 
manfred’s grip, and then with an obeisance, which discover more 
jealousy of innocence than dismay, he asked, with respect, of what he was 
guilty? manfred, more enrage at the vigour, however decent exerted, 
with which the young man had shaken off his hold, than appease by his 
submission, ordered his attendant to seize him, and, if he had not been 
withheld by his friends whom he had invite to the nuptials, would have 
poignarde the peasant in their arms. 

during this altercation, some of the vulgar spectator had run to the 
great church, which stood near the castle, and came back open-mouthed, 
declare that the helmet was missing from alfonso’s statue. manfred, at 
this news, grew perfectly frantic; and, as if he sought a subject on 
which to vent the tempest within him, he rush again on the young 
peasant, crying— 

“villain! monster! sorcerer! ’tis thou hast done this! ’tis thou hast 
slain my son!” 

the mob, who want some object within the scope of their capacities, on 
whom they might discharge their bewilder reasoning, caught the words 
from the mouth of their lord, and re-echoed— 

“ay, ay; ’tis he, ’tis he: he has stolen the helmet from good alfonso’s 
tomb, and dashed out the brains of our young prince with it,” never 
reflect how enormous the disproportion was between the marble helmet 
that had been in the church, and that of steel before their eyes; nor how 
impossible it was for a youth seemingly not twenty, to wield a piece of 
armour of so prodigious a weight. 

the folly of these ejaculation brought manfre to himself: yet whether 
provoke at the peasant have observe the resemblance between the two 
helmets, and thereby led to the farther discovery of the absence of that 
in the church, or wish to bury any such rumour under so impertinent a 
supposition, he grave pronounced that the young man was certainly a 
necromancer, and that till the church could take cognisance of the 
affair, he would have the magician, whom they had thus detected, kept 
prisoner under the helmet itself, which he ordered his attendant to 
raise, and place the young man under it; declare he should be kept 
there without food, with which his own infernal art might furnish him. 

it was in vain for the youth to represent against this preposterous 
sentence: in vain did manfred’s friends endeavour to divert him from this 
savage and ill-grounded resolution. the generality were charm with 
their lord’s decision, which, to their apprehensions, carry great 
appearance of justice, as the magician was to be punish by the very 
instrument with which he had offended: nor were they struck with the 
least compunction at the probability of the youth being starved, for they 
firm believe that, by his diabolic skill, he could easily supply 
himself with nutriment. 

manfre thus saw his command even cheerful obeyed; and appoint a 
guard with strict orders to prevent any food being convey to the 
prisoner, he dismiss his friends and attendants, and retired to his own 
chamber, after lock the gate of the castle, in which he suffer none 
but his domestic to remain. 

in the meantime, the care and zeal of the young ladies had brought the 
princess hippolita to herself, who amidst the transport of her own 
sorrow frequent demand news of her lord, would have dismiss her 
attendant to watch over him, and at last enjoin matilda to leave her, 
and visit and comfort her father. matilda, who want no affectionate 
duty to manfred, though she tremble at his austerity, obey the orders 
of hippolita, whom she tender recommend to isabella; and inquiring of 
the domestic for her father, was informed that he was retired to his 
chamber, and had command that nobody should have admittance to him. 
conclude that he was immerse in sorrow for the death of her brother, 
and fear to renew his tear by the sight of his sole remain child, 
she hesitate whether she should break in upon his affliction; yet 
solicitude for him, back by the command of her mother, encourage her 
to venture disobey the orders he had given; a fault she had never been 
guilty of before. 

the gentle timid of her nature made her pause for some minutes at his 
door. she heard him traverse his chamber backwards, and forward with 
disorder steps; a mood which increase her apprehensions. she was, 
however, just go to beg admittance, when manfre sudden open the 
door; and as it was now twilight, concur with the disorder of his 
mind, he did not distinguish the person, but ask angrily, who it was? 
matilda replied, trembling— 

“my dearest father, it is i, your daughter.” 

manfred, step back hastily, cried, “begone! i do not want a 
daughter;” and fling back abruptly, clap the door against the 
terrify matilda. 

she was too well acquaint with her father’s impetuos to venture a 
second intrusion. when she had a little recover the shock of so bitter 
a reception, she wipe away her tear to prevent the additional stab that 
the knowledge of it would give to hippolita, who question her in the 
most anxious terms on the health of manfred, and how he bore his loss. 
matilda assured her he was well, and support his misfortune with manly 
fortitude. 

“but will he not let me see him?” said hippolita mournfully; “will he not 
permit me to blend my tear with his, and shed a mother’s sorrow in the 
bosom of her lord? or do you deceive me, matilda? i know how manfre 
dote on his son: is not the stroke too heavy for him? has he not sunk 
under it? you do not answer me—alas! i dread the worst!—raise me, my 
maidens; i will, i will see my lord. bear me to him instantly: he is 
dear to me even than my children.” 

matilda made sign to isabella to prevent hippolita’s rising; and both 
those lovely young women were use their gentle violence to stop and 
calm the princess, when a servant, on the part of manfred, arrive and 
told isabella that his lord demand to speak with her. 

“with me!” cry isabella. 

“go,” said hippolita, relieved by a message from her lord: “manfred 
cannot support the sight of his own family. he think you less 
disorder than we are, and dread the shock of my grief. console him, 
dear isabella, and tell him i will smother my own anguish rather than add 
to his.” 

as it was now evening the servant who conduct isabella bore a torch 
before her. when they came to manfred, who was walking impatient about 
the gallery, he started, and said hastily— 

“take away that light, and begone.” 

then shut the door impetuously, he flung himself upon a bench against 
the wall, and bade isabella sit by him. she obey trembling. 

“i sent for you, lady,” said he—and then stop under great appearance 
of confusion. 

“my lord!” 

“yes, i sent for you on a matter of great moment,” resume he. “dry your 
tears, young lady—you have lost your bridegroom. yes, cruel fate! and i 
have lost the hope of my race! but conrad was not worthy of your 
beauty.” 

“how, my lord!” said isabella; “sure you do not suspect me of not feeling 
the concern i ought: my duty and affection would have always—” 

“think no more of him,” interrupt manfred; “he was a sickly, puny 
child, and heaven has perhaps taken him away, that i might not trust the 
honours of my house on so frail a foundation. the line of manfre call 
for numerous supports. my foolish fond for that boy blind the eyes 
of my prudence—but it is better as it is. i hope, in a few years, to 
have reason to rejoice at the death of conrad.” 

words cannot paint the astonishment of isabella. at first she 
apprehend that grief had disorder manfred’s understanding. her next 
thought suggest that this strange discourse was design to ensnare 
her: she fear that manfre had perceive her indifference for his son: 
and in consequence of that idea she replied— 

“good my lord, do not doubt my tenderness: my heart would have 
accompany my hand. conrad would have engross all my care; and 
wherever fate shall dispose of me, i shall always cherish his memory, and 
regard your highness and the virtuous hippolita as my parents.” 

“curse on hippolita!” cry manfred. “forget her from this moment, as i 
do. in short, lady, you have miss a husband undeserv of your 
charms: they shall now be better disposed of. instead of a sickly boy, 
you shall have a husband in the prime of his age, who will know how to 
value your beauties, and who may expect a numerous offspring.” 

“alas, my lord!” said isabella, “my mind is too sadly engross by the 
recent catastrophe in your family to think of another marriage. if ever 
my father returns, and it shall be his pleasure, i shall obey, as i did 
when i consent to give my hand to your son: but until his return, 
permit me to remain under your hospitable roof, and employ the melancholy 
hour in assuage yours, hippolita’s, and the fair matilda’s 
affliction.” 

“i desire you once before,” said manfre angrily, “not to name that 
woman: from this hour she must be a stranger to you, as she must be to 
me. in short, isabella, since i cannot give you my son, i offer you 
myself.” 

“heavens!” cry isabella, waking from her delusion, “what do i hear? 
you! my lord! you! my father-in-law! the father of conrad! the husband 
of the virtuous and tender hippolita!” 

“i tell you,” said manfre imperiously, “hippolita is no long my wife; 
i divorce her from this hour. too long has she cursed me by her 
unfruitfulness. my fate depend on have sons, and this night i trust 
will give a new date to my hopes.” 

at those words he seize the cold hand of isabella, who was half dead 
with fright and horror. she shrieked, and start from him, manfre rose 
to pursue her, when the moon, which was now up, and gleam in at the 
opposite casement, present to his sight the plume of the fatal helmet, 
which rose to the height of the windows, wave backwards and forward in 
a tempestuous manner, and accompany with a hollow and rustling sound. 
isabella, who gather courage from her situation, and who dread 
nothing so much as manfred’s pursuit of his declaration, cried— 

“look, my lord! see, heaven itself declare against your impious 
intentions!” 

“heaven nor hell shall impede my designs,” said manfred, advance again 
to seize the princess. 

at that instant the portrait of his grandfather, which hung over the 
bench where they had been sitting, utter a deep sigh, and heave its 
breast. 

isabella, whose back was turn to the picture, saw not the motion, nor 
knew whence the sound came, but started, and said— 

“hark, my lord! what sound was that?” and at the same time made towards 
the door. 

manfred, distracted between the flight of isabella, who had now reach 
the stairs, and yet unable to keep his eyes from the picture, which began 
to move, had, however, advanced some steps after her, still look 
backwards on the portrait, when he saw it quit its panel, and descend on 
the floor with a grave and melancholy air. 

“do i dream?” cry manfred, returning; “or are the devil themselves in 
league against me? speak, internal spectre! or, if thou art my 
grandsire, why dost thou too conspire against thy wretched descendant, 
who too dearly pay for—” ere he could finish the sentence, the vision 
sigh again, and made a sign to manfre to follow him. 

“lead on!” cry manfred; “i will follow thee to the gulf of perdition.” 

the spectre march sedately, but dejected, to the end of the gallery, 
and turn into a chamber on the right hand. manfre accompany him at 
a little distance, full of anxiety and horror, but resolved. as he would 
have enter the chamber, the door was clap to with violence by an 
invisible hand. the prince, collect courage from this delay, would 
have forcibly burst open the door with his foot, but found that it 
resist his utmost efforts. 

“since hell will not satisfy my curiosity,” said manfred, “i will use the 
human means in my power for preserve my race; isabella shall not escape 
me.” 

the lady, whose resolution had given way to terror the moment she had 
quit manfred, continue her flight to the bottom of the principal 
staircase. there she stopped, not knowing whither to direct her steps, 
nor how to escape from the impetuos of the prince. the gate of the 
castle, she knew, were locked, and guard placed in the court. should 
she, as her heart prompt her, go and prepare hippolita for the cruel 
destiny that await her, she did not doubt but manfre would seek her 
there, and that his violence would incite him to double the injury he 
meditated, without leave room for them to avoid the impetuos of his 
passions. delay might give him time to reflect on the horrid measure he 
had conceived, or produce some circumstance in her favour, if she 
could—for that night, at least—avoid his odious purpose. yet where 
conceal herself? how avoid the pursuit he would infallibly make 
throughout the castle? 

as these thought pass rapid through her mind, she recollect a 
subterraneous passage which led from the vault of the castle to the 
church of st. nicholas. could she reach the altar before she was 
overtaken, she knew even manfred’s violence would not dare to profane the 
sacred of the place; and she determined, if no other means of 
deliverance offered, to shut herself up for ever among the holy virgin 
whose convent was contiguous to the cathedral. in this resolution, she 
seize a lamp that burn at the foot of the staircase, and hurried 
towards the secret passage. 

the lower part of the castle was hollow into several intricate 
cloisters; and it was not easy for one under so much anxiety to find the 
door that open into the cavern. an awful silence reign throughout 
those subterraneous regions, except now and then some blast of wind that 
shook the door she had passed, and which, grating on the rusty hinges, 
were re-echoed through that long labyrinth of darkness. every murmur 
struck her with new terror; yet more she dread to hear the wrathful 
voice of manfre urge his domestic to pursue her. 

she trod as soft as impatience would give her leave, yet frequent 
stop and listen to hear if she was followed. in one of those 
moments she thought she heard a sigh. she shuddered, and recoil a few 
paces. in a moment she thought she heard the step of some person. her 
blood curdled; she conclude it was manfred. every suggestion that 
horror could inspire rush into her mind. she condemn her rash 
flight, which had thus expose her to his rage in a place where her cries 
were not likely to draw anybody to her assistance. yet the sound seem 
not to come from behind. if manfre knew where she was, he must have 
follow her. she was still in one of the cloisters, and the steps she 
had heard were too distinct to proceed from the way she had come. 
cheer with this reflection, and hope to find a friend in whoever was 
not the prince, she was go to advance, when a door that stood ajar, at 
some distance to the left, was open gently: but ere her lamp, which she 
held up, could discover who open it, the person retreat precipitate 
on seeing the light. 

isabella, whom every incident was sufficient to dismay, hesitate whether 
she should proceed. her dread of manfre soon outweigh every other 
terror. the very circumstance of the person avoid her gave her a sort 
of courage. it could only be, she thought, some domestic belong to 
the castle. her gentle had never raise her an enemy, and conscious 
innocence made her hope that, unless sent by the prince’s order to seek 
her, his servant would rather assist than prevent her flight. 
fortify herself with these reflections, and believe by what she 
could observe that she was near the mouth of the subterraneous cavern, 
she approach the door that had been opened; but a sudden gust of wind 
that met her at the door extinguish her lamp, and left her in total 
darkness. 

words cannot paint the horror of the princess’s situation. alone in so 
dismal a place, her mind imprint with all the terrible event of the 
day, hopeless of escaping, expect every moment the arrival of manfred, 
and far from tranquil on knowing she was within reach of somebody, she 
knew not whom, who for some cause seem conceal thereabouts; all these 
thought crowded on her distracted mind, and she was ready to sink under 
her apprehensions. she address herself to every saint in heaven, and 
inward implore their assistance. for a considerable time she remain 
in an agony of despair. 

at last, as soft as was possible, she felt for the door, and have 
found it, enter tremble into the vault from whence she had heard the 
sigh and steps. it gave her a kind of momentary joy to perceive an 
imperfect ray of cloud moonshine gleam from the roof of the vault, 
which seem to be fallen in, and from whence hung a fragment of earth or 
building, she could not distinguish which, that appear to have been 
crush inwards. she advanced eager towards this chasm, when she 
discern a human form standing close against the wall. 

she shrieked, believe it the ghost of her betrothed conrad. the 
figure, advancing, said, in a submissive voice— 

“be not alarmed, lady; i will not injure you.” 

isabella, a little encourage by the words and tone of voice of the 
stranger, and recollect that this must be the person who had open 
the door, recover her spirits enough to reply— 

“sir, whoever you are, take pity on a wretched princess, standing on the 
brink of destruction. assist me to escape from this fatal castle, or in 
a few moments i may be made miserable for ever.” 

“alas!” said the stranger, “what can i do to assist you? i will die in 
your defence; but i am unacquainted with the castle, and want—” 

“oh!” said isabella, hasty interrupt him; “help me but to find a 
trap-door that must be hereabout, and it is the greatest service you can 
do me, for i have not a minute to lose.” 

saying a these words, she felt about on the pavement, and direct the 
stranger to search likewise, for a smooth piece of brass enclose in one 
of the stones. 

“that,” said she, “is the lock, which open with a spring, of which i 
know the secret. if we can find that, i may escape—if not, alas! 
courteous stranger, i fear i shall have involved you in my misfortunes: 
manfre will suspect you for the accomplice of my flight, and you will 
fall a victim to his resentment.” 

“i value not my life,” said the stranger, “and it will be some comfort to 
lose it in try to deliver you from his tyranny.” 

“generous youth,” said isabella, “how shall i ever requite—” 

as she utter those words, a ray of moonshine, stream through a 
cranny of the ruin above, shone directly on the lock they sought. 

“oh! transport!” said isabella; “here is the trap-door!” and, taking out 
the key, she touched the spring, which, start aside, discover an 
iron ring. “lift up the door,” said the princess. 

the stranger obeyed, and beneath appear some stone steps descend 
into a vault total dark. 

“we must go down here,” said isabella. “follow me; dark and dismal as it 
is, we cannot miss our way; it leads directly to the church of st. 
nicholas. but, perhaps,” add the princess modestly, “you have no 
reason to leave the castle, nor have i farther occasion for your service; 
in a few minutes i shall be safe from manfred’s rage—only let me know to 
whom i am so much obliged.” 

“i will never quit you,” said the stranger eagerly, “until i have placed 
you in safety—nor think me, princess, more generous than i am; though you 
are my principal care—” 

the stranger was interrupt by a sudden noise of voice that seem 
approaching, and they soon distinguished these words— 

“talk not to me of necromancers; i tell you she must be in the castle; i 
will find her in spite of enchantment.” 

“oh, heavens!” cry isabella; “it is the voice of manfred! make haste, 
or we are ruined! and shut the trap-door after you.” 

saying this, she descended the steps precipitately; and as the stranger 
hasten to follow her, he let the door slip out of his hands: it fell, 
and the spring closed over it. he try in vain to open it, not have 
observe isabella’s method of touching the spring; nor had he many 
moments to make an essay. the noise of the fall door had been heard 
by manfred, who, direct by the sound, hasten thither, attend by his 
servant with torches. 

“it must be isabella,” cry manfred, before he enter the vault. “she 
is escape by the subterraneous passage, but she cannot have got far.” 

what was the astonishment of the prince when, instead of isabella, the 
light of the torch discover to him the young peasant whom he thought 
confine under the fatal helmet! 

“traitor!” said manfred; “how camest thou here? i thought thee in 
durance above in the court.” 

“i am no traitor,” reply the young man boldly, “nor am i answerable for 
your thoughts.” 

“presumptuous villain!” cry manfred; “dost thou provoke my wrath? tell 
me, how hast thou escape from above? thou hast corrupt thy guards, 
and their lives shall answer it.” 

“my poverty,” said the peasant calmly, “will disculpate them: though the 
minister of a tyrant’s wrath, to thee they are faithful, and but too 
willing to execute the orders which you unjust impose upon them.” 

“art thou so hardy as to dare my vengeance?” said the prince; “but 
torture shall force the truth from thee. tell me; i will know thy 
accomplices.” 

“there was my accomplice!” said the youth, smiling, and point to the 
roof. 

manfre ordered the torch to be held up, and perceive that one of the 
cheek of the enchant casque had forced its way through the pavement of 
the court, as his servant had let it fall over the peasant, and had 
broken through into the vault, leave a gap, through which the peasant 
had pressed himself some minutes before he was found by isabella. 

“was that the way by which thou didst descend?” said manfred. 

“it was,” said the youth. 

“but what noise was that,” said manfred, “which i heard as i enter the 
cloister?” 

“a door clapped,” said the peasant; “i heard it as well as you.” 

“what door?” said manfre hastily. 

“i am not acquaint with your castle,” said the peasant; “this is the 
first time i ever enter it, and this vault the only part of it within 
which i ever was.” 

“but i tell thee,” said manfre (wishing to find out if the youth had 
discover the trap-door), “it was this way i heard the noise. my 
servant heard it too.” 

“my lord,” interrupt one of them officiously, “to be sure it was the 
trap-door, and he was go to make his escape.” 

“peace, blockhead!” said the prince angrily; “if he was go to escape, 
how should he come on this side? i will know from his own mouth what 
noise it was i heard. tell me truly; thy life depend on thy veracity.” 

“my veracity is dear to me than my life,” said the peasant; “nor would 
i purchase the one by forfeit the other.” 

“indeed, young philosopher!” said manfre contemptuously; “tell me, then, 
what was the noise i heard?” 

“ask me what i can answer,” said he, “and put me to death instantly if i 
tell you a lie.” 

manfred, grow impatient at the steady valour and indifference of the 
youth, cried— 

“well, then, thou man of truth, answer! was it the fall of the trap-door 
that i heard?” 

“it was,” said the youth. 

“it was!” said the prince; “and how didst thou come to know there was a 
trap-door here?” 

“i saw the plate of brass by a gleam of moonshine,” reply he. 

“but what told thee it was a lock?” said manfred. “how didst thou 
discover the secret of opening it?” 

“providence, that deliver me from the helmet, was able to direct me to 
the spring of a lock,” said he. 

“providence should have gone a little farther, and have placed thee out 
of the reach of my resentment,” said manfred. “when providence had 
taught thee to open the lock, it abandoned thee for a fool, who did not 
know how to make use of its favours. why didst thou not pursue the path 
pointed out for thy escape? why didst thou shut the trap-door before 
thou hadst descended the steps?” 

“i might ask you, my lord,” said the peasant, “how i, total 
unacquainted with your castle, was to know that those steps led to any 
outlet? but i scorn to evade your questions. wherever those steps lead 
to, perhaps i should have explore the way—i could not be in a worse 
situation than i was. but the truth is, i let the trap-door fall: your 
immediate arrival followed. i had given the alarm—what import it to me 
whether i was seize a minute soon or a minute later?” 

“thou art a resolute villain for thy years,” said manfred; “yet on 
reflection i suspect thou dost but trifle with me. thou hast not yet 
told me how thou didst open the lock.” 

“that i will show you, my lord,” said the peasant; and, taking up a 
fragment of stone that had fallen from above, he laid himself on the 
trap-door, and began to beat on the piece of brass that cover it, 
meaning to gain time for the escape of the princess. this presence of 
mind, join to the frank of the youth, stagger manfred. he even 
felt a disposition towards pardon one who had been guilty of no crime. 
manfre was not one of those savage tyrant who wanton in cruelty 
unprovoked. the circumstances of his fortune had given an asperity to 
his temper, which was naturally humane; and his virtue were always ready 
to operate, when his passion did not obscure his reason. 

while the prince was in this suspense, a confuse noise of voice echo 
through the distant vaults. as the sound approached, he distinguished 
the clamour of some of his domestics, whom he had disperse through the 
castle in search of isabella, calling out— 

“where is my lord? where is the prince?” 

“here i am,” said manfred, as they came nearer; “have you found the 
princess?” 

the first that arrived, replied, “oh, my lord! i am glad we have found 
you.” 

“found me!” said manfred; “have you found the princess?” 

“we thought we had, my lord,” said the fellow, look terrified, “but—” 

“but, what?” cry the prince; “has she escaped?” 

“jaquez and i, my lord—” 

“yes, i and diego,” interrupt the second, who came up in still greater 
consternation. 

“speak one of you at a time,” said manfred; “i ask you, where is the 
princess?” 

“we do not know,” said they both together; “but we are frightened out of 
our wits.” 

“so i think, blockheads,” said manfred; “what is it has scared you thus?” 

“oh! my lord,” said jaquez, “diego has seen such a sight! your highness 
would not believe our eyes.” 

“what new absurd is this?” cry manfred; “give me a direct answer, 
or, by heaven—” 

“why, my lord, if it please your highness to hear me,” said the poor 
fellow, “diego and i—” 

“yes, i and jaquez—” cry his comrade. 

“did not i forbid you to speak both at a time?” said the prince: “you, 
jaquez, answer; for the other fool seem more distracted than thou art; 
what is the matter?” 

“my gracious lord,” said jaquez, “if it please your highness to hear me; 
diego and i, according to your highness’s orders, went to search for the 
young lady; but being comprehensive that we might meet the ghost of my 
young lord, your highness’s son, god rest his soul, as he has not 
received christian burial—” 

“sot!” cry manfre in a rage; “is it only a ghost, then, that thou hast 
seen?” 

“oh! worse! worse! my lord,” cry diego: “i had rather have seen ten 
whole ghosts.” 

“grant me patience!” said manfred; “these blockhead distract me. out of 
my sight, diego! and thou, jaquez, tell me in one word, art thou sober? 
art thou raving? thou wast wont to have some sense: has the other sot 
frightened himself and thee too? speak; what is it he fancies he has 
seen?” 

“why, my lord,” reply jaquez, trembling, “i was go to tell your 
highness, that since the calamitous misfortune of my young lord, god rest 
his precious soul! not one of us your highness’s faithful servants—indeed 
we are, my lord, though poor men—i say, not one of us has dare to set a 
foot about the castle, but two together: so diego and i, thinking that my 
young lady might be in the great gallery, went up there to look for her, 
and tell her your highness want something to impart to her.” 

“o blunder fools!” cry manfred; “and in the meantime, she has made 
her escape, because you were afraid of goblins!—why, thou knave! she left 
me in the gallery; i came from thence myself.” 

“for all that, she may be there still for aught i know,” said jaquez; 
“but the devil shall have me before i seek her there again—poor diego! i 
do not believe he will ever recover it.” 

“recover what?” said manfred; “am i never to learn what it is has 
terrify these rascals?—but i lose my time; follow me, slave; i will see 
if she is in the gallery.” 

“for heaven’s sake, my dear, good lord,” cry jaquez, “do not go to the 
gallery. satan himself i believe is in the chamber next to the gallery.” 

manfred, who hitherto had treat the terror of his servant as an idle 
panic, was struck at this new circumstance. he recollect the 
apparition of the portrait, and the sudden close of the door at the end 
of the gallery. his voice faltered, and he ask with disorder— 

“what is in the great chamber?” 

“my lord,” said jaquez, “when diego and i came into the gallery, he went 
first, for he said he had more courage than i. so when we came into the 
gallery we found nobody. we look under every bench and stool; and 
still we found nobody.” 

“were all the pictures in their places?” said manfred. 

“yes, my lord,” answer jaquez; “but we did not think of look behind 
them.” 

“well, well!” said manfred; “proceed.” 

“when we came to the door of the great chamber,” continue jaquez, “we 
found it shut.” 

“and could not you open it?” said manfred. 

“oh! yes, my lord; would to heaven we had not!” reply he—“nay, it was 
not i neither; it was diego: he was grown foolhardy, and would go on, 
though i advise him not—if ever i open a door that is shut again—” 

“trifle not,” said manfred, shuddering, “but tell me what you saw in the 
great chamber on opening the door.” 

“i! my lord!” said jaquez; “i was behind diego; but i heard the noise.” 

“jaquez,” said manfred, in a solemn tone of voice; “tell me, i adjure 
thee by the soul of my ancestors, what was it thou sawest? what was it 
thou heardest?” 

“it was diego saw it, my lord, it was not i,” reply jaquez; “i only 
heard the noise. diego had no soon open the door, than he cry out, 
and ran back. i ran back too, and said, ‘is it the ghost?’ ‘the ghost! 
no, no,’ said diego, and his hair stood on end—‘it is a giant, i believe; 
he is all clad in armour, for i saw his foot and part of his leg, and 
they are as large as the helmet below in the court.’ as he said these 
words, my lord, we heard a violent motion and the rattling of armour, as 
if the giant was rising, for diego has told me since that he believe the 
giant was lie down, for the foot and leg were stretch at length on 
the floor. before we could get to the end of the gallery, we heard the 
door of the great chamber clap behind us, but we did not dare turn back 
to see if the giant was following us—yet, now i think on it, we must have 
heard him if he had pursue us—but for heaven’s sake, good my lord, send 
for the chaplain, and have the castle exorcised, for, for certain, it is 
enchanted.” 

“ay, pray do, my lord,” cry all the servant at once, “or we must leave 
your highness’s service.” 

“peace, dotards!” said manfred, “and follow me; i will know what all this 
means.” 

“we! my lord!” cry they with one voice; “we would not go up to the 
gallery for your highness’s revenue.” the young peasant, who had stood 
silent, now spoke. 

“will your highness,” said he, “permit me to try this adventure? my life 
is of consequence to nobody; i fear no bad angel, and have offend no 
good one.” 

“your behaviour is above your seeming,” said manfred, view him with 
surprise and admiration—“hereafter i will reward your bravery—but now,” 
continue he with a sigh, “i am so circumstanced, that i dare trust no 
eyes but my own. however, i give you leave to accompany me.” 

manfred, when he first follow isabella from the gallery, had gone 
directly to the apartment of his wife, conclude the princess had 
retired thither. hippolita, who knew his step, rose with anxious 
fond to meet her lord, whom she had not seen since the death of their 
son. she would have flown in a transport mixed of joy and grief to his 
bosom, but he pushed her rudely off, and said— 

“where is isabella?” 

“isabella! my lord!” said the astonish hippolita. 

“yes, isabella,” cry manfre imperiously; “i want isabella.” 

“my lord,” reply matilda, who perceive how much his behaviour had 
shock her mother, “she has not been with us since your highness 
summon her to your apartment.” 

“tell me where she is,” said the prince; “i do not want to know where she 
has been.” 

“my good lord,” say hippolita, “your daughter tell you the truth: 
isabella left us by your command, and has not return since;—but, my 
good lord, compose yourself: retire to your rest: this dismal day has 
disorder you. isabella shall wait your orders in the morning.” 

“what, then, you know where she is!” cry manfred. “tell me directly, 
for i will not lose an instant—and you, woman,” speak to his wife, 
“order your chaplain to attend me forthwith.” 

“isabella,” said hippolita calmly, “is retired, i suppose, to her 
chamber: she is not accustomed to watch at this late hour. gracious my 
lord,” continue she, “let me know what has disturbed you. has isabella 
offend you?” 

“trouble me not with questions,” said manfred, “but tell me where she 
is.” 

“matilda shall call her,” said the princess. “sit down, my lord, and 
resume your wonted fortitude.” 

“what, art thou jealous of isabella?” reply he, “that you wish to be 
present at our interview!” 

“good heavens! my lord,” said hippolita, “what is it your highness 
means?” 

“thou wilt know ere many minutes are passed,” said the cruel prince. 
“send your chaplain to me, and wait my pleasure here.” 

at these words he flung out of the room in search of isabella, leave 
the amaze ladies thunderstruck with his words and frantic deportment, 
and lost in vain conjecture on what he was meditating. 

manfre was now return from the vault, attend by the peasant and a 
few of his servant whom he had oblige to accompany him. he ascend 
the staircase without stopping till he arrive at the gallery, at the 
door of which he met hippolita and her chaplain. when diego had been 
dismiss by manfred, he had gone directly to the princess’s apartment 
with the alarm of what he had seen. that excellent lady, who no more 
than manfre doubt of the reality of the vision, yet affected to treat 
it as a delirium of the servant. willing, however, to save her lord from 
any additional shock, and prepared by a series of grief not to tremble 
at any accession to it, she determined to make herself the first 
sacrifice, if fate had marked the present hour for their destruction. 
dismiss the reluctant matilda to her rest, who in vain sue for leave 
to accompany her mother, and attend only by her chaplain, hippolita had 
visit the gallery and great chamber; and now with more serene of soul 
than she had felt for many hours, she met her lord, and assured him that 
the vision of the gigantic leg and foot was all a fable; and no doubt an 
impression made by fear, and the dark and dismal hour of the night, on 
the mind of his servants. she and the chaplain had examine the 
chamber, and found everything in the usual order. 

manfred, though persuaded, like his wife, that the vision had been no 
work of fancy, recover a little from the tempest of mind into which so 
many strange event had thrown him. ashamed, too, of his inhuman 
treatment of a princess who return every injury with new mark of 
tender and duty, he felt return love force itself into his eyes; 
but not less ashamed of feeling remorse towards one against whom he was 
inward meditate a yet more bitter outrage, he curb the yearning of 
his heart, and did not dare to lean even towards pity. the next 
transition of his soul was to exquisite villainy. 

presume on the unshaken submission of hippolita, he flatter himself 
that she would not only acquiesce with patience to a divorce, but would 
obey, if it was his pleasure, in endeavour to persuade isabella to 
give him her hand—but ere he could indulge his horrid hope, he reflect 
that isabella was not to be found. coming to himself, he gave orders 
that every avenue to the castle should be strict guarded, and charged 
his domestic on pain of their lives to suffer nobody to pass out. the 
young peasant, to whom he spoke favourably, he ordered to remain in a 
small chamber on the stairs, in which there was a pallet-bed, and the key 
of which he took away himself, telling the youth he would talk with him 
in the morning. then dismiss his attendants, and bestow a sullen 
kind of half-nod on hippolita, he retired to his own chamber. 




chapter ii. 


matilda, who by hippolita’s order had retired to her apartment, was 
ill-disposed to take any rest. the shocking fate of her brother had 
deep affected her. she was surprise at not seeing isabella; but the 
strange words which had fallen from her father, and his obscure menace to 
the princess his wife, accompany by the most furious behaviour, had 
fill her gentle mind with terror and alarm. she wait anxious for 
the return of bianca, a young damsel that attend her, whom she had sent 
to learn what was become of isabella. bianca soon appeared, and informed 
her mistress of what she had gather from the servants, that isabella 
was nowhere to be found. she related the adventure of the young peasant 
who had been discover in the vault, though with many simple addition 
from the incoherent account of the domestics; and she dwelt principally 
on the gigantic leg and foot which had been seen in the gallery-chamber. 
this last circumstance had terrify bianca so much, that she was 
rejoice when matilda told her that she would not go to rest, but would 
watch till the princess should rise. 

the young princess weary herself in conjecture on the flight of 
isabella, and on the threat of manfre to her mother. “but what 
business could he have so urgent with the chaplain?” said matilda, “does 
he intend to have my brother’s body inter private in the chapel?” 

“oh, madam!” said bianca, “now i guess. as you are become his heiress, 
he is impatient to have you married: he has always been raving for more 
sons; i warrant he is now impatient for grandsons. as sure as i live, 
madam, i shall see you a bride at last.—good madam, you won’t cast off 
your faithful bianca: you won’t put donna rosara over me now you are a 
great princess.” 

“my poor bianca,” said matilda, “how fast your thought amble! i a great 
princess! what hast thou seen in manfred’s behaviour since my brother’s 
death that bespeak any increase of tender to me? no, bianca; his 
heart was ever a stranger to me—but he is my father, and i must not 
complain. nay, if heaven shut my father’s heart against me, it overpay 
my little merit in the tender of my mother—o that dear mother! yes, 
bianca, ’tis there i feel the rugged temper of manfred. i can support 
his harsh to me with patience; but it wound my soul when i am 
witness to his causeless severity towards her.” 

“oh! madam,” said bianca, “all men use their wives so, when they are 
weary of them.” 

“and yet you congratulate me but now,” said matilda, “when you fancy 
my father intended to dispose of me!” 

“i would have you a great lady,” reply bianca, “come what will. i do 
not wish to see you moped in a convent, as you would be if you had your 
will, and if my lady, your mother, who know that a bad husband is better 
than no husband at all, did not hinder you.—bless me! what noise is that! 
st. nichola forgive me! i was but in jest.” 

“it is the wind,” said matilda, “whistling through the battlements in the 
tower above: you have heard it a thousand times.” 

“nay,” said bianca, “there was no harm neither in what i said: it is no 
sin to talk of matrimony—and so, madam, as i was saying, if my lord 
manfre should offer you a handsome young prince for a bridegroom, you 
would drop him a curtsey, and tell him you would rather take the veil?” 

“thank heaven! i am in no such danger,” said matilda: “you know how many 
proposal for me he has rejected—” 

“and you thank him, like a dutiful daughter, do you, madam? but come, 
madam; suppose, to-morrow morning, he was to send for you to the great 
council chamber, and there you should find at his elbow a lovely young 
prince, with large black eyes, a smooth white forehead, and manly curling 
locks like jet; in short, madam, a young hero resemble the picture of 
the good alfonso in the gallery, which you sit and gaze at for hour 
together—” 

“do not speak lightly of that picture,” interrupt matilda sighing; “i 
know the adoration with which i look at that picture is uncommon—but i am 
not in love with a coloured panel. the character of that virtuous 
prince, the venerate with which my mother has inspired me for his 
memory, the orison which, i know not why, she has enjoin me to pour 
forth at his tomb, all have concur to persuade me that somehow or 
other my destiny is link with something relate to him.” 

“lord, madam! how should that be?” said bianca; “i have always heard that 
your family was in no way related to his: and i am sure i cannot conceive 
why my lady, the princess, send you in a cold morning or a damp evening 
to pray at his tomb: he is no saint by the almanack. if you must pray, 
why do she not bid you address yourself to our great st. nicholas? i 
am sure he is the saint i pray to for a husband.” 

“perhaps my mind would be less affected,” said matilda, “if my mother 
would explain her reason to me: but it is the mystery she observes, that 
inspire me with this—i know not what to call it. as she never acts from 
caprice, i am sure there is some fatal secret at bottom—nay, i know there 
is: in her agony of grief for my brother’s death she drop some words 
that intimate as much.” 

“oh! dear madam,” cry bianca, “what were they?” 

“no,” said matilda, “if a parent let fall a word, and wish it 
recalled, it is not for a child to utter it.” 

“what! was she sorry for what she had said?” ask bianca; “i am sure, 
madam, you may trust me—” 

“with my own little secret when i have any, i may,” said matilda; “but 
never with my mother’s: a child ought to have no ear or eyes but as a 
parent directs.” 

“well! to be sure, madam, you were born to be a saint,” said bianca, “and 
there is no resist one’s vocation: you will end in a convent at last. 
but there is my lady isabella would not be so reserved to me: she will 
let me talk to her of young men: and when a handsome cavalier has come to 
the castle, she has own to me that she wish your brother conrad 
resemble him.” 

“bianca,” said the princess, “i do not allow you to mention my friend 
disrespectfully. isabella is of a cheerful disposition, but her soul is 
pure as virtue itself. she know your idle babble humour, and perhaps 
has now and then encourage it, to divert melancholy, and enliven the 
solitude in which my father keeps us—” 

“blessed mary!” said bianca, starting, “there it is again! dear madam, 
do you hear nothing? this castle is certainly haunted!” 

“peace!” said matilda, “and listen! i did think i heard a voice—but it 
must be fancy: your terrors, i suppose, have infect me.” 

“indeed! indeed! madam,” said bianca, half-weeping with agony, “i am 
sure i heard a voice.” 

“does anybody lie in the chamber beneath?” said the princess. 

“nobody has dare to lie there,” answer bianca, “since the great 
astrologer, that was your brother’s tutor, drown himself. for certain, 
madam, his ghost and the young prince’s are now met in the chamber 
below—for heaven’s sake let us fly to your mother’s apartment!” 

“i charge you not to stir,” said matilda. “if they are spirits in pain, 
we may ease their suffering by questioning them. they can mean no hurt 
to us, for we have not injure them—and if they should, shall we be more 
safe in one chamber than in another? reach me my beads; we will say a 
prayer, and then speak to them.” 

“oh! dear lady, i would not speak to a ghost for the world!” cry 
bianca. as she said those words they heard the case of the little 
chamber below matilda’s open. they listen attentively, and in a few 
minutes thought they heard a person sing, but could not distinguish the 
words. 

“this can be no evil spirit,” said the princess, in a low voice; “it is 
undoubted one of the family—open the window, and we shall know the 
voice.” 

“i dare not, indeed, madam,” said bianca. 

“thou art a very fool,” said matilda, opening the window gently herself. 
the noise the princess made was, however, heard by the person beneath, 
who stopped; and they conclude had heard the case open. 

“is anybody below?” said the princess; “if there is, speak.” 

“yes,” said an unknown voice. 

“who is it?” said matilda. 

“a stranger,” reply the voice. 

“what stranger?” said she; “and how didst thou come there at this unusual 
hour, when all the gate of the castle are locked?” 

“i am not here willingly,” answer the voice. “but pardon me, lady, if 
i have disturbed your rest; i knew not that i was overheard. sleep had 
forsaken me; i left a restless couch, and came to waste the irksome hour 
with gaze on the fair approach of morning, impatient to be dismiss 
from this castle.” 

“thy words and accents,” said matilda, “are of melancholy cast; if thou 
art unhappy, i pity thee. if poverty afflict thee, let me know it; i 
will mention thee to the princess, whose beneficent soul ever melt for 
the distressed, and she will relieve thee.” 

“i am indeed unhappy,” said the stranger; “and i know not what wealth is. 
but i do not complain of the lot which heaven has cast for me; i am young 
and healthy, and am not ashamed of owe my support to myself—yet think 
me not proud, or that i disdain your generous offers. i will remember 
you in my orisons, and will pray for blessing on your gracious self and 
your noble mistress—if i sigh, lady, it is for others, not for myself.” 

“now i have it, madam,” said bianca, whisper the princess; “this is 
certainly the young peasant; and, by my conscience, he is in love—well! 
this is a charming adventure!—do, madam, let us sift him. he do not 
know you, but take you for one of my lady hippolita’s women.” 

“art thou not ashamed, bianca!” said the princess. “what right have we 
to pry into the secret of this young man’s heart? he seem virtuous and 
frank, and tell us he is unhappy. are those circumstances that 
authorise us to make a property of him? how are we entitle to his 
confidence?” 

“lord, madam! how little you know of love!” reply bianca; “why, lovers 
have no pleasure equal to talk of their mistress.” 

“and would you have _me_ become a peasant’s confidante?” said the 
princess. 

“well, then, let me talk to him,” said bianca; “though i have the honour 
of being your highness’s maid of honour, i was not always so great. 
besides, if love level ranks, it raise them too; i have a respect for 
any young man in love.” 

“peace, simpleton!” said the princess. “though he said he was unhappy, 
it do not follow that he must be in love. think of all that has 
happen to-day, and tell me if there are no misfortune but what love 
causes.—stranger,” resume the princess, “if thy misfortune have not 
been occasion by thy own fault, and are within the compass of the 
princess hippolita’s power to redress, i will take upon me to answer that 
she will be thy protectress. when thou art dismiss from this castle, 
repair to holy father jerome, at the convent adjoin to the church of 
st. nicholas, and make thy story known to him, as far as thou thinkest 
meet. he will not fail to inform the princess, who is the mother of all 
that want her assistance. farewell; it is not seemly for me to hold 
farther converse with a man at this unwonted hour.” 

“may the saint guard thee, gracious lady!” reply the peasant; “but oh! 
if a poor and worthless stranger might presume to beg a minute’s audience 
farther; am i so happy? the case is not shut; might i venture to 
ask—” 

“speak quickly,” said matilda; “the morning dawn apace: should the 
labourer come into the field and perceive us—what wouldst thou ask?” 

“i know not how, i know not if i dare,” said the young stranger, 
faltering; “yet the humanity with which you have spoken to me 
emboldens—lady! dare i trust you?” 

“heavens!” said matilda, “what dost thou mean? with what wouldst thou 
trust me? speak boldly, if thy secret is fit to be entrust to a 
virtuous breast.” 

“i would ask,” said the peasant, recollect himself, “whether what i 
have heard from the domestic is true, that the princess is missing from 
the castle?” 

“what import it to thee to know?” reply matilda. “thy first words 
bespoke a prudent and becoming gravity. dost thou come hither to pry 
into the secret of manfred? adieu. i have been mistaken in thee.” 
saying these words she shut the case hastily, without give the 
young man time to reply. 

“i had act more wisely,” said the princess to bianca, with some 
sharpness, “if i had let thee converse with this peasant; his 
inquisitive seem of a piece with thy own.” 

“it is not fit for me to argue with your highness,” reply bianca; “but 
perhaps the question i should have put to him would have been more to 
the purpose than those you have been pleased to ask him.” 

“oh! no doubt,” said matilda; “you are a very discreet personage! may i 
know what _you_ would have ask him?” 

“a bystander often see more of the game than those that play,” answer 
bianca. “does your highness think, madam, that this question about my 
lady isabella was the result of mere curiosity? no, no, madam, there is 
more in it than you great folks are aware of. lopez told me that all the 
servant believe this young fellow contrived my lady isabella’s escape; 
now, pray, madam, observe you and i both know that my lady isabella never 
much fancy the prince your brother. well! he is kill just in a 
critical minute—i accuse nobody. a helmet falls from the moon—so, my 
lord, your father says; but lopez and all the servant say that this 
young spark is a magician, and stole it from alfonso’s tomb—” 

“have done with this rhapsody of impertinence,” said matilda. 

“nay, madam, as you please,” cry bianca; “yet it is very particular 
though, that my lady isabella should be missing the very same day, and 
that this young sorcerer should be found at the mouth of the trap-door. 
i accuse nobody; but if my young lord came honestly by his death—” 

“dare not on thy duty,” said matilda, “to breathe a suspicion on the 
purity of my dear isabella’s fame.” 

“purity, or not purity,” said bianca, “gone she is—a stranger is found 
that nobody knows; you question him yourself; he tell you he is in love, 
or unhappy, it is the same thing—nay, he own he was unhappy about 
others; and is anybody unhappy about another, unless they are in love 
with them? and at the very next word, he ask innocently, pour soul! if 
my lady isabella is missing.” 

“to be sure,” said matilda, “thy observations are not total without 
foundation—isabella’s flight amaze me. the curiosity of the stranger is 
very particular; yet isabella never conceal a thought from me.” 

“so she told you,” said bianca, “to fish out your secrets; but who knows, 
madam, but this stranger may be some prince in disguise? do, madam, let 
me open the window, and ask him a few questions.” 

“no,” reply matilda, “i will ask him myself, if he know aught of 
isabella; he is not worthy i should converse farther with him.” she was 
go to open the casement, when they heard the bell ring at the 
postern-gate of the castle, which is on the right hand of the tower, 
where matilda lay. this prevent the princess from renew the 
conversation with the stranger. 

after continue silent for some time, “i am persuaded,” said she to 
bianca, “that whatever be the cause of isabella’s flight it had no 
unworthy motive. if this stranger was accessory to it, she must be 
satisfy with his fidelity and worth. i observed, did not you, bianca? 
that his words were tincture with an uncommon infusion of piety. it was 
no ruffian’s speech; his phrase were becoming a man of gentle birth.” 

“i told you, madam,” said bianca, “that i was sure he was some prince in 
disguise.” 

“yet,” said matilda, “if he was privy to her escape, how will you account 
for his not accompany her in her flight? why expose himself 
unnecessary and rash to my father’s resentment?” 

“as for that, madam,” reply she, “if he could get from under the 
helmet, he will find ways of elude your father’s anger. i do not doubt 
but he has some talisman or other about him.” 

“you resolve everything into magic,” said matilda; “but a man who has any 
intercourse with infernal spirits, do not dare to make use of those 
tremendous and holy words which he uttered. didst thou not observe with 
what fervour he vow to remember _me_ to heaven in his prayers? yes; 
isabella was undoubted convinced of his piety.” 

“commend me to the piety of a young fellow and a damsel that consult to 
elope!” said bianca. “no, no, madam, my lady isabella is of another 
guess mould than you take her for. she use indeed to sigh and lift up 
her eyes in your company, because she know you are a saint; but when 
your back was turned—” 

“you wrong her,” said matilda; “isabella is no hypocrite; she has a due 
sense of devotion, but never affected a call she has not. on the 
contrary, she always combat my inclination for the cloister; and though 
i own the mystery she has made to me of her flight confound me; though 
it seem inconsistent with the friendship between us; i cannot forget the 
disinterested warmth with which she always oppose my taking the veil. 
she wish to see me married, though my dower would have been a loss to 
her and my brother’s children. for her sake i will believe well of this 
young peasant.” 

“then you do think there is some liking between them,” said bianca. 
while she was speaking, a servant came hasty into the chamber and told 
the princess that the lady isabella was found. 

“where?” said matilda. 

“she has taken sanctuary in st. nicholas’s church,” reply the servant; 
“father jerome has brought the news himself; he is below with his 
highness.” 

“where is my mother?” said matilda. 

“she is in her own chamber, madam, and has ask for you.” 

manfre had risen at the first dawn of light, and gone to hippolita’s 
apartment, to inquire if she knew aught of isabella. while he was 
questioning her, word was brought that jerome demand to speak with him. 
manfred, little suspect the cause of the friar’s arrival, and knowing 
he was employ by hippolita in her charities, ordered him to be 
admitted, intend to leave them together, while he pursue his search 
after isabella. 

“is your business with me or the princess?” said manfred. 

“with both,” reply the holy man. “the lady isabella—” 

“what of her?” interrupt manfred, eagerly. 

“is at st. nicholas’s altar,” reply jerome. 

“that is no business of hippolita,” said manfre with confusion; “let us 
retire to my chamber, father, and inform me how she came thither.” 

“no, my lord,” reply the good man, with an air of firm and 
authority, that daunt even the resolute manfred, who could not help 
revere the saint-like virtue of jerome; “my commission is to both, and 
with your highness’s good-liking, in the presence of both i shall deliver 
it; but first, my lord, i must interrogate the princess, whether she is 
acquaint with the cause of the lady isabella’s retirement from your 
castle.” 

“no, on my soul,” said hippolita; “does isabella charge me with being 
privy to it?” 

“father,” interrupt manfred, “i pay due reverence to your holy 
profession; but i am sovereign here, and will allow no meddle priest to 
interfere in the affair of my domestic. if you have aught to say attend 
me to my chamber; i do not use to let my wife be acquaint with the 
secret affair of my state; they are not within a woman’s province.” 

“my lord,” said the holy man, “i am no intruder into the secret of 
families. my office is to promote peace, to heal divisions, to preach 
repentance, and teach mankind to curb their headstrong passions. i 
forgive your highness’s uncharitable apostrophe; i know my duty, and am 
the minister of a mighty prince than manfred. hearken to him who 
speak through my organs.” 

manfre tremble with rage and shame. hippolita’s countenance declared 
her astonishment and impatience to know where this would end. her 
silence more strong spoke her observance of manfred. 

“the lady isabella,” resume jerome, “commends herself to both your 
highnesses; she thanks both for the kindness with which she has been 
treat in your castle: she deplore the loss of your son, and her own 
misfortune in not becoming the daughter of such wise and noble princes, 
whom she shall always respect as parents; she pray for uninterrupted 
union and felicity between you” [manfred’s colour changed]: “but as it is 
no long possible for her to be allied to you, she entreat your consent 
to remain in sanctuary, till she can learn news of her father, or, by the 
certainty of his death, be at liberty, with the approbation of her 
guardians, to dispose of herself in suitable marriage.” 

“i shall give no such consent,” said the prince, “but insist on her 
return to the castle without delay: i am answerable for her person to her 
guardians, and will not brook her being in any hand but my own.” 

“your highness will recollect whether that can any long be proper,” 
reply the friar. 

“i want no monitor,” said manfred, colouring; “isabella’s conduct leaves 
room for strange suspicions—and that young villain, who was at least the 
accomplice of her flight, if not the cause of it—” 

“the cause!” interrupt jerome; “was a _young_ man the cause?” 

“this is not to be borne!” cry manfred. “am i to be bearded in my own 
palace by an insolent monk? thou art privy, i guess, to their amours.” 

“i would pray to heaven to clear up your uncharitable surmises,” said 
jerome, “if your highness were not satisfy in your conscience how 
unjust you accuse me. i do pray to heaven to pardon that 
uncharitableness: and i implore your highness to leave the princess at 
peace in that holy place, where she is not liable to be disturbed by such 
vain and worldly fantasy as discourse of love from any man.” 

“cant not to me,” said manfred, “but return and bring the princess to her 
duty.” 

“it is my duty to prevent her return hither,” said jerome. “she is where 
orphan and virgin are safest from the snare and wiles of this world; 
and nothing but a parent’s authority shall take her thence.” 

“i am her parent,” cry manfred, “and demand her.” 

“she wish to have you for her parent,” said the friar; “but heaven that 
forbad that connection has for ever dissolve all tie betwixt you: and i 
announce to your highness—” 

“stop! audacious man,” said manfred, “and dread my displeasure.” 

“holy father,” said hippolita, “it is your office to be no respecter of 
persons: you must speak as your duty prescribes: but it is my duty to 
hear nothing that it please not my lord i should hear. attend the 
prince to his chamber. i will retire to my oratory, and pray to the 
blessed virgin to inspire you with her holy counsels, and to restore the 
heart of my gracious lord to its wonted peace and gentleness.” 

“excellent woman!” said the friar. “my lord, i attend your pleasure.” 

manfred, accompany by the friar, pass to his own apartment, where 
shut the door, “i perceive, father,” said he, “that isabella has 
acquaint you with my purpose. now hear my resolve, and obey. reason 
of state, most urgent reasons, my own and the safety of my people, demand 
that i should have a son. it is in vain to expect an heir from 
hippolita. i have made choice of isabella. you must bring her back; and 
you must do more. i know the influence you have with hippolita: her 
conscience is in your hands. she is, i allow, a faultless woman: her 
soul is set on heaven, and scorn the little grandeur of this world: you 
can withdraw her from it entirely. persuade her to consent to the 
dissolution of our marriage, and to retire into a monastery—she shall 
endow one if she will; and she shall have the means of being as liberal 
to your order as she or you can wish. thus you will divert the 
calamity that are hanging over our heads, and have the merit of saying 
the principality of otranto from destruction. you are a prudent man, and 
though the warmth of my temper betray me into some unbecome 
expressions, i honour your virtue, and wish to be indebted to you for the 
repose of my life and the preservation of my family.” 

“the will of heaven be done!” said the friar. “i am but its worthless 
instrument. it make use of my tongue to tell thee, prince, of thy 
unwarrantable designs. the injury of the virtuous hippolita have 
mount to the throne of pity. by me thou art reprimand for thy 
adulterous intention of repudiate her: by me thou art warn not to 
pursue the incestuous design on thy contract daughter. heaven that 
deliver her from thy fury, when the judgment so recently fallen on thy 
house ought to have inspired thee with other thoughts, will continue to 
watch over her. even i, a poor and despise friar, am able to protect 
her from thy violence—i, sinner as i am, and uncharitable revile by your 
highness as an accomplice of i know not what amours, scorn the 
allurement with which it has pleased thee to tempt mine honesty. i love 
my order; i honour devout souls; i respect the piety of thy princess—but 
i will not betray the confidence she repose in me, nor serve even the 
cause of religion by foul and sinful compliances—but forsooth! the 
welfare of the state depend on your highness have a son! heaven mock 
the short-sighted view of man. but yester-morn, whose house was so 
great, so flourish as manfred’s?—where is young conrad now?—my lord, i 
respect your tears—but i mean not to check them—let them flow, prince! 
they will weigh more with heaven toward the welfare of thy subjects, than 
a marriage, which, found on lust or policy, could never prosper. the 
sceptre, which pass from the race of alfonso to thine, cannot be 
preserve by a match which the church will never allow. if it is the 
will of the most high that manfred’s name must perish, resign yourself, 
my lord, to its decrees; and thus deserve a crown that can never pass 
away. come, my lord; i like this sorrow—let us return to the princess: 
she is not apprise of your cruel intentions; nor did i mean more than to 
alarm you. you saw with what gentle patience, with what effort of love, 
she heard, she reject hearing, the extent of your guilt. i know she 
long to fold you in her arms, and assure you of her unalterable 
affection.” 

“father,” said the prince, “you mistake my compunction: true, i honour 
hippolita’s virtues; i think her a saint; and wish it were for my soul’s 
health to tie fast the knot that has united us—but alas! father, you 
know not the bitterest of my pangs! it is some time that i have had 
scruple on the legality of our union: hippolita is related to me in the 
fourth degree—it is true, we had a dispensation: but i have been informed 
that she had also been contract to another. this it is that sit heavy 
at my heart: to this state of unlawful wedlock i impute the visitation 
that has fallen on me in the death of conrad!—ease my conscience of this 
burden: dissolve our marriage, and accomplish the work of godliness—which 
your divine exhortation have commence in my soul.” 

how cutting was the anguish which the good man felt, when he perceive 
this turn in the wily prince! he tremble for hippolita, whose ruin he 
saw was determined; and he fear if manfre had no hope of recover 
isabella, that his impatience for a son would direct him to some other 
object, who might not be equally proof against the temptation of 
manfred’s rank. for some time the holy man remain absorb in thought. 
at length, conceive some hope from delay, he thought the wisest 
conduct would be to prevent the prince from despairing of recover 
isabella. her the friar knew he could dispose, from her affection to 
hippolita, and from the aversion she had express to him for manfred’s 
addresses, to second his views, till the censure of the church could be 
fulminate against a divorce. with this intention, as if struck with the 
prince’s scruples, he at length said: 

“my lord, i have been ponder on what your highness has said; and if in 
truth it is delicacy of conscience that is the real motive of your 
repugnance to your virtuous lady, far be it from me to endeavour to 
harden your heart. the church is an indulgent mother: unfold your grief 
to her: she alone can administer comfort to your soul, either by 
satisfying your conscience, or upon examination of your scruples, by 
setting you at liberty, and indulge you in the lawful means of 
continue your lineage. in the latter case, if the lady isabella can be 
brought to consent—” 

manfred, who conclude that he had either over-reached the good man, or 
that his first warmth had been but a tribute paid to appearance, was 
overjoyed at this sudden turn, and repeated the most magnificent 
promises, if he should succeed by the friar’s mediation. the 
well-meaning priest suffer him to deceive himself, fully determined to 
traverse his views, instead of second them. 

“since we now understand one another,” resume the prince, “i expect, 
father, that you satisfy me in one point. who is the youth that i found 
in the vault? he must have been privy to isabella’s flight: tell me 
truly, is he her lover? or is he an agent for another’s passion? i have 
often suspect isabella’s indifference to my son: a thousand 
circumstances crowd on my mind that confirm that suspicion. she herself 
was so conscious of it, that while i discourse her in the gallery, she 
outran my suspicious, and endeavour to justify herself from cool to 
conrad.” 

the friar, who knew nothing of the youth, but what he had learnt 
occasional from the princess, ignorant what was become of him, and not 
sufficient reflect on the impetuos of manfred’s temper, conceive 
that it might not be amiss to sow the seed of jealousy in his mind: they 
might be turn to some use hereafter, either by prejudice the prince 
against isabella, if he persist in that union or by divert his 
attention to a wrong scent, and employ his thought on a visionary 
intrigue, prevent his engaging in any new pursuit. with this unhappy 
policy, he answer in a manner to confirm manfre in the belief of some 
connection between isabella and the youth. the prince, whose passion 
want little fuel to throw them into a blaze, fell into a rage at the 
idea of what the friar suggested. 

“i will fathom to the bottom of this intrigue,” cry he; and quit 
jerome abruptly, with a command to remain there till his return, he 
hasten to the great hall of the castle, and ordered the peasant to be 
brought before him. 

“thou harden young impostor!” said the prince, as soon as he saw the 
youth; “what become of thy boast veracity now? it was providence, was 
it, and the light of the moon, that discover the lock of the trap-door 
to thee? tell me, audacious boy, who thou art, and how long thou hast 
been acquaint with the princess—and take care to answer with less 
equivocation than thou didst last night, or torture shall wring the 
truth from thee.” 

the young man, perceive that his share in the flight of the princess 
was discovered, and conclude that anything he should say could no 
long be of any service or detriment to her, replied— 

“i am no impostor, my lord, nor have i deserve opprobrious language. i 
answer to every question your highness put to me last night with the 
same veracity that i shall speak now: and that will not be from fear of 
your tortures, but because my soul abhor a falsehood. please to repeat 
your questions, my lord; i am ready to give you all the satisfaction in 
my power.” 

“you know my questions,” reply the prince, “and only want time to 
prepare an evasion. speak directly; who art thou? and how long hast thou 
been known to the princess?” 

“i am a labourer at the next village,” said the peasant; “my name is 
theodore. the princess found me in the vault last night: before that 
hour i never was in her presence.” 

“i may believe as much or as little as i please of this,” said manfred; 
“but i will hear thy own story before i examine into the truth of it. 
tell me, what reason did the princess give thee for making her escape? 
thy life depend on thy answer.” 

“she told me,” reply theodore, “that she was on the brink of 
destruction, and that if she could not escape from the castle, she was in 
danger in a few moments of being made miserable for ever.” 

“and on this slight foundation, on a silly girl’s report,” said manfred, 
“thou didst hazard my displeasure?” 

“i fear no man’s displeasure,” said theodore, “when a woman in distress 
put herself under my protection.” 

during this examination, matilda was go to the apartment of hippolita. 
at the upper end of the hall, where manfre sat, was a board gallery 
with lattice windows, through which matilda and bianca were to pass. 
hearing her father’s voice, and seeing the servant assemble round him, 
she stop to learn the occasion. the prisoner soon drew her attention: 
the steady and compose manner in which he answered, and the gallantry of 
his last reply, which were the first words she heard distinctly, 
interested her in his flavour. his person was noble, handsome, and 
commanding, even in that situation: but his countenance soon engross 
her whole care. 

“heavens! bianca,” said the princess softly, “do i dream? or is not that 
youth the exact resemblance of alfonso’s picture in the gallery?” 

she could say no more, for her father’s voice grew loud at every word. 

“this bravado,” said he, “surpasses all thy former insolence. thou shalt 
experience the wrath with which thou darest to trifle. seize him,” 
continue manfred, “and bind him—the first news the princess hear of her 
champion shall be, that he has lost his head for her sake.” 

“the injustice of which thou art guilty towards me,” said theodore, 
“convinces me that i have done a good deed in deliver the princess 
from thy tyranny. may she be happy, whatever become of me!” 

“this is a lover!” cry manfre in a rage: “a peasant within sight of 
death is not animate by such sentiments. tell me, tell me, rash boy, 
who thou art, or the rack shall force thy secret from thee.” 

“thou hast threaten me with death already,” said the youth, “for the 
truth i have told thee: if that is all the encouragement i am to expect 
for sincerity, i am not tempt to indulge thy vain curiosity farther.” 

“then thou wilt not speak?” said manfred. 

“i will not,” reply he. 

“bear him away into the courtyard,” said manfred; “i will see his head 
this instant sever from his body.” 

matilda faint at hearing those words. bianca shrieked, and cried— 

“help! help! the princess is dead!” manfre start at this ejaculation, 
and demand what was the matter! the young peasant, who heard it too, 
was struck with horror, and ask eager the same question; but manfre 
ordered him to be hurried into the court, and kept there for execution, 
till he had informed himself of the cause of bianca’s shrieks. when he 
learned the meaning, he treat it as a womanish panic, and order 
matilda to be carry to her apartment, he rush into the court, and 
calling for one of his guards, bade theodore kneel down, and prepare to 
receive the fatal blow. 

the undaunted youth received the bitter sentence with a resignation that 
touched every heart but manfred’s. he wish earnest to know the 
meaning of the words he had heard relate to the princess; but fear 
to exasperate the tyrant more against her, he desisted. the only boon he 
deign to ask was, that he might be permit to have a confessor, and 
make his peace with heaven. manfred, who hope by the confessor’s means 
to come at the youth’s history, readily grant his request; and being 
convinced that father jerome was now in his interest, he ordered him to 
be call and shrive the prisoner. the holy man, who had little foreseen 
the catastrophe that his imprudence occasioned, fell on his knee to the 
prince, and adjure him in the most solemn manner not to shed innocent 
blood. he accused himself in the bitterest terms for his indiscretion, 
endeavour to disculpate the youth, and left no method untry to soften 
the tyrant’s rage. manfred, more incense than appease by jerome’s 
intercession, whose retraction now made him suspect he had been impose 
upon by both, command the friar to do his duty, telling him he would 
not allow the prisoner many minutes for confession. 

“nor do i ask many, my lord,” said the unhappy young man. “my sins, 
thank heaven, have not been numerous; nor exceed what might be expect 
at my years. dry your tears, good father, and let us despatch. this is 
a bad world; nor have i had cause to leave it with regret.” 

“oh wretched youth!” said jerome; “how canst thou bear the sight of me 
with patience? i am thy murderer! it is i have brought this dismal hour 
upon thee!” 

“i forgive thee from my soul,” said the youth, “as i hope heaven will 
pardon me. hear my confession, father; and give me thy blessing.” 

“how can i prepare thee for thy passage as i ought?” said jerome. “thou 
canst not be save without pardon thy foes—and canst thou forgive that 
impious man there?” 

“i can,” said theodore; “i do.” 

“and do not this touch thee, cruel prince?” said the friar. 

“i sent for thee to confess him,” said manfred, sternly; “not to plead 
for him. thou didst first incense me against him—his blood be upon thy 
head!” 

“it will! it will!” said the good man, in an agony of sorrow. “thou and 
i must never hope to go where this blessed youth is going!” 

“despatch!” said manfred; “i am no more to be move by the whine of 
priest than by the shriek of women.” 

“what!” said the youth; “is it possible that my fate could have 
occasion what i heard! is the princess then again in thy power?” 

“thou dost but remember me of my wrath,” said manfred. “prepare thee, 
for this moment is thy last.” 

the youth, who felt his indignation rise, and who was touched with the 
sorrow which he saw he had infuse into all the spectators, as well as 
into the friar, suppress his emotions, and putt off his doublet, and 
unbuttoning, his collar, knelt down to his prayers. as he stooped, his 
shirt slip down below his shoulder, and discover the mark of a 
bloody arrow. 

“gracious heaven!” cry the holy man, starting; “what do i see? it is 
my child! my theodore!” 

the passion that ensue must be conceived; they cannot be painted. the 
tear of the assistant were suspend by wonder, rather than stop by 
joy. they seem to inquire in the eyes of their lord what they ought to 
feel. surprise, doubt, tenderness, respect, succeed each other in the 
countenance of the youth. he received with modest submission the 
effusion of the old man’s tear and embraces. yet afraid of give a 
loose to hope, and suspect from what had pass the inflexible of 
manfred’s temper, he cast a glance towards the prince, as if to say, 
canst thou be unmoved at such a scene as this? 

manfred’s heart was capable of being touched. he forgot his anger in his 
astonishment; yet his pride forbad his own himself affected. he even 
doubt whether this discovery was not a contrivance of the friar to save 
the youth. 

“what may this mean?” said he. “how can he be thy son? is it consistent 
with thy profession or reputed sanctity to avow a peasant’s offspring for 
the fruit of thy irregular amours!” 

“oh, god!” said the holy man, “dost thou question his being mine? could 
i feel the anguish i do if i were not his father? spare him! good 
prince! spare him! and revile me as thou pleasest.” 

“spare him! spare him!” cry the attendants; “for this good man’s sake!” 

“peace!” said manfred, sternly. “i must know more ere i am disposed to 
pardon. a saint’s bastard may be no saint himself.” 

“injurious lord!” said theodore, “add not insult to cruelty. if i am 
this venerable man’s son, though no prince, as thou art, know the blood 
that flow in my veins—” 

“yes,” said the friar, interrupt him, “his blood is noble; nor is he 
that abject thing, my lord, you speak him. he is my lawful son, and 
sici can boast of few house more ancient than that of falconara. but 
alas! my lord, what is blood! what is nobility! we are all reptiles, 
miserable, sinful creatures. it is piety alone that can distinguish us 
from the dust whence we sprung, and whither we must return.” 

“truce to your sermon,” said manfred; “you forget you are no long friar 
jerome, but the count of falconara. let me know your history; you will 
have time to moralise hereafter, if you should not happen to obtain the 
grace of that sturdy criminal there.” 

“mother of god!” said the friar, “is it possible my lord can refuse a 
father the life of his only, his long-lost, child! trample me, my lord, 
scorn, afflict me, accept my life for his, but spare my son!” 

“thou canst feel, then,” said manfred, “what it is to lose an only son! 
a little hour ago thou didst preach up resignation to me: _my_ house, if 
fate so pleased, must perish—but the count of falconara—” 

“alas! my lord,” said jerome, “i confess i have offended; but aggravate 
not an old man’s sufferings! i boast not of my family, nor think of such 
vanities—it is nature, that plead for this boy; it is the memory of the 
dear woman that bore him. is she, theodore, is she dead?” 

“her soul has long been with the blessed,” said theodore. 

“oh! how?” cry jerome, “tell me—no—she is happy! thou art all my care 
now!—most dread lord! will you—will you grant me my poor boy’s life?” 

“return to thy convent,” answer manfred; “conduct the princess hither; 
obey me in what else thou knowest; and i promise thee the life of thy 
son.” 

“oh! my lord,” said jerome, “is my honesty the price i must pay for this 
dear youth’s safety?” 

“for me!” cry theodore. “let me die a thousand deaths, rather than 
stain thy conscience. what is it the tyrant would exact of thee? is the 
princess still safe from his power? protect her, thou venerable old man; 
and let all the weight of his wrath fall on me.” 

jerome endeavour to check the impetuos of the youth; and ere manfre 
could reply, the trample of horse was heard, and a brazen trumpet, 
which hung without the gate of the castle, was sudden sounded. at the 
same instant the sable plume on the enchant helmet, which still 
remain at the other end of the court, were tempestuous agitated, and 
nod thrice, as if bowed by some invisible wearer. 




chapter iii. 


manfred’s heart misgave him when he beheld the plumage on the miraculous 
casque shaken in concert with the sound of the brazen trumpet. 

“father!” said he to jerome, whom he now cease to treat as count of 
falconara, “what mean these portents? if i have offended—” the plume 
were shaken with greater violence than before. 

“unhappy prince that i am,” cry manfred. “holy father! will you not 
assist me with your prayers?” 

“my lord,” reply jerome, “heaven is no doubt displease with your 
mockery of its servants. submit yourself to the church; and cease to 
persecute her ministers. dismiss this innocent youth; and learn to 
respect the holy character i wear. heaven will not be trifle with: you 
see—” the trumpet sound again. 

“i acknowledge i have been too hasty,” said manfred. “father, do you go 
to the wicket, and demand who is at the gate.” 

“do you grant me the life of theodore?” reply the friar. 

“i do,” said manfred; “but inquire who is without!” 

jerome, fall on the neck of his son, discharge a flood of tears, that 
spoke the fulness of his soul. 

“you promise to go to the gate,” said manfred. 

“i thought,” reply the friar, “your highness would excuse my thank 
you first in this tribute of my heart.” 

“go, dearest sir,” said theodore; “obey the prince. i do not deserve 
that you should delay his satisfaction for me.” 

jerome, inquiring who was without, was answered, “a herald.” 

“from whom?” said he. 

“from the knight of the gigantic sabre,” said the herald; “and i must 
speak with the usurp of otranto.” 

jerome return to the prince, and did not fail to repeat the message in 
the very words it had been uttered. the first sound struck manfre with 
terror; but when he heard himself style usurper, his rage rekindled, and 
all his courage revived. 

“usurper!—insolent villain!” cry he; “who dare to question my title? 
retire, father; this is no business for monks: i will meet this 
presumptuous man myself. go to your convent and prepare the princess’s 
return. your son shall be a hostage for your fidelity: his life depend 
on your obedience.” 

“good heaven! my lord,” cry jerome, “your highness did but this instant 
freely pardon my child—have you so soon forgot the interposition of 
heaven?” 

“heaven,” reply manfred, “does not send herald to question the title 
of a lawful prince. i doubt whether it even notify its will through 
friars—but that is your affair, not mine. at present you know my 
pleasure; and it is not a saucy herald that shall save your son, if you 
do not return with the princess.” 

it was in vain for the holy man to reply. manfre command him to be 
conduct to the postern-gate, and shut out from the castle. and he 
ordered some of his attendant to carry theodore to the top of the black 
tower, and guard him strictly; scarce permit the father and son to 
exchange a hasty embrace at parting. he then withdrew to the hall, and 
seating himself in princely state, ordered the herald to be admitted to 
his presence. 

“well! thou insolent!” said the prince, “what wouldst thou with me?” 

“i come,” reply he, “to thee, manfred, usurp of the principality of 
otranto, from the renowned and invincible knight, the knight of the 
gigantic sabre: in the name of his lord, frederic, marquis of vicenza, he 
demand the lady isabella, daughter of that prince, whom thou hast base 
and traitorous got into thy power, by bribe her false guardian 
during his absence; and he require thee to resign the principality of 
otranto, which thou hast usurp from the said lord frederic, the nearest 
of blood to the last rightful lord, alfonso the good. if thou dost not 
instantly comply with these just demands, he defy thee to single combat 
to the last extremity.” and so saying the herald cast down his warder. 

“and where is this braggart who send thee?” said manfred. 

“at the distance of a league,” said the herald: “he come to make good 
his lord’s claim against thee, as he is a true knight, and thou an 
usurp and ravisher.” 

injurious as this challenge was, manfre reflect that it was not his 
interest to provoke the marquis. he knew how well found the claim of 
frederic was; nor was this the first time he had heard of it. frederic’s 
ancestor had assume the style of prince of otranto, from the death of 
alfonso the good without issue; but manfred, his father, and grandfather, 
had been too powerful for the house of vicenza to dispossess them. 
frederic, a martial and amorous young prince, had married a beautiful 
young lady, of whom he was enamoured, and who had die in childbe of 
isabella. her death affected him so much that he had taken the cross and 
gone to the holy land, where he was wound in an engagement against the 
infidels, made prisoner, and report to be dead. when the news reach 
manfred’s ears, he bribe the guardian of the lady isabella to deliver 
her up to him as a bride for his son conrad, by which alliance he had 
propose to unite the claim of the two houses. this motive, on conrad’s 
death, had co-operated to make him so sudden resolve on espouse her 
himself; and the same reflection determined him now to endeavour at 
obtain the consent of frederic to this marriage. a like policy 
inspired him with the thought of inviting frederic’s champion into the 
castle, lest he should be informed of isabella’s flight, which he 
strict enjoin his domestic not to disclose to any of the knight’s 
retinue. 

“herald,” said manfred, as soon as he had digest these reflections, 
“return to thy master, and tell him, ere we liquidate our difference by 
the sword, manfre would hold some converse with him. bid him welcome to 
my castle, where by my faith, as i am a true knight, he shall have 
courteous reception, and full security for himself and followers. if we 
cannot adjust our quarrel by amicable means, i swear he shall depart in 
safety, and shall have full satisfaction according to the law of arms: 
so help me god and his holy trinity!” 

the herald made three obeisance and retired. 

during this interview jerome’s mind was agitate by a thousand contrary 
passions. he tremble for the life of his son, and his first thought was 
to persuade isabella to return to the castle. yet he was scarce less 
alarm at the thought of her union with manfred. he dread hippolita’s 
unbounded submission to the will of her lord; and though he did not doubt 
but he could alarm her piety not to consent to a divorce, if he could get 
access to her; yet should manfre discover that the obstruction came from 
him, it might be equally fatal to theodore. he was impatient to know 
whence came the herald, who with so little management had question the 
title of manfred: yet he did not dare absent himself from the convent, 
lest isabella should leave it, and her flight be impute to him. he 
return disconsolate to the monastery, uncertain on what conduct to 
resolve. a monk, who met him in the porch and observe his melancholy 
air, said— 

“alas! brother, is it then true that we have lost our excellent princess 
hippolita?” 

the holy man started, and cried, “what meanest thou, brother? i come 
this instant from the castle, and left her in perfect health.” 

“martelli,” reply the other friar, “passed by the convent but a quarter 
of an hour ago on his way from the castle, and report that her highness 
was dead. all our brethren are gone to the chapel to pray for her happy 
transit to a better life, and will me to wait thy arrival. they know 
thy holy attachment to that good lady, and are anxious for the affliction 
it will cause in thee—indeed we have all reason to weep; she was a mother 
to our house. but this life is but a pilgrimage; we must not murmur—we 
shall all follow her! may our end be like hers!” 

“good brother, thou dreamest,” said jerome. “i tell thee i come from the 
castle, and left the princess well. where is the lady isabella?” 

“poor gentlewoman!” reply the friar; “i told her the sad news, and 
offer her spiritual comfort. i remind her of the transitory 
condition of mortality, and advise her to take the veil: i quote the 
example of the holy princess sanchia of arragon.” 

“thy zeal was laudable,” said jerome, impatiently; “but at present it was 
unnecessary: hippolita is well—at least i trust in the lord she is; i 
heard nothing to the contrary—yet, methinks, the prince’s 
earnestness—well, brother, but where is the lady isabella?” 

“i know not,” said the friar; “she wept much, and said she would retire 
to her chamber.” 

jerome left his comrade abruptly, and hasten to the princess, but she 
was not in her chamber. he inquire of the domestic of the convent, but 
could learn no news of her. he search in vain throughout the monastery 
and the church, and despatch messenger round the neighbourhood, to get 
intelligence if she had been seen; but to no purpose. nothing could 
equal the good man’s perplexity. he judge that isabella, suspect 
manfre of have precipitate his wife’s death, had taken the alarm, and 
withdrawn herself to some more secret place of concealment. this new 
flight would probably carry the prince’s fury to the height. the report 
of hippolita’s death, though it seem almost incredible, increase his 
consternation; and though isabella’s escape bespoke her aversion of 
manfre for a husband, jerome could feel no comfort from it, while it 
endanger the life of his son. he determined to return to the castle, 
and made several of his brethren accompany him to attest his innocence to 
manfred, and, if necessary, join their intercession with his for 
theodore. 

the prince, in the meantime, had pass into the court, and ordered the 
gate of the castle to be flung open for the reception of the stranger 
knight and his train. in a few minutes the cavalcade arrived. first 
came two harbinger with wands. next a herald, follow by two page and 
two trumpets. then a hundred foot-guards. these were attend by as 
many horse. after them fifty footmen, clothe in scarlet and black, the 
colours of the knight. then a led horse. two herald on each side of a 
gentleman on horseback bearing a banner with the arms of vicenza and 
otranto quarterly—a circumstance that much offend manfred—but he 
stifle his resentment. two more pages. the knight’s confessor telling 
his beads. fifty more footmen clad as before. two knight habit in 
complete armour, their beaver down, comrade to the principal knight. 
the squire of the two knights, carry their shield and devices. the 
knight’s own squire. a hundred gentlemen bearing an enormous sword, and 
seeming to faint under the weight of it. the knight himself on a 
chestnut steed, in complete armour, his lance in the rest, his face 
entire conceal by his vizor, which was surmount by a large plume of 
scarlet and black feathers. fifty foot-guards with drum and trumpet 
closed the procession, which wheel off to the right and left to make 
room for the principal knight. 

as soon as he approach the gate he stopped; and the herald advancing, 
read again the words of the challenge. manfred’s eyes were fixed on the 
gigantic sword, and he scarce seem to attend to the cartel: but his 
attention was soon divert by a tempest of wind that rose behind him. 
he turn and beheld the plume of the enchant helmet agitate in the 
same extraordinary manner as before. it require intrepid like 
manfred’s not to sink under a concurrence of circumstances that seem to 
announce his fate. yet scorn in the presence of stranger to betray 
the courage he had always manifested, he said boldly— 

“sir knight, whoever thou art, i bid thee welcome. if thou art of mortal 
mould, thy valour shall meet its equal: and if thou art a true knight, 
thou wilt scorn to employ sorcery to carry thy point. be these omen 
from heaven or hell, manfre trust to the righteous of his cause and 
to the aid of st. nicholas, who has ever protect his house. alight, 
sir knight, and repose thyself. to-morrow thou shalt have a fair field, 
and heaven befriend the just side!” 

the knight made no reply, but dismounting, was conduct by manfre to 
the great hall of the castle. as they traverse the court, the knight 
stop to gaze on the miraculous casque; and kneel down, seem to 
pray inward for some minutes. rising, he made a sign to the prince to 
lead on. as soon as they enter the hall, manfre propose to the 
stranger to disarm, but the knight shook his head in token of refusal. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, “this is not courteous, but by my good faith 
i will not cross thee, nor shalt thou have cause to complain of the 
prince of otranto. no treachery is design on my part; i hope none is 
intended on thine; here take my gage” (giving him his ring): “your 
friends and you shall enjoy the law of hospitality. rest here until 
refreshments are brought. i will but give orders for the accommodation 
of your train, and return to you.” the three knight bowed as accept 
his courtesy. manfre direct the stranger’s retinue to be conduct to 
an adjacent hospital, found by the princess hippolita for the reception 
of pilgrims. as they made the circuit of the court to return towards the 
gate, the gigantic sword burst from the supporters, and fall to the 
ground opposite to the helmet, remain immovable. manfred, almost 
harden to preternatural appearances, surmount the shock of this new 
prodigy; and return to the hall, where by this time the feast was 
ready, he invite his silent guest to take their places. manfred, 
however ill his heart was at ease, endeavour to inspire the company 
with mirth. he put several question to them, but was answer only by 
signs. they raise their vizor but sufficient to feed themselves, and 
that sparingly. 

“sirs” said the prince, “ye are the first guest i ever treat within 
these wall who scorn to hold any intercourse with me: nor has it oft 
been customary, i ween, for prince to hazard their state and dignity 
against stranger and mutes. you say you come in the name of frederic of 
vicenza; i have ever heard that he was a gallant and courteous knight; 
nor would he, i am bold to say, think it beneath him to mix in social 
converse with a prince that is his equal, and not unknown by deed in 
arms. still ye are silent—well! be it as it may—by the law of 
hospitality and chivalry ye are master under this roof: ye shall do your 
pleasure. but come, give me a goblet of wine; ye will not refuse to 
pledge me to the health of your fair mistresses.” 

the principal knight sigh and cross himself, and was rising from the 
board. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, “what i said was but in sport. i shall 
constrain you in nothing: use your good liking. since mirth is not your 
mood, let us be sad. business may hit your fancies better. let us 
withdraw, and hear if what i have to unfold may be better relish than 
the vain effort i have made for your pastime.” 

manfre then conduct the three knight into an inner chamber, shut the 
door, and inviting them to be seated, began thus, address himself to 
the chief personage:— 

“you come, sir knight, as i understand, in the name of the marquis of 
vicenza, to re-demand the lady isabella, his daughter, who has been 
contract in the face of holy church to my son, by the consent of her 
legal guardians; and to require me to resign my dominion to your lord, 
who give himself for the nearest of blood to prince alfonso, whose soul 
god rest! i shall speak to the latter article of your demand first. 
you must know, your lord knows, that i enjoy the principality of otranto 
from my father, don manuel, as he received it from his father, don 
ricardo. alfonso, their predecessor, die childless in the holy land, 
bequeath his estate to my grandfather, don ricardo, in consideration 
of his faithful services.” the stranger shook his head. 

“sir knight,” said manfred, warmly, “ricardo was a valiant and upright 
man; he was a pious man; witness his munificent foundation of the 
adjoin church and two convents. he was peculiarly patronise by st. 
nicholas—my grandfather was incapable—i say, sir, don ricardo was 
incapable—excuse me, your interrupt has disorder me. i venerate the 
memory of my grandfather. well, sirs, he held this estate; he held it by 
his good sword and by the favour of st. nicholas—so did my father; and 
so, sirs, will i, come what come will. but frederic, your lord, is 
nearest in blood. i have consent to put my title to the issue of the 
sword. do that imply a vicious title? i might have asked, where is 
frederic your lord? report speak him dead in captivity. you say, your 
action say, he lives—i question it not—i might, sirs, i might—but i do 
not. other prince would bid frederic take his inheritance by force, if 
he can: they would not stake their dignity on a single combat: they would 
not submit it to the decision of unknown mutes!—pardon me, gentlemen, i 
am too warm: but suppose yourself in my situation: as ye are stout 
knights, would it not move your choler to have your own and the honour of 
your ancestor call in question?” 

“but to the point. ye require me to deliver up the lady isabella. sirs, 
i must ask if ye are authorise to receive her?” 

the knight nodded. 

“receive her,” continue manfred; “well, you are authorise to receive 
her, but, gentle knight, may i ask if you have full powers?” 

the knight nodded. 

“’tis well,” said manfred; “then hear what i have to offer. ye see, 
gentlemen, before you, the most unhappy of men!” (he began to weep); 
“afford me your compassion; i am entitle to it, indeed i am. know, i 
have lost my only hope, my joy, the support of my house—conrad die 
yester morning.” 

the knight discover sign of surprise. 

“yes, sirs, fate has disposed of my son. isabella is at liberty.” 

“do you then restore her?” cry the chief knight, break silence. 

“afford me your patience,” said manfred. “i rejoice to find, by this 
testimony of your goodwill, that this matter may be adjust without 
blood. it is no interest of mine dictate what little i have farther to 
say. ye behold in me a man disgust with the world: the loss of my son 
has wean me from earthly cares. power and great have no long any 
charm in my eyes. i wish to transmit the sceptre i had received from 
my ancestor with honour to my son—but that is over! life itself is so 
indifferent to me, that i accept your defiance with joy. a good knight 
cannot go to the grave with more satisfaction than when fall in his 
vocation: whatever is the will of heaven, i submit; for alas! sirs, i am 
a man of many sorrows. manfre is no object of envy, but no doubt you 
are acquaint with my story.” 

the knight made sign of ignorance, and seem curious to have manfre 
proceed. 

“is it possible, sirs,” continue the prince, “that my story should be a 
secret to you? have you heard nothing relate to me and the princess 
hippolita?” 

they shook their heads. 

“no! thus, then, sirs, it is. you think me ambitious: ambition, alas! 
is compose of more rugged materials. if i were ambitious, i should not 
for so many years have been a prey to all the hell of conscientious 
scruples. but i weary your patience: i will be brief. know, then, that 
i have long been trouble in mind on my union with the princess 
hippolita. oh! sirs, if ye were acquaint with that excellent woman! if 
ye knew that i adore her like a mistress, and cherish her as a friend—but 
man was not born for perfect happiness! she shares my scruples, and with 
her consent i have brought this matter before the church, for we are 
related within the forbidden degrees. i expect every hour the definitive 
sentence that must separate us for ever—i am sure you feel for me—i see 
you do—pardon these tears!” 

the knight gaze on each other, wonder where this would end. 

manfre continued— 

“the death of my son betide while my soul was under this anxiety, i 
thought of nothing but resign my dominions, and retiring for ever from 
the sight of mankind. my only difficulty was to fix on a successor, who 
would be tender of my people, and to dispose of the lady isabella, who is 
dear to me as my own blood. i was willing to restore the line of 
alfonso, even in his most distant kindred. and though, pardon me, i am 
satisfy it was his will that ricardo’s lineage should take place of his 
own relations; yet where was i to search for those relations? i knew of 
none but frederic, your lord; he was a captive to the infidels, or dead; 
and were he living, and at home, would he quit the flourish state of 
vicenza for the inconsiderable principality of otranto? if he would not, 
could i bear the thought of seeing a hard, unfeeling, viceroy set over my 
poor faithful people? for, sirs, i love my people, and thank heaven am 
beloved by them. but ye will ask whither tend this long discourse? 
briefly, then, thus, sirs. heaven in your arrival seem to point out a 
remedy for these difficulty and my misfortunes. the lady isabella is 
at liberty; i shall soon be so. i would submit to anything for the good 
of my people. were it not the best, the only way to extinguish the feud 
between our families, if i was to take the lady isabella to wife? you 
start. but though hippolita’s virtue will ever be dear to me, a prince 
must not consider himself; he is born for his people.” a servant at that 
instant enter the chamber apprise manfre that jerome and several of 
his brethren demand immediate access to him. 

the prince, provoke at this interruption, and fear that the friar 
would discover to the stranger that isabella had taken sanctuary, was 
go to forbid jerome’s entrance. but recollect that he was 
certainly arrive to notify the princess’s return, manfre began to 
excuse himself to the knight for leave them for a few moments, but was 
prevent by the arrival of the friars. manfre angry reprimand them 
for their intrusion, and would have forced them back from the chamber; 
but jerome was too much agitate to be repulsed. he declared aloud the 
flight of isabella, with protestation of his own innocence. 

manfred, distracted at the news, and not less at its coming to the 
knowledge of the strangers, utter nothing but incoherent sentences, now 
upbraid the friar, now apologise to the knights, earnest to know 
what was become of isabella, yet equally afraid of their knowing; 
impatient to pursue her, yet dread to have them join in the pursuit. 
he offer to despatch messenger in quest of her, but the chief knight, 
no long keeping silence, reproach manfre in bitter terms for his 
dark and ambiguous dealing, and demand the cause of isabella’s first 
absence from the castle. manfred, casting a stern look at jerome, 
imply a command of silence, pretended that on conrad’s death he had 
placed her in sanctuary until he could determine how to dispose of her. 
jerome, who tremble for his son’s life, did not dare contradict this 
falsehood, but one of his brethren, not under the same anxiety, declared 
frankly that she had flee to their church in the preceding night. the 
prince in vain endeavour to stop this discovery, which overwhelm him 
with shame and confusion. the principal stranger, amaze at the 
contradiction he heard, and more than half persuade that manfre had 
secrete the princess, notwithstanding the concern he express at her 
flight, rush to the door, said— 

“thou traitor prince! isabella shall be found.” 

manfre endeavour to hold him, but the other knight assist their 
comrade, he broke from the prince, and hasten into the court, demanding 
his attendants. manfred, finding it vain to divert him from the pursuit, 
offer to accompany him and summon his attendants, and taking jerome 
and some of the friar to guide them, they issue from the castle; 
manfre private give orders to have the knight’s company secured, 
while to the knight he affected to despatch a messenger to require their 
assistance. 

the company had no soon quit the castle than matilda, who felt 
herself deep interested for the young peasant, since she had seen him 
condemn to death in the hall, and whose thought had been taken up with 
concert measure to save him, was informed by some of the female 
attendant that manfre had despatch all his men various ways in 
pursuit of isabella. he had in his hurry given this order in general 
terms, not meaning to extend it to the guard he had set upon theodore, 
but forget it. the domestics, officious to obey so peremptory a 
prince, and urge by their own curiosity and love of novelty to join in 
any precipitate chase, had to a man left the castle. matilda disengaged 
herself from her women, stole up to the black tower, and unbolt the 
door, present herself to the astonish theodore. 

“young man,” said she, “though filial duty and womanly modesty condemn 
the step i am taking, yet holy charity, surmount all other ties, 
justify this act. fly; the door of thy prison are open: my father and 
his domestic are absent; but they may soon return. be gone in safety; 
and may the angel of heaven direct thy course!” 

“thou art surely one of those angels!” said the enrapture theodore: 
“none but a blessed saint could speak, could act—could look—like thee. 
may i not know the name of my divine protectress? methought thou namedst 
thy father. is it possible? can manfred’s blood feel holy pity! lovely 
lady, thou answerest not. but how art thou here thyself? why dost thou 
neglect thy own safety, and waste a thought on a wretch like theodore? 
let us fly together: the life thou bestowest shall be dedicated to thy 
defence.” 

“alas! thou mistakest,” said matilda, signing: “i am manfred’s daughter, 
but no danger await me.” 

“amazement!” said theodore; “but last night i blessed myself for yielding 
thee the service thy gracious compassion so charitable returns me now.” 

“still thou art in an error,” said the princess; “but this is no time for 
explanation. fly, virtuous youth, while it is in my power to save thee: 
should my father return, thou and i both should indeed have cause to 
tremble.” 

“how!” said theodore; “thinkest thou, charming maid, that i will accept 
of life at the hazard of aught calamitous to thee? better i endure a 
thousand deaths.” 

“i run no risk,” said matilda, “but by thy delay. depart; it cannot be 
known that i have assist thy flight.” 

“swear by the saint above,” said theodore, “that thou canst not be 
suspected; else here i vow to await whatever can befall me.” 

“oh! thou art too generous,” said matilda; “but rest assured that no 
suspicion can alight on me.” 

“give me thy beauteous hand in token that thou dost not deceive me,” said 
theodore; “and let me bathe it with the warm tear of gratitude.” 

“forbear!” said the princess; “this must not be.” 

“alas!” said theodore, “i have never known but calamity until this 
hour—perhaps shall never know other fortune again: suffer the chaste 
rapture of holy gratitude: ’tis my soul would print its effusion on thy 
hand.” 

“forbear, and be gone,” said matilda. “how would isabella approve of 
seeing thee at my feet?” 

“who is isabella?” said the young man with surprise. 

“ah, me! i fear,” said the princess, “i am serving a deceitful one. 
hast thou forgot thy curiosity this morning?” 

“thy looks, thy actions, all thy beauteous self seem an emanate of 
divinity,” said theodore; “but thy words are dark and mysterious. speak, 
lady; speak to thy servant’s comprehension.” 

“thou understandest but too well!” said matilda; “but once more i command 
thee to be gone: thy blood, which i may preserve, will be on my head, if 
i waste the time in vain discourse.” 

“i go, lady,” said theodore, “because it is thy will, and because i would 
not bring the grey hair of my father with sorrow to the grave. say but, 
adore lady, that i have thy gentle pity.” 

“stay,” said matilda; “i will conduct thee to the subterraneous vault by 
which isabella escaped; it will lead thee to the church of st. nicholas, 
where thou mayst take sanctuary.” 

“what!” said theodore, “was it another, and not thy lovely self that i 
assist to find the subterraneous passage?” 

“it was,” said matilda; “but ask no more; i tremble to see thee still 
abide here; fly to the sanctuary.” 

“to sanctuary,” said theodore; “no, princess; sanctuary are for 
helpless damsels, or for criminals. theodore’s soul is free from guilt, 
nor will wear the appearance of it. give me a sword, lady, and thy 
father shall learn that theodore scorn an ignominious flight.” 

“rash youth!” said matilda; “thou wouldst not dare to lift thy 
presumptuous arm against the prince of otranto?” 

“not against thy father; indeed, i dare not,” said theodore. “excuse me, 
lady; i had forgotten. but could i gaze on thee, and remember thou art 
sprung from the tyrant manfred! but he is thy father, and from this 
moment my injury are bury in oblivion.” 

a deep and hollow groan, which seem to come from above, startle the 
princess and theodore. 

“good heaven! we are overheard!” said the princess. they listened; but 
perceive no further noise, they both conclude it the effect of pent-up 
vapours. and the princess, preceding theodore softly, carry him to her 
father’s armoury, where, equip him with a complete suit, he was 
conduct by matilda to the postern-gate. 

“avoid the town,” said the princess, “and all the western side of the 
castle. ’tis there the search must be making by manfre and the 
strangers; but hie thee to the opposite quarter. yonder behind that 
forest to the east is a chain of rocks, hollow into a labyrinth of 
cavern that reach to the sea coast. there thou mayst lie concealed, 
till thou canst make sign to some vessel to put on shore, and take thee 
off. go! heaven be thy guide!—and sometimes in thy prayer 
remember—matilda!” 

theodore flung himself at her feet, and seize her lily hand, which with 
struggle she suffer him to kiss, he vow on the earliest opportunity 
to get himself knighted, and fervent entreat her permission to swear 
himself eternal her knight. ere the princess could reply, a clap of 
thunder was sudden heard that shook the battlements. theodore, 
regardless of the tempest, would have urge his suit: but the princess, 
dismayed, retreat hasty into the castle, and command the youth to 
be gone with an air that would not be disobeyed. he sighed, and retired, 
but with eyes fixed on the gate, until matilda, close it, put an end to 
an interview, in which the heart of both had drunk so deep of a 
passion, which both now taste for the first time. 

theodore went pensive to the convent, to acquaint his father with his 
deliverance. there he learned the absence of jerome, and the pursuit 
that was making after the lady isabella, with some particulars of whose 
story he now first became acquainted. the generous gallantry of his 
nature prompt him to wish to assist her; but the monk could lend him 
no lights to guess at the route she had taken. he was not tempt to 
wander far in search of her, for the idea of matilda had imprint itself 
so strong on his heart, that he could not bear to absent himself at 
much distance from her abode. the tender jerome had express for 
him concur to confirm this reluctance; and he even persuade himself 
that filial affection was the chief cause of his hover between the 
castle and monastery. 

until jerome should return at night, theodore at length determined to 
repair to the forest that matilda had pointed out to him. arrive 
there, he sought the gloomiest shades, as best suit to the pleasing 
melancholy that reign in his mind. in this mood he rove insensible to 
the cave which had formerly serve as a retreat to hermits, and were now 
report round the country to be haunt by evil spirits. he recollect 
to have heard this tradition; and being of a brave and adventurous 
disposition, he willing indulge his curiosity in explore the secret 
recess of this labyrinth. he had not penetrate far before he thought 
he heard the steps of some person who seem to retreat before him. 

theodore, though firm ground in all our holy faith enjoin to be 
believed, had no apprehension that good men were abandoned without cause 
to the malice of the powers of darkness. he thought the place more 
likely to be infest by robber than by those infernal agent who are 
report to molest and bewilder travellers. he had long burn with 
impatience to approve his valour. drawing his sabre, he march sedate 
onwards, still direct his steps as the imperfect rustling sound before 
him led the way. the armour he wore was a like indication to the person 
who avoid him. theodore, now convinced that he was not mistaken, 
redouble his pace, and evidently gain on the person that fled, whose 
haste increasing, theodore came up just as a woman fell breathless before 
him. he haste to raise her, but her terror was so great that he 
apprehend she would faint in his arms. he use every gentle word to 
dispel her alarms, and assured her that far from injuring, he would 
defend her at the peril of his life. the lady recover her spirits 
from his courteous demeanour, and gaze on her protector, said— 

“sure, i have heard that voice before!” 

“not to my knowledge,” reply theodore; “unless, as i conjecture, thou 
art the lady isabella.” 

“merciful heaven!” cry she. “thou art not sent in quest of me, art 
thou?” and saying those words, she threw herself at his feet, and 
besought him not to deliver her up to manfred. 

“to manfred!” cry theodore—“no, lady; i have once already deliver 
thee from his tyranny, and it shall fare hard with me now, but i will 
place thee out of the reach of his daring.” 

“is it possible,” said she, “that thou shouldst be the generous unknown 
whom i met last night in the vault of the castle? sure thou art not a 
mortal, but my guardian angel. on my knees, let me thank—” 

“hold! gentle princess,” said theodore, “nor demean thyself before a poor 
and friendless young man. if heaven has select me for thy deliverer, 
it will accomplish its work, and strengthen my arm in thy cause. but 
come, lady, we are too near the mouth of the cavern; let us seek its 
inmost recesses. i can have no tranquill till i have placed thee 
beyond the reach of danger.” 

“alas! what mean you, sir?” said she. “though all your action are 
noble, though your sentiment speak the purity of your soul, is it 
fitting that i should accompany you alone into these perplexed retreats? 
should we be found together, what would a censorious world think of my 
conduct?” 

“i respect your virtuous delicacy,” said theodore; “nor do you harbour a 
suspicion that wound my honour. i meant to conduct you into the most 
private cavity of these rocks, and then at the hazard of my life to guard 
their entrance against every living thing. besides, lady,” continue he, 
drawing a deep sigh, “beauteous and all perfect as your form is, and 
though my wish are not guiltless of aspiring, know, my soul is 
dedicated to another; and although—” a sudden noise prevent theodore 
from proceeding. they soon distinguished these sounds— 

“isabella! what, ho! isabella!” the tremble princess relapse into her 
former agony of fear. theodore endeavour to encourage her, but in 
vain. he assured her he would die rather than suffer her to return under 
manfred’s power; and beg her to remain concealed, he went forth to 
prevent the person in search of her from approaching. 

at the mouth of the cavern he found an armed knight, discourse with a 
peasant, who assured him he had seen a lady enter the pass of the rock. 
the knight was prepare to seek her, when theodore, place himself in 
his way, with his sword drawn, stern forbad him at his peril to 
advance. 

“and who art thou, who darest to cross my way?” said the knight, 
haughtily. 

“one who do not dare more than he will perform,” said theodore. 

“i seek the lady isabella,” said the knight, “and understand she has 
taken refuge among these rocks. impede me not, or thou wilt repent 
have provoke my resentment.” 

“thy purpose is as odious as thy resentment is contemptible,” said 
theodore. “return whence thou camest, or we shall soon know whose 
resentment is most terrible.” 

the stranger, who was the principal knight that had arrive from the 
marquis of vicenza, had gallop from manfre as he was busy in get 
information of the princess, and give various orders to prevent her 
fall into the power of the three knights. their chief had suspect 
manfre of being privy to the princess’s absconding, and this insult from 
a man, who he conclude was station by that prince to secrete her, 
confirm his suspicions, he made no reply, but discharge a blow with 
his sabre at theodore, would soon have remove all obstruction, if 
theodore, who took him for one of manfred’s captains, and who had no 
soon given the provocation than prepared to support it, had not 
received the stroke on his shield. the valour that had so long been 
smother in his breast broke forth at once; he rush impetuous on the 
knight, whose pride and wrath were not less powerful incentive to hardy 
deeds. the combat was furious, but not long. theodore wound the 
knight in three several places, and at last disarm him as he faint by 
the loss of blood. 

the peasant, who had flee on the first onset, had given the alarm to some 
of manfred’s domestics, who, by his orders, were disperse through the 
forest in pursuit of isabella. they came up as the knight fell, whom 
they soon discover to be the noble stranger. theodore, notwithstanding 
his hatred to manfred, could not behold the victory he had gain without 
emotion of pity and generosity. but he was more touched when he learned 
the quality of his adversary, and was informed that he was no retainer, 
but an enemy, of manfred. he assist the servant of the latter in 
disarm the knight, and in endeavour to stanch the blood that flow 
from his wounds. the knight recover his speech, said, in a faint and 
falter voice— 

“generous foe, we have both been in an error. i took thee for an 
instrument of the tyrant; i perceive thou hast made the like mistake. it 
is too late for excuses. i faint. if isabella is at hand—call her—i 
have important secret to—” 

“he is dying!” said one of the attendants; “has nobody a crucifix about 
them? andrea, do thou pray over him.” 

“fetch some water,” said theodore, “and pour it down his throat, while i 
hasten to the princess.” 

saying this, he flew to isabella, and in few words told her modest that 
he had been so unfortunate by mistake as to wound a gentleman from her 
father’s court, who wished, ere he died, to impart something of 
consequence to her. 

the princess, who had been transport at hearing the voice of theodore, 
as he call to her to come forth, was astonish at what she heard. 
suffering herself to be conduct by theodore, the new proof of whose 
valour recall her disperse spirits, she came where the bleeding knight 
lay speechless on the ground. but her fear return when she beheld the 
domestic of manfred. she would again have flee if theodore had not made 
her observe that they were unarmed, and had not threaten them with 
instant death if they should dare to seize the princess. 

the stranger, opening his eyes, and behold a woman, said, “art 
thou—pray tell me truly—art thou isabella of vicenza?” 

“i am,” said she: “good heaven restore thee!” 

“then thou—then thou”—said the knight, struggle for 
utterance—“seest—thy father. give me one—” 

“oh! amazement! horror! what do i hear! what do i see!” cry isabella. 
“my father! you my father! how came you here, sir? for heaven’s sake, 
speak! oh! run for help, or he will expire!” 

“’tis most true,” said the wound knight, exert all his force; “i am 
frederic thy father. yes, i came to deliver thee. it will not be. give 
me a parting kiss, and take—” 

“sir,” said theodore, “do not exhaust yourself; suffer us to convey you 
to the castle.” 

“to the castle!” said isabella. “is there no help near than the 
castle? would you expose my father to the tyrant? if he go thither, i 
dare not accompany him; and yet, can i leave him!” 

“my child,” said frederic, “it matter not for me whither i am carried. 
a few minutes will place me beyond danger; but while i have eyes to dote 
on thee, forsake me not, dear isabella! this brave knight—i know not who 
he is—will protect thy innocence. sir, you will not abandon my child, 
will you?” 

theodore, shed tear over his victim, and vow to guard the 
princess at the expense of his life, persuade frederic to suffer himself 
to be conduct to the castle. they placed him on a horse belong to 
one of the domestics, after binding up his wound as well as they were 
able. theodore march by his side; and the afflict isabella, who 
could not bear to quit him, follow mournful behind. 




chapter iv. 


the sorrowful troop no soon arrive at the castle, than they were met 
by hippolita and matilda, whom isabella had sent one of the domestic 
before to advertise of their approach. the ladies cause frederic to be 
convey into the nearest chamber, retired, while the surgeon examine 
his wounds. matilda blush at seeing theodore and isabella together; 
but endeavour to conceal it by embrace the latter, and condole with 
her on her father’s mischance. the surgeon soon came to acquaint 
hippolita that none of the marquis’s wound were dangerous; and that he 
was desirous of seeing his daughter and the princesses. 

theodore, under pretence of express his joy at being free from his 
apprehension of the combat being fatal to frederic, could not resist the 
impulse of following matilda. her eyes were so often cast down on 
meeting his, that isabella, who regard theodore as attentive as he 
gaze on matilda, soon divine who the object was that he had told her in 
the cave engaged his affections. while this mute scene passed, hippolita 
demand of frederic the cause of his have taken that mysterious course 
for reclaim his daughter; and threw in various apology to excuse her 
lord for the match contract between their children. 

frederic, however incense against manfred, was not insensible to the 
courtesy and benevolence of hippolita: but he was still more struck with 
the lovely form of matilda. wish to detain them by his bedside, he 
informed hippolita of his story. he told her that, while prisoner to the 
infidels, he had dream that his daughter, of whom he had learned no 
news since his captivity, was detain in a castle, where she was in 
danger of the most dreadful misfortunes: and that if he obtain his 
liberty, and repair to a wood near joppa, he would learn more. alarm 
at this dream, and incapable of obey the direction given by it, his 
chain became more grievous than ever. but while his thought were 
occupy on the means of obtain his liberty, he received the agreeable 
news that the confederate prince who were war in palestine had paid 
his ransom. he instantly set out for the wood that had been marked in 
his dream. 

for three days he and his attendant had wander in the forest without 
seeing a human form: but on the evening of the third they came to a cell, 
in which they found a venerable hermit in the agony of death. apply 
rich cordials, they brought the faint man to his speech. 

“my sons,” said he, “i am bounden to your charity—but it is in vain—i am 
go to my eternal rest—yet i die with the satisfaction of perform 
the will of heaven. when first i repair to this solitude, after seeing 
my country become a prey to unbelievers—it is alas! above fifty years 
since i was witness to that dreadful scene! st. nichola appear to me, 
and reveal a secret, which he bade me never disclose to mortal man, but 
on my death-bed. this is that tremendous hour, and ye are no doubt the 
chosen warrior to whom i was ordered to reveal my trust. as soon as ye 
have done the last offices to this wretched corse, dig under the seventh 
tree on the left hand of this poor cave, and your pains will—oh! good 
heaven receive my soul!” with those words the devout man breathe his 
last. 

“by break of day,” continue frederic, “when we had committed the holy 
relics to earth, we dug according to direction. but what was our 
astonishment when about the depth of six feet we discover an enormous 
sabre—the very weapon yonder in the court. on the blade, which was then 
partly out of the scabbard, though since closed by our effort in 
remove it, were written the following lines—no; excuse me, madam,” 
add the marquis, turning to hippolita; “if i forbear to repeat them: i 
respect your sex and rank, and would not be guilty of offend your ear 
with sound injurious to aught that is dear to you.” 

he paused. hippolita trembled. she did not doubt but frederic was 
destined by heaven to accomplish the fate that seem to threaten her 
house. look with anxious fond at matilda, a silent tear stole 
down her cheek: but recollect herself, she said— 

“proceed, my lord; heaven do nothing in vain; mortal must receive its 
divine behest with lowly and submission. it is our part to 
deprecate its wrath, or bow to its decrees. repeat the sentence, my 
lord; we listen resigned.” 

frederic was grieve that he had proceed so far. the dignity and 
patient firm of hippolita penetrate him with respect, and the tender 
silent affection with which the princess and her daughter regard each 
other, melt him almost to tears. yet apprehensive that his forbearance 
to obey would be more alarming, he repeated in a falter and low voice 
the following lines: 

“where’er a casque that suit this sword is found, 
with peril is thy daughter compass’d round; 
_alfonso’s_ blood alone can save the maid, 
and quiet a long restless prince’s shade.” 

“what is there in these lines,” said theodore impatiently, “that affect 
these princesses? why were they to be shock by a mysterious delicacy, 
that has so little foundation?” 

“your words are rude, young man,” said the marquis; “and though fortune 
has favoured you once—” 

“my honour lord,” said isabella, who resent theodore’s warmth, which 
she perceive was dictate by his sentiment for matilda, “discompose not 
yourself for the glose of a peasant’s son: he forget the reverence he 
owe you; but he is not accustomed—” 

hippolita, concerned at the heat that had arisen, checked theodore for 
his boldness, but with an air acknowledge his zeal; and change the 
conversation, demand of frederic where he had left her lord? as the 
marquis was go to reply, they heard a noise without, and rising to 
inquire the cause, manfred, jerome, and part of the troop, who had met an 
imperfect rumour of what had happened, enter the chamber. manfre 
advanced hasty towards frederic’s bed to condole with him on his 
misfortune, and to learn the circumstances of the combat, when start 
in an agony of terror and amazement, he cried— 

“ha! what art thou? thou dreadful spectre! is my hour come?” 

“my dearest, gracious lord,” cry hippolita, clasp him in her arms, 
“what is it you see! why do you fix your eye-balls thus?” 

“what!” cry manfre breathless; “dost thou see nothing, hippolita? is 
this ghastly phantom sent to me alone—to rue, who did not—” 

“for mercy’s sweetest self, my lord,” said hippolita, “resume your soul, 
command your reason. there is none here, but us, your friends.” 

“what, is not that alfonso?” cry manfred. “dost thou not see him? can 
it be my brain’s delirium?” 

“this! my lord,” said hippolita; “this is theodore, the youth who has 
been so unfortunate.” 

“theodore!” said manfre mournfully, and striking his forehead; “theodore 
or a phantom, he has unhinge the soul of manfred. but how come he 
here? and how come he in armour?” 

“i believe he went in search of isabella,” said hippolita. 

“of isabella!” said manfred, relapse into rage; “yes, yes, that is not 
doubtful—. but how did he escape from durance in which i left him? was 
it isabella, or this hypocrite old friar, that procure his 
enlargement?” 

“and would a parent be criminal, my lord,” said theodore, “if he 
meditate the deliverance of his child?” 

jerome, amaze to hear himself in a manner accused by his son, and 
without foundation, knew not what to think. he could not comprehend how 
theodore had escaped, how he came to be armed, and to encounter frederic. 
still he would not venture to ask any question that might tend to 
inflame manfred’s wrath against his son. jerome’s silence convinced 
manfre that he had contrived theodore’s release. 

“and is it thus, thou ungrateful old man,” said the prince, address 
himself to the friar, “that thou repayest mine and hippolita’s bounties? 
and not content with traverse my heart’s nearest wishes, thou armest 
thy bastard, and bringest him into my own castle to insult me!” 

“my lord,” said theodore, “you wrong my father: neither he nor i are 
capable of harbour a thought against your peace. is it insole thus 
to surrender myself to your highness’s pleasure?” add he, lay his 
sword respectful at manfred’s feet. “behold my bosom; strike, my lord, 
if you suspect that a disloyal thought is lodge there. there is not a 
sentiment engraven on my heart that do not venerate you and yours.” 

the grace and fervour with which theodore utter these words interested 
every person present in his favour. even manfre was touched—yet still 
possessed with his resemblance to alfonso, his admiration was dashed with 
secret horror. 

“rise,” said he; “thy life is not my present purpose. but tell me thy 
history, and how thou camest connected with this old traitor here.” 

“my lord,” said jerome eagerly. 

“peace! impostor!” said manfred; “i will not have him prompted.” 

“my lord,” said theodore, “i want no assistance; my story is very brief. 
i was carry at five years of age to algiers with my mother, who had 
been taken by corsair from the coast of sicily. she die of grief in 
less than a twelvemonth;” the tear gush from jerome’s eyes, on whose 
countenance a thousand anxious passion stood expressed. “before she 
died,” continue theodore, “she bound a writing about my arm under my 
garments, which told me i was the son of the count falconara.” 

“it is most true,” said jerome; “i am that wretched father.” 

“again i enjoin thee silence,” said manfred: “proceed.” 

“i remain in slavery,” said theodore, “until within these two years, 
when attend on my master in his cruises, i was deliver by a 
christian vessel, which overpower the pirate; and discover myself to 
the captain, he generous put me on shore in sicily; but alas! instead 
of finding a father, i learned that his estate, which was situated on the 
coast, had, during his absence, been laid waste by the rover who had 
carry my mother and me into captivity: that his castle had been burnt 
to the ground, and that my father on his return had sold what remained, 
and was retired into religion in the kingdom of naples, but where no man 
could inform me. destitute and friendless, hopeless almost of attain 
the transport of a parent’s embrace, i took the first opportunity of 
setting sail for naples, from whence, within these six days, i wander 
into this province, still support myself by the labour of my hands; 
nor until yester-morn did i believe that heaven had reserved any lot for 
me but peace of mind and contented poverty. this, my lord, is theodore’s 
story. i am blessed beyond my hope in finding a father; i am unfortunate 
beyond my desert in have incur your highness’s displeasure.” 

he ceased. a murmur of approbation gently arose from the audience. 

“this is not all,” said frederic; “i am bound in honour to add what he 
suppresses. though he is modest, i must be generous; he is one of the 
bravest youth on christian ground. he is warm too; and from the short 
knowledge i have of him, i will pledge myself for his veracity: if what 
he report of himself were not true, he would not utter it—and for me, 
youth, i honour a frank which become thy birth; but now, and thou 
didst offend me: yet the noble blood which flow in thy veins, may well 
be allow to boil out, when it has so recently trace itself to its 
source. come, my lord,” (turning to manfred), “if i can pardon him, 
surely you may; it is not the youth’s fault, if you took him for a 
spectre.” 

this bitter taunt gall the soul of manfred. 

“if being from another world,” reply he haughtily, “have power to 
impress my mind with awe, it is more than living man can do; nor could a 
stripling’s arm.” 

“my lord,” interrupt hippolita, “your guest has occasion for repose: 
shall we not leave him to his rest?” saying this, and taking manfre by 
the hand, she took leave of frederic, and led the company forth. 

the prince, not sorry to quit a conversation which recall to mind the 
discovery he had made of his most secret sensations, suffer himself to 
be conduct to his own apartment, after permit theodore, though 
under engagement to return to the castle on the morrow (a condition the 
young man gladly accepted), to retire with his father to the convent. 
matilda and isabella were too much occupy with their own reflections, 
and too little content with each other, to wish for farther converse that 
night. they separate each to her chamber, with more expression of 
ceremony and few of affection than had pass between them since their 
childhood. 

if they part with small cordiality, they did but meet with greater 
impatience, as soon as the sun was risen. their mind were in a 
situation that exclude sleep, and each recollect a thousand question 
which she wish she had put to the other overnight. matilda reflect 
that isabella had been twice deliver by theodore in very critical 
situations, which she could not believe accidental. his eyes, it was 
true, had been fixed on her in frederic’s chamber; but that might have 
been to disguise his passion for isabella from the father of both. it 
were better to clear this up. she wish to know the truth, lest she 
should wrong her friend by entertaining a passion for isabella’s lover. 
thus jealousy prompted, and at the same time borrow an excuse from 
friendship to justify its curiosity. 

isabella, not less restless, had better foundation for her suspicions. 
both theodore’s tongue and eyes had told her his heart was engaged; it 
was true—yet, perhaps, matilda might not correspond to his passion; she 
had ever appear insensible to love: all her thought were set on 
heaven. 

“why did i dissuade her?” said isabella to herself; “i am punish for my 
generosity; but when did they meet? where? it cannot be; i have deceive 
myself; perhaps last night was the first time they ever beheld each 
other; it must be some other object that has prepossessed his 
affections—if it is, i am not so unhappy as i thought; if it is not my 
friend matilda—how! can i stoop to wish for the affection of a man, who 
rudely and unnecessary acquaint me with his indifference? and that at 
the very moment in which common courtesy demand at least expression of 
civility. i will go to my dear matilda, who will confirm me in this 
becoming pride. man is false—i will advise with her on taking the veil: 
she will rejoice to find me in this disposition; and i will acquaint her 
that i no long oppose her inclination for the cloister.” 

in this frame of mind, and determined to open her heart entire to 
matilda, she went to that princess’s chamber, whom she found already 
dressed, and leaning pensive on her arm. this attitude, so 
correspondent to what she felt herself, revive isabella’s suspicions, 
and destroy the confidence she had purpose to place in her friend. 
they blush at meeting, and were too much novice to disguise their 
sensation with address. after some unmeane question and replies, 
matilda demand of isabella the cause of her flight? the latter, who 
had almost forgotten manfred’s passion, so entire was she occupy by 
her own, conclude that matilda refer to her last escape from the 
convent, which had occasion the event of the preceding evening, 
replied— 

“martelli brought word to the convent that your mother was dead.” 

“oh!” said matilda, interrupt her, “bianca has explain that mistake 
to me: on seeing me faint, she cry out, ‘the princess is dead!’ and 
martelli, who had come for the usual dole to the castle—” 

“and what made you faint?” said isabella, indifferent to the rest. 
matilda blush and stammered— 

“my father—he was sitting in judgment on a criminal—” 

“what criminal?” said isabella eagerly. 

“a young man,” said matilda; “i believe—” 

“i think it was that young man that—” 

“what, theodore?” said isabella. 

“yes,” answer she; “i never saw him before; i do not know how he had 
offend my father, but as he has been of service to you, i am glad my 
lord has pardon him.” 

“served me!” reply isabella; “do you term it serving me, to wound my 
father, and almost occasion his death? though it is but since yesterday 
that i am blessed with knowing a parent, i hope matilda do not think i 
am such a stranger to filial tender as not to resent the bold of 
that audacious youth, and that it is impossible for me ever to feel any 
affection for one who dare to lift his arm against the author of my 
being. no, matilda, my heart abhor him; and if you still retain the 
friendship for me that you have vow from your infancy, you will detest 
a man who has been on the point of making me miserable for ever.” 

matilda held down her head and replied: “i hope my dearest isabella do 
not doubt her matilda’s friendship: i never beheld that youth until 
yesterday; he is almost a stranger to me: but as the surgeon have 
pronounced your father out of danger, you ought not to harbour 
uncharitable resentment against one, who i am persuade did not know the 
marquis was related to you.” 

“you plead his cause very pathetically,” said isabella, “considering he 
is so much a stranger to you! i am mistaken, or he returns your 
charity.” 

“what mean you?” said matilda. 

“nothing,” said isabella, repent that she had given matilda a hint of 
theodore’s inclination for her. then change the discourse, she ask 
matilda what occasion manfre to take theodore for a spectre? 

“bless me,” said matilda, “did not you observe his extreme resemblance to 
the portrait of alfonso in the gallery? i took notice of it to bianca 
even before i saw him in armour; but with the helmet on, he is the very 
image of that picture.” 

“i do not much observe pictures,” said isabella: “much less have i 
examine this young man so attentive as you seem to have done. ah? 
matilda, your heart is in danger, but let me warn you as a friend, he has 
own to me that he is in love; it cannot be with you, for yesterday was 
the first time you ever met—was it not?” 

“certainly,” reply matilda; “but why do my dearest isabella conclude 
from anything i have said, that”—she paused—then continuing: “he saw you 
first, and i am far from have the vanity to think that my little 
portion of charm could engage a heart devoted to you; may you be happy, 
isabella, whatever is the fate of matilda!” 

“my lovely friend,” said isabella, whose heart was too honest to resist a 
kind expression, “it is you that theodore admires; i saw it; i am 
persuade of it; nor shall a thought of my own happiness suffer me to 
interfere with yours.” 

this frank drew tear from the gentle matilda; and jealousy that for 
a moment had raise a cool between these amiable maiden soon gave 
way to the natural sincerity and candour of their souls. each confessed 
to the other the impression that theodore had made on her; and this 
confidence was follow by a struggle of generosity, each insist on 
yielding her claim to her friend. at length the dignity of isabella’s 
virtue remind her of the preference which theodore had almost declared 
for her rival, made her determine to conquer her passion, and cede the 
beloved object to her friend. 

during this contest of amity, hippolita enter her daughter’s chamber. 

“madam,” said she to isabella, “you have so much tender for matilda, 
and interest yourself so kindly in whatever affect our wretched house, 
that i can have no secret with my child which are not proper for you to 
hear.” 

the princess were all attention and anxiety. 

“know then, madam,” continue hippolita, “and you my dearest matilda, 
that being convinced by all the event of these two last ominous days, 
that heaven purpose the sceptre of otranto should pass from manfred’s 
hand into those of the marquis frederic, i have been perhaps inspired 
with the thought of avert our total destruction by the union of our 
rival houses. with this view i have been propose to manfred, my lord, 
to tender this dear, dear child to frederic, your father.” 

“me to lord frederic!” cry matilda; “good heavens! my gracious 
mother—and have you name it to my father?” 

“i have,” said hippolita; “he listen benign to my proposal, and is 
gone to break it to the marquis.” 

“ah! wretched princess!” cry isabella; “what hast thou done! what ruin 
has thy inadvertent goodness been prepare for thyself, for me, and for 
matilda!” 

“ruin from me to you and to my child!” said hippolita “what can this 
mean?” 

“alas!” said isabella, “the purity of your own heart prevent your seeing 
the depravity of others. manfred, your lord, that impious man—” 

“hold,” said hippolita; “you must not in my presence, young lady, mention 
manfre with disrespect: he is my lord and husband, and—” 

“will not long be so,” said isabella, “if his wicked purpose can be 
carry into execution.” 

“this language amaze me,” said hippolita. “your feeling, isabella, is 
warm; but until this hour i never knew it betray you into intemperance. 
what deed of manfre authorise you to treat him as a murderer, an 
assassin?” 

“thou virtuous, and too credulous princess!” reply isabella; “it is not 
thy life he aim at—it is to separate himself from thee! to divorce thee! 
to—” 

“to divorce me!” “to divorce my mother!” cry hippolita and matilda at 
once. 

“yes,” said isabella; “and to complete his crime, he meditates—i cannot 
speak it!” 

“what can surpass what thou hast already uttered?” said matilda. 

hippolita was silent. grief choke her speech; and the recollection of 
manfred’s late ambiguous discourse confirmed what she heard. 

“excellent, dear lady! madam! mother!” cry isabella, fling herself 
at hippolita’s feet in a transport of passion; “trust me, believe me, i 
will die a thousand death soon than consent to injure you, than yield 
to so odious—oh!—” 

“this is too much!” cry hippolita: “what crime do one crime suggest! 
rise, dear isabella; i do not doubt your virtue. oh! matilda, this 
stroke is too heavy for thee! weep not, my child; and not a murmur, i 
charge thee. remember, he is thy father still!” 

“but you are my mother too,” said matilda fervently; “and you are 
virtuous, you are guiltless!—oh! must not i, must not i complain?” 

“you must not,” said hippolita—“come, all will yet be well. manfred, in 
the agony for the loss of thy brother, knew not what he said; perhaps 
isabella misunderstood him; his heart is good—and, my child, thou knowest 
not all! there is a destiny hang over us; the hand of providence is 
stretch out; oh! could i but save thee from the wreck! yes,” continue 
she in a firm tone, “perhaps the sacrifice of myself may atone for all; 
i will go and offer myself to this divorce—it boots not what become of 
me. i will withdraw into the neighbouring monastery, and waste the 
remainder of life in prayer and tear for my child and—the prince!” 

“thou art as much too good for this world,” said isabella, “as manfre is 
execrable; but think not, lady, that thy weakness shall determine for me. 
i swear, hear me all ye angels—” 

“stop, i adjure thee,” cry hippolita: “remember thou dost not depend on 
thyself; thou hast a father.” 

“my father is too pious, too noble,” interrupt isabella, “to command an 
impious deed. but should he command it; can a father enjoin a cursed 
act? i was contract to the son, can i wed the father? no, madam, no; 
force should not drag me to manfred’s hate bed. i loathe him, i abhor 
him: divine and human law forbid—and my friend, my dearest matilda! 
would i wound her tender soul by injure her adore mother? my own 
mother—i never have known another”— 

“oh! she is the mother of both!” cry matilda: “can we, can we, 
isabella, adore her too much?” 

“my lovely children,” said the touched hippolita, “your tender 
overpower me—but i must not give way to it. it is not ours to make 
election for ourselves: heaven, our fathers, and our husband must decide 
for us. have patience until you hear what manfre and frederic have 
determined. if the marquis accept matilda’s hand, i know she will 
readily obey. heaven may interpose and prevent the rest. what means my 
child?” continue she, seeing matilda fall at her feet with a flood of 
speechless tears—“but no; answer me not, my daughter: i must not hear a 
word against the pleasure of thy father.” 

“oh! doubt not my obedience, my dreadful obedience to him and to you!” 
said matilda. “but can i, most respect of women, can i experience all 
this tenderness, this world of goodness, and conceal a thought from the 
best of mothers?” 

“what art thou go to utter?” said isabella trembling. “recollect 
thyself, matilda.” 

“no, isabella,” said the princess, “i should not deserve this 
incomparable parent, if the inmost recess of my soul harbour a 
thought without her permission—nay, i have offend her; i have suffer 
a passion to enter my heart without her avowal—but here i disclaim it; 
here i vow to heaven and her—” 

“my child! my child;” said hippolita, “what words are these! what new 
calamity has fate in store for us! thou, a passion? thou, in this 
hour of destruction—” 

“oh! i see all my guilt!” said matilda. “i abhor myself, if i cost my 
mother a pang. she is the dearest thing i have on earth—oh! i will 
never, never behold him more!” 

“isabella,” said hippolita, “thou art conscious to this unhappy secret, 
whatever it is. speak!” 

“what!” cry matilda, “have i so forfeit my mother’s love, that she 
will not permit me even to speak my own guilt? oh! wretched, wretched 
matilda!” 

“thou art too cruel,” said isabella to hippolita: “canst thou behold this 
anguish of a virtuous mind, and not commiserate it?” 

“not pity my child!” said hippolita, catching matilda in her arms—“oh! i 
know she is good, she is all virtue, all tenderness, and duty. i do 
forgive thee, my excellent, my only hope!” 

the princess then reveal to hippolita their mutual inclination for 
theodore, and the purpose of isabella to resign him to matilda. 
hippolita blame their imprudence, and show them the improbability that 
either father would consent to bestow his heiress on so poor a man, 
though nobly born. some comfort it gave her to find their passion of so 
recent a date, and that theodore had had but little cause to suspect it 
in either. she strict enjoin them to avoid all correspondence with 
him. this matilda fervent promised: but isabella, who flatter 
herself that she meant no more than to promote his union with her friend, 
could not determine to avoid him; and made no reply. 

“i will go to the convent,” said hippolita, “and order new masses to be 
said for a deliverance from these calamities.” 

“oh! my mother,” said matilda, “you mean to quit us: you mean to take 
sanctuary, and to give my father an opportunity of pursue his fatal 
intention. alas! on my knee i supplicate you to forbear; will you leave 
me a prey to frederic? i will follow you to the convent.” 

“be at peace, my child,” said hippolita: “i will return instantly. i 
will never abandon thee, until i know it is the will of heaven, and for 
thy benefit.” 

“do not deceive me,” said matilda. “i will not marry frederic until thou 
commandest it. alas! what will become of me?” 

“why that exclamation?” said hippolita. “i have promise thee to 
return—” 

“ah! my mother,” reply matilda, “stay and save me from myself. a frown 
from thee can do more than all my father’s severity. i have given away 
my heart, and you alone can make me recall it.” 

“no more,” said hippolita; “thou must not relapse, matilda.” 

“i can quit theodore,” said she, “but must i wed another? let me attend 
thee to the altar, and shut myself from the world for ever.” 

“thy fate depend on thy father,” said hippolita; “i have ill-bestowed my 
tenderness, if it has taught thee to revere aught beyond him. adieu! my 
child: i go to pray for thee.” 

hippolita’s real purpose was to demand of jerome, whether in conscience 
she might not consent to the divorce. she had oft urge manfre to 
resign the principality, which the delicacy of her conscience render an 
hourly burthen to her. these scruple concur to make the separation 
from her husband appear less dreadful to her than it would have seem in 
any other situation. 

jerome, at quit the castle overnight, had question theodore 
severe why he had accused him to manfre of being privy to his escape. 
theodore own it had been with design to prevent manfred’s suspicion 
from alight on matilda; and added, the holiness of jerome’s life and 
character secure him from the tyrant’s wrath. jerome was heartily 
grieve to discover his son’s inclination for that princess; and leave 
him to his rest, promise in the morning to acquaint him with important 
reason for conquer his passion. 

theodore, like isabella, was too recently acquaint with parental 
authority to submit to its decision against the impulse of his heart. 
he had little curiosity to learn the friar’s reasons, and less 
disposition to obey them. the lovely matilda had made strong 
impression on him than filial affection. all night he pleased himself 
with vision of love; and it was not till late after the morning-office, 
that he recollect the friar’s command to attend him at alfonso’s tomb. 

“young man,” said jerome, when he saw him, “this tardy do not 
please me. have a father’s command already so little weight?” 

theodore made awkward excuses, and attribute his delay to have 
overslept himself. 

“and on whom were thy dream employed?” said the friar sternly. his son 
blushed. “come, come,” resume the friar, “inconsiderate youth, this 
must not be; eradicate this guilty passion from thy breast—” 

“guilty passion!” cry theodore: “can guilt dwell with innocent beauty 
and virtuous modesty?” 

“it is sinful,” reply the friar, “to cherish those whom heaven has 
doom to destruction. a tyrant’s race must be swept from the earth to 
the third and fourth generation.” 

“will heaven visit the innocent for the crime of the guilty?” said 
theodore. “the fair matilda has virtue enough—” 

“to undo thee:” interrupt jerome. “hast thou so soon forgotten that 
twice the savage manfre has pronounced thy sentence?” 

“nor have i forgotten, sir,” said theodore, “that the charity of his 
daughter deliver me from his power. i can forget injuries, but never 
benefits.” 

“the injury thou hast received from manfred’s race,” said the friar, 
“are beyond what thou canst conceive. reply not, but view this holy 
image! beneath this marble monument rest the ashes of the good alfonso; 
a prince adorn with every virtue: the father of his people! the delight 
of mankind! kneel, headstrong boy, and list, while a father unfold a 
tale of horror that will expel every sentiment from thy soul, but 
sensation of sacred vengeance—alfonso! much injure prince! let thy 
unsatisfy shade sit awful on the trouble air, while these tremble 
lips—ha! who come there?—” 

“the most wretched of women!” said hippolita, enter the choir. “good 
father, art thou at leisure?—but why this kneel youth? what means the 
horror imprint on each countenance? why at this venerable tomb—alas! 
hast thou seen aught?” 

“we were pour forth our orison to heaven,” reply the friar, with 
some confusion, “to put an end to the woe of this deplorable province. 
join with us, lady! thy spotless soul may obtain an exemption from the 
judgment which the portent of these days but too speaking denounce 
against thy house.” 

“i pray fervent to heaven to divert them,” said the pious princess. 
“thou knowest it has been the occupation of my life to wrest a blessing 
for my lord and my harmless children.—one alas! is taken from me! would 
heaven but hear me for my poor matilda! father! intercede for her!” 

“every heart will bless her,” cry theodore with rapture. 

“be dumb, rash youth!” said jerome. “and thou, fond princess, contend 
not with the powers above! the lord giveth, and the lord taketh away: 
bless his holy name, and submit to his decrees.” 

“i do most devoutly,” said hippolita; “but will he not spare my only 
comfort? must matilda perish too?—ah! father, i came—but dismiss thy 
son. no ear but thine must hear what i have to utter.” 

“may heaven grant thy every wish, most excellent princess!” said theodore 
retiring. jerome frowned. 

hippolita then acquaint the friar with the proposal she had suggest 
to manfred, his approbation of it, and the tender of matilda that he was 
gone to make to frederic. jerome could not conceal his dislike of the 
notion, which he cover under pretence of the improbability that 
frederic, the nearest of blood to alfonso, and who was come to claim his 
succession, would yield to an alliance with the usurp of his right. 
but nothing could equal the perplexity of the friar, when hippolita 
confessed her readiness not to oppose the separation, and demand his 
opinion on the legality of her acquiescence. the friar caught eager at 
her request of his advice, and without explain his aversion to the 
propose marriage of manfre and isabella, he paint to hippolita in the 
most alarm colours the sinful of her consent, denounce judgment 
against her if she complied, and enjoin her in the severest terms to 
treat any such proposition with every mark of indignation and refusal. 

manfred, in the meantime, had broken his purpose to frederic, and 
propose the double marriage. that weak prince, who had been struck with 
the charm of matilda, listen but too eager to the offer. he forgot 
his enmity to manfred, whom he saw but little hope of dispossess by 
force; and flatter himself that no issue might succeed from the union 
of his daughter with the tyrant, he look upon his own succession to the 
principality as facilitate by wedding matilda. he made faint opposition 
to the proposal; affecting, for form only, not to acquiesce unless 
hippolita should consent to the divorce. manfre took that upon himself. 

transport with his success, and impatient to see himself in a situation 
to expect sons, he hasten to his wife’s apartment, determined to extort 
her compliance. he learned with indignation that she was absent at the 
convent. his guilt suggest to him that she had probably been informed 
by isabella of his purpose. he doubt whether her retirement to the 
convent did not import an intention of remain there, until she could 
raise obstacle to their divorce; and the suspicion he had already 
entertain of jerome, made him apprehend that the friar would not only 
traverse his views, but might have inspired hippolita with the resolution 
of talk sanctuary. impatient to unravel this clue, and to defeat its 
success, manfre hasten to the convent, and arrive there as the friar 
was earnest exhort the princess never to yield to the divorce. 

“madam,” said manfred, “what business drew you hither? why did you not 
await my return from the marquis?” 

“i came to implore a blessing on your councils,” reply hippolita. 

“my council do not need a friar’s intervention,” said manfred; “and of 
all men living is that hoary traitor the only one whom you delight to 
confer with?” 

“profane prince!” said jerome; “is it at the altar that thou choosest to 
insult the servant of the altar?—but, manfred, thy impious scheme are 
known. heaven and this virtuous lady know them—nay, frown not, prince. 
the church despise thy menaces. her thunder will be heard above thy 
wrath. dare to proceed in thy cursed purpose of a divorce, until her 
sentence be known, and here i lance her anathema at thy head.” 

“audacious rebel!” said manfred, endeavour to conceal the awe with 
which the friar’s words inspired him. “dost thou presume to threaten thy 
lawful prince?” 

“thou art no lawful prince,” said jerome; “thou art no prince—go, discuss 
thy claim with frederic; and when that is done—” 

“it is done,” reply manfred; “frederic accept matilda’s hand, and is 
content to waive his claim, unless i have no male issue”—as he spoke 
those words three drops of blood fell from the nose of alfonso’s statue. 
manfre turn pale, and the princess sank on her knees. 

“behold!” said the friar; “mark this miraculous indication that the blood 
of alfonso will never mix with that of manfred!” 

“my gracious lord,” said hippolita, “let us submit ourselves to heaven. 
think not thy ever obedient wife rebel against thy authority. i have no 
will but that of my lord and the church. to that revere tribunal let us 
appeal. it do not depend on us to burst the bonds that unite us. if 
the church shall approve the dissolution of our marriage, be it so—i have 
but few years, and those of sorrow, to pass. where can they be worn away 
so well as at the foot of this altar, in prayer for thine and matilda’s 
safety?” 

“but thou shalt not remain here until then,” said manfred. “repair with 
me to the castle, and there i will advise on the proper measure for a 
divorce;—but this meddle friar come not thither; my hospitable roof 
shall never more harbour a traitor—and for thy reverence’s offspring,” 
continue he, “i banish him from my dominions. he, i ween, is no sacred 
personage, nor under the protection of the church. whoever wed 
isabella, it shall not be father falconara’s started-up son.” 

“they start up,” said the friar, “who are sudden beheld in the seat of 
lawful princes; but they wither away like the grass, and their place 
know them no more.” 

manfred, casting a look of scorn at the friar, led hippolita forth; but 
at the door of the church whisper one of his attendant to remain 
conceal about the convent, and bring him instant notice, if any one 
from the castle should repair thither. 




chapter v. 


every reflection which manfre made on the friar’s behaviour, conspire 
to persuade him that jerome was privy to an amour between isabella and 
theodore. but jerome’s new presumption, so dissonant from his former 
meekness, suggest still deep apprehensions. the prince even 
suspect that the friar depend on some secret support from frederic, 
whose arrival, coincide with the novel appearance of theodore, seem 
to bespeak a correspondence. still more was he trouble with the 
resemblance of theodore to alfonso’s portrait. the latter he knew had 
unquestionable die without issue. frederic had consent to bestow 
isabella on him. these contradiction agitate his mind with numberless 
pangs. 

he saw but two method of extricate himself from his difficulties. the 
one was to resign his dominion to the marquis—pride, ambition, and his 
reliance on ancient prophecies, which had pointed out a possibility of 
his preserve them to his posterity, combat that thought. the other 
was to press his marriage with isabella. after long ruminate on these 
anxious thoughts, as he march silent with hippolita to the castle, he 
at last discourse with that princess on the subject of his disquiet, and 
use every insinuate and plausible argument to extract her consent to, 
even her promise of promote the divorce. hippolita need little 
persuasion to bend her to his pleasure. she endeavour to win him over 
to the measure of resign his dominions; but finding her exhortation 
fruitless, she assured him, that as far as her conscience would allow, 
she would raise no opposition to a separation, though without better 
found scruple than what he yet alleged, she would not engage to be 
active in demanding it. 

this compliance, though inadequate, was sufficient to raise manfred’s 
hopes. he trust that his power and wealth would easily advance his 
suit at the court of rome, whither he resolve to engage frederic to take 
a journey on purpose. that prince had discover so much passion for 
matilda, that manfre hope to obtain all he wish by holding out or 
withdraw his daughter’s charms, according as the marquis should appear 
more or less disposed to co-operate in his views. even the absence of 
frederic would be a material point gained, until he could take further 
measure for his security. 

dismiss hippolita to her apartment, he repair to that of the 
marquis; but crossing the great hall through which he was to pass he met 
bianca. the damsel he knew was in the confidence of both the young 
ladies. it immediately occur to him to sift her on the subject of 
isabella and theodore. calling her aside into the recess of the oriel 
window of the hall, and soothe her with many fair words and promises, 
he demand of her whether she knew aught of the state of isabella’s 
affections. 

“i! my lord! no my lord—yes my lord—poor lady! she is wonderful alarm 
about her father’s wounds; but i tell her he will do well; don’t your 
highness think so?” 

“i do not ask you,” reply manfred, “what she think about her father; 
but you are in her secrets. come, be a good girl and tell me; is there 
any young man—ha!—you understand me.” 

“lord bless me! understand your highness? no, not i. i told her a few 
vulnerary herb and repose—” 

“i am not talking,” reply the prince, impatiently, “about her father; i 
know he will do well.” 

“bless me, i rejoice to hear your highness say so; for though i thought 
it not right to let my young lady despond, methought his great had a 
wan look, and a something—i remember when young ferdinand was wound by 
the venetian—” 

“thou answerest from the point,” interrupt manfred; “but here, take 
this jewel, perhaps that may fix thy attention—nay, no reverences; my 
favour shall not stop here—come, tell me truly; how stand isabella’s 
heart?” 

“well! your highness has such a way!” said bianca, “to be sure—but can 
your highness keep a secret? if it should ever come out of your lips—” 

“it shall not, it shall not,” cry manfred. 

“nay, but swear, your highness.” 

“by my halidame, if it should ever be known that i said it—” 

“why, truth is truth, i do not think my lady isabella ever much 
affection my young lord your son; yet he was a sweet youth as one 
should see; i am sure, if i had been a princess—but bless me! i must 
attend my lady matilda; she will marvel what is become of me.” 

“stay,” cry manfred; “thou hast not satisfy my question. hast thou 
ever carry any message, any letter?” 

“i! good gracious!” cry bianca; “i carry a letter? i would not to be a 
queen. i hope your highness thinks, though i am poor, i am honest. did 
your highness never hear what count marsigli offer me, when he came a 
woo to my lady matilda?” 

“i have not leisure,” said manfred, “to listen to thy tale. i do not 
question thy honesty. but it is thy duty to conceal nothing from me. 
how long has isabella been acquaint with theodore?” 

“nay, there is nothing can escape your highness!” said bianca; “not that 
i know any thing of the matter. theodore, to be sure, is a proper young 
man, and, as my lady matilda says, the very image of good alfonso. has 
not your highness remark it?” 

“yes, yes,—no—thou torturest me,” said manfred. “where did they meet? 
when?” 

“who! my lady matilda?” said bianca. 

“no, no, not matilda: isabella; when did isabella first become acquaint 
with this theodore!” 

“virgin mary!” said bianca, “how should i know?” 

“thou dost know,” said manfred; “and i must know; i will—” 

“lord! your highness is not jealous of young theodore!” said bianca. 

“jealous! no, no. why should i be jealous? perhaps i mean to unite 
them—if i were sure isabella would have no repugnance.” 

“repugnance! no, i’ll warrant her,” said bianca; “he is as comely a youth 
as ever trod on christian ground. we are all in love with him; there is 
not a soul in the castle but would be rejoice to have him for our 
prince—i mean, when it shall please heaven to call your highness to 
itself.” 

“indeed!” said manfred, “has it gone so far! oh! this cursed friar!—but i 
must not lose time—go, bianca, attend isabella; but i charge thee, not a 
word of what has passed. find out how she is affected towards theodore; 
bring me good news, and that ring has a companion. wait at the foot of 
the winding staircase: i am go to visit the marquis, and will talk 
further with thee at my return.” 

manfred, after some general conversation, desire frederic to dismiss the 
two knights, his companions, have to talk with him on urgent affairs. 

as soon as they were alone, he began in artful guise to sound the marquis 
on the subject of matilda; and finding him disposed to his wish, he let 
drop hint on the difficulty that would attend the celebration of their 
marriage, unless—at that instant bianca burst into the room with a 
wild in her look and gesture that spoke the utmost terror. 

“oh! my lord, my lord!” cry she; “we are all undone! it is come again! 
it is come again!” 

“what is come again?” cry manfre amazed. 

“oh! the hand! the giant! the hand!—support me! i am terrify out of my 
senses,” cry bianca. “i will not sleep in the castle to-night. where 
shall i go? my things may come after me to-morrow—would i had been 
content to wed francesco! this come of ambition!” 

“what has terrify thee thus, young woman?” said the marquis. “thou art 
safe here; be not alarmed.” 

“oh! your great is wonderful good,” said bianca, “but i dare 
not—no, pray let me go—i had rather leave everything behind me, than stay 
another hour under this roof.” 

“go to, thou hast lost thy senses,” said manfred. “interrupt us not; we 
were commune on important matters—my lord, this wench is subject to 
fits—come with me, bianca.” 

“oh! the saints! no,” said bianca, “for certain it come to warn your 
highness; why should it appear to me else? i say my prayer morning and 
evening—oh! if your highness had believe diego! ’tis the same hand that 
he saw the foot to in the gallery-chamber—father jerome has often told us 
the prophecy would be out one of these days—‘bianca,’ said he, ‘mark my 
words—’” 

“thou ravest,” said manfred, in a rage; “be gone, and keep these 
foolery to frighten thy companions.” 

“what! my lord,” cry bianca, “do you think i have seen nothing? go to 
the foot of the great stairs yourself—as i live i saw it.” 

“saw what? tell us, fair maid, what thou hast seen,” said frederic. 

“can your highness listen,” said manfred, “to the delirium of a silly 
wench, who has heard story of apparition until she believe them?” 

“this is more than fancy,” said the marquis; “her terror is too natural 
and too strong impress to be the work of imagination. tell us, fair 
maiden, what it is has move thee thus?” 

“yes, my lord, thank your greatness,” said bianca; “i believe i look very 
pale; i shall be better when i have recover myself—i was go to my 
lady isabella’s chamber, by his highness’s order—” 

“we do not want the circumstances,” interrupt manfred. “since his 
highness will have it so, proceed; but be brief.” 

“lord! your highness thwart one so!” reply bianca; “i fear my hair—i 
am sure i never in my life—well! as i was telling your greatness, i was 
go by his highness’s order to my lady isabella’s chamber; she lie in 
the watchet-coloured chamber, on the right hand, one pair of stairs: so 
when i came to the great stairs—i was look on his highness’s present 
here—” 

“grant me patience!” said manfred, “will this wench never come to the 
point? what import it to the marquis, that i gave thee a bauble for thy 
faithful attendance on my daughter? we want to know what thou sawest.” 

“i was go to tell your highness,” said bianca, “if you would permit 
me. so as i was rubbing the ring—i am sure i had not gone up three 
steps, but i heard the rattling of armour; for all the world such a 
clatter as diego say he heard when the giant turn him about in the 
gallery-chamber.” 

“what giant is this, my lord?” said the marquis; “is your castle haunt 
by giant and goblins?” 

“lord! what, has not your great heard the story of the giant in the 
gallery-chamber?” cry bianca. “i marvel his highness has not told you; 
mayhap you do not know there is a prophecy—” 

“this trifling is intolerable,” interrupt manfred. “let us dismiss 
this silly wench, my lord! we have more important affair to discuss.” 

“by your favour,” said frederic, “these are no trifles. the enormous 
sabre i was direct to in the wood, yon casque, its fellow—are these 
vision of this poor maiden’s brain?” 

“so jaquez thinks, may it please your greatness,” said bianca. “he say 
this moon will not be out without our seeing some strange revolution. 
for my part, i should not be surprise if it was to happen to-morrow; 
for, as i was saying, when i heard the clatter of armour, i was all in 
a cold sweat. i look up, and, if your great will believe me, i saw 
upon the uppermost banister of the great stairs a hand in armour as big 
as big. i thought i should have swooned. i never stop until i came 
hither—would i were well out of this castle. my lady matilda told me but 
yester-morning that her highness hippolita know something.” 

“thou art an insolent!” cry manfred. “lord marquis, it much misgive 
me that this scene is concerted to affront me. are my own domestic 
suborn to spread tale injurious to my honour? pursue your claim by 
manly daring; or let us bury our feuds, as was proposed, by the 
intermarriage of our children. but trust me, it ill become a prince of 
your bearing to practise on mercenary wenches.” 

“i scorn your imputation,” said frederic. “until this hour i never set 
eyes on this damsel: i have given her no jewel. my lord, my lord, your 
conscience, your guilt accuse you, and would throw the suspicion on me; 
but keep your daughter, and think no more of isabella. the judgment 
already fallen on your house forbid me matching into it.” 

manfred, alarm at the resolute tone in which frederic deliver these 
words, endeavour to pacify him. dismiss bianca, he made such 
submission to the marquis, and threw in such artful encomium on 
matilda, that frederic was once more staggered. however, as his passion 
was of so recent a date, it could not at once surmount the scruple he 
had conceived. he had gather enough from bianca’s discourse to 
persuade him that heaven declared itself against manfred. the propose 
marriage too remove his claim to a distance; and the principality of 
otranto was a strong temptation than the contingent reversion of it 
with matilda. still he would not absolutely recede from his engagements; 
but purpose to gain time, he demand of manfre if it was true in fact 
that hippolita consent to the divorce. the prince, transport to find 
no other obstacle, and depend on his influence over his wife, assured 
the marquis it was so, and that he might satisfy himself of the truth 
from her own mouth. 

as they were thus discoursing, word was brought that the banquet was 
prepared. manfre conduct frederic to the great hall, where they were 
received by hippolita and the young princesses. manfre placed the 
marquis next to matilda, and seat himself between his wife and 
isabella. hippolita comport herself with an easy gravity; but the 
young ladies were silent and melancholy. manfred, who was determined to 
pursue his point with the marquis in the remainder of the evening, pushed 
on the feast until it wax late; affecting unrestrained gaiety, and 
ply frederic with repeated goblet of wine. the latter, more upon his 
guard than manfre wished, decline his frequent challenges, on pretence 
of his late loss of blood; while the prince, to raise his own disorder 
spirits, and to counterfeit unconcern, indulge himself in plentiful 
draughts, though not to the intoxicate of his senses. 

the evening being far advanced, the banquet concluded. manfre would 
have withdrawn with frederic; but the latter pleading weakness and want 
of repose, retired to his chamber, gallant telling the prince that his 
daughter should amuse his highness until himself could attend him. 
manfre accept the party, and to the no small grief of isabella, 
accompany her to her apartment. matilda wait on her mother to enjoy 
the fresh of the evening on the rampart of the castle. 

soon as the company were disperse their several ways, frederic, quit 
his chamber, inquire if hippolita was alone, and was told by one of her 
attendants, who had not notice her go forth, that at that hour she 
generally withdrew to her oratory, where he probably would find her. the 
marquis, during the repast, had beheld matilda with increase of passion. 
he now wish to find hippolita in the disposition her lord had promised. 
the portent that had alarm him were forgotten in his desires. 
steal soft and unobserved to the apartment of hippolita, he enter 
it with a resolution to encourage her acquiesce to the divorce, have 
perceive that manfre was resolve to make the possession of isabella an 
unalterable condition, before he would grant matilda to his wishes. 

the marquis was not surprise at the silence that reign in the 
princess’s apartment. conclude her, as he had been advertised, in her 
oratory, he pass on. the door was ajar; the evening gloomy and 
overcast. push open the door gently, he saw a person kneel before 
the altar. as he approach nearer, it seem not a woman, but one in a 
long woollen weed, whose back was towards him. the person seem 
absorb in prayer. the marquis was about to return, when the figure, 
rising, stood some moments fixed in meditation, without regarding him. 
the marquis, expect the holy person to come forth, and meaning to 
excuse his uncivil interruption, said, 

“reverend father, i sought the lady hippolita.” 

“hippolita!” reply a hollow voice; “camest thou to this castle to seek 
hippolita?” and then the figure, turning slow round, discover to 
frederic the fleshless jaws and empty socket of a skeleton, wrapt in a 
hermit’s cowl. 

“angels of grace protect me!” cry frederic, recoiling. 

“deserve their protection!” said the spectre. frederic, fall on his 
knees, adjure the phantom to take pity on him. 

“dost thou not remember me?” said the apparition. “remember the wood of 
joppa!” 

“art thou that holy hermit?” cry frederic, trembling. “can i do aught 
for thy eternal peace?” 

“wast thou deliver from bondage,” said the spectre, “to pursue carnal 
delights? hast thou forgotten the bury sabre, and the behest of heaven 
engraven on it?” 

“i have not, i have not,” said frederic; “but say, blest spirit, what is 
thy errand to me? what remains to be done?” 

“to forget matilda!” said the apparition; and vanished. 

frederic’s blood froze in his veins. for some minutes he remain 
motionless. then fall prostrate on his face before the altar, he 
besought the intercession of every saint for pardon. a flood of tear 
succeed to this transport; and the image of the beauteous matilda 
rush in spite of him on his thoughts, he lay on the ground in a 
conflict of penitence and passion. ere he could recover from this agony 
of his spirits, the princess hippolita with a taper in her hand enter 
the oratory alone. seeing a man without motion on the floor, she gave a 
shriek, conclude him dead. her fright brought frederic to himself. 
rising suddenly, his face bedewed with tears, he would have rush from 
her presence; but hippolita stopping him, conjure him in the most 
plaintive accent to explain the cause of his disorder, and by what 
strange chance she had found him there in that posture. 

“ah, virtuous princess!” said the marquis, penetrate with grief, and 
stopped. 

“for the love of heaven, my lord,” said hippolita, “disclose the cause of 
this transport! what mean these doleful sounds, this alarm 
exclamation on my name? what woe has heaven still in store for the 
wretched hippolita? yet silent! by every pity angel, i adjure thee, 
noble prince,” continue she, fall at his feet, “to disclose the 
purport of what lie at thy heart. i see thou feelest for me; thou 
feelest the sharp pang that thou inflictest—speak, for pity! do aught 
thou knowest concern my child?” 

“i cannot speak,” cry frederic, burst from her. “oh, matilda!” 

quit the princess thus abruptly, he hasten to his own apartment. 
at the door of it he was accost by manfred, who flushed by wine and 
love had come to seek him, and to propose to waste some hour of the 
night in music and revelling. frederic, offend at an invitation so 
dissonant from the mood of his soul, pushed him rudely aside, and 
enter his chamber, flung the door intemperate against manfred, and 
bolt it inwards. the haughty prince, enrage at this unaccountable 
behaviour, withdrew in a frame of mind capable of the most fatal 
excesses. as he cross the court, he was met by the domestic whom he 
had plant at the convent as a spy on jerome and theodore. this man, 
almost breathless with the haste he had made, informed his lord that 
theodore, and some lady from the castle were, at that instant, in private 
conference at the tomb of alfonso in st. nicholas’s church. he had 
dogged theodore thither, but the gloomy of the night had prevent 
his discover who the woman was. 

manfred, whose spirits were inflamed, and whom isabella had driven from 
her on his urge his passion with too little reserve, did not doubt but 
the inquietude she had express had been occasion by her impatience to 
meet theodore. provoke by this conjecture, and enrage at her father, 
he hasten secret to the great church. gliding soft between the 
aisles, and guide by an imperfect gleam of moonshine that shone faint 
through the illuminate windows, he stole towards the tomb of alfonso, to 
which he was direct by indistinct whisper of the person he sought. 
the first sound he could distinguish were— 

“does it, alas! depend on me? manfre will never permit our union.” 

“no, this shall prevent it!” cry the tyrant, drawing his dagger, and 
plunge it over her shoulder into the bosom of the person that spoke. 

“ah, me, i am slain!” cry matilda, sinking. “good heaven, receive my 
soul!” 

“savage, inhuman monster, what hast thou done!” cry theodore, rush 
on him, and wrench his dagger from him. 

“stop, stop thy impious hand!” cry matilda; “it is my father!” 

manfred, waking as from a trance, beat his breast, twist his hand in 
his locks, and endeavour to recover his dagger from theodore to 
despatch himself. theodore, scarce less distracted, and only master 
the transport of his grief to assist matilda, had now by his cries drawn 
some of the monk to his aid. while part of them endeavoured, in concert 
with the afflict theodore, to stop the blood of the die princess, the 
rest prevent manfre from lay violent hand on himself. 

matilda, resign herself patient to her fate, acknowledge with looks 
of grateful love the zeal of theodore. yet oft as her faint would 
permit her speech its way, she beg the assistant to comfort her 
father. jerome, by this time, had learnt the fatal news, and reach the 
church. his looks seem to reproach theodore, but turning to manfred, 
he said, 

“now, tyrant! behold the completion of woe fulfill on thy impious and 
devoted head! the blood of alfonso cry to heaven for vengeance; and 
heaven has permit its altar to be pollute by assassination, that thou 
mightest shed thy own blood at the foot of that prince’s sepulchre!” 

“cruel man!” cry matilda, “to aggravate the woe of a parent; may 
heaven bless my father, and forgive him as i do! my lord, my gracious 
sire, dost thou forgive thy child? indeed, i came not hither to meet 
theodore. i found him pray at this tomb, whither my mother sent me to 
intercede for thee, for her—dearest father, bless your child, and say you 
forgive her.” 

“forgive thee! murderous monster!” cry manfred, “can assassin 
forgive? i took thee for isabella; but heaven direct my bloody hand to 
the heart of my child. oh, matilda!—i cannot utter it—canst thou forgive 
the blind of my rage?” 

“i can, i do; and may heaven confirm it!” said matilda; “but while i have 
life to ask it—oh! my mother! what will she feel? will you comfort her, 
my lord? will you not put her away? indeed she love you! oh, i am 
faint! bear me to the castle. can i live to have her close my eyes?” 

theodore and the monk besought her earnest to suffer herself to be 
borne into the convent; but her instance were so pressing to be carry 
to the castle, that place her on a litter, they convey her thither as 
she requested. theodore, support her head with his arm, and hanging 
over her in an agony of despairing love, still endeavour to inspire her 
with hope of life. jerome, on the other side, comfort her with 
discourse of heaven, and holding a crucifix before her, which she bath 
with innocent tears, prepared her for her passage to immortality. 
manfred, plunge in the deepest affliction, follow the litter in 
despair. 

ere they reach the castle, hippolita, informed of the dreadful 
catastrophe, had flown to meet her murder child; but when she saw the 
afflict procession, the mighty of her grief deprived her of her 
senses, and she fell lifeless to the earth in a swoon. isabella and 
frederic, who attend her, were overwhelm in almost equal sorrow. 
matilda alone seem insensible to her own situation: every thought was 
lost in tender for her mother. 

order the litter to stop, as soon as hippolita was brought to herself, 
she ask for her father. he approached, unable to speak. matilda, 
seize his hand and her mother’s, lock them in her own, and then 
clasp them to her heart. manfre could not support this act of 
pathetic piety. he dashed himself on the ground, and cursed the day he 
was born. isabella, apprehensive that these struggle of passion were 
more than matilda could support, took upon herself to order manfre to be 
borne to his apartment, while she cause matilda to be convey to the 
nearest chamber. hippolita, scarce more alive than her daughter, was 
regardless of everything but her; but when the tender isabella’s care 
would have likewise remove her, while the surgeon examine matilda’s 
wound, she cried, 

“remove me! never, never! i live but in her, and will expire with her.” 

matilda raise her eyes at her mother’s voice, but closed them again 
without speaking. her sink pulse and the damp cold of her hand 
soon dispel all hope of recovery. theodore follow the surgeon 
into the outer chamber, and heard them pronounce the fatal sentence with 
a transport equal to frenzy. 

“since she cannot live mine,” cry he, “at least she shall be mine in 
death! father! jerome! will you not join our hands?” cry he to the 
friar, who, with the marquis, had accompany the surgeons. 

“what means thy distracted rashness?” said jerome. “is this an hour for 
marriage?” 

“it is, it is,” cry theodore. “alas! there is no other!” 

“young man, thou art too unadvised,” said frederic. “dost thou think we 
are to listen to thy fond transport in this hour of fate? what 
pretension hast thou to the princess?” 

“those of a prince,” said theodore; “of the sovereign of otranto. this 
reverend man, my father, has informed me who i am.” 

“thou ravest,” said the marquis. “there is no prince of otranto but 
myself, now manfred, by murder, by sacrilegious murder, has forfeit all 
pretensions.” 

“my lord,” said jerome, assume an air of command, “he tell you true. 
it was not my purpose the secret should have been divulge so soon, but 
fate press onward to its work. what his hot-headed passion has 
revealed, my tongue confirms. know, prince, that when alfonso set sail 
for the holy land—” 

“is this a season for explanations?” cry theodore. “father, come and 
unite me to the princess; she shall be mine! in every other thing i will 
dutiful obey you. my life! my adore matilda!” continue theodore, 
rush back into the inner chamber, “will you not be mine? will you not 
bless your—” 

isabella made sign to him to be silent, apprehend the princess was 
near her end. 

“what, is she dead?” cry theodore; “is it possible!” 

the violence of his exclamation brought matilda to herself. lift up 
her eyes, she look round for her mother. 

“life of my soul, i am here!” cry hippolita; “think not i will quit 
thee!” 

“oh! you are too good,” said matilda. “but weep not for me, my mother! 
i am go where sorrow never dwells—isabella, thou hast love me; 
wouldst thou not supply my fond to this dear, dear woman? indeed i 
am faint!” 

“oh! my child! my child!” said hippolita in a flood of tears, “can i not 
withhold thee a moment?” 

“it will not be,” said matilda; “commend me to heaven—where is my father? 
forgive him, dearest mother—forgive him my death; it was an error. oh! 
i had forgotten—dearest mother, i vow never to see theodore 
more—perhaps that has drawn down this calamity—but it was not 
intentional—can you pardon me?” 

“oh! wound not my agonising soul!” said hippolita; “thou never couldst 
offend me—alas! she faints! help! help!” 

“i would say something more,” said matilda, struggling, “but it cannot 
be—isabella—theodore—for my sake—oh!—” she expired. 

isabella and her women tore hippolita from the corse; but theodore 
threaten destruction to all who attempt to remove him from it. he 
print a thousand kiss on her clay-cold hands, and utter every 
expression that despairing love could dictate. 

isabella, in the meantime, was accompany the afflict hippolita to 
her apartment; but, in the middle of the court, they were met by manfred, 
who, distracted with his own thoughts, and anxious once more to behold 
his daughter, was advance to the chamber where she lay. as the moon 
was now at its height, he read in the countenance of this unhappy 
company the event he dreaded. 

“what! is she dead?” cry he in wild confusion. a clap of thunder at 
that instant shook the castle to its foundations; the earth rocked, and 
the clank of more than mortal armour was heard behind. frederic and 
jerome thought the last day was at hand. the latter, force theodore 
along with them, rush into the court. the moment theodore appeared, 
the wall of the castle behind manfre were thrown down with a mighty 
force, and the form of alfonso, dilate to an immense magnitude, appear 
in the centre of the ruins. 

“behold in theodore the true heir of alfonso!” said the vision: and 
have pronounced those words, accompany by a clap of thunder, it 
ascend solemn towards heaven, where the cloud parting asunder, the 
form of st. nichola was seen, and receiving alfonso’s shade, they were 
soon wrapt from mortal eyes in a blaze of glory. 

the behold fell prostrate on their faces, acknowledge the divine 
will. the first that broke silence was hippolita. 

“my lord,” said she to the despond manfred, “behold the vanity of 
human greatness! conrad is gone! matilda is no more! in theodore we 
view the true prince of otranto. by what miracle he is so i know 
not—suffice it to us, our doom is pronounced! shall we not, can we but 
dedicate the few deplorable hour we have to live, in deprecate the 
further wrath of heaven? heaven eject us—whither can we fly, but to yon 
holy cell that yet offer us a retreat.” 

“thou guiltless but unhappy woman! unhappy by my crimes!” reply 
manfred, “my heart at last is open to thy devout admonitions. oh! 
could—but it cannot be—ye are lost in wonder—let me at last do justice on 
myself! to heap shame on my own head is all the satisfaction i have left 
to offer to offend heaven. my story has drawn down these judgments: 
let my confession atone—but, ah! what can atone for usurp and a 
murder child? a child murder in a consecrate place? list, sirs, and 
may this bloody record be a warning to future tyrants!” 

“alfonso, ye all know, die in the holy land—ye would interrupt me; ye 
would say he came not fairly to his end—it is most true—why else this 
bitter cup which manfre must drink to the dregs. ricardo, my 
grandfather, was his chamberlain—i would draw a veil over my ancestor’s 
crimes—but it is in vain! alfonso die by poison. a fictitious will 
declared ricardo his heir. his crime pursue him—yet he lost no conrad, 
no matilda! i pay the price of usurp for all! a storm overtook 
him. haunt by his guilt he vow to st. nichola to found a church and 
two convents, if he live to reach otranto. the sacrifice was accepted: 
the saint appear to him in a dream, and promise that ricardo’s 
posterity should reign in otranto until the rightful owner should be 
grown too large to inhabit the castle, and as long as issue male from 
ricardo’s loins should remain to enjoy it—alas! alas! nor male nor 
female, except myself, remains of all his wretched race! i have done—the 
woe of these three days speak the rest. how this young man can be 
alfonso’s heir i know not—yet i do not doubt it. his are these 
dominions; i resign them—yet i knew not alfonso had an heir—i question 
not the will of heaven—poverty and prayer must fill up the woeful space, 
until manfre shall be summon to ricardo.” 

“what remains is my part to declare,” said jerome. “when alfonso set 
sail for the holy land he was driven by a storm to the coast of sicily. 
the other vessel, which bore ricardo and his train, as your lordship must 
have heard, was separate from him.” 

“it is most true,” said manfred; “and the title you give me is more than 
an outcast can claim—well! be it so—proceed.” 

jerome blushed, and continued. “for three month lord alfonso was 
wind-bound in sicily. there he became enamoured of a fair virgin name 
victoria. he was too pious to tempt her to forbidden pleasures. they 
were married. yet deem this amour incongruous with the holy vow of 
arms by which he was bound, he determined to conceal their nuptials until 
his return from the crusade, when he purpose to seek and acknowledge her 
for his lawful wife. he left her pregnant. during his absence she was 
deliver of a daughter. but scarce had she felt a mother’s pang ere 
she heard the fatal rumour of her lord’s death, and the succession of 
ricardo. what could a friendless, helpless woman do? would her 
testimony avail?—yet, my lord, i have an authentic writing—” 

“it needs not,” said manfred; “the horrors of these days, the vision we 
have but now seen, all corroborate thy evidence beyond a thousand 
parchments. matilda’s death and my expulsion—” 

“be composed, my lord,” said hippolita; “this holy man did not mean to 
recall your griefs.” jerome proceeded. 

“i shall not dwell on what is needless. the daughter of which victoria 
was delivered, was at her maturity bestow in marriage on me. victoria 
died; and the secret remain lock in my breast. theodore’s narrative 
has told the rest.” 

the friar ceased. the disconsolate company retired to the remain part 
of the castle. in the morning manfre sign his abdicate of the 
principality, with the approbation of hippolita, and each took on them 
the habit of religion in the neighbouring convents. frederic offer his 
daughter to the new prince, which hippolita’s tender for isabella 
concur to promote. but theodore’s grief was too fresh to admit the 
thought of another love; and it was not until after frequent discourse 
with isabella of his dear matilda, that he was persuade he could know no 
happiness but in the society of one with whom he could for ever indulge 
the melancholy that had taken possession of his soul. 




***end of the project gutenberg ebook the castle of otranto*** 


******* this file should be name 696-0.txt or 696-0.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/9/696 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the 
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for forty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
