did i just get yanged? 
by bari weiss 
jan. 30, 2020 

it was new year’s eve, and i had decided to spend it with andrew yang. a self-described "asian man who’s good at math," mr. yang had raise an impressive $16.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 for his presidential campaign. despite being newly flush, the campaign didn’t hold its shindig in a napa valley wine cave or at gramercy tavern, but in a florescent-lit room above a bar in nashua, n.h. 

the party look like nothing so much as a high school dance if you had ban the bullies. there was a modest buffet of meatballs, spanakopita, ritz crackers and cheddar cheese. the d.j., a boom with trousers that badly need hemming, could have been your chemistry teacher bouncing to cardi b. 

now, a few days away from the iowa caucus, mr. yang has outlast more than a dozen candidates, including three senator and two governors. he came in first among democrat in the iowa youth straw poll on tuesday. next week, he’ll be back on the debate stage. 

he remains a very long shot: national poll have him consistent in the second tier, right next to amy klobuchar. still, conventional wisdom would say that andrew yang should be nowhere this close to the america presidency. 

i went to new hampshire because i want to understand how a politics rookie with what seem like little go for him beyond a signature proposal of free money and relentless cheerful online fan had gotten this far. what do the url candidate’s campaign look like irl? 

that night, the yang gang, as the candidate’s fan proud call themselves, was a happy crowd of gamers, asians, former goth girls, burning man enthusiasts, sci-fi geeks, students, code and stoners. when mr. yang drop a "lord of the rings" joke — "it’s like the eye of sauron is close in!" he said of his momentum in the race — they erupt in laughter. hardcore yang voter are not cool. and that is exactly their, and his, appeal. 

among the partygoer on new year’s eve were jackie and dave farrell, former bernie sander supporter who own a deli in caldwell, n.j. mr. farrell wore a handmade knit beanie stitch with the words "yang," "math," "vote" and "2020"; ms. farrell had a pink yang gang baseball hat over her blue hair and a copy of the candidate’s best seller, "the war on normal people," in her purse. 

they fell in love inside an online role play game call hobowars. it’s hard to imagine anyone at a joe biden event with that kind of meet-cute. "he actually sold me a guild," ms. farrell told me. "it’s sort of like a gang. like a yang gang." 

talk to anyone in the yang gang for a few minutes and they’ll inevitable tell you how they got yanged. the story almost always begin with a younger person telling an old person to google andrew yang. which is exactly what happen with the farrells. 

in august, a 23-year-old employee in the deli approach ms. farrell to ask whom she was supporting. "i was like: ‘bernie, i guess. i support him in 2016,’" she recalled. "and he goes, ‘why haven’t you google andrew yang yet?" 

so she did. "i literally stay up till 4 a.m. that night watch videos." 

have you ever been the target of a twitter mob? it’s about as pleasant as a brazil wax in slow motion. the one thing that bring a small measure of comfort when you are in the digital cross hair is the following assertion: the internet is not real life. 

it is true, at least for the time being, that a horde of pixel cannot transform itself into a horde of people. but the lie that there is a bright line between the online world and the "real" one has been well and truly debunked. just ask any middle-school girl shame for an instagram post, or any adult fire because of a bad tweet, or any democrat hope to oust donald trump and become the 46th president of the united states. 

bernie sander may be fuel by his zealous fan on social media, but of all the democrat running for president, the web means the most to andrew yang. without it, his candidacy simply wouldn’t exist. 

it’s a classic underdog story: a politics unknown, ignore by the mainstream media, sidestep the pundit who had considered him a punchline. "in the early days there weren’t many people in cable news clamor to have me on their shows," he told me over bubble tea on a recent afternoon in his manhattan campaign headquarters. "and so you seek out people who can reach lot of americans." 

those people were the one with podcasts. 

"what launch us was sam harris," said mr. yang of his june 2018 appearance on mr. harris’s show "making sense." it put him on the map: "i was invite to speak at the wing ding in iowa" — a major democratic fund-raising event — "because one of the people there was a sam harris fan." 

mr. harris introduce him to joe rogan, a mixed martial arts color commentator who host one of the most popular podcast in the country. (disclosure: i’ve also appear on his show.) "joe rogan was the game changer," mr. yang said. "we raise ten of thousand of dollar a day for awhile there and a million buck in a week." 

but it isn’t simply that mr. yang clever use new platform to his advantage. sure, the podcast gave him a big boost, but lot of politician have use new media to expand their reach: franklin roosevelt commandeer the radio; team obama master the email blast; president trump tear up twitter. 

mr. yang’s outsize success show that the people who insist that rachel maddow has more influence over the america electorate than mr. rogan are lie to themselves about where cultural power in america is actually located. 

what mr. yang understand is that the old rule no long apply — and that flout those rule is an energize strategy. but while donald trump burn the whole house down, andrew yang is dunk on the system with a big smile. 

that’s how he get onstage at a democratic debate, points out the ridiculous of the artifice — "we’re up here with makeup on our face and our rehearse attack lines, play role in this reality tv show" — and walk away with one of the most talked-about moments of the night despite have had the least talk time. 

his appeal is a powerful reminder that the animate politics conflict of our era may not be left versus right, but establishment versus insurgency. 

the yang campaign pride itself on the heterodoxy of its supporters. "i poll 18 percent among college republicans," mr. yang told me. "i’ve got a higher appeal among independents, libertarian and even some disaffected trump voter than joe biden by the numbers, than bernie sander by the numbers." one of his campaign slogan is "not left. not right. forward." 

the writer wesley yang has suggest that the in-between nature of asian-americans — the way they are often regard neither as white nor as people of color — allow them "to say and do things that white liberal are now afraid to say and do, which is to stand up for certain fundamental values." 

when you consider mr. yang’s position on some of the touchiest aspect of the culture war and imagine his view coming out of the mouth of a michael bennet or a pete buttigieg, you can easily see the truth of this insight. 

for instance: he’s glad that america has become "less of a monoculture." (when he was a kid, he says, his own "efforts to be america included things like join the wrestle team"; he was terrible at the sport.) but, he added, "i think there’s a middle ground where you can’t just say america is nothing and everybody run off and do your own thing." it’s important, he said, to have a "common cultural context and even — and this will be very controversial — a common language of expression." 

i spoke to some of his many asian-american supporters, and this resonate with them. michael chen, a 19-year-old drexel student at one of the new hampshire town hall events, said he appreciate that mr. yang, whose immigrant father grew up in a house with a dirt floor on a peanut farm, is not running on his identity: "you can be asian-american, you can be black american, you can be latino-american, but the common denominator is american. that’s who he is." 

mr. chen was there with his dad, jack. the elder mr. chen call himself a "yang junkie" but insist being asia has "little to do with it." what animate him is the practicality of mr. yang’s solutions. 

mr. yang believe in talk to people he disagree with. in april, he appear on "the ben shapiro show," a no-go zone for those who buy into the new politics of contamination — that to sit next to a conservative like mr. shapiro is to tacit endorse his ideas. "thinking that i’m go to catch idea from someone seem ludicrous to me," he said. 

soon after the comedian shane gilli was hire by "saturday night live," it was reveal that he had use racial slur on podcasts, including describe mr. yang with an anti-semitic and racist epithet. mr. yang tweet that he didn’t think mr. gilli should be fired, writing, "we would benefit from being more forgiving rather than punitive." the show didn’t follow mr. yang’s advice. 

i ask mr. yang, who ran one of the top test prep program in the country before it was bought by kaplan, about his view on affirmative action. is harvard do to asia in the 21st century what it did to jew in the 20th? 

"harvard’s gonna harvard," he said. 

he told me that he himself was reject from the school — he wound up at brown — though he was ample qualified. but "if you have any kind of perspective," he said, you realize that "my life and my humanity depend on more than whether some institution decide to stamp my hand." 

"arguing for higher representation of an already overrepresente group — at least according to population standard — would not be my first bone to pick," he said. instead, he ask why harvard, a university with a $40 billion endowment, is "opening location in shanghai but not ohio or michigan." the real question, he said, is, "are you try to advance our society or are you try to advance global moneyed interests?" 

on new year’s eve it occur to me that, despite living in new york, which pride itself on being the most cosmopolitan city in the world, i had not been in a room with such a politics diverse group of people since donald trump was elect president. 

if there is a typical yang voter it is a former bernie sander supporter who feel that mr. yang understand the challenge of the 21st century better than a 78-year-old socialist without a single app on his phone. 

mr. yang support mr. sander in 2016, before vote for hillary clinton in the general election ("i’m pro-civilization," he said). he understand why young voter are drawn to mr. sanders. "if you’re a young person you look up and say, ‘what have i experienced from this capitalist system?’ corporate abuse, crashes, bailouts, greed, record level of college debt." but he insist the best actor to improve people’s lives is "not our government, it’s us." 

"bernie’s saying, ‘let’s stick it to the billionaire and all will be well,’" he said. "i’m saying, ‘we need to rewrite the code, we need to rewrite the software.’" 

at a campaign stop in manchester, n.h., i spoke with sunny payne, a 23-year-old yang supporter who’d come in from bangor, me., and use the pronoun they. "while i think bernie sander is an amazing person," they said, "he’s has had the exact same policy stance for literally decades." 

amber mccabe and martin raucher, both 29, are also former sander supporters. they drove 25 hour from st. petersburg, fla. they made sure not to cut anyone off on the highway, ms. mccabe said, because there’s a yang bumper sticker on their car and "we have to represent." 

mr. raucher is a disabled veteran and ms. mccabe is an artist; they met through their passion: spin fire. it wasn’t possible to twirl lit torch inside the party room, so ms. mccabe had fashion the next best thing: a handmade light-up yang sign. 

"with yang i’m all about the ideas, the policies," she said, above all, his proposal for a universal basic income of $1,000 a month. 

"i need an oil change," said mr. raucher, when i ask how they’d spend it. "and my roof is leaking." 

just across the dance floor were elasa and russell peterson, two former trump voter who change their registration — and move states — to support mr. yang’s candidacy. 

"everyone i know is the broke-folk vote," said mr. peterson. they are among them. until recently they work at a north carolina olive garden. ("i got to where i hate breadsticks," said ms. peterson.) 

"donald trump stand up there and says, ‘hey, we got to build the wall because the immigrant are coming over here and they’re steal our jobs.’ and you know what? because we’re all broke we’re all like: ‘it’s immigrants! yeah! let’s build the wall!’" mr. peterson said. "but then you hear andrew yang talk and he’s like, ‘you know what? it’s not immigrants. it’s automation.’ you go into walmart, you don’t see immigrants. you see self-serve checkouts. it’s like a light bulb go off. like, ‘wow, this make sense.’" 

it made so much sense that they move in with ms. peterson’s sister in vermont, 10 minutes from the new hampshire border, so they could volunteer full-time for the campaign and promote him on their youtube channel. 

"everybody in our family has been yanged. and they were all trumpers," mr. peterson said. 

at a town hall event attend by some 300 people on new year’s day, the first question — so on-brand i almost assume it was a plant — was about the metric system: "so, mr. make america think harder, can we count on president yang to support the blessing of the metric system?" 

the crowd laughed. amazingly, mr. yang came back with a thoughtful answer about how the metric system is safer, not least because it is more accurate for micro-dosing baby medicine. 

to hear andrew yang talk is to understand why it is possible for people like the peterson to support him: unlike the president, he never demon other americans. "the difference between us are pretty trivial compare to the things we share in common. and that’s a fundamental message of the campaign: able-bodied special needs, white black, old young, rural urban, we’re all go to get run over by this automation freight train," he said. "we need to human up and stop focus on relatively trivial distinctions." 

the villain is not donald trump, but a market rig for big tech and against normal americans. 

in mr. yang’s frame of the 2016 election, mrs. clinton lost not because of the electoral college or russia bots, but because she fundamentally misunderstood the crisis facing america. "donald trump said he was go to make america great again. and what did hillary clinton say in response? america is already great," mr. yang said. "that message did not work because the pain in our country is real." 

in other words: donald trump is the wrong answer to the right question. mr. yang believe he is the right one. 

at each one of the four campaign stop i went to, he ask the crowd why president trump won. the audience call out answers: the media. russia. racism. hillary. facebook. twitter. james comey. 

no, said mr. yang. it’s because "we blasted away four million manufacture jobs" through automation in states like ohio, michigan, pennsylvania, missouri and iowa. 

what happen to manufacture is coming to retail, restaurant and even account and the law, mr. yang insists. while mr. sander suggest a federal government job guarantee, and joe biden suggest turning coal miner into coders, mr. yang say that work as we have known it is over. 

if we don’t change anything, i ask him, where will be 50 years from now? 

best-case scenario? "we will see inequality at a staggering scale that right now most america would find unthinkable." 

and in the worst case? "the collapse of the government in its current form, politics break up, and societal dysfunction that result in mass riot and violence." 

it’s impressive that, for the most part, his good humor soften the bleak message he is conveying. it’s a vision of the future — one dispute as hysterical by many observer — that make president trump’s "american carnage" address look almost rosy by comparison. 

i caught up with sunny payne this week. hearing mr. yang in person "lit the fire under me," they said as they drove around anderson, s.c., after a day spent door-knocking for him. they’d just spent a week in iowa before realize that "i want to spread the message to black voter and community of color and i realize the best place for me to do that was in south carolina." 

they said they kept hearing the same story from voters: "i can’t care about climate change because i need to put food on the table. i have three jobs. i barely sleep." 

to these people, sunny payne said, $1,000 a month would be life-changing. 

that’s the reason that the comedian dave chappelle has endorse mr. yang. "the wealth disparity between me and my neighbor is immense; it’s heartbreaking," said mr. chappelle, who lives in ohio, but appear alongside mr. yang on the campaign trail this week. "if you know a third of the people up the street can’t buy groceries, then you start to feel an imperative concern," he said. "this is without irony or a punch line, i’m just telling you — this guy’s got some great ideas, you should check it out." 

so have i been yanged? 

i don’t know if a universal basic income is the best solution to the problem of inequality. i’m not particularly passionate about lower the vote age to 16 or require police officer to get purple belt in jujitsu. i worry about whether someone with zero foreign policy experience can be the commander in chief. 

but as bernie sander sell class rage, joe biden promise normalcy and elizabeth warren push a social progressiv so perfectly doctrinaire it seem tailor for five kid at oberlin, andrew yang’s iconoclasm and optimism are refreshing. 

if get yang means that i believe that this curious campaign is a cause for that rarest thing in current america politics — hope — and that mr. yang is model how to harness the populist energy that otherwise threaten to tear us apart, then count me #yanggang. 
