the project gutenberg ebook of the vampyre; a tale, by john william polidori 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the vampyre; a tale 

author: john william polidori 

posting date: october 21, 2009 [ebook #6087] 
release date: july, 2004 
first posted: november 3, 2002 
[last updated: may 26, 2012] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the vampyre; a tale *** 




produce by an anonymous project gutenberg volunteer. 









the 

vampyre; 

a tale. 

by john william polidori 



london 

print for sherwood, neely, and jones 

paternoster row 


1819 

[entered at stationers' hall, march 27, 1819] 

gillet, printer, crown court, fleet street, london. 







extract of a letter 

from geneva. 
______________ 
preface 
"i breathe freely in the neighbourhood of this lake; the ground upon 
which i tread has been subdued from the earliest ages; the principal 
object which immediately strike my eye, bring to my recollection 
scenes, in which man act the hero and was the chief object of 
interest. not to look back to early times of battle and sieges, 
here is the bust of rousseau--here is a house with an inscription 
denote that the genevan philosopher first drew breath under its 
roof. a little out of the town is ferney, the residence of voltaire; 
where that wonderful, though certainly in many respects contemptible, 
character, received, like the hermit of old, the visit of pilgrims, 
not only from his own nation, but from the farthest boundary of 
europe. here too is bonnet's abode, and, a few steps beyond, the house 
of that astonish woman madame de stael: perhaps the first of her 
sex, who has really prove its often claim equality with, the noble 
man. we have before had women who have written interesting novel and 
poems, in which their tact at observing drawing-room character has 
avail them; but never since the days of heloise have those faculty 
which are peculiar to man, been develop as the possible inheritance 
of woman. though even here, as in the case of heloise, our sex have 
not been backward in alledg the existence of an abeilard in the 
person of m. schlegel as the inspire of her works. but to proceed: 
upon the same side of the lake, gibbon, bonnivard, bradshaw, and 
other mark, as it were, the stage for our progress; whilst upon the 
other side there is one house, built by diodati, the friend of milton, 
which has contained within its walls, for several months, that poet 
whom we have so often read together, and who--if human passion remain 
the same, and human feelings, like chords, on being swept by nature's 
impulse shall vibrate as before--will be placed by posterity in the 
first rank of our english poets. you must have heard, or the third 
canto of childe harold will have informed you, that lord byron reside 
many month in this neighbourhood. i went with some friends a few days 
ago, after have seen ferney, to view this mansion. i trod the floor 
with the same feelings of awe and respect as we did, together, those 
of shakespeare's dwelling at stratford. i sat down in a chair of the 
saloon, and satisfy myself that i was rest on what he had made 
his constant seat. i found a servant there who had live with him; 
she, however, gave me but little information. she pointed out his 
bed-chamber upon the same level as the saloon and dining-room, and 
informed me that he retired to rest at three, got up at two, and 
employ himself a long time over his toilette; that he never went to 
sleep without a pair of pistol and a dagger by his side, and that he 
never ate animal food. he apparently spent some part of every day upon 
the lake in an english boat. there is a balcony from the saloon which 
looks upon the lake and the mountain jura; and i imagine, that it must 
have been hence, he contemplate the storm so magnificent describe 
in the third canto; for you have from here a most extensive view of 
all the points he has therein depicted. i can fancy him like the 
scathe pine, whilst all around was sunk to repose, still waking to 
observe, what gave but a weak image of the storm which had desolate 
his own breast. 

the sky is changed!--and such a change; oh, night! 
and storm and darkness, ye are wond'rous strong, 
yet lovely in your strength, as is the light 
of a dark eye in woman! far along 
from peak to peak, the rattling crag among, 
leap the lire thunder! not from one lone cloud, 
but every mountain now hath found a tongue, 
and jura answer thro' her misty shroud, 
back to the joyous alps who call to her aloud! 

and this is in the night:--most glorious night! 
thou wer't not sent for slumber! let me be 
a share in thy far and fierce delight,-- 
a portion of the tempest and of me! 
how the lit lake shine a phosphoric sea, 
and the big rain comet dance to the earth! 
and now again 'tis black,--and now the glee 
of the loud hill shakes with its mountain mirth, 
as if they did rejoice o'er a young; earthquake's birth, 

now where the swift rhine cleave his way between 
heights which appear, as lovers who have part 
in haste, whose mining depths so intervene, 
that they can meet no more, tho' broken hearted; 
tho' in their soul which thus each other thwarted, 
love was the very root of the fond rage 
which blight their life's bloom, and then departed-- 
itself expired, but leaving; them an age 
of years all winter--war within themselves to wage. 

i went down to the little port, if i may use the expression, wherein 
his vessel use to lay, and converse with the cottager, who had the 
care of it. you may smile, but i have my pleasure in thus helping my 
personification of the individual i admire, by attain to the 
knowledge of those circumstances which were daily around him. i have 
made numerous enquiry in the town concerning him, but can learn 
nothing. he only went into society there once, when m. pictet took him 
to the house of a lady to spend the evening. they say he is a very 
singular man, and seem to think him very uncivil. amongst other things 
they relate, that have invite m. pictet and bonstetten to dinner, 
he went on the lake to chillon, leave a gentleman who travelled with 
him to receive them and make his apologies. another evening, being 
invite to the house of lady d---- h----, he promise to attend, 
but upon approach the window of her ladyship's villa, and 
perceive the room to be full of company, he set down his friend, 
desire him to plead his excuse, and immediately return home. this 
will serve as a contradiction to the report which you tell me is 
current in england, of his have been avoid by his countrymen on 
the continent. the case happen to be directly the reverse, as he has 
been generally sought by them, though on most occasions, apparently 
without success. it is said, indeed, that upon pay his first visit 
at coppet, following the servant who had announce his name, he was 
surprise to meet a lady carry out fainting; but before he had been 
seat many minutes, the same lady, who had been so affected at the 
sound of his name, return and converse with him a considerable 
time--such is female curiosity and affectation! he visit coppet 
frequently, and of course associate there with several of his 
countrymen, who evince no reluctance to meet him whom his enemy 
alone would represent as an outcast. 

though i have been so unsuccessful in this town, i have been more 
fortunate in my enquiry elsewhere. there is a society three or four 
mile from geneva, the centre of which is the countess of breuss, a 
russia lady, well acquaint with the agrémens de la société, and who 
has collected them round herself at her mansion. it was chiefly here, 
i find, that the gentleman who travelled with lord byron, as 
physician, sought for society. he use almost every day to cross the 
lake by himself, in one of their flat-bottomed boats, and return after 
passing the evening with his friends, about eleven or twelve at night, 
often whilst the storm were rage in the circle summit of the 
mountain around. as he became intimate, from long acquaintance, with 
several of the family in this neighbourhood, i have gather from 
their account some excellent trait of his lordship's character, 
which i will relate to you at some future opportunity. i must, 
however, free him from one imputation attach to him--of have in 
his house two sister as the partake of his revels. this is, like 
many other charge which have been brought against his lordship, 
entire destitute of truth. his only companion was the physician i 
have already mentioned. the report originate from the following 
circumstance: mr. percy bysshe shelly, a gentleman well known for 
extravagance of doctrine, and for his daring, in their profession, 
even to sign himself with the title of atheo in the album at 
chamouny, have taken a house below, in which he reside with miss m. 
w. godwin and miss clermont, (the daughter of the celebrated mr. 
godwin) they were frequent visitor at diodati, and were often seen 
upon the lake with his lordship, which gave rise to the report, the 
truth of which is here positively denied. 

among other things which the lady, from whom i procure these 
anecdotes, related to me, she mention the outline of a ghost story 
by lord byron. it appear that one evening lord b., mr. p. b. shelly, 
the two ladies and the gentleman before allude to, after have 
peruse a germany work, which was entitle phantasmagoriana, began 
relate ghost stories; when his lordship have recite the beginning 
of christabel, then unpublished, the whole took so strong a hold of 
mr. shelly's mind, that he sudden start up and ran out of the 
room. the physician and lord byron followed, and discover him 
leaning against a mantle-piece, with cold drops of perspiration 
trickle down his face. after have given him something to refresh 
him, upon enquiring into the cause of his alarm, they found that his 
wild imagination have picture to him the bosom of one of the ladies 
with eyes (which was report of a lady in the neighbourhood where he 
lived) he was oblige to leave the room in order to destroy the 
impression. it was afterwards proposed, in the course of conversation, 
that each of the company present should write a tale depend upon 
some supernatural agency, which was undertaken by lord b., the 
physician, and miss m. w. godwin.[1] my friend, the lady above 
refer to, had in her possession the outline of each of these 
stories; i obtain them as a great favour, and herewith forward them 
to you, as i was assured you would feel as much curiosity as myself, 
to peruse the ebauche of so great a genius, and those immediately 
under his influence." 



[1] since publish under the title of "frankenstein; or, the modern 
prometheus." 




the vampyre. 
________________________________________________________________ 

introduction. 
__________ 

the superstition upon which this tale is found is very general in 
the east. among the arabia it appear to be common: it did not, 
however, extend itself to the greece until after the establishment of 
christianity; and it has only assume its present form since the 
division of the latin and greece churches; at which time, the idea 
becoming prevalent, that a latin body could not corrupt if bury in 
their territory, it gradual increased, and form the subject of 
many wonderful stories, still extant, of the dead rising from their 
graves, and feed upon the blood of the young and beautiful. in the 
west it spread, with some slight variation, all over hungary, poland, 
austria, and lorraine, where the belief existed, that vampyre nightly 
imbibe a certain portion of the blood of their victims, who became 
emaciated, lost their strength, and speedy die of consumptions; 
whilst these human blood-suckers fattened--and their vein became 
distend to such a state of repletion, as to cause the blood to flow 
from all the passage of their bodies, and even from the very pore of 
their skins. 

in the london journal, of march, 1732, is a curious, and, of course, 
credible account of a particular case of vampyrism, which is state to 
have occur at madreyga, in hungary. it appears, that upon an 
examination of the commander-in-chief and magistrate of the place, 
they positively and unanimous affirmed, that, about five years 
before, a certain heyduke, name arnold paul, had been heard to say, 
that, at cassovia, on the frontier of the turkey servia, he had been 
torment by a vampyre, but had found a way to rid himself of the 
evil, by eat some of the earth out of the vampyre's grave, and 
rubbing himself with his blood. this precaution, however, did not 
prevent him from becoming a vampyre[2] himself; for, about twenty or 
thirty days after his death and burial, many person complain of 
have been torment by him, and a deposition was made, that four 
person had been deprived of life by his attacks. to prevent further 
mischief, the inhabitant have consult their hadagni,[3] took up 
the body, and found it (as is supposed to be usual in case of 
vampyrism) fresh, and entire free from corruption, and emit at 
the mouth, nose, and ears, pure and florid blood. proof have been 
thus obtained, they resort to the accustomed remedy. a stake was 
driven entire through the heart and body of arnold paul, at which he 
is report to have cry out as dreadfully as if he had been alive. 
this done, they cut off his head, burn his body, and threw the ashes 
into his grave. the same measure were adopt with the corse of 
those person who had previous die from vampyrism, lest they 
should, in their turn, become agent upon other who survive them. 



[2] the universal belief is, that a person suck by a vampyre become a 
vampyre himself, and suck in his turn. 

[3] chief bailiff. 



this monstrous rodomontade is here related, because it seem better 
adapt to illustrate the subject of the present observations than any 
other instance which could be adduced. in many parts of greece it is 
considered as a sort of punishment after death, for some heinous crime 
committed whilst in existence, that the deceased is not only doom to 
vampyrise, but compel to confine his infernal visitation solely to 
those being he love most while upon earth--those to whom he was bound 
by tie of kindred and affection.--a supposition allude to in the 
"giaour." 

but first on earth, as vampyre sent, 
thy corse shall from its tomb be rent; 
then ghastly haunt the native place, 
and suck the blood of all thy race; 
there from thy daughter, sister, wife, 
at midnight drain the stream of life; 
yet loathe the banquet which perforce 
must feed thy livid living corse, 
thy victims, ere they yet expire, 
shall know the demon for their sire; 
as curse thee, thou curse them, 
thy flower are wither on the stem. 
but one that for thy crime must fall, 
the youngest, best beloved of all, 
shall bless thee with a father's name-- 
that word shall wrap thy heart in flame! 
yet thou must end thy task and mark 
her cheek's last tinge--her eye's last spark, 
and the last glassy glance must view 
which freeze o'er its lifeless blue; 
then with unhallowed hand shall tear 
the tresses of her yellow hair, 
of which, in life a lock when shorn 
affection's fondest pledge was worn-- 
but now is borne away by thee 
memorial of thine agony! 
yet with thine own best blood shall drip; 
thy gnash tooth, and haggard lip; 
then stalk to thy sullen grave, 
go--and with goul and afrit rave, 
till these in horror shrink away 
from spectre more accursed than they. 

mr. southey has also introduce in his wild but beautiful poem of 
"thalaba," the vampyre corse of the arabia maid oneiza, who is 
represent as have return from the grave for the purpose of 
torment him she best love whilst in existence. but this cannot be 
supposed to have result from the sinful of her life, she being 
pourtraye throughout the whole of the tale as a complete type of 
purity and innocence. the veracious tournefort give a long account in 
his travels of several astonish case of vampyrism, to which he 
pretend to have been an eyewitness; and calmet, in his great work 
upon this subject, besides a variety of anecdotes, and traditionary 
narrative illustrative of its effects, has put forth some learned 
dissertations, tend to prove it to be a classical, as well as 
barbarian error. 

many curious and interesting notice on this singularly horrible 
superstition might be added; though the present may suffice for the 
limit of a note, necessarily devoted to explanation, and which may 
now be conclude by merely remarking, that though the term vampyre is 
the one in most general acceptation, there are several other 
synonymous with it, made use of in various parts of the world: as 
vroucolocha, vardoulacha, goul, broucoloka, &c. 


________________________________________________________________ 

the vampyre. 
__________ 

it happen that in the midst of the dissipation attendant upon a 
london winter, there appear at the various party of the leader of 
the ton a nobleman, more remarkable for his singularities, than his 
rank. he gaze upon the mirth around him, as if he could not 
participate therein. apparently, the light laughter of the fair only 
attract his attention, that he might by a look quell it, and throw 
fear into those breast where thoughtless reigned. those who felt 
this sensation of awe, could not explain whence it arose: some 
attribute it to the dead grey eye, which, fix upon the object's 
face, did not seem to penetrate, and at one glance to pierce through 
to the inward workings of the heart; but fell upon the cheek with a 
leaden ray that weigh upon the skin it could not pass. his 
peculiarity cause him to be invite to every house; all wish to 
see him, and those who had been accustomed to violent excitement, and 
now felt the weight of ennui, were pleased at have something in 
their presence capable of engaging their attention. in spite of the 
deadly hue of his face, which never gain a warm tint, either from 
the blush of modesty, or from the strong emotion of passion, though 
its form and outline were beautiful, many of the female hunter after 
notoriety attempt to win his attentions, and gain, at least, some 
mark of what they might term affection: lady mercer, who had been the 
mockery of every monster shewn in drawing-rooms since her marriage, 
threw herself in his way, and did all but put on the dress of a 
mountebank, to attract his notice:--though in vain:--when she 
stood before him, though his eyes were apparently fixed upon her's, 
still it seem as if they were unperceived;--even her unappall 
impudence was baffled, and she left the field. but though the common 
adultress could not influence even the guidance of his eyes, it was 
not that the female sex was indifferent to him: yet such was the 
apparent caution with which he spoke to the virtuous wife and innocent 
daughter, that few knew he ever address himself to females. he had, 
however, the reputation of a winning tongue; and whether it was that 
it even overcame the dread of his singular character, or that they 
were move by his apparent hatred of vice, he was as often among those 
female who form the boast of their sex from their domestic virtues, 
as among those who sully it by their vices. 

about the same time, there came to london a young gentleman of the 
name of aubrey: he was an orphan left with an only sister in the 
possession of great wealth, by parent who die while he was yet in 
childhood. left also to himself by guardians, who thought it their 
duty merely to take care of his fortune, while they relinquish the 
more important charge of his mind to the care of mercenary subalterns, 
he cultivated more his imagination than his judgment. he had, hence, 
that high romantic feeling of honour and candour, which daily ruins so 
many milliners' apprentices. he believe all to sympathise with 
virtue, and thought that vice was thrown in by providence merely for 
the picturesque effect of the scene, as we see in romances: he thought 
that the misery of a cottage merely consist in the vest of 
clothes, which were as warm, but which were better adapt to the 
painter's eye by their irregular fold and various coloured patches. 
he thought, in fine, that the dream of poet were the reality of 
life. he was handsome, frank, and rich: for these reasons, upon his 
enter into the gay circles, many mother surround him, strive 
which should describe with least truth their languish or romp 
favourites: the daughter at the same time, by their brighten 
countenance when he approached, and by their sparkle eyes, when he 
open his lips, soon led him into false notions of his talent and 
his merit. attach as he was to the romance of his solitary hours, 
he was startle at finding, that, except in the tallow and wax candle 
that flickered, not from the presence of a ghost, but from want of 
snuffing, there was no foundation in real life for any of that 
congery of pleasing pictures and description contained in those 
volumes, from which he had form his study. finding, however, some 
compensation in his gratify vanity, he was about to relinquish his 
dreams, when the extraordinary being we have above described, cross 
him in his career. 

he watch him; and the very impossible of form an idea of the 
character of a man entire absorb in himself, who gave few other 
sign of his observation of external objects, than the tacit assent to 
their existence, imply by the avoidance of their contact: allow 
his imagination to picture every thing that flatter its propensity 
to extravagant ideas, he soon form this object into the hero of a 
romance, and determined to observe the offspring of his fancy, rather 
than the person before him. he became acquaint with him, paid him 
attentions, and so far advanced upon his notice, that his presence was 
always recognised. he gradual learnt that lord ruthven's affair 
were embarrassed, and soon found, from the note of preparation in 
---- street, that he was about to travel. desirous of gain some 
information respecting this singular character, who, till now, had 
only whet his curiosity, he hint to his guardians, that it was 
time for him to perform the tour, which for many generation has been 
thought necessary to enable the young to take some rapid steps in the 
career of vice towards putt themselves upon an equality with the 
aged, and not allow them to appear as if fallen from the skies, 
whenever scandalous intrigue are mention as the subject of 
pleasantry or of praise, according to the degree of skill shewn in 
carry them on. they consented: and aubrey immediately mention 
his intentions to lord ruthven, was surprise to receive from him a 
proposal to join him. flatter by such a mark of esteem from him, 
who, apparently, had nothing in common with other men, he gladly 
accept it, and in a few days they had pass the circle waters. 

hitherto, aubrey had had no opportunity of study lord ruthven's 
character, and now he found, that, though many more of his action 
were expose to his view, the result offer different conclusion 
from the apparent motive to his conduct. his companion was profuse 
in his liberality;--the idle, the vagabond, and the beggar, received 
from his hand more than enough to relieve their immediate wants. but 
aubrey could not avoid remarking, that it was not upon the virtuous, 
reduce to indigence by the misfortune attendant even upon virtue, 
that he bestow his alms;--these were sent from the door with 
hardly suppress sneers; but when the profligate came to ask 
something, not to relieve his wants, but to allow him to wallow in his 
lust, or to sink him still deep in his iniquity, he was sent away 
with rich charity. this was, however, attribute by him to the greater 
importune of the vicious, which generally prevail over the retiring 
bashful of the virtuous indigent. there was one circumstance about 
the charity of his lordship, which was still more impress upon his 
mind: all those upon whom it was bestowed, inevitable found that there 
was a curse upon it, for they were all either led to the scaffold, or 
sunk to the lowest and the most abject misery. at brussels and other 
town through which they passed, aubrey was surprize at the apparent 
eager with which his companion sought for the centre of all 
fashionable vice; there he enter into all the spirit of the faro 
table: he betted, and always gamble with success, except where the 
known sharper was his antagonist, and then he lost even more than he 
gained; but it was always with the same unchang face, with which he 
generally watch the society around: it was not, however, so when he 
encounter the rash youthful novice, or the luckless father of a 
numerous family; then his very wish seem fortune's law--this 
apparent abstracted of mind was laid aside, and his eyes sparkle 
with more fire than that of the cat whilst dally with the 
half-dead mouse. in every town, he left the formerly affluent youth, 
torn from the circle he adorned, cursing, in the solitude of a 
dungeon, the fate that had drawn him within the reach of this fiend; 
whilst many a father sat frantic, amidst the speak looks of mute 
hungry children, without a single farthing of his late immense wealth, 
wherewith to buy even sufficient to satisfy their present craving. yet 
he took no money from the gamble table; but immediately lost, to the 
ruin of many, the last gild he had just snatch from the 
convulsive grasp of the innocent: this might but be the result of a 
certain degree of knowledge, which was not, however, capable of 
combat the cunning of the more experienced. aubrey often wish to 
represent this to his friend, and beg him to resign that charity and 
pleasure which prove the ruin of all, and did not tend to his own 
profit;--but he delay it--for each day he hope his friend would 
give him some opportunity of speak frankly and openly to him; 
however, this never occurred. lord ruthven in his carriage, and amidst 
the various wild and rich scene of nature, was always the same: his 
eye spoke less than his lip; and though aubrey was near the object of 
his curiosity, he obtain no greater gratification from it than the 
constant excitement of vain wish to break that mystery, which to 
his exalted imagination began to assume the appearance of something 
supernatural. 

they soon arrive at rome, and aubrey for a time lost sight of his 
companion; he left him in daily attendance upon the morning circle of 
an italy countess, whilst he went in search of the memorial of 
another almost desert city. whilst he was thus engaged, letters 
arrive from england, which he open with eager impatience; the first 
was from his sister, breathing nothing but affection; the other were 
from his guardians, the latter astonish him; if it had before 
enter into his imagination that there was an evil power resident in 
his companion, these seem to give him sufficient reason for the 
belief. his guardian insist upon his immediately leave his 
friend, and urged, that his character was dreadfully vicious, for that 
the possession of irresistible powers of seduction, render his 
licentious habit more dangerous to society. it had been discovered, 
that his contempt for the adultress had not originate in hatred of 
her character; but that he had required, to enhance his gratification, 
that his victim, the partner of his guilt, should be hurl from the 
pinnacle of unsullied virtue, down to the lowest abyss of infamy and 
degradation: in fine, that all those female whom he had sought, 
apparently on account of their virtue, had, since his departure, 
thrown even the mask aside, and had not scruple to expose the whole 
deformity of their vice to the public gaze. 

aubrey determined upon leave one, whose character had not yet shown 
a single bright point on which to rest the eye. he resolve to invent 
some plausible pretext for abandon him altogether, purposing, in 
the mean while, to watch him more closely, and to let no slight 
circumstances pass by unnoticed. he enter into the same circle, and 
soon perceived, that his lordship was endeavour to work upon the 
inexperience of the daughter of the lady whose house he chiefly 
frequented. in italy, it is seldom that an unmarried female is met 
with in society; he was therefore oblige to carry on his plan in 
secret; but aubrey's eye follow him in all his windings, and soon 
discover that an assignation had been appointed, which would most 
likely end in the ruin of an innocent, though thoughtless girl. lose 
no time, he enter the apartment of lord ruthven, and abrupt ask 
him his intentions with respect to the lady, inform him at the same 
time that he was aware of his being about to meet her that very night. 
lord ruthven answered, that his intentions were such as he supposed 
all would have upon such an occasion; and upon being pressed whether 
he intended to marry her, merely laughed. aubrey retired; and, 
immediately writing a note, to say, that from that moment he must 
decline accompany his lordship in the remainder of their propose 
tour, he ordered his servant to seek other apartments, and calling 
upon the mother of the lady, informed her of all he knew, not only 
with regard to her daughter, but also concerning the character of his 
lordship. the assignation was prevented. lord ruthven next day merely 
sent his servant to notify his complete assent to a separation; but 
did not hint any suspicion of his plan have been foil by aubrey's 
interposition. 

have left rome, aubrey direct his steps towards greece, and 
crossing the peninsula, soon found himself at athens. he then fixed 
his residence in the house of a greek; and soon occupy himself in 
tracing the fade record of ancient glory upon monument that 
apparently, ashamed of chronicle the deed of freemen only before 
slaves, had hidden themselves beneath the shelter soil or many 
coloured lichen. under the same roof as himself, exist a being, so 
beautiful and delicate, that she might have form the model for a 
painter wish to pourtray on canvass the promise hope of the 
faithful in mahomet's paradise, save that her eyes spoke too much mind 
for any one to think she could belong to those who had no souls. as 
she dance upon the plain, or trip along the mountain's side, one 
would have thought the gazelle a poor type of her beauties; for who 
would have exchange her eye, apparently the eye of animate nature, 
for that sleepy luxurious look of the animal suit but to the taste 
of an epicure. the light step of ianthe often accompany aubrey in 
his search after antiquities, and often would the unconscious girl, 
engaged in the pursuit of a kashmere butterfly, show the whole beauty 
of her form, floating as it were upon the wind, to the eager gaze of 
him, who forgot the letters he had just decyphere upon an almost 
efface tablet, in the contemplation of her sylph-like figure. often 
would her tresses falling, as she flit around, exhibit in the sun's 
ray such delicate brilliant and swift fade hues, it might well 
excuse the forgetful of the antiquary, who let escape from his 
mind the very object he had before thought of vital importance to the 
proper interpretation of a passage in pausanias. but why attempt to 
describe charm which all feel, but none can appreciate?--it was 
innocence, youth, and beauty, unaffected by crowded drawing-rooms and 
stifle balls. whilst he drew those remains of which he wish to 
preserve a memorial for his future hours, she would stand by, and 
watch the magic effects of his pencil, in tracing the scene of her 
native place; she would then describe to him the circle dance upon 
the open plain, would paint, to him in all the glowing colours of 
youthful memory, the marriage pomp she remember view in her 
infancy; and then, turning to subject that had evidently made a 
greater impression upon her mind, would tell him all the supernatural 
tale of her nurse. her earnest and apparent belief of what she 
narrated, excited the interest even of aubrey; and often as she told 
him the tale of the living vampyre, who had pass years amidst his 
friends, and dearest ties, forced every year, by feed upon the life 
of a lovely female to prolong his existence for the ensue months, 
his blood would run cold, whilst he attempt to laugh her out of such 
idle and horrible fantasies; but ianthe cite to him the name of old 
men, who had at last detect one living among themselves, after 
several of their near relative and children had been found marked 
with the stamp of the fiend's appetite; and when she found him so 
incredulous, she beg of him to believe her, for it had been, 
remarked, that those who had dare to question their existence, always 
had some proof given, which oblige them, with grief and 
heartbreaking, to confess it was true. she detailed to him the 
traditional appearance of these monsters, and his horror was 
increased, by hearing a pretty accurate description of lord ruthven; 
he, however, still persist in persuade her, that there could be no 
truth in her fears, though at the same time he wonder at the many 
coincidence which had all tend to excite a belief in the 
supernatural power of lord ruthven. 

aubrey began to attach himself more and more to ianthe; her innocence, 
so contrast with all the affected virtue of the women among whom he 
had sought for his vision of romance, won his heart; and while he 
ridicule the idea of a young man of english habits, marry an 
uneducated greece girl, still he found himself more and more attach 
to the almost fairy form before him. he would tear himself at times 
from her, and, form a plan for some antiquarian research, he would 
depart, determined not to return until his object was attained; but he 
always found it impossible to fix his attention upon the ruins around 
him, whilst in his mind he retain an image that seem alone the 
rightful possessor of his thoughts. ianthe was unconscious of his 
love, and was ever the same frank infantile being he had first known. 
she always seem to part from him with reluctance; but it was because 
she had no long any one with whom she could visit her favourite 
haunts, whilst her guardian was occupy in sketch or uncover 
some fragment which had yet escape the destructive hand of time. she 
had appeal to her parent on the subject of vampyres, and they both, 
with several present, affirm their existence, pale with horror at 
the very name. soon after, aubrey determined to proceed upon one of 
his excursions, which was to detain him for a few hours; when they 
heard the name of the place, they all at once beg of him not to 
return at night, as he must necessarily pass through a wood, where no 
greece would ever remain, after the day had closed, upon any 
consideration. they describe it as the resort of the vampyre in 
their nocturnal orgies, and denounce the most heavy evil as 
impending upon him who dare to cross their path. aubrey made light of 
their representations, and try to laugh them out of the idea; but 
when he saw them shudder at his daring thus to mock a superior, 
infernal power, the very name of which apparently made their blood 
freeze, he was silent. 

next morning aubrey set off upon his excursion unattended; he was 
surprise to observe the melancholy face of his host, and was 
concerned to find that his words, mock the belief of those horrible 
fiends, had inspired them with such terror. when he was about to 
depart, ianthe came to the side of his horse, and earnest beg of 
him to return, ere night allow the power of these being to be put 
in action;--he promised. he was, however, so occupy in his 
research, that he did not perceive that day-light would soon end, and 
that in the horizon there was one of those speck which, in the warm 
climates, so rapid gather into a tremendous mass, and pour all their 
rage upon the devoted country.--he at last, however, mount his 
horse, determined to make up by speed for his delay: but it was too 
late. twilight, in these southern climates, is almost unknown; 
immediately the sun sets, night begins: and ere he had advanced far, 
the power of the storm was above--its echo thunder had scarcely 
an interval of rest--its thick heavy rain forced its way through the 
canopy foliage, whilst the blue forked lightning seem to fall and 
radiate at his very feet. sudden his horse took fright, and he was 
carry with dreadful rapid through the entangle forest. the 
animal at last, through fatigue, stopped, and he found, by the glare 
of lightning, that he was in the neighbourhood of a hovel that hardly 
lift itself up from the masses of dead leaves and brushwood which 
surround it. dismounting, he approached, hope to find some one to 
guide him to the town, or at least trust to obtain shelter from the 
pelt of the storm. as he approached, the thunders, for a moment 
silent, allow him to hear the dreadful shriek of a woman mingle 
with the stifled, exultant mockery of a laugh, continue in one almost 
unbroken sound;--he was startled: but, rouse by the thunder which 
again roll over his head, he, with a sudden effort, forced open the 
door of the hut. he found himself in utter darkness: the sound, 
however, guide him. he was apparently unperceived; for, though he 
called, still the sound continued, and no notice was taken of him. he 
found himself in contact with some one, whom he immediately seized; 
when a voice cried, "again baffled!" to which a loud laugh succeeded; 
and he felt himself grapple by one whose strength seem superhuman: 
determined to sell his life as dearly as he could, he struggled; but 
it was in vain: he was lift from his feet and hurl with enormous 
force against the ground:--his enemy threw himself upon him, and 
kneel upon his breast, had placed his hand upon his throat--when 
the glare of many torch penetrating through the hole that gave 
light in the day, disturbed him;--he instantly rose, and, leave his 
prey, rush through the door, and in a moment the crashing of the 
branches, as he broke through the wood, was no long heard. the storm 
was now still; and aubrey, incapable of moving, was soon heard by 
those without. they entered; the light of their torch fell upon the 
mud walls, and the thatch loaded on every individual straw with heavy 
flake of soot. at the desire of aubrey they search for her who had 
attract him by her cries; he was again left in darkness; but what 
was his horror, when the light of the torch once more burst upon 
him, to perceive the airy form of his fair conductress brought in a 
lifeless corse. he shut his eyes, hope that it was but a vision 
arise from his disturbed imagination; but he again saw the same 
form, when he unclosed them, stretch by his side. there was no 
colour upon her cheek, not even upon her lip; yet there was a 
still about her face that seem almost as attach as the life 
that once dwelt there:--upon her neck and breast was blood, and upon 
her throat were the mark of teeth have open the vein:--to this 
the men pointed, crying, simultaneous struck with horror, "a 
vampyre! a vampyre!" a litter was quick formed, and aubrey was laid 
by the side of her who had lately been to him the object of so many 
bright and fairy visions, now fallen with the flower of life that had 
die within her. he knew not what his thought were--his mind was 
benumbed and seem to shun reflection, and take refuge in 
vacancy--he held almost unconscious in his hand a naked dagger of a 
particular construction, which had been found in the hut. they were 
soon met by different party who had been engaged in the search of 
her whom a mother had missed. their lamentable cries, as they 
approach the city, forewarn the parent of some dreadful 
catastrophe. --to describe their grief would be impossible; but when 
they ascertain the cause of their child's death, they look at 
aubrey, and pointed to the corse. they were inconsolable; both die 
broken-hearted. 

aubrey being put to bed was seize with a most violent fever, and was 
often delirious; in these interval he would call upon lord ruthven 
and upon ianthe--by some unaccountable combination he seem to beg 
of his former companion to spare the being he loved. at other times he 
would imprecate malediction upon his head, and curse him as her 
destroyer. lord ruthven, chance at this time to arrive at athens, 
and, from whatever motive, upon hearing of the state of aubrey, 
immediately placed himself in the same house, and became his constant 
attendant. when the latter recover from his delirium, he was 
horrify and startle at the sight of him whose image he had now 
combine with that of a vampyre; but lord ruthven, by his kind words, 
imply almost repentance for the fault that had cause their 
separation, and still more by the attention, anxiety, and care which 
he showed, soon reconcile him to his presence. his lordship seem 
quite changed; he no long appear that apathetic being who had so 
astonish aubrey; but as soon as his convalescence began to be rapid, 
he again gradual retired into the same state of mind, and aubrey 
perceive no difference from the former man, except that at times he 
was surprise to meet his gaze fixed intent upon him, with a smile 
of malicious exultation play upon his lips: he knew not why, but 
this smile haunt him. during the last stage of the invalid's 
recovery, lord ruthven was apparently engaged in watch the tideless 
wave raise by the cool breeze, or in marking the progress of 
those orbs, circling, like our world, the moveless sun;--indeed, he 
appear to wish to avoid the eyes of all. 

aubrey's mind, by this shock, was much weakened, and that elasticity 
of spirit which had once so distinguished him now seem to have flee 
for ever. he was now as much a lover of solitude and silence as lord 
ruthven; but much as he wish for solitude, his mind could not find 
it in the neighbourhood of athens; if he sought it amidst the ruins he 
had formerly frequented, ianthe's form stood by his side--if he 
sought it in the woods, her light step would appear wandering amidst 
the underwood, in quest of the modest violet; then sudden turning 
round, would show, to his wild imagination, her pale face and wound 
throat, with a meek smile upon her lips. he determined to fly scenes, 
every feature of which create such bitter association in his mind. 
he propose to lord ruthven, to whom he held himself bound by the 
tender care he had taken of him during his illness, that they should 
visit those parts of greece neither had yet seen. they travelled in 
every direction, and sought every spot to which a recollection could 
be attached: but though they thus hasten from place to place, yet 
they seem not to heed what they gaze upon. they heard much of 
robbers, but they gradual began to slight these reports, which they 
imagine were only the invention of individuals, whose interest it was 
to excite the generous of those whom they defend from pretended 
dangers. in consequence of thus neglect the advice of the 
inhabitants, on one occasion they travelled with only a few guards, 
more to serve as guide than as a defence. upon entering, however, a 
narrow defile, at the bottom of which was the bed of a torrent, with 
large masses of rock brought down from the neighbouring precipices, 
they had reason to repent their negligence; for scarcely were the 
whole of the party engaged in the narrow pass, when they were startle 
by the whistle of bullet close to their heads, and by the echo 
report of several guns. in an instant their guard had left them, and, 
place themselves behind rocks, had begun to fire in the direction 
whence the report came. lord ruthven and aubrey, imitate their 
example, retired for a moment behind the shelter turn of the 
defile: but ashamed of being thus detain by a foe, who with 
insult shout bade them advance, and being expose to unresist 
slaughter, if any of the robber should climb above and take them in 
the rear, they determined at once to rush forward in search of the 
enemy. hardly had they lost the shelter of the rock, when lord ruthven 
received a shot in the shoulder, which brought him to the ground. 
aubrey hasten to his assistance; and, no long heed the contest 
or his own peril, was soon surprise by seeing the robbers' face 
around him--his guard having, upon lord ruthven's being wounded, 
immediately thrown up their arms and surrendered. 

by promise of great reward, aubrey soon induce them to convey his 
wound friend to a neighbouring cabin; and have agree upon a 
ransom, he was no more disturbed by their presence--they being 
content merely to guard the entrance till their comrade should return 
with the promise sum, for which he had an order. lord ruthven's 
strength rapid decreased; in two days mortification ensued, and 
death seem advance with hasty steps. his conduct and appearance 
had not changed; he seem as unconscious of pain as he had been of 
the object about him: but towards the close of the last evening, his 
mind became apparently uneasy, and his eye often fixed upon aubrey, 
who was induce to offer his assistance with more than usual 
earnestness--"assist me! you may save me--you may do more than 
that--i mean not my life, i heed the death of my existence as little 
as that of the passing day; but you may save my honour, your friend's 
honour."--"how? tell me how? i would do any thing," reply aubrey.--"i 
need but little--my life ebb apace--i cannot explain the 
whole--but if you would conceal all you know of me, my honour were 
free from stain in the world's mouth--and if my death were unknown 
for some time in england--i--i--but life."--"it shall not be 
known."--"swear!" cry the die man, raise himself with exultant 
violence, "swear by all your soul reveres, by all your nature fears, 
swear that, for a year and a day you will not impart your knowledge of 
my crime or death to any living being in any way, whatever may 
happen, or whatever you may see. "--his eyes seem burst from 
their sockets: "i swear!" said aubrey; he sunk laugh upon his 
pillow, and breathe no more. 

aubrey retired to rest, but did not sleep; the many circumstances 
attend his acquaintance with this man rose upon his mind, and he 
knew not why; when he remember his oath a cold shiver came over 
him, as if from the presentiment of something horrible await him. 
rising early in the morning, he was about to enter the hovel in which 
he had left the corpse, when a robber met him, and informed him that 
it was no long there, have been convey by himself and comrades, 
upon his retiring, to the pinnacle of a neighbouring mount, according 
to a promise they had given his lordship, that it should be expose to 
the first cold ray of the moon that rose after his death. aubrey 
astonished, and taking several of the men, determined to go and bury 
it upon the spot where it lay. but, when he had mount to the summit 
he found no trace of either the corpse or the clothes, though the 
robber swore they pointed out the identical rock on which they had 
laid the body. for a time his mind was bewilder in conjectures, but 
he at last returned, convinced that they had bury the corpse for the 
sake of the clothes. 

weary of a country in which he had met with such terrible misfortunes, 
and in which all apparently conspire to heighten that superstitious 
melancholy that had seize upon his mind, he resolve to leave it, and 
soon arrive at smyrna. while wait for a vessel to convey him to 
otranto, or to naples, he occupy himself in arrange those effects 
he had with him belong to lord ruthven. amongst other things there 
was a case contain several weapon of offence, more or less adapt 
to ensure the death of the victim. there were several dagger and 
ataghans. whilst turning them over, and examine their curious forms, 
what was his surprise at finding a sheath apparently ornament in the 
same style as the dagger discover in the fatal hut--he 
shuddered--hastening to gain further proof, he found the weapon, and 
his horror may be imagine when he discover that it fitted, though 
peculiarly shaped, the sheath he held in his hand. his eyes seem to 
need no further certainty--they seem gaze to be bound to the 
dagger; yet still he wish to disbelieve; but the particular form, 
the same vary tint upon the haft and sheath were alike in 
splendour on both, and left no room for doubt; there were also drops 
of blood on each. 

he left smyrna, and on his way home, at rome, his first inquiry were 
concerning the lady he had attempt to snatch from lord ruthven's 
seductive arts. her parent were in distress, their fortune ruined, 
and she had not been heard of since the departure of his lordship. 
aubrey's mind became almost broken under so many repeated horrors; he 
was afraid that this lady had fallen a victim to the destroyer of 
ianthe. he became morose and silent; and his only occupation consist 
in urge the speed of the postilions, as if he were go to save the 
life of some one he held dear. he arrive at calais; a breeze, which 
seem obedient to his will, soon waft him to the english shores; 
and he hasten to the mansion of his fathers, and there, for a 
moment, appear to lose, in the embrace and caress of his sister, 
all memory of the past. if she before, by her infantine caresses, had 
gain his affection, now that the woman began to appear, she was 
still more attach as a companion. 

miss aubrey had not that winning grace which gain the gaze and 
applause of the drawing-room assemblies. there was none of that light 
brilliancy which only exist in the heated atmosphere of a crowded 
apartment. her blue eye was never lit up by the levity of the mind 
beneath. there was a melancholy charm about it which did not seem to 
arise from misfortune, but from some feeling within, that appear to 
indicate a soul conscious of a bright realm. her step was not that 
light footing, which stray where'er a butterfly or a colour may 
attract--it was sedate and pensive. when alone, her face was never 
brighten by the smile of joy; but when her brother breathe to her 
his affection, and would in her presence forget those grief she knew 
destroy his rest, who would have exchange her smile for that of the 
voluptuary? it seem as if those eyes,--that face were then play 
in the light of their own native sphere. she was yet only eighteen, 
and had not been present to the world, it have been thought by her 
guardian more fit that her presentation should be delay until her 
brother's return from the continent, when he might be her protector. 
it was now, therefore, resolve that the next drawing-room, which was 
fast approaching, should be the epoch of her entry into the "busy 
scene." aubrey would rather have remain in the mansion of his 
fathers, and fed upon the melancholy which overpower him. he could 
not feel interest about the frivolity of fashionable strangers, when 
his mind had been so torn by the event he had witnessed; but he 
determined to sacrifice his own comfort to the protection of his 
sister. they soon arrive in town, and prepared for the next day, 
which had been announce as a drawing-room. 

the crowd was excessive--a drawing-room had not been held for a long 
time, and all who were anxious to bask in the smile of royalty, 
hasten thither. aubrey was there with his sister. while he was 
standing in a corner by himself, heedless of all around him, engaged 
in the remembrance that the first time he had seen lord ruthven was in 
that very place--he felt himself sudden seize by the arm, and a 
voice he recognize too well, sound in his ear--"remember your 
oath." he had hardly courage to turn, fearful of seeing a spectre 
that would blast him, when he perceived, at a little distance, the 
same figure which had attract his notice on this spot upon his first 
entry into society. he gaze till his limb almost refuse to bear 
their weight, he was oblige to take the arm of a friend, and force 
a passage through the crowd, he threw himself into his carriage, and 
was driven home. he pace the room with hurried steps, and fixed his 
hand upon his head, as if he were afraid his thought were burst 
from his brain. lord ruthven again before him--circumstances start 
up in dreadful array--the dagger--his oath.--he rouse himself, he 
could not believe it possible--the dead rise again!--he thought his 
imagination had conjure up the image his mind was rest upon. it 
was impossible that it could be real--he determined, therefore, to 
go again into society; for though he attempt to ask concerning lord 
ruthven, the name hung upon his lips, and he could not succeed in 
gain information. he went a few nights after with his sister to the 
assembly of a near relation. leave her under the protection of a 
matron, he retired into a recess, and there gave himself up to his own 
devour thoughts. perceiving, at last, that many were leaving, he 
rouse himself, and enter another room, found his sister surround 
by several, apparently in earnest conversation; he attempt to pass 
and get near her, when one, whom he request to move, turn round, 
and reveal to him those features he most abhorred. he sprang 
forward, seize his sister's arm, and, with hurried step, forced her 
towards the street: at the door he found himself impede by the crowd 
of servant who were wait for their lords; and while he was engaged 
in passing them, he again heard that voice whisper close to 
him--"remember your oath!"--he did not dare to turn, but, hurry his 
sister, soon reach home. 

aubrey became almost distracted. if before his mind had been absorb 
by one subject, how much more completely was it engrossed, now that 
the certainty of the monster's living again pressed upon his thoughts. 
his sister's attention were now unheeded, and it was in vain that she 
intreate him to explain to her what had cause his abrupt conduct. he 
only utter a few words, and those terrify her. the more he 
thought, the more he was bewildered. his oath startle him;--was he 
then to allow this monster to roam, bearing ruin upon his breath, 
amidst all he held dear, and not avert its progress? his very sister 
might have been touched by him. but even if he were to break his oath, 
and disclose his suspicions, who would believe him? he thought of 
employ his own hand to free the world from such a wretch; but 
death, he remembered, had been already mocked. for days he remain in 
this state; shut up in his room, he saw no one, and ate only when his 
sister came, who, with eyes stream with tears, besought him, for 
her sake, to support nature. at last, no long capable of bearing 
still and solitude, he left his house, roam from street to 
street, anxious to fly that image which haunt him. his dress became 
neglected, and he wandered, as often expose to the noon-day sun as to 
the midnight damps. he was no long to be recognized; at first he 
return with the evening to the house; but at last he laid him down 
to rest wherever fatigue overtook him. his sister, anxious for his 
safety, employ people to follow him; but they were soon distance by 
him who flee from a pursuer swift than any--from thought. his 
conduct, however, sudden changed. struck with the idea that he left 
by his absence the whole of his friends, with a fiend amongst them, of 
whose presence they were unconscious, he determined to enter again 
into society, and watch him closely, anxious to forewarn, in spite of 
his oath, all whom lord ruthven approach with intimacy. but when he 
enter into a room, his haggard and suspicious looks were so 
striking, his inward shudder so visible, that his sister was at 
last oblige to beg of him to abstain from seeking, for her sake, a 
society which affected him so strongly. when, however, remonstrance 
prove unavailing, the guardian thought proper to interpose, and, 
fear that his mind was becoming alienated, they thought it high 
time to resume again that trust which had been before impose upon 
them by aubrey's parents. 

desirous of saving him from the injury and suffering he had daily 
encounter in his wanderings, and of prevent him from expose to 
the general eye those mark of what they considered folly, they 
engaged a physician to reside in the house, and take constant care of 
him. he hardly appear to notice it, so completely was his mind 
absorb by one terrible subject. his incoherence became at last so 
great, that he was confine to his chamber. there he would often lie 
for days, incapable of being roused. he had become emaciated, his eyes 
had attain a glassy lustre;--the only sign of affection and 
recollection remain display itself upon the entry of his sister; 
then he would sometimes start, and, seize her hands, with looks that 
severe afflict her, he would desire her not to touch him. "oh, do 
not touch him--if your love for me is aught, do not go near him!" 
when, however, she inquire to whom he referred, his only answer was, 
"true! true!" and again he sank into a state, whence not even she could 
rouse him. this last many months: gradually, however, as the year 
was passing, his incoherence became less frequent, and his mind threw 
off a portion of its gloom, whilst his guardian observed, that 
several times in the day he would count upon his finger a definite 
number, and then smile. 

the time had nearly elapsed, when, upon the last day of the year, one 
of his guardian enter his room, began to converse with his 
physician upon the melancholy circumstance of aubrey's being in so 
awful a situation, when his sister was go next day to be married. 
instantly aubrey's attention was attracted; he ask anxious to 
whom. glad of this mark of return intellect, of which they fear 
he had been deprived, they mention the name of the earl of marsden. 
thinking this was a young earl whom he had met with in society, aubrey 
seem pleased, and astonish them still more by his express his 
intention to be present at the nuptials, and desire to see his 
sister. they answer not, but in a few minutes his sister was with 
him. he was apparently again capable of being affected by the 
influence of her lovely smile; for he pressed her to his breast, and 
kiss her cheek, wet with tears, flowing at the thought of her 
brother's being once more alive to the feelings of affection. he began 
to speak with all his wonted warmth, and to congratulate her upon her 
marriage with a person so distinguished for rank and every 
accomplishment; when he sudden perceive a locket upon her breast; 
opening it, what was his surprise at behold the features of the 
monster who had so long influence his life. he seize the portrait in 
a paroxysm of rage, and trample it under foot. upon her ask him 
why he thus destroy the resemblance of her future husband, he look 
as if he did not understand her--then seize her hands, and gaze 
on her with a frantic expression of countenance, he bade her swear 
that she would never wed this monster, for he---- but he could not 
advance--it seem as if that voice again bade him remember his 
oath--he turn sudden round, thinking lord ruthven was near him 
but saw no one. in the meantime the guardian and physician, who had 
heard the whole, and thought this was but a return of his disorder, 
entered, and force him from miss aubrey, desire her to leave him. 
he fell upon his knee to them, he implored, he beg of them to 
delay but for one day. they, attribute this to the insanity they 
imagine had taken possession of his mind, endeavour to pacify him, 
and retired. 

lord ruthven had call the morning after the drawing-room, and had 
been refuse with every one else. when he heard of aubrey's ill 
health, he readily understood himself to be the cause of it; but when 
he learned that he was deem insane, his exultation and pleasure 
could hardly be conceal from those among whom he had gain this 
information. he hasten to the house of his former companion, and, by 
constant attendance, and the pretence of great affection for the 
brother and interest in his fate, he gradual won the ear of miss 
aubrey. who could resist his power? his tongue had danger and toils 
to recount--could speak of himself as of an individual have no 
sympathy with any being on the crowded earth, save with her to whom he 
address himself;--could tell how, since he knew her, his existence, 
had begun to seem worthy of preservation, if it were merely that he 
might listen to her soothe accents;--in fine, he knew so well how to 
use the serpent's art, or such was the will of fate, that he gain 
her affections. the title of the elder branch fall at length to 
him, he obtain an important embassy, which serve as an excuse for 
hasten the marriage, (in spite of her brother's derange state,) 
which was to take place the very day before his departure for the 
continent. 

aubrey, when he was left by the physician and his guardians, attempt 
to bribe the servants, but in vain. he ask for pen and paper; it was 
given him; he wrote a letter to his sister, conjure her, as she 
value her own happiness, her own honour, and the honour of those now 
in the grave, who once held her in their arms as their hope and the 
hope of their house, to delay but for a few hour that marriage, on 
which he denounce the most heavy curses. the servant promise they 
would deliver it; but give it to the physician, he thought it better 
not to harass any more the mind of miss aubrey by, what he considered, 
the ravings of a maniac. night pass on without rest to the busy 
inmate of the house; and aubrey heard, with a horror that may more 
easily be conceive than described, the note of busy preparation. 
morning came, and the sound of carriage broke upon his ear. aubrey 
grew almost frantic. the curiosity of the servant at last overcame 
their vigilance, they gradual stole away, leave him in the custody 
of an helpless old woman. he seize the opportunity, with one bound 
was out of the room, and in a moment found himself in the apartment 
where all were nearly assembled. lord ruthven was the first to 
perceive him: he immediately approached, and, taking his arm by 
force, hurried him from the room, speechless with rage. when on the 
staircase, lord ruthven whisper in his ear--"remember your oath, 
and know, if not my bride to day, your sister is dishonoured. women 
are frail!" so saying, he pushed him towards his attendants, who, 
rouse by the old woman, had come in search of him. aubrey could no 
long support himself; his rage not finding vent, had broken a 
blood-vessel, and he was convey to bed. this was not mention to 
his sister, who was not present when he entered, as the physician was 
afraid of agitate her. the marriage was solemnized, and the bride 
and bridegroom left london. 

aubrey's weakness increased; the effusion of blood produce symptom 
of the near approach of death. he desire his sister's guardian might 
be called, and when the midnight hour had struck, he related 
composed what the reader has perused--he die immediately after. 

the guardian hasten to protect miss aubrey; but when they arrived, 
it was too late. lord ruthven had disappeared, and aubrey's sister had 
glut the thirst of a vampyre! 


________________________________________________________________ 

extract of a letter, 

contain an account 

of 

lord byron's residence 

in the 

island of mitylene. 
________________________________________________________________ 

account 

of 

lord byron's residence, &c. 
______________ 

"the world was all before him, where to choose his place of rest, and 
providence his guide." 

in sailing through the grecian archipelago, on board one of his 
majesty's vessels, in the year 1812, we put into the harbour of 
mitylene, in the island of that name. the beauty of this place, and 
the certain supply of cattle and vegetable always to be had there, 
induce many britain vessel to visit it--both men of war and 
merchantmen; and though it lie rather out of the track for ship 
bound to smyrna, its bounty ample repay for the deviation of a 
voyage. we landed; as usual, at the bottom of the bay, and whilst the 
men were employ in watering, and the purser bargain for cattle 
with the natives, the clergyman and myself took a ramble to the cave 
call homer's school, and other places, where we had been before. on 
the brow of mount ida (a small monticule so named) we met with and 
engaged a young greece as our guide, who told us he had come from scio 
with an english lord, who left the island four days previous to our 
arrival in his felucca. "he engaged me as a pilot," said the greek, 
"and would have taken me with him; but i did not choose to quit 
mitylene, where i am likely to get married. he was an odd, but a very 
good man. the cottage over the hill, facing the river, belong to him, 
and he has left an old man in charge of it: he gave dominick, the 
wine-trader, six hundred zechine for it, (about l250 english 
currency,) and has reside there about fourteen months, though not 
constantly; for he sail in his felucca very often to the different 
islands." 

this account excited our curiosity very much, and we lost no time in 
hasten to the house where our countryman had resided. we were 
kindly received by an old man, who conduct us over the mansion. it 
consist of four apartments on the ground-floor--an entrance hall, a 
drawing-room, a sitting parlour, and a bed-room, with a spacious 
closet annexed. they were all simply decorated: plain green-stained 
walls, marble table on either side, a large myrtle in the centre, and 
a small fountain beneath, which could be made to play through the 
branch by moving a spring fixed in the side of a small bronze venus 
in a leaning posture; a large couch or sofa complete the furniture. 
in the hall stood half a dozen english cane chairs, and an empty 
book-case: there were no mirrors, nor a single painting. the 
bedchamber had merely a large mattress spread on the floor, with two 
stuff cotton quilt and a pillow--the common bed throughout greece. 
in the sitting-room we observe a marble recess, formerly, the old man 
told us, fill with books and papers, which were then in a large 
seaman's chest in the closet: it was open, but we did not think 
ourselves justified in examine the contents. on the tablet of the 
recess lay voltaire's, shakspeare's, boileau's, and rousseau's works 
complete; volney's ruins of empires; zimmerman, in the germany 
language; klopstock's messiah; kotzebue's novels; schiller's play of 
the robbers; milton's paradise lost, an italy edition, print at 
parma in 1810; several small pamphlet from the greece press at 
constantinople, much torn, but no english book of any description. 
most of these books were fill with marginal notes, written with a 
pencil, in italy and latin. the messiah was literally scribble all 
over, and marked with slips of paper, on which also were remarks. 

the old man said: "the lord had been reading these books the evening 
before he sailed, and forgot to place them with the others; but," 
said he, "there they must lie until his return; for he is so 
particular, that were i to move one thing without orders, he would 
frown upon me for a week together; he is otherway very good. i once 
did him a service; and i have the produce of this farm for the trouble 
of taking care of it, except twenty zechine which i pay to an age 
armenia who reside in a small cottage in the wood, and whom the lord 
brought here from adrianople; i don't know for what reason." 

the appearance of the house externally was pleasing. the portico in 
front was fifty pace long and fourteen broad, and the flute marble 
pillar with black plinth and fret-work cornices, (as it is now 
customary in grecian architecture,) were considerably higher than the 
roof. the roof, surround by a light stone balustrade, was cover by 
a fine turkey carpet, beneath an awning of strong coarse linen. most 
of the house-tops are thus furnished, as upon them the greece pass 
their evenings in smoking, drink light wines, such as "lachryma 
christi," eat fruit, and enjoy the evening breeze. 

on the left hand as we enter the house, a small streamlet glide 
away, grapes, orange and lime were cluster together on its 
borders, and under the shade of two large myrtle bushes, a marble seat 
with an ornamental wooden back was placed, on which we were told, the 
lord pass many of his evenings and nights till twelve o'clock, 
reading, writing, and talk to himself. "i suppose," said the old 
man, "praying" for he was very devout, "and always attend our church 
twice a week, besides sundays." 

the view from this seat was what may be term "a bird's-eye view." 
a line of rich vineyard led the eye to mount calcla, cover with 
olive and myrtle tree in bloom, and on the summit of which an ancient 
greece temple appear in majestic decay. a small stream issue from 
the ruins descended in broken cascades, until it was lost in the wood 
near the mountain's base. the sea smooth as glass, and an horizon 
unshadowed by a single cloud, terminate the view in front; and a 
little on the left, through a vista of lofty chesnut and palm-trees, 
several small island were distinct observed, stud the light 
blue wave with spot of emerald green. i seldom enjoy a view more 
than i did this; but our enquiry were fruitless as to the name of 
the person who had reside in this romantic solitude: none knew his 
name but dominick, his banker, who had gone to candia. "the armenian," 
said our conductor, "could tell, but i am sure he will not,"--"and 
cannot you tell, old friend?" said i--"if i can," said he, "i dare 
not." we had not time to visit the armenian, but on our return to the 
town we learnt several particulars of the isolated lord. he had 
portion eight young girl when he was last upon the island, and even 
dance with them at the nuptial feast. he gave a cow to one man, 
horse to others, and cotton and silk to the girl who live by weave 
these articles. he also bought a new boat for a fisherman who had lost 
his own in a gale, and he often gave greece testament to the poor 
children. in short, he appear to us, from all we collected, to have 
been a very eccentric and benevolent character. one circumstance we 
learnt, which our old friend at the cottage thought proper not to 
disclose. he had a most beautiful daughter, with whom the lord was 
often seen walking on the sea-shore, and he had bought her a 
piano-forte, and taught her himself the use of it. 

such was the information with which we departed from the peaceful isle 
of mitylene; our imagination all on the rack, guess who this 
rambler in greece could be. he had money it was evident: he had 
philanthropy of disposition, and all those eccentricity which mark 
peculiar genius. arrive at palermo, all our doubt were dispelled. 
fall in company with mr. foster, the architect, a pupil of wyatt's, 
who had been travel in egypt and greece, "the individual," said 
he, "about whom you are so anxious, is lord byron; i met him in my 
travels on the island of tenedos, and i also visit him at mitylene." 
we had never then heard of his lordship's fame, as we had been some 
years from home; but "childe harolde" being put into our hand we 
recognize the recluse of calcla in every page. deep did we regret 
not have been more curious in our research at the cottage, but we 
console ourselves with the idea of return to mitylene on some 
future day; but to me that day will never return. i make this 
statement, believe it not quite uninteresting, and in justice to his 
lordship's good name, which has been gross slandered. he has been 
describe as of an unfeeling disposition, averse to associate with 
human nature, or contribute in any way to sooth its sorrows, or add 
to its pleasures. the fact is directly the reverse, as may be plainly 
gather from these little anecdotes. all the fine feelings of the 
heart, so elegant depict in his lordship's poems, seem to have 
their seat in his bosom. tenderness, sympathy, and charity appear to 
guide all his actions: and his courting the repose of solitude is an 
additional reason for marking him as a being on whose heart religion 
hath set her seal, and over whose head benevolence hath thrown her 
mantle. no man can read the preceding pleasing "traits" without 
feeling proud of him as a countryman. with respect to his love or 
pleasures, i do not assume a right to give an opinion. report are 
ever to be received with caution, particularly when direct against 
man's moral integrity; and he who dare justify himself before that 
awful tribunal where all must appear, alone may censure the error of 
a fellow-mortal. lord byron's character is worthy of his genius. to do 
good in secret, and shun the world's applause, is the surest testimony 
of a virtuous heart and self-approving conscience. 


the end 
____________________ 

gillet, printer, crown-court, fleet-street. 








end of project gutenberg's the vampyre; a tale, by john william polidori 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the vampyre; a tale *** 

***** this file should be name 6087-8.txt or 6087-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/8/6087/ 

produce by an anonymous project gutenberg volunteer. 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
