project gutenberg's the fall of the house of usher, by edgar allan poe 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the fall of the house of usher 

author: edgar allan poe 

posting date: december 15, 2010 [ebook #932] 
release date: june, 1997 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the fall of the house of usher *** 




produce by levent kurnaz and jose menendez 









the fall of the house of usher 


son coeur est un luth suspendu; 
sitot qu'on le touche il resonne. 
de beranger. 


preface 
during the whole of a dull, dark, and soundless day in the 
autumn of the year, when the cloud hung oppressive low in the 
heavens, i had been passing alone, on horseback, through a 
singularly dreary tract of country; and at length found myself, 
as the shades of the evening drew on, within view of the 
melancholy house of usher. i know not how it was--but, with the 
first glimpse of the building, a sense of insufferable gloom 
pervade my spirit. i say insufferable; for the feeling was 
unrelieved by any of that half-pleasureable, because poetic, 
sentiment, with which the mind usually receive even the sternest 
natural image of the desolate or terrible. i look upon the 
scene before me--upon the mere house, and the simple landscape 
features of the domain--upon the bleak walls--upon the vacant 
eye-like windows--upon a few rank sedges--and upon a few white 
trunks of decay trees--with an utter depression of soul which i 
can compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to the 
after-dream of the revel upon opium--the bitter lapse into 
everyday life--the hideous drop off of the veil. there was 
an iciness, a sinking, a sickening of the heart--an unredeemed 
dreary of thought which no goad of the imagination could 
torture into aught of the sublime. what was it--i pause to 
think--what was it that so unnerve me in the contemplation of 
the house of usher? it was a mystery all insoluble; nor could i 
grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as i 
pondered. i was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory 
conclusion, that while, beyond doubt, there are combinations 
of very simple natural object which have the power of thus 
affecting us, still the analysis of this power lie among 
consideration beyond our depth. it was possible, i reflected, 
that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the 
scene, of the detail of the picture, would be sufficient to 
modify, or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful 
impression; and, acting upon this idea, i rein my horse 
to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in 
unruffled lustre by the dwelling, and gaze down--but with a 
shudder even more thrill than before--upon the remodel and 
invert image of the grey sedge, and the ghastly tree-stems, 
and the vacant and eye-like windows. 

nevertheless, in this mansion of gloom i now propose to 
myself a sojourn of some weeks. its proprietor, roderick usher, 
had been one of my boon companion in boyhood; but many years had 
elapse since our last meeting. a letter, however, had lately 
reach me in a distant part of the country--a letter from 
him--which, in its wildly importunate nature, had admitted of no 
other than a personal reply. the ms gave evidence of nervous 
agitation. the writer spoke of acute bodily illness--of a mental 
disorder which oppress him--and of an earnest desire to see me, 
as his best, and indeed his only personal friend, with a view of 
attempting, by the cheerful of my society, some alleviate 
of his malady. it was the manner in which all this, and much 
more, was said--it was the apparent heart that went with his 
request--which allow me no room for hesitation; and i 
accordingly obey forthwith what i still considered a very 
singular summons. 

although, as boys, we had been even intimate associates, yet 
i really knew little of my friend. his reserve had been always 
excessive and habitual. i was aware, however, that his very 
ancient family had been noted, time out of mind, for a peculiar 
sensibility of temperament, display itself, through long ages, 
in many works of exalted art, and manifested, of late, in 
repeated deed of munificent yet unobtrusive charity, as well as 
in a passionate devotion to the intricacies, perhaps even more 
than to the orthodox and easily recognise beauty of musical 
science. i had learned, too, the very remarkable fact, that the 
stem of the usher race, all time-honoured as it was, had put 
forth, at no period, any enduring branch; in other words, that 
the entire family lay in the direct line of descent, and had 
always, with very trifling and very temporary variation, so lain. 
it was this deficiency, i considered, while running over in 
thought the perfect keeping of the character of the premises with 
the accredit character of the people, and while speculate 
upon the possible influence which the one, in the long 
lapse of centuries, might have exercise upon the other--it was 
this deficiency, perhaps, of collateral issue, and the consequent 
undeviate transmission, from sire to son, of the patrimony with 
the name, which had, at length, so identify the two as to merge 
the original title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal 
appellation of the "house of usher"--an appellation which seem 
to include, in the mind of the peasantry who use it, both the 
family and the family mansion. 

i have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish 
experiment--that of look down within the tarn--had been to 
deepen the first singular impression. there can be no doubt that 
the consciousness of the rapid increase of my superstition--for 
why should i not so term it?--served mainly to accelerate the 
increase itself. such, i have long known, is the paradox law 
of all sentiment have terror as a basis. and it might have 
been for this reason only, that, when i again uplift my eyes to 
the house itself, from its image in the pool, there grew in my 
mind a strange fancy--a fancy so ridiculous, indeed, that i but 
mention it to show the vivid force of the sensation which 
oppress me. i had so work upon my imagination as really to 
believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an 
atmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity--an 
atmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven, but 
which had reek up from the decay trees, and the grey wall, 
and the silent tarn--a pestilent and mystic vapour, dull, 
sluggish, faint discernible, and leaden-hued. 

shake off from my spirit what must have been a dream, 
i scan more narrowly the real aspect of the building. its 
principal feature seem to be that of an excessive antiquity. 
the discoloration of age had been great. minute fungi 
overspread the whole exterior, hanging in a fine tangle web-work 
from the eaves. yet all this was apart from any extraordinary 
dilapidation. no portion of the masonry had fallen; and there 
appear to be a wild inconsistent between its still perfect 
adaptation of parts, and the crumble condition of the 
individual stones. in this there was much that remind me of 
the specious totality of old wood-work which has rot for long 
years in some neglect vault, with no disturbance from the 
breath of the external air. beyond this indication of 
extensive decay, however, the fabric gave little token of 
instability. perhaps the eye of a scrutinize observer might 
have discover a barely perceptible fissure, which, extend 
from the roof of the building in front, made its way down the 
wall in a zigzag direction, until it became lost in the sullen 
waters of the tarn. 

notice these things, i rode over a short causeway to the 
house. a servant in wait took my horse, and i enter the 
gothic archway of the hall. a valet, of stealthy step, thence 
conduct me, in silence, through many dark and intricate 
passage in my progress to the studio of his master. much 
that i encounter on the way contributed, i know not how, to 
heighten the vague sentiment of which i have already spoken. 
while the object around me--while the carving of the ceilings, 
the sombre tapestry of the walls, the ebony black of the 
floors, and the phantasmagoric armorial trophy which rattle as 
i strode, were but matter to which, or to such as which, i had 
been accustomed from my infancy--while i hesitate not to 
acknowledge how familiar was all this--i still wonder to find 
how unfamiliar were the fancies which ordinary image were 
stirring up. on one of the staircases, i met the physician of 
the family. his countenance, i thought, wore a mingle 
expression of low cunning and perplexity. he accost me with 
trepidation and pass on. the valet now threw open a door and 
usher me into the presence of his master. 

the room in which i found myself was very large and lofty. 
the window were long, narrow, and pointed, and at so vast a 
distance from the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible 
from within. feeble gleam of encrimsone light made their way 
through the trellis panes, and serve to render sufficient 
distinct the more prominent object around; the eye, however, 
struggle in vain to reach the remote angle of the chamber, or 
the recess of the vaulted and fret ceiling. dark drapery 
hung upon the walls. the general furniture was profuse, 
comfortless, antique, and tattered. many books and musical 
instrument lay scattered about, but fail to give any vitality 
to the scene. i felt that i breathe an atmosphere of sorrow. 
an air of stern, deep, and irredeemable gloom hung over and 
pervade all. 

upon my entrance, usher rose from a sofa on which he had 
been lie at full length, and greet me with a vivacious warmth 
which had much in it, i at first thought, of an overdone 
cordiality--of the constrained effort of the ennuye man of 
the world. a glance, however, at his countenance, convinced me 
of his perfect sincerity. we sat down; and for some moments, 
while he spoke not, i gaze upon him with a feeling half of pity, 
half of awe. surely, man had never before so terribly altered, 
in so brief a period, as had roderick usher! it was with 
difficulty that i could bring myself to admit the identity of the 
man being before me with the companion of my early boyhood. yet 
the character of his face had been at all times remarkable. a 
cadaverous of complexion; an eye large, liquid, and luminous 
beyond comparison; lip somewhat thin and very pallid, but of a 
surpassing beautiful curve; a nose of a delicate hebrew model, 
but with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations; a 
finely-moulded chin, speaking, in its want of prominence, of a 
want of moral energy; hair of a more than web-like soft and 
tenuity; these features, with an inordinate expansion above the 
regions of the temple, made up altogether a countenance not 
easily to be forgotten. and now in the mere exaggeration of the 
prevailing character of these features, and of the expression 
they were wont to convey, lay so much of change that i doubt to 
whom i spoke. the now ghastly pallor of the skin, and the now 
miraculous lustre of the eye, above all things startle and even 
awed me. the silken hair, too, had been suffer to grow all 
unheeded, and as, in its wild gossamer texture, it float rather 
than fell about the face, i could not, even with effort, connect 
its arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity. 

in the manner of my friend i was at once struck with an 
incoherence--an inconsistency; and i soon found this to arise 
from a series of feeble and futile struggle to overcome an 
habitual trepidancy--an excessive nervous agitation. for 
something of this nature i had indeed been prepared, no less by 
his letter, than by reminiscences of certain boyish traits, and 
by conclusion deduce from his peculiar physical conformation 
and temperament. his action was alternate vivacious and 
sullen. his voice varied rapid from a tremulous indecision 
(when the animal spirits seem utterly in abeyance) to 
that species of energetic concision--that abrupt, weighty, 
unhurried, and hollow-sounding enunciation--that leaden, 
self-balanced and perfectly modulate guttural utterance, which may 
be observe in the lost drunkard, or the irreclaimable eater of 
opium, during the periods of his most intense excitement. 

it was thus that he spoke of the object of my visit, of his 
earnest desire to see me, and of the solace he expect me to 
afford him. he entered, at some length, into what he conceive 
to be the nature of his malady. it was, he said, a 
constitutional and a family evil, and one for which he despair 
to find a remedy--a mere nervous affection, he immediately added, 
which would undoubted soon pass off. it display itself in a 
host of unnatural sensations. some of these, as he detailed 
them, interested and bewilder me; although, perhaps, the terms, 
and the general manner of the narration had their weight. he 
suffer much from a morbid acute of the senses; the most 
insipid food was alone endurable; he could wear only garment of 
certain texture; the odour of all flower were oppressive; his 
eyes were torture by even a faint light; and there were but 
peculiar sounds, and these from string instruments, which did 
not inspire him with horror. 

to an anomalous species of terror i found him a bounden 
slave. "i shall perish," said he, "i must perish in this 
deplorable folly. thus, thus, and not otherwise, shall i be 
lost. i dread the event of the future, not in themselves, but 
in their results. i shudder at the thought of any, even the most 
trivial, incident, which may operate upon this intolerable 
agitation of soul. i have, indeed, no abhorrence of danger, 
except in its absolute effect--in terror. in this unnerved--in 
this pitiable condition--i feel that the period will soon or 
later arrive when i must abandon life and reason together, in 
some struggle with the grim phantasm, fear." 

i learned, moreover, at intervals, and through broken and 
equivocal hints, another singular feature of his mental 
condition. he was enchain by certain superstitious impression 
in regard to the dwelling which he tenanted, and whence, for many 
years, he had never venture forth--in regard to an influence 
whose supposititious force was convey in terms too shadowy here 
to be re-stated--an influence which some peculiarity in the 
mere form and substance of his family mansion, had, by 
dint of long sufferance, he said, obtain over his spirit--an 
effect which the physique of the grey wall and turrets, and 
of the dim tarn into which they all look down, had, at length, 
brought about upon the morale of his existence. 

he admitted, however, although with hesitation, that much of 
the peculiar gloom which thus afflict him could be trace to a 
more natural and far more palpable origin--to the severe and 
long-continued illness--indeed to the evidently approach 
dissolution--of a tender beloved sister--his sole companion for 
long years--his last and only relative on earth. "her decease," 
he said, with a bitter which i can never forget, "would leave 
him (him the hopeless and the frail) the last of the ancient race 
of the ushers." while he spoke, the lady madeline (for so was 
she called) pass slow through a remote portion of the 
apartment, and, without have notice my presence, disappeared. 
i regard her with an utter astonishment not unmingled with 
dread--and yet i found it impossible to account for such 
feelings. a sensation of stupor oppress me, as my eyes 
follow her retreat steps. when a door, at length, closed 
upon her, my glance sought instinctive and eager the 
countenance of the brother--but he had bury his face in his 
hands, and i could only perceive that a far more than ordinary 
wan had overspread the emaciate finger through which 
trickle many passionate tears. 

the disease of the lady madeline had long baffle the skill 
of her physicians. a settled apathy, a gradual waste away of 
the person, and frequent although transient affection of a 
partially cataleptic character, were the unusual diagnosis. 
hitherto she had steady borne up against the pressure of her 
malady, and had not betaken herself finally to bed; but, on the 
close in of the evening of my arrival at the house, she 
succumb (as her brother told me at night with inexpressible 
agitation) to the prostrate power of the destroyer; and i 
learned that the glimpse i had obtain of her person would thus 
probably be the last i should obtain--that the lady, at least 
while living, would be seen by me no more. 

for several days ensuing, her name was unmentioned by either 
usher or myself: and during this period i was busy in earnest 
endeavour to alleviate the melancholy of my friend. we 
paint and read together; or i listened, as if in a dream, to 
the wild improvise of his speak guitar. and thus, as a 
close and still close intimacy admitted me more unreserved 
into the recess of his spirit, the more bitter did i perceive 
the futility of all attempt at cheering a mind from which 
darkness, as if an inherent positive quality, pour forth upon 
all object of the moral and physical universe, in one uncease 
radiation of gloom. 

i shall ever bear about me a memory of the many solemn hour 
i thus spent alone with the master of the house of usher. yet i 
should fail in any attempt to convey an idea of the exact 
character of the studies, or of the occupations, in which he 
involved me, or led me the way. an excited and highly 
distempered ideal threw a sulphureous lustre over all. his 
long improvise dirge will ring for ever in my ears. among 
other things, i hold painful in mind a certain singular 
perversion and amplify of the wild air of the last waltz of 
von weber. from the painting over which his elaborate fancy 
brooded, and which grew, touch by touch, into vague at which 
i shudder the more thrillingly, because i shudder knowing not 
why;--from these painting (vivid as their image now are before 
me) i would in vain endeavour to educe more than a small portion 
which should lie within the compass of merely written words. by 
the utter simplicity, by the naked of his designs, he 
arrest and overawe attention. if ever mortal paint an idea, 
that mortal was roderick usher. for me at least--in the 
circumstances then surrounding me--there arose out of the pure 
abstraction which the hypochondriac contrived to throw upon his 
canvas, an intensity of intolerable awe, no shadow of which felt 
i ever yet in the contemplation of the certainly glowing yet too 
concrete reverie of fuseli. 

one of the phantasmagoric conception of my friend, 
partake not so rigid of the spirit of abstraction, may be 
shadow forth, although feebly, in words. a small picture 
present the interior of an immensely long and rectangular vault 
or tunnel, with low walls, smooth, white, and without 
interrupt or device. certain accessory points of the design 
serve well to convey the idea that this excavation lay at an 
exceed depth below the surface of the earth. no outlet was 
observe in any portion of its vast extent, and no torch, 
or other artificial source of light was discernible; yet a flood 
of intense ray roll throughout, and bath the whole in a 
ghastly and inappropriate splendour. 

i have just spoken of that morbid condition of the auditory 
nerve which render all music intolerable to the sufferer, with 
the exception of certain effects of string instruments. it 
was, perhaps, the narrow limit to which he thus confine himself 
upon the guitar, which gave birth, in great measure, to the 
fantastic character of the performances. but the fervid 
facility of his impromptu could not be so account for. 
they must have been, and were, in the notes, as well as in the 
words of his wild fantasia (for he not unfrequent accompany 
himself with rhymed verbal improvisations), the result of that 
intense mental collected and concentration to which i have 
previous allude as observable only in particular moments of 
the highest artificial excitement. the words of one of these 
rhapsody i have easily remembered. i was, perhaps, the more 
forcibly impress with it, as he gave it, because, in the under 
or mystic current of its meaning, i fancy that i perceived, and 
for the first time, a full consciousness on the part of usher, of 
the totter of his lofty reason upon her throne. the verses, 
which were entitle "the haunt palace," ran very nearly, if not 
accurately, thus: 


i. 

in the greenest of our valleys, 
by good angel tenanted, 
once a fair and stately palace-- 
radiant palace--reared its head. 
in the monarch thought's dominion-- 
it stood there! 
never seraph spread a pinion 
over fabric half so fair. 


ii. 

banner yellow, glorious, golden, 
on its roof did float and flow; 
(this--all this--was in the olden 
time long ago) 
and every gentle air that dallied, 
in that sweet day, 
along the rampart plumed and pallid, 
a wing odour went away. 


iii. 

wanderer in that happy valley 
through two luminous window saw 
spirits moving musically 
to a lute's well tune law, 
round about a throne, where sitting 
(porphyrogene!) 
in state his glory well befitting, 
the ruler of the realm was seen. 


iv. 

and all with pearl and ruby glowing 
was the fair palace door, 
through which came flowing, flowing, flowing 
and sparkle evermore, 
a troop of echo whose sweet duty 
was but to sing, 
in voice of surpassing beauty, 
the wit and wisdom of their king. 


v. 

but evil things, in robe of sorrow, 
assail the monarch's high estate; 
(ah, let us mourn, for never morrow 
shall dawn upon him, desolate!) 
and, round about his home, the glory 
that blush and bloom 
is but a dim-remembered story, 
of the old time entombed. 


vi. 

and traveller now within that valley, 
through the red-litten windows, see 
vast form that move fantastic 
to a discordant melody; 
while, like a rapid ghastly river, 
through the pale door, 
a hideous throng rush out forever, 
and laugh--but smile no more. 


i well remember that suggestion arise from this ballad, 
led us into a train of thought wherein there became manifest an 
opinion of usher's which i mention not so much on account of its 
novelty (for other men* have thought thus,) as on account of the 
pertinac with which he maintain it. this opinion, in its 
general form, was that of the sentience of all vegetable things. 
but, in his disorder fancy, the idea had assume a more daring 
character, and trespassed, under certain conditions, upon the 
kingdom of inorganization. i lack words to express the full 
extent, or the earnest abandon of his persuasion. the 
belief, however, was connected (as i have previous hinted) with 
the gray stone of the home of his forefathers. the conditions 
of the sentience had been here, he imagined, fulfill in the 
method of collocation of these stones--in the order of their 
arrangement, as well as in that of the many fungi which 
overspread them, and of the decay tree which stood around--above 
all, in the long undisturbed endurance of this arrangement, 
and in its reduplicate in the still waters of the tarn. its 
evidence--the evidence of the sentience--was to be seen, he said, 
(and i here start as he spoke,) in the gradual yet certain 
condensation of an atmosphere of their own about the waters and 
the walls. the result was discoverable, he added, in that 
silent, yet importunate and terrible influence which for 
century had mould the destiny of his family, and which made 
him what i now saw him--what he was. such opinion need no 
comment, and i will make none. 

our books--the books which, for years, had form no small 
portion of the mental existence of the invalid--were, as might be 
supposed, in strict keeping with this character of phantasm. we 
pore together over such works as the ververt et chartreuse 
of gresset; the belphegor of machiavelli; the heaven and 
hell of swedenborg; the subterranean voyage of nichola klimm by 
holberg; the chiromancy of robert flud, of jean d'indagine, 
and of de la chambre; the journey into the blue distance of 
tieck; and the city of the sun by campanella. one favourite 
volume was a small octavo edition of the directorium 
inquisitorum, by the dominican eymeric de gironne; and there 
were passage in pomponiu mela, about the old africa satyr 
and oegipans, over which usher would sit dream for hours. his 
chief delight, however, was found in the peruse of an 
exceedingly rare and curious book in quarto gothic--the manual of 
a forgotten church--the vigiliae mortuorum secundum chorum ecclesiae 
maguntinae. 

i could not help thinking of the wild ritual of this work, 
and of its probable influence upon the hypochondriac, when, one 
evening, have informed me abrupt that the lady madeline was 
no more, he state his intention of preserve her corpse for a 
fortnight, (previously to its final interment), in one of the 
numerous vault within the main wall of the building. the 
worldly reason, however, assign for this singular proceeding, 
was one which i did not feel at liberty to dispute. the brother 
had been led to his resolution (so he told me) by consideration 
of the unusual character of the malady of the deceased, of 
certain obtrusive and eager inquiry on the part of her medical 
men, and of the remote and expose situation of the burial-ground 
of the family. i will not deny that when i call to mind the 
sinister countenance of the person whom i met upon the staircase, 
on the day of my arrival at the house, i had no desire to oppose 
what i regard as at best but a harmless, and by no means an 
unnatural, precaution. 

at the request of usher, i personally aid him in the 
arrangement for the temporary entombment. the body have been 
encoffined, we two alone bore it to its rest. the vault in which 
we placed it (and which had been so long unopened that our 
torches, half smother in its oppressive atmosphere, gave us 
little opportunity for investigation) was small, damp, and 
entire without means of admission for light; lying, at great 
depth, immediately beneath that portion of the building in which 
was my own sleep apartment. it had been used, apparently, in 
remote feudal times, for the worst purpose of a donjon-keep, and, 
in later days, as a place of deposit for powder, or some other 
highly combustible substance, as a portion of its floor, 
and the whole interior of a long archway through which we reach 
it, were careful sheathe with copper. the door, of massive 
iron, had been, also, similarly protected. its immense weight 
cause an unusually sharp grating sound, as it move upon its hinges. 

have deposit our mournful burden upon tressel within 
this region of horror, we partially turn aside the yet 
unscrew lid of the coffin, and look upon the face of the 
tenant. a striking similitude between the brother and sister now 
first arrest my attention; and usher, divining, perhaps, my 
thoughts, murmur out some few words from which i learned that 
the deceased and himself had been twins, and that sympathies of a 
scarcely intelligible nature had always exist between them. 
our glances, however, rest not long upon the dead--for we could 
not regard her unawed. the disease which had thus entomb the 
lady in the maturity of youth, had left, as usual in all malady 
of a strict cataleptic character, the mockery of a faint 
blush upon the bosom and the face, and that suspicious 
lingering smile upon the lip which is so terrible in death. we 
replace and screw down the lid, and, have secure the door 
of iron, made our way, with toil, into the scarcely less gloomy 
apartments of the upper portion of the house. 

and now, some days of bitter grief have elapsed, an 
observable change came over the features of the mental disorder 
of my friend. his ordinary manner had vanished. his ordinary 
occupation were neglect or forgotten. he roam from chamber 
to chamber with hurried, unequal, and objectless step. the 
pallor of his countenance had assumed, if possible, a more 
ghastly hue--but the luminous of his eye had utterly gone 
out. the once occasional husky of his tone was heard no 
more; and a tremulous quaver, as if of extreme terror, habitual 
characterize his utterance. there were times, indeed, when i 
thought his unceasing agitate mind was labour with some 
oppressive secret, to divulge which he struggle for the 
necessary courage. at times, again, i was oblige to resolve all 
into the mere inexplicable vagary of madness, for i beheld him 
gaze upon vacancy for long hours, in an attitude of the 
profoundest attention, as if listen to some imaginary 
sound. it was no wonder that his condition terrified--that it 
infect me. i felt creep upon me, by slow yet certain 
degrees, the wild influence of his own fantastic yet impressive 
superstitions. 

it was, especially, upon retiring to bed late in the night 
of the seventh or eighth day after the place of the lady 
madeline within the donjon, that i experienced the full power of 
such feelings. sleep came not near my couch--while the hour 
wane and wane away. i struggle to reason off the nervous 
which had dominion over me. i endeavour to believe that much, 
if not all of what i felt, was due to the bewilder influence 
of the gloomy furniture of the room--of the dark and tattered 
draperies, which, torture into motion by the breath of a rising 
tempest, sway fitful to and fro upon the walls, and rustle 
uneasy about the decoration of the bed. but my effort were 
fruitless. an irrepressible tremor gradual pervade my frame; 
and, at length, there sat upon my very heart an incubus of 
utterly causeless alarm. shake this off with a gasp and a 
struggle, i uplift myself upon the pillows, and, peer 
earnest within the intense dark of the chamber, hearkened--i 
know not why, except that an instinctive spirit prompt me--to 
certain low and indefinite sound which came, through the pause 
of the storm, at long intervals, i knew not whence. overpower 
by an intense sentiment of horror, unaccountable yet unendurable, 
i threw on my clothes with haste (for i felt that i should sleep 
no more during the night,) and endeavour to arouse myself from 
the pitiable condition into which i had fallen, by pace rapid 
to and fro through the apartment. 

i had taken but few turn in this manner, when a light step 
on an adjoin staircase arrest my attention. i presently 
recognize it as that of usher. in an instant afterwards he 
rapped, with a gentle touch, at my door, and entered, bearing a 
lamp. his countenance was, as usual, cadaverous wan--but, 
moreover, there was a species of mad hilarity in his eyes--an 
evidently restrained hysteria in his whole demeanour. his 
air appall me--but anything was preferable to the solitude 
which i had so long endured, and i even welcome his presence as 
a relief. 

"and you have not seen it?" he said abruptly, after have 
stare about him for some moments in silence--"you have 
not then seen it?--but, stay! you shall." thus speaking, and 
have careful shade his lamp, he hurried to one of the 
casements, and threw it freely open to the storm. 

the impetuous fury of the enter gust nearly lift us 
from our feet. it was, indeed, a tempestuous yet stern 
beautiful night, and one wildly singular in its terror and its 
beauty. a whirlwind had apparently collected its force in our 
vicinity; for there were frequent and violent alteration in the 
direction of the wind; and the exceed density of the cloud 
(which hung so low as to press upon the turret of the house) did 
not prevent our perceive the lifelike velocity with which they 
flew career from all points against each other, without 
passing away into the distance. i say that even their exceed 
density did not prevent our perceive this--yet we had no 
glimpse of the moon or stars--nor was there any flash forth of 
the lightning. but the under surface of the huge masses of 
agitate vapor, as well as all terrestrial object immediately 
around us, were glowing in the unnatural light of a faint 
luminous and distinct visible gaseous exhalation which hung 
about and enshroud the mansion. 

"you must not--you shall not behold this!" said i, 
shudderingly, to usher, as i led him, with a gentle violence, 
from the window to a seat. "these appearances, which bewilder 
you, are merely electrical phenomena not uncommon--or it may be 
that they have their ghastly origin in the rank miasma of the 
tarn. let us close this casement;--the air is chill and 
dangerous to your frame. here is one of your favourite romances. 
i will read, and you shall listen;--and so we will pass away this 
terrible night together." 

the antique volume which i had taken up was the "mad 
trist" of sir launcelot canning; but i had call it a favourite 
of usher's more in sad jest than in earnest; for, in truth, there 
is little in its uncouth and unimaginative prolix which could 
have had interest for the lofty and spiritual ideal of my 
friend. it was, however, the only book immediately at hand; and 
i indulge a vague hope that the excitement which now agitate 
the hypochondriac, might find relief (for the history of mental 
disorder is full of similar anomalies) even in the extreme of 
the folly which i should read. could i have judged, indeed, by 
the wild overstraine air of vivace with which he 
hearkened, or apparently hearkened, to the words of the tale, i 
might well have congratulate myself upon the success of my 
design. 

i had arrive at that well-known portion of the story where 
ethelred, the hero of the trist, have sought in vain for 
peaceable admission into the dwelling of the hermit, proceeds to 
make good an entrance by force. here, it will be remembered, the 
words of the narrative run thus: 

"and ethelred, who was by nature of a doughty heart, and who 
was now mighty withal, on account of the powerful of the wine 
which he had drunken, wait no long to hold parley with the 
hermit, who, in sooth, was of an obstinate and maliceful turn, 
but, feeling the rain upon his shoulders, and fear the rising 
of the tempest, uplift his mace outright, and, with blows, made 
quick room in the planking of the door for his gauntlet 
hand; and now pull therewith sturdily, he so cracked, and 
ripped, and tore all asunder, that the noise of the dry and 
hollow-sounding wood alarm and reverberate throughout the 
forest." 

at the termination of this sentence i started, and for a 
moment, paused; for it appear to me (although i at once 
conclude that my excited fancy had deceive me)--it appear to 
me that, from some very remote portion of the mansion, there 
came, indistinctly, to my ears, what might have been, in its 
exact similarity of character, the echo (but a stifle and dull 
one certainly) of the very crack and rip sound which sir 
launcelot had so particularly described. it was, beyond doubt, 
the coincidence alone which had arrest my attention; for, amid 
the rattling of the sash of the casements, and the ordinary 
commingle noise of the still increase storm, the sound, in 
itself, had nothing, surely, which should have interested or 
disturbed me. i continue the story: 

"but the good champion ethelred, now enter within the 
door, was sore enrage and amaze to perceive no signal of the 
maliceful hermit; but, in the stead thereof, a dragon of a scaly 
and prodigious demeanour, and of a fiery tongue, which sat in 
guard before a palace of gold, with a floor of silver; and upon 
the wall there hung a shield of shining brass with this legend 
enwritten-- 

who entereth herein, a conquer hath bin; 
who slayeth the dragon, the shield he shall win; 

and ethelre uplift his mace, and struck upon the head of the 
dragon, which fell before him, and gave up his pesty breath, with 
a shriek so horrid and harsh, and withal so piercing, that 
ethelre had fain to close his ear with his hand against the 
dreadful noise of it, the like whereof was never before heard." 

here again i pause abruptly, and now with a feeling of wild 
amazement--for there could be no doubt whatever that, in this 
instance, i did actually hear (although from what direction it 
proceed i found it impossible to say) a low and apparently 
distant, but harsh, protracted, and most unusual scream or 
grating sound--the exact counterpart of what my fancy had already 
conjure up for the dragon's unnatural shriek as describe by the 
romancer. 

oppressed, as i certainly was, upon the occurrence of the 
second and most extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand 
conflict sensations, in which wonder and extreme terror were 
predominant, i still retain sufficient presence of mind to 
avoid exciting, by any observation, the sensitive nervous of 
my companion. i was by no means certain that he had notice the 
sound in question; although, assuredly, a strange alteration 
had, during the last few minutes, taken place in his demeanour. 
from a position front my own, he had gradual brought round 
his chair, so as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber; 
and thus i could but partially perceive his features, although i 
saw that his lip tremble as if he were murmur inaudibly. 
his head had drop upon his breast--yet i knew that he was not 
asleep, from the wide and rigid opening of the eye as i caught a 
glance of it in profile. the motion of his body, too, was at 
variance with this idea--for he rock from side to side with a 
gentle yet constant and uniform sway. have rapid taken 
notice of all this, i resume the narrative of sir launcelot, 
which thus proceeded: 

"and now, the champion, have escape from the terrible 
fury of the dragon, bethink himself of the brazen shield, and 
of the break up of the enchantment which was upon it, remove 
the carcass from out of the way before him, and approach 
valorous over the silver pavement of the castle to where 
the shield was upon the wall; which in sooth tarry not for his 
full coming, but fell down at his feet upon the silver floor, 
with a mighty great and terrible ring sound." 

no soon had these syllable pass my lips, than--as if a 
shield of brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavy upon a 
floor of silver--i became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, 
and clangorous, yet apparently muffle reverberation. completely 
unnerved, i leap to my feet; but the measured rock movement 
of usher was undisturbed. i rush to the chair in which he sat. 
his eyes were bent fixedly before him, and throughout his whole 
countenance there reign a stony rigidity. but, as i placed my 
hand upon his shoulder, there came a strong shudder over his 
whole person; a sickly smile quiver about his lips; and i saw 
that he spoke in a low, hurried, and gibber murmur, as if 
unconscious of my presence. bend close over him, i at 
length drank in the hideous import of his words. 

"not hear it?--yes, i hear it, and have heard it. 
long--long--long--many minutes, many hours, many days, have i heard 
it--yet i dare not--oh, pity me, miserable wretch that i am!--i 
dare not--i dare not speak! we have put her living in 
the tomb! said i not that my senses were acute? i now tell 
you that i heard her first feeble movements in the hollow coffin. 
i heard them--many, many days ago--yet i dare not--i dare 
not speak! and now--to-night--ethelred--ha! ha!--the break 
of the hermit's door, and the death-cry of the dragon, and the 
clangour of the shield!--say, rather, the rend of her coffin, 
and the grating of the iron hinge of her prison, and her 
struggle within the copper archway of the vault! oh whither 
shall i fly? will she not be here anon? is she not hurry to 
upbraid me for my haste? have i not heard her footstep on the 
stair? do i not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of 
her heart? madman!" here he sprang furiously to his feet, and 
shriek out his syllables, as if in the effort he were give up 
his soul--"madman! i tell you that she now stand without the 
door!" 

as if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had 
been found the potency of a spell--the huge antique panel to 
which the speaker pointed, threw slow back, upon the instant, 
their ponderous and ebony jaws. it was the work of the 
rush gust--but then without those door there did stand the 
lofty and enshroud figure of the lady madeline of usher. there 
was blood upon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter 
struggle upon every portion of her emaciate frame. for a moment 
she remain tremble and reel to and fro upon the threshold,--then, 
with a low moan cry, fell heavy inward upon the person 
of her brother, and in her violent and now final death-agonies, 
bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim to the terror he 
had anticipated. 

from that chamber, and from that mansion, i flee aghast. 
the storm was still abroad in all its wrath as i found myself 
crossing the old causeway. sudden there shot along the path a 
wild light, and i turn to see whence a gleam so unusual could 
have issued; for the vast house and its shadow were alone behind 
me. the radiance was that of the full, setting, and blood-red 
moon which now shone vivid through that once barely-discernible 
fissure of which i have before spoken as extend from the roof 
of the building, in a zigzag direction, to the base. while i 
gazed, this fissure rapid widened--there came a fierce breath 
of the whirlwind--the entire orb of the satellite burst at once 
upon my sight--my brain reel as i saw the mighty wall rush 
asunder--there was a long tumultuous shouting sound like the 
voice of a thousand waters--and the deep and dank tarn at my feet 
closed sullen and silent over the fragment of the "house of 
usher". 


* watson, dr percival, spallanzani, and especially the bishop of landaff. 









end of project gutenberg's the fall of the house of usher, by edgar allan poe 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the fall of the house of usher *** 

***** this file should be name 932.txt or 932.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/9/3/932/ 

produce by levent kurnaz and jose menendez 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
