the project gutenberg ebook of the great god pan, by arthur machen 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the great god pan 

author: arthur machen 

posting date: august 12, 2008 [ebook #389] 
release date: january, 1996 
last updated: july 3, 2013 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the great god pan *** 




produce by brandi weed. html version by al haines. 









the great god pan 

by 

arthur machen 



contents 

i the experiment 
ii mr. clarke's memoirs 
iii the city of resurrection 
iv the discovery in paul street 
v the letter of advice 
vi the suicide 
vii the encounter in soho 
viii the fragment 




i 
preface 
the experiment 

"i am glad you came, clarke; very glad indeed. i was not sure you 
could spare the time." 

"i was able to make arrangement for a few days; things are not very 
lively just now. but have you no misgivings, raymond? is it 
absolutely safe?" 

the two men were slow pace the terrace in front of dr. raymond's 
house. the sun still hung above the western mountain-line, but it 
shone with a dull red glow that cast no shadows, and all the air was 
quiet; a sweet breath came from the great wood on the hillside above, 
and with it, at intervals, the soft murmur call of the wild doves. 
below, in the long lovely valley, the river wound in and out between 
the lonely hills, and, as the sun hover and vanish into the west, a 
faint mist, pure white, began to rise from the hills. dr. raymond 
turn sharp to his friend. 

"safe? of course it is. in itself the operation is a perfectly simple 
one; any surgeon could do it." 

"and there is no danger at any other stage?" 

"none; absolutely no physical danger whatsoever, i give you my word. 
you are always timid, clarke, always; but you know my history. i have 
devoted myself to transcendental medicine for the last twenty years. i 
have heard myself call quack and charlatan and impostor, but all the 
while i knew i was on the right path. five years ago i reach the 
goal, and since then every day has been a preparation for what we shall 
do tonight." 

"i should like to believe it is all true." clarke knit his brows, and 
look doubtful at dr. raymond. "are you perfectly sure, raymond, 
that your theory is not a phantasmagoria--a splendid vision, certainly, 
but a mere vision after all?" 

dr. raymond stop in his walk and turn sharply. he was a 
middle-aged man, gaunt and thin, of a pale yellow complexion, but as he 
answer clarke and face him, there was a flush on his cheek. 

"look about you, clarke. you see the mountain, and hill following 
after hill, as wave on wave, you see the wood and orchard, the field 
of ripe corn, and the meadow reach to the reed-beds by the river. 
you see me standing here beside you, and hear my voice; but i tell you 
that all these things--yes, from that star that has just shone out in 
the sky to the solid ground beneath our feet--i say that all these are 
but dream and shadows; the shadow that hide the real world from our 
eyes. there is a real world, but it is beyond this glamour and this 
vision, beyond these 'chases in arras, dream in a career,' beyond them 
all as beyond a veil. i do not know whether any human being has ever 
lift that veil; but i do know, clarke, that you and i shall see it 
lift this very night from before another's eyes. you may think this 
all strange nonsense; it may be strange, but it is true, and the 
ancients knew what lift the veil means. they call it seeing the 
god pan." 

clarke shivered; the white mist gathering over the river was chilly. 

"it is wonderful indeed," he said. "we are standing on the brink of a 
strange world, raymond, if what you say is true. i suppose the knife 
is absolutely necessary?" 

"yes; a slight lesion in the grey matter, that is all; a trifling 
rearrange of certain cells, a microscopic alteration that would 
escape the attention of ninety-nine brain specialist out of a hundred. 
i don't want to bother you with 'shop,' clarke; i might give you a mass 
of technical detail which would sound very imposing, and would leave 
you as enlightened as you are now. but i suppose you have read, 
casually, in out-of-the-way corner of your paper, that immense stride 
have been made recently in the physiology of the brain. i saw a 
paragraph the other day about digby's theory, and browne faber's 
discoveries. theory and discoveries! where they are standing now, i 
stood fifteen years ago, and i need not tell you that i have not been 
standing still for the last fifteen years. it will be enough if i say 
that five years ago i made the discovery that i allude to when i said 
that ten years ago i reach the goal. after years of labour, after 
years of toil and grope in the dark, after days and nights of 
disappointment and sometimes of despair, in which i use now and then 
to tremble and grow cold with the thought that perhaps there were 
other seek for what i sought, at last, after so long, a pang of 
sudden joy thrill my soul, and i knew the long journey was at an end. 
by what seem then and still seem a chance, the suggestion of a 
moment's idle thought follow up upon familiar lines and path that i 
had track a hundred times already, the great truth burst upon me, and 
i saw, map out in lines of sight, a whole world, a sphere unknown; 
continent and islands, and great ocean in which no ship has sail 
(to my belief) since a man first lift up his eyes and beheld the sun, 
and the stars of heaven, and the quiet earth beneath. you will think 
this all high-flown language, clarke, but it is hard to be literal. 
and yet; i do not know whether what i am hint at cannot be set forth 
in plain and lonely terms. for instance, this world of ours is pretty 
well gird now with the telegraph wire and cables; thought, with 
something less than the speed of thought, flash from sunrise to 
sunset, from north to south, across the flood and the desert places. 
suppose that an electrician of today were sudden to perceive that he 
and his friends have merely been play with pebble and mistake 
them for the foundations of the world; suppose that such a man saw 
uttermost space lie open before the current, and words of men flash 
forth to the sun and beyond the sun into the system beyond, and the 
voice of articulate-speaking men echo in the waste void that bounds our 
thought. as analogy go, that is a pretty good analogy of what i have 
done; you can understand now a little of what i felt as i stood here 
one evening; it was a summer evening, and the valley look much as it 
do now; i stood here, and saw before me the unutterable, the 
unthinkable gulf that yawn profound between two worlds, the world of 
matter and the world of spirit; i saw the great empty deep stretch dim 
before me, and in that instant a bridge of light leapt from the earth 
to the unknown shore, and the abyss was spanned. you may look in 
browne faber's book, if you like, and you will find that to the present 
day men of science are unable to account for the presence, or to 
specify the function of a certain group of nerve-cells in the brain. 
that group is, as it were, land to let, a mere waste place for fanciful 
theories. i am not in the position of browne faber and the 
specialists, i am perfectly instruct as to the possible function of 
those nerve-centers in the scheme of things. with a touch i can bring 
them into play, with a touch, i say, i can set free the current, with a 
touch i can complete the communication between this world of sense 
and--we shall be able to finish the sentence later on. yes, the knife 
is necessary; but think what that knife will effect. it will level 
utterly the solid wall of sense, and probably, for the first time since 
man was made, a spirit will gaze on a spirit-world. clarke, mary will 
see the god pan!" 

"but you remember what you wrote to me? i thought it would be 
requisite that she--" 

he whisper the rest into the doctor's ear. 

"not at all, not at all. that is nonsense. i assure you. indeed, it 
is better as it is; i am quite certain of that." 

"consider the matter well, raymond. it's a great responsibility. 
something might go wrong; you would be a miserable man for the rest of 
your days." 

"no, i think not, even if the worst happened. as you know, i rescue 
mary from the gutter, and from almost certain starvation, when she was 
a child; i think her life is mine, to use as i see fit. come, it's 
get late; we had better go in." 

dr. raymond led the way into the house, through the hall, and down a 
long dark passage. he took a key from his pocket and open a heavy 
door, and motion clarke into his laboratory. it had once been a 
billiard-room, and was light by a glass dome in the centre of the 
ceiling, whence there still shone a sad grey light on the figure of the 
doctor as he lit a lamp with a heavy shade and placed it on a table in 
the middle of the room. 

clarke look about him. scarcely a foot of wall remain bare; there 
were shelves all around laden with bottle and phial of all shape and 
colours, and at one end stood a little chippendale book-case. raymond 
pointed to this. 

"you see that parchment oswald crollius? he was one of the first to 
show me the way, though i don't think he ever found it himself. that 
is a strange saying of his: 'in every grain of wheat there lie hidden 
the soul of a star.'" 

there was not much furniture in the laboratory. the table in the 
centre, a stone slab with a drain in one corner, the two armchair on 
which raymond and clarke were sitting; that was all, except an 
odd-looking chair at the furthest end of the room. clarke look at 
it, and raise his eyebrows. 

"yes, that is the chair," said raymond. "we may as well place it in 
position." he got up and wheel the chair to the light, and began 
raise and lower it, letting down the seat, setting the back at 
various angles, and adjust the foot-rest. it look comfortable 
enough, and clarke pass his hand over the soft green velvet, as the 
doctor manipulate the levers. 

"now, clarke, make yourself quite comfortable. i have a couple hours' 
work before me; i was oblige to leave certain matter to the last." 

raymond went to the stone slab, and clarke watch him dreary as he 
bent over a row of phial and lit the flame under the crucible. the 
doctor had a small hand-lamp, shade as the large one, on a ledge 
above his apparatus, and clarke, who sat in the shadows, look down at 
the great shadowy room, wonder at the bizarre effects of brilliant 
light and undefined dark contrast with one another. soon he 
became conscious of an odd odour, at first the merest suggestion of 
odour, in the room, and as it grew more decided he felt surprise that 
he was not remind of the chemist's shop or the surgery. clarke found 
himself idle endeavour to analyse the sensation, and half conscious, 
he began to think of a day, fifteen years ago, that he had spent 
roam through the wood and meadow near his own home. it was a 
burning day at the beginning of august, the heat had dim the 
outline of all things and all distance with a faint mist, and people 
who observe the thermometer spoke of an abnormal register, of a 
temperature that was almost tropical. strange that wonderful hot day 
of the fifty rose up again in clarke's imagination; the sense of 
dazzle all-pervading sunlight seem to blot out the shadow and the 
lights of the laboratory, and he felt again the heated air beating in 
gust about his face, saw the shimmer rising from the turf, and heard 
the myriad murmur of the summer. 

"i hope the smell doesn't annoy you, clarke; there's nothing 
unwholesome about it. it may make you a bit sleepy, that's all." 

clarke heard the words quite distinctly, and knew that raymond was 
speak to him, but for the life of him he could not rouse himself 
from his lethargy. he could only think of the lonely walk he had taken 
fifteen years ago; it was his last look at the field and wood he had 
known since he was a child, and now it all stood out in brilliant 
light, as a picture, before him. above all there came to his nostril 
the scent of summer, the smell of flower mingled, and the odour of the 
woods, of cool shade places, deep in the green depths, drawn forth by 
the sun's heat; and the scent of the good earth, lie as it were with 
arms stretch forth, and smile lips, overpower all. his fancies 
made him wander, as he had wander long ago, from the field into the 
wood, track a little path between the shining undergrowth of 
beech-trees; and the trickle of water drop from the limestone rock 
sound as a clear melody in the dream. thought began to go astray 
and to mingle with other thoughts; the beech alley was transform to a 
path between ilex-trees, and here and there a vine climb from bough 
to bough, and sent up wave tendril and droop with purple grapes, 
and the sparse grey-green leaves of a wild olive-tree stood out against 
the dark shadow of the ilex. clarke, in the deep fold of dream, was 
conscious that the path from his father's house had led him into an 
undiscovered country, and he was wonder at the strange of it 
all, when suddenly, in place of the hum and murmur of the summer, an 
infinite silence seem to fall on all things, and the wood was hushed, 
and for a moment in time he stood face to face there with a presence, 
that was neither man nor beast, neither the living nor the dead, but 
all things mingled, the form of all things but devoid of all form. and 
in that moment, the sacrament of body and soul was dissolved, and a 
voice seem to cry "let us go hence," and then the dark of 
dark beyond the stars, the dark of everlasting. 

when clarke woke up with a start he saw raymond pour a few drops of 
some oily fluid into a green phial, which he stopper tightly. 

"you have been dozing," he said; "the journey must have tired you out. 
it is done now. i am go to fetch mary; i shall be back in ten 
minutes." 

clarke lay back in his chair and wondered. it seem as if he had but 
pass from one dream into another. he half expect to see the wall 
of the laboratory melt and disappear, and to awake in london, 
shudder at his own sleep fancies. but at last the door opened, 
and the doctor returned, and behind him came a girl of about seventeen, 
dress all in white. she was so beautiful that clarke did not wonder 
at what the doctor had written to him. she was blush now over face 
and neck and arms, but raymond seem unmoved. 

"mary," he said, "the time has come. you are quite free. are you 
willing to trust yourself to me entirely?" 

"yes, dear." 

"do you hear that, clarke? you are my witness. here is the chair, 
mary. it is quite easy. just sit in it and lean back. are you ready?" 

"yes, dear, quite ready. give me a kiss before you begin." 

the doctor stoop and kiss her mouth, kindly enough. "now shut your 
eyes," he said. the girl closed her eyelids, as if she were tired, and 
long for sleep, and raymond placed the green phial to her nostrils. 
her face grew white, white than her dress; she struggle faintly, and 
then with the feeling of submission strong within her, cross her arms 
upon her breast as a little child about to say her prayers. the bright 
light of the lamp fell full upon her, and clarke watch change 
fleeting over her face as the change of the hill when the summer 
cloud float across the sun. and then she lay all white and still, and 
the doctor turn up one of her eyelids. she was quite unconscious. 
raymond pressed hard on one of the lever and the chair instantly sank 
back. clarke saw him cutting away a circle, like a tonsure, from her 
hair, and the lamp was move nearer. raymond took a small glittering 
instrument from a little case, and clarke turn away shudderingly. 
when he look again the doctor was binding up the wound he had made. 

"she will awake in five minutes." raymond was still perfectly cool. 
"there is nothing more to be done; we can only wait." 

the minutes pass slowly; they could hear a slow, heavy, ticking. 
there was an old clock in the passage. clarke felt sick and faint; his 
knee shook beneath him, he could hardly stand. 

suddenly, as they watched, they heard a long-drawn sigh, and sudden 
did the colour that had vanish return to the girl's cheeks, and 
sudden her eyes opened. clarke quail before them. they shone with 
an awful light, look far away, and a great wonder fell upon her 
face, and her hand stretch out as if to touch what was invisible; 
but in an instant the wonder faded, and gave place to the most awful 
terror. the muscle of her face were hideous convulsed, she shook 
from head to foot; the soul seem struggle and shudder within the 
house of flesh. it was a horrible sight, and clarke rush forward, as 
she fell shriek to the floor. 

three days later raymond took clarke to mary's bedside. she was lie 
wide-awake, rolling her head from side to side, and grin vacantly. 

"yes," said the doctor, still quite cool, "it is a great pity; she is a 
hopeless idiot. however, it could not be helped; and, after all, she 
has seen the great god pan." 



ii 

mr. clarke's memoirs 

mr. clarke, the gentleman chosen by dr. raymond to witness the strange 
experiment of the god pan, was a person in whose character caution and 
curiosity were oddly mingled; in his sober moments he thought of the 
unusual and eccentric with undisguised aversion, and yet, deep in his 
heart, there was a wide-eyed inquisitive with respect to all the 
more recondite and esoteric elements in the nature of men. the latter 
tendency had prevail when he accept raymond's invitation, for 
though his considered judgment had always repudiate the doctor's 
theory as the wildest nonsense, yet he secret hug a belief in 
fantasy, and would have rejoice to see that belief confirmed. the 
horrors that he witness in the dreary laboratory were to a certain 
extent salutary; he was conscious of being involved in an affair not 
altogether reputable, and for many years afterwards he clung brave to 
the commonplace, and reject all occasion of occult investigation. 
indeed, on some homeopathy principle, he for some time attend the 
see of distinguished mediums, hope that the clumsy trick of 
these gentlemen would make him altogether disgust with mysticism of 
every kind, but the remedy, though caustic, was not efficacious. clarke 
knew that he still pine for the unseen, and little by little, the old 
passion began to reassert itself, as the face of mary, shudder and 
convulse with an unknown terror, fade slow from his memory. 
occupy all day in pursuit both serious and lucrative, the temptation 
to relax in the evening was too great, especially in the winter months, 
when the fire cast a warm glow over his snug bachelor apartment, and a 
bottle of some choice claret stood ready by his elbow. his dinner 
digested, he would make a brief pretence of reading the evening paper, 
but the mere catalogue of news soon pall upon him, and clarke would 
find himself casting glance of warm desire in the direction of an old 
japan bureau, which stood at a pleasant distance from the hearth. 
like a boy before a jam-closet, for a few minutes he would hover 
indecisive, but lust always prevailed, and clarke end by drawing up 
his chair, lighting a candle, and sitting down before the bureau. its 
pigeon-holes and drawers teem with document on the most morbid 
subjects, and in the well repose a large manuscript volume, in which 
he had painful enter the gem of his collection. clarke had a fine 
contempt for publish literature; the most ghostly story cease to 
interest him if it happen to be printed; his sole pleasure was in the 
reading, compiling, and rearrange what he call his "memoirs to 
prove the existence of the devil," and engaged in this pursuit the 
evening seem to fly and the night appear too short. 

on one particular evening, an ugly december night, black with fog, and 
raw with frost, clarke hurried over his dinner, and scarcely deign to 
observe his customary ritual of taking up the paper and lay it down 
again. he pace two or three times up and down the room, and open 
the bureau, stood still a moment, and sat down. he leant back, 
absorb in one of those dream to which he was subject, and at length 
drew out his book, and open it at the last entry. there were three 
or four page dense cover with clarke's round, set penmanship, and 
at the beginning he had written in a somewhat large hand: 

singular narrative told me by my friend, dr. phillips. 
he assure me that all the fact related 
therein are strict and wholly true, but 
refuse to give either the surname of the 
person concerned, or the place where these 
extraordinary event occurred. 

mr. clarke began to read over the account for the tenth time, glancing 
now and then at the pencil note he had made when it was told him by 
his friend. it was one of his humour to pride himself on a certain 
literary ability; he thought well of his style, and took pains in 
arrange the circumstances in dramatic order. he read the following 
story:-- 


the person concerned in this statement are helen v., who, if she is 
still alive, must now be a woman of twenty-three, rachel m., since 
deceased, who was a year younger than the above, and trevor w., an 
imbecile, age eighteen. these person were at the period of the story 
inhabitant of a village on the border of wales, a place of some 
importance in the time of the roman occupation, but now a scattered 
hamlet, of not more than five hundred souls. it is situated on rising 
ground, about six mile from the sea, and is sheltered by a large and 
picturesque forest. 

some eleven years ago, helen v. came to the village under rather 
peculiar circumstances. it is understood that she, being an orphan, 
was adopt in her infancy by a distant relative, who brought her up in 
his own house until she was twelve years old. thinking, however, that 
it would be better for the child to have playmate of her own age, he 
advertise in several local papers for a good home in a comfortable 
farmhouse for a girl of twelve, and this advertisement was answer by 
mr. r., a well-to-do farmer in the above-mentioned village. his 
reference prove satisfactory, the gentleman sent his adopt 
daughter to mr. r., with a letter, in which he stipulate that the girl 
should have a room to herself, and state that her guardian need be at 
no trouble in the matter of education, as she was already sufficient 
educated for the position in life which she would occupy. in fact, mr. 
r. was given to understand that the girl be allow to find her own 
occupation and to spend her time almost as she liked. mr. r. duly 
met her at the nearest station, a town seven mile away from his house, 
and seem to have remark nothing extraordinary about the child except 
that she was reticent as to her former life and her adopt father. she 
was, however, of a very different type from the inhabitant of the 
village; her skin was a pale, clear olive, and her features were 
strong marked, and of a somewhat foreign character. she appear to 
have settled down easily enough into farmhouse life, and became a 
favourite with the children, who sometimes went with her on her ramble 
in the forest, for this was her amusement. mr. r. states that he has 
known her to go out by herself directly after their early breakfast, 
and not return till after dusk, and that, feeling uneasy at a young 
girl being out alone for so many hours, he communicate with her 
adopt father, who reply in a brief note that helen must do as she 
chose. in the winter, when the forest path are impassable, she spent 
most of her time in her bedroom, where she slept alone, according to 
the instruction of her relative. it was on one of these expedition to 
the forest that the first of the singular incident with which this 
girl is connected occurred, the date being about a year after her 
arrival at the village. the preceding winter had been remarkably 
severe, the snow drift to a great depth, and the frost continue 
for an unexampled period, and the summer following was as noteworthy 
for its extreme heat. on one of the very hottest days in this summer, 
helen v. left the farmhouse for one of her long ramble in the forest, 
taking with her, as usual, some bread and meat for lunch. she was seen 
by some men in the field making for the old roman road, a green 
causeway which traverse the highest part of the wood, and they were 
astonish to observe that the girl had taken off her hat, though the 
heat of the sun was already tropical. as it happened, a labourer, 
joseph w. by name, was working in the forest near the roman road, and 
at twelve o'clock his little son, trevor, brought the man his dinner of 
bread and cheese. after the meal, the boy, who was about seven years 
old at the time, left his father at work, and, as he said, went to look 
for flower in the wood, and the man, who could hear him shouting with 
delight at his discoveries, felt no uneasiness. suddenly, however, he 
was horrify at hearing the most dreadful screams, evidently the 
result of great terror, proceeding from the direction in which his son 
had gone, and he hasty threw down his tool and ran to see what had 
happened. tracing his path by the sound, he met the little boy, who 
was running headlong, and was evidently terribly frightened, and on 
questioning him the man elicit that after pick a posy of flower 
he felt tired, and lay down on the grass and fell asleep. he was 
sudden awakened, as he stated, by a peculiar noise, a sort of singing 
he call it, and on peep through the branch he saw helen v. 
play on the grass with a "strange naked man," who he seem unable 
to describe more fully. he said he felt dreadfully frightened and ran 
away crying for his father. joseph w. proceed in the direction 
indicate by his son, and found helen v. sitting on the grass in the 
middle of a glade or open space left by charcoal burners. he angry 
charged her with frighten his little boy, but she entire deny 
the accusation and laugh at the child's story of a "strange man," to 
which he himself did not attach much credence. joseph w. came to the 
conclusion that the boy had woke up with a sudden fright, as children 
sometimes do, but trevor persist in his story, and continue in such 
evident distress that at last his father took him home, hope that his 
mother would be able to soothe him. for many weeks, however, the boy 
gave his parent much anxiety; he became nervous and strange in his 
manner, refuse to leave the cottage by himself, and constant 
alarm the household by waking in the night with cries of "the man in 
the wood! father! father!" 

in course of time, however, the impression seem to have worn off, and 
about three month later he accompany his father to the home of a 
gentleman in the neighborhood, for whom joseph w. occasional did 
work. the man was shown into the study, and the little boy was left 
sitting in the hall, and a few minutes later, while the gentleman was 
give w. his instructions, they were both horrify by a piercing 
shriek and the sound of a fall, and rush out they found the child 
lie senseless on the floor, his face contort with terror. the 
doctor was immediately summoned, and after some examination he 
pronounced the child to be suffering form a kind of fit, apparently 
produce by a sudden shock. the boy was taken to one of the bedrooms, 
and after some time recover consciousness, but only to pass into a 
condition describe by the medical man as one of violent hysteria. the 
doctor exhibit a strong sedative, and in the course of two hour 
pronounced him fit to walk home, but in passing through the hall the 
paroxysm of fright return and with additional violence. the father 
perceive that the child was point at some object, and heard the old 
cry, "the man in the wood," and look in the direction indicate saw 
a stone head of grotesque appearance, which had been built into the 
wall above one of the doors. it seem the owner of the house had 
recently made alteration in his premises, and on digging the 
foundations for some offices, the men had found a curious head, 
evidently of the roman period, which had been placed in the manner 
described. the head is pronounced by the most experienced 
archaeologist of the district to be that of a faun or satyr. [dr. 
phillip tell me that he has seen the head in question, and assure me 
that he has never received such a vivid present of intense evil.] 

from whatever cause arising, this second shock seem too severe for 
the boy trevor, and at the present date he suffer from a weakness of 
intellect, which give but little promise of amending. the matter 
cause a good deal of sensation at the time, and the girl helen was 
close question by mr. r., but to no purpose, she steadfast 
deny that she had frightened or in any way molest trevor. 

the second event with which this girl's name is connected took place 
about six years ago, and is of a still more extraordinary character. 

at the beginning of the summer of 1882, helen contract a friendship 
of a peculiarly intimate character with rachel m., the daughter of a 
prosperous farmer in the neighbourhood. this girl, who was a year 
younger than helen, was considered by most people to be the pretty of 
the two, though helen's features had to a great extent soften as she 
became older. the two girls, who were together on every available 
opportunity, present a singular contrast, the one with her clear, 
olive skin and almost italy appearance, and the other of the 
proverbial red and white of our rural districts. it must be state 
that the payment made to mr. r. for the maintenance of helen were 
known in the village for their excessive liberality, and the impression 
was general that she would one day inherit a large sum of money from 
her relative. the parent of rachel were therefore not averse from 
their daughter's friendship with the girl, and even encourage the 
intimacy, though they now bitter regret have done so. helen still 
retain her extraordinary fond for the forest, and on several 
occasion rachel accompany her, the two friends setting out early in 
the morning, and remain in the wood until dusk. once or twice after 
these excursion mrs. m. thought her daughter's manner rather peculiar; 
she seem languid and dreamy, and as it has been expressed, "different 
from herself," but these peculiarity seem to have been thought too 
trifling for remark. one evening, however, after rachel had come home, 
her mother heard a noise which sound like suppress weeping in the 
girl's room, and on go in found her lying, half undressed, upon the 
bed, evidently in the greatest distress. as soon as she saw her 
mother, she exclaimed, "ah, mother, mother, why did you let me go to 
the forest with helen?" mrs. m. was astonish at so strange a 
question, and proceed to make inquiries. rachel told her a wild 
story. she said-- 

clarke closed the book with a snap, and turn his chair towards the 
fire. when his friend sat one evening in that very chair, and told his 
story, clarke had interrupt him at a point a little subsequent to 
this, had cut short his words in a paroxysm of horror. "my god!" he 
had exclaimed, "think, think what you are saying. it is too 
incredible, too monstrous; such things can never be in this quiet 
world, where men and women live and die, and struggle, and conquer, or 
maybe fail, and fall down under sorrow, and grieve and suffer strange 
fortune for many a year; but not this, phillips, not such things as 
this. there must be some explanation, some way out of the terror. 
why, man, if such a case were possible, our earth would be a nightmare." 

but phillip had told his story to the end, concluding: 

"her flight remains a mystery to this day; she vanish in broad 
sunlight; they saw her walking in a meadow, and a few moments later she 
was not there." 

clarke try to conceive the thing again, as he sat by the fire, and 
again his mind shudder and shrank back, appall before the sight of 
such awful, unspeakable elements enthroned as it were, and triumphant 
in human flesh. before him stretch the long dim vista of the green 
causeway in the forest, as his friend had describe it; he saw the 
sway leaves and the quiver shadow on the grass, he saw the 
sunlight and the flowers, and far away, far in the long distance, the 
two figures move toward him. one was rachel, but the other? 

clarke had try his best to disbelieve it all, but at the end of the 
account, as he had written it in his book, he had placed the 
inscription: 

et diabolu incarnate est. et homo factu est. 



iii 

the city of resurrection 

"herbert! good god! is it possible?" 

"yes, my name's herbert. i think i know your face, too, but i don't 
remember your name. my memory is very queer." 

"don't you recollect villier of wadham?" 

"so it is, so it is. i beg your pardon, villiers, i didn't think i was 
beg of an old college friend. good-night." 

"my dear fellow, this haste is unnecessary. my rooms are close by, but 
we won't go there just yet. suppose we walk up shaftesbury avenue a 
little way? but how in heaven's name have you come to this pass, 
herbert?" 

"it's a long story, villiers, and a strange one too, but you can hear 
it if you like." 

"come on, then. take my arm, you don't seem very strong." 

the ill-assorted pair move slow up rupert street; the one in dirty, 
evil-looking rags, and the other attire in the regulation uniform of a 
man about town, trim, glossy, and eminently well-to-do. villier had 
emerge from his restaurant after an excellent dinner of many courses, 
assist by an ingratiating little flask of chianti, and, in that frame 
of mind which was with him almost chronic, had delay a moment by the 
door, peer round in the dimly-lighted street in search of those 
mysterious incident and person with which the street of london teem 
in every quarter and every hour. villier pride himself as a 
practised explore of such obscure maze and byways of london life, and 
in this unprofitable pursuit he display an assiduity which was worthy 
of more serious employment. thus he stood by the lamp-post survey 
the passers-by with undisguised curiosity, and with that gravity known 
only to the systematic diner, had just enunciate in his mind the 
formula: "london has been call the city of encounters; it is more 
than that, it is the city of resurrections," when these reflection 
were sudden interrupt by a piteous whine at his elbow, and a 
deplorable appeal for alms. he look around in some irritation, and 
with a sudden shock found himself confront with the embody proof of 
his somewhat stilted fancies. there, close beside him, his face 
alter and disfigure by poverty and disgrace, his body barely cover 
by greasy ill-fitting rags, stood his old friend charles herbert, who 
had matriculate on the same day as himself, with whom he had been 
merry and wise for twelve revolving terms. different occupation and 
vary interests had interrupt the friendship, and it was six years 
since villier had seen herbert; and now he look upon this wreck of a 
man with grief and dismay, mingle with a certain inquisitive as to 
what dreary chain of circumstances had drag him down to such a 
doleful pass. villier felt together with compassion all the relish of 
the amateur in mysteries, and congratulate himself on his leisurely 
speculation outside the restaurant. 

they walk on in silence for some time, and more than one passer-by 
stare in astonishment at the unaccustomed spectacle of a well-dressed 
man with an unmistakable beggar hanging on to his arm, and, observing 
this, villier led the way to an obscure street in soho. here he 
repeated his question. 

"how on earth has it happened, herbert? i always understood you would 
succeed to an excellent position in dorsetshire. did your father 
disinherit you? surely not?" 

"no, villiers; i came into all the property at my poor father's death; 
he die a year after i left oxford. he was a very good father to me, 
and i mourn his death sincerely enough. but you know what young men 
are; a few month later i came up to town and went a good deal into 
society. of course i had excellent introductions, and i manage to 
enjoy myself very much in a harmless sort of way. i play a little, 
certainly, but never for heavy stakes, and the few bet i made on races 
brought me in money--only a few pounds, you know, but enough to pay for 
cigar and such petty pleasures. it was in my second season that the 
tide turned. of course you have heard of my marriage?" 

"no, i never heard anything about it." 

"yes, i married, villiers. i met a girl, a girl of the most wonderful 
and most strange beauty, at the house of some people whom i knew. i 
cannot tell you her age; i never knew it, but, so far as i can guess, i 
should think she must have been about nineteen when i made her 
acquaintance. my friends had come to know her at florence; she told 
them she was an orphan, the child of an english father and an italy 
mother, and she charm them as she charm me. the first time i saw 
her was at an evening party. i was standing by the door talk to a 
friend, when sudden above the hum and babble of conversation i heard 
a voice which seem to thrill to my heart. she was singing an italy 
song. i was introduce to her that evening, and in three month i 
married helen. villiers, that woman, if i can call her woman, 
corrupt my soul. the night of the wedding i found myself sitting in 
her bedroom in the hotel, listen to her talk. she was sitting up in 
bed, and i listen to her as she spoke in her beautiful voice, spoke 
of things which even now i would not dare whisper in the blackest 
night, though i stood in the midst of a wilderness. you, villiers, 
you may think you know life, and london, and what go on day and night 
in this dreadful city; for all i can say you may have heard the talk of 
the vilest, but i tell you you can have no conception of what i know, 
not in your most fantastic, hideous dream can you have image forth 
the faintest shadow of what i have heard--and seen. yes, seen. i have 
seen the incredible, such horrors that even i myself sometimes stop in 
the middle of the street and ask whether it is possible for a man to 
behold such things and live. in a year, villiers, i was a ruin man, 
in body and soul--in body and soul." 

"but your property, herbert? you had land in dorset." 

"i sold it all; the field and woods, the dear old house--everything." 

"and the money?" 

"she took it all from me." 

"and then left you?" 

"yes; she disappear one night. i don't know where she went, but i am 
sure if i saw her again it would kill me. the rest of my story is of no 
interest; sordid misery, that is all. you may think, villiers, that i 
have exaggerate and talk for effect; but i have not told you half. 
i could tell you certain things which would convince you, but you would 
never know a happy day again. you would pass the rest of your life, as 
i pass mine, a haunt man, a man who has seen hell." 

villier took the unfortunate man to his rooms, and gave him a meal. 
herbert could eat little, and scarcely touched the glass of wine set 
before him. he sat moody and silent by the fire, and seem relieved 
when villier sent him away with a small present of money. 

"by the way, herbert," said villiers, as they part at the door, "what 
was your wife's name? you said helen, i think? helen what?" 

"the name she pass under when i met her was helen vaughan, but what 
her real name was i can't say. i don't think she had a name. no, no, 
not in that sense. only human being have names, villiers; i can't say 
anymore. good-bye; yes, i will not fail to call if i see any way in 
which you can help me. good-night." 

the man went out into the bitter night, and villier return to his 
fireside. there was something about herbert which shock him 
inexpressibly; not his poor rag nor the mark which poverty had set 
upon his face, but rather an indefinite terror which hung about him 
like a mist. he had acknowledge that he himself was not devoid of 
blame; the woman, he had avowed, had corrupt him body and soul, and 
villier felt that this man, once his friend, had been an actor in 
scene evil beyond the power of words. his story need no 
confirmation: he himself was the embody proof of it. villier muse 
curious over the story he had heard, and wonder whether he had 
heard both the first and the last of it. "no," he thought, "certainly 
not the last, probably only the beginning. a case like this is like a 
nest of china boxes; you open one after the other and find a quaint 
workmanship in every box. most likely poor herbert is merely one of 
the outside boxes; there are stranger one to follow." 

villier could not take his mind away from herbert and his story, which 
seem to grow wild as the night wore on. the fire seem to burn 
low, and the chilly air of the morning crept into the room; villier 
got up with a glance over his shoulder, and, shiver slightly, went 
to bed. 

a few days later he saw at his club a gentleman of his acquaintance, 
name austin, who was famous for his intimate knowledge of london life, 
both in its tenebrous and luminous phases. villiers, still full of his 
encounter in soho and its consequences, thought austin might possibly 
be able to shed some light on herbert's history, and so after some 
casual talk he sudden put the question: 

"do you happen to know anything of a man name herbert--charles 
herbert?" 

austin turn round sharp and stare at villier with some 
astonishment. 

"charles herbert? weren't you in town three years ago? no; then you 
have not heard of the paul street case? it cause a good deal of 
sensation at the time." 

"what was the case?" 

"well, a gentleman, a man of very good position, was found dead, stark 
dead, in the area of a certain house in paul street, off tottenham 
court road. of course the police did not make the discovery; if you 
happen to be sitting up all night and have a light in your window, the 
constable will ring the bell, but if you happen to be lie dead in 
somebody's area, you will be left alone. in this instance, as in many 
others, the alarm was raise by some kind of vagabond; i don't mean a 
common tramp, or a public-house loafer, but a gentleman, whose business 
or pleasure, or both, made him a spectator of the london street at 
five o'clock in the morning. this individual was, as he said, 'going 
home,' it did not appear whence or whither, and had occasion to pass 
through paul street between four and five a.m. something or other 
caught his eye at number 20; he said, absurd enough, that the house 
had the most unpleasant physiognomy he had ever observed, but, at any 
rate, he glance down the area and was a good deal astonish to see a 
man lie on the stones, his limb all huddle together, and his face 
turn up. our gentleman thought his face look peculiarly ghastly, 
and so set off at a run in search of the nearest policeman. the 
constable was at first inclined to treat the matter lightly, suspect 
common drunkenness; however, he came, and after look at the man's 
face, change his tone, quick enough. the early bird, who had picked 
up this fine worm, was sent off for a doctor, and the policeman rang 
and knock at the door till a slattern servant girl came down 
look more than half asleep. the constable pointed out the contents 
of the area to the maid, who scream loud enough to wake up the 
street, but she knew nothing of the man; had never seen him at the 
house, and so forth. meanwhile, the original discover had come back 
with a medical man, and the next thing was to get into the area. the 
gate was open, so the whole quartet stump down the steps. the doctor 
hardly need a moment's examination; he said the poor fellow had been 
dead for several hours, and it was then the case began to get 
interesting. the dead man had not been robbed, and in one of his 
pocket were papers identify him as--well, as a man of good family 
and means, a favourite in society, and nobody's enemy, as far as could 
be known. i don't give his name, villiers, because it has nothing to 
do with the story, and because it's no good rake up these affair 
about the dead when there are no relations living. the next curious 
point was that the medical men couldn't agree as to how he met his 
death. there were some slight bruise on his shoulders, but they were 
so slight that it look as if he had been pushed roughly out of the 
kitchen door, and not thrown over the railing from the street or even 
drag down the steps. but there were positively no other mark of 
violence about him, certainly none that would account for his death; 
and when they came to the autopsy there wasn't a trace of poison of any 
kind. of course the police want to know all about the people at 
number 20, and here again, so i have heard from private sources, one or 
two other very curious points came out. it appear that the occupant 
of the house were a mr. and mrs. charles herbert; he was said to be a 
landed proprietor, though it struck most people that paul street was 
not exactly the place to look for country gentry. as for mrs. herbert, 
nobody seem to know who or what she was, and, between ourselves, i 
fancy the divers after her history found themselves in rather strange 
waters. of course they both deny knowing anything about the 
deceased, and in default of any evidence against them they were 
discharged. but some very odd things came out about them. though it 
was between five and six in the morning when the dead man was removed, 
a large crowd had collected, and several of the neighbour ran to see 
what was go on. they were pretty free with their comments, by all 
accounts, and from these it appear that number 20 was in very bad 
odour in paul street. the detective try to trace down these rumour 
to some solid foundation of fact, but could not get hold of anything. 
people shook their head and raise their eyebrow and thought the 
herbert rather 'queer,' 'would rather not be seen go into their 
house,' and so on, but there was nothing tangible. the authority 
were morally certain the man met his death in some way or another in 
the house and was thrown out by the kitchen door, but they couldn't 
prove it, and the absence of any indication of violence or poison 
left them helpless. an odd case, wasn't it? but curious enough, 
there's something more that i haven't told you. i happen to know one 
of the doctor who was consult as to the cause of death, and some 
time after the inquest i met him, and ask him about it. 'do you 
really mean to tell me,' i said, 'that you were baffle by the case, 
that you actually don't know what the man die of?' 'pardon me,' he 
replied, 'i know perfectly well what cause death. blank die of 
fright, of sheer, awful terror; i never saw features so hideous 
contort in the entire course of my practice, and i have seen the 
face of a whole host of dead.' the doctor was usually a cool customer 
enough, and a certain vehemence in his manner struck me, but i couldn't 
get anything more out of him. i suppose the treasury didn't see their 
way to prosecute the herbert for frighten a man to death; at any 
rate, nothing was done, and the case drop out of men's minds. do 
you happen to know anything of herbert?" 

"well," reply villiers, "he was an old college friend of mine." 

"you don't say so? have you ever seen his wife?" 

"no, i haven't. i have lost sight of herbert for many years." 

"it's queer, isn't it, parting with a man at the college gate or at 
paddington, seeing nothing of him for years, and then finding him pop 
up his head in such an odd place. but i should like to have seen mrs. 
herbert; people said extraordinary things about her." 

"what sort of things?" 

"well, i hardly know how to tell you. everyone who saw her at the 
police court said she was at once the most beautiful woman and the most 
repulsive they had ever set eyes on. i have spoken to a man who saw 
her, and i assure you he positively shudder as he try to describe 
the woman, but he couldn't tell why. she seem to have been a sort of 
enigma; and i expect if that one dead man could have told tales, he 
would have told some uncommonly queer ones. and there you are again in 
another puzzle; what could a respectable country gentleman like mr. 
blank (we'll call him that if you don't mind) want in such a very queer 
house as number 20? it's altogether a very odd case, isn't it?" 

"it is indeed, austin; an extraordinary case. i didn't think, when i 
ask you about my old friend, i should strike on such strange metal. 
well, i must be off; good-day." 

villier went away, thinking of his own conceit of the china boxes; 
here was quaint workmanship indeed. 



iv 

the discovery in paul street 

a few month after villiers' meeting with herbert, mr. clarke was 
sitting, as usual, by his after-dinner hearth, resolute guard his 
fancies from wandering in the direction of the bureau. for more than a 
week he had succeed in keeping away from the "memoirs," and he 
cherish hope of a complete self-reformation; but, in spite of his 
endeavours, he could not hush the wonder and the strange curiosity that 
the last case he had written down had excited within him. he had put 
the case, or rather the outline of it, conjectural to a scientific 
friend, who shook his head, and thought clarke get queer, and on 
this particular evening clarke was making an effort to rationalize the 
story, when a sudden knock at the door rouse him from his meditations. 

"mr. villier to see you sir." 

"dear me, villiers, it is very kind of you to look me up; i have not 
seen you for many months; i should think nearly a year. come in, come 
in. and how are you, villiers? want any advice about investments?" 

"no, thanks, i fancy everything i have in that way is pretty safe. no, 
clarke, i have really come to consult you about a rather curious matter 
that has been brought under my notice of late. i am afraid you will 
think it all rather absurd when i tell my tale. i sometimes think so 
myself, and that's just what i made up my mind to come to you, as i 
know you're a practical man." 

mr. villier was ignorant of the "memoirs to prove the existence of the 
devil." 

"well, villiers, i shall be happy to give you my advice, to the best of 
my ability. what is the nature of the case?" 

"it's an extraordinary thing altogether. you know my ways; i always 
keep my eyes open in the streets, and in my time i have chance upon 
some queer customers, and queer case too, but this, i think, beat 
all. i was coming out of a restaurant one nasty winter night about 
three month ago; i had had a capital dinner and a good bottle of 
chianti, and i stood for a moment on the pavement, thinking what a 
mystery there is about london street and the company that pass along 
them. a bottle of red wine encourage these fancies, clarke, and i 
dare say i should have thought a page of small type, but i was cut 
short by a beggar who had come behind me, and was making the usual 
appeals. of course i look round, and this beggar turn out to be 
what was left of an old friend of mine, a man name herbert. i ask 
him how he had come to such a wretched pass, and he told me. we walk 
up and down one of those long and dark soho streets, and there i 
listen to his story. he said he had married a beautiful girl, some 
years younger than himself, and, as he put it, she had corrupt him 
body and soul. he wouldn't go into details; he said he dare not, that 
what he had seen and heard haunt him by night and day, and when i 
look in his face i knew he was speak the truth. there was 
something about the man that made me shiver. i don't know why, but it 
was there. i gave him a little money and sent him away, and i assure 
you that when he was gone i gasp for breath. his presence seem to 
chill one's blood." 

"isn't this all just a little fanciful, villiers? i suppose the poor 
fellow had made an imprudent marriage, and, in plain english, gone to 
the bad." 

"well, listen to this." villier told clarke the story he had heard 
from austin. 

"you see," he concluded, "there can be but little doubt that this mr. 
blank, whoever he was, die of sheer terror; he saw something so awful, 
so terrible, that it cut short his life. and what he saw, he most 
certainly saw in that house, which, somehow or other, had got a bad 
name in the neighbourhood. i had the curiosity to go and look at the 
place for myself. it's a sadden kind of street; the house are old 
enough to be mean and dreary, but not old enough to be quaint. as far 
as i could see most of them are let in lodgings, furnish and 
unfurnished, and almost every door has three bell to it. here and 
there the ground floor have been made into shop of the commonest 
kind; it's a dismal street in every way. i found number 20 was to let, 
and i went to the agent's and got the key. of course i should have 
heard nothing of the herbert in that quarter, but i ask the man, 
fair and square, how long they had left the house and whether there had 
been other tenant in the meanwhile. he look at me queer for a 
minute, and told me the herbert had left immediately after the 
unpleasantness, as he call it, and since then the house had been 
empty." 

mr. villier pause for a moment. 

"i have always been rather fond of go over empty houses; there's a 
sort of fascination about the desolate empty rooms, with the nail 
stick in the walls, and the dust thick upon the window-sills. but i 
didn't enjoy go over number 20, paul street. i had hardly put my 
foot inside the passage when i notice a queer, heavy feeling about the 
air of the house. of course all empty house are stuffy, and so forth, 
but this was something quite different; i can't describe it to you, but 
it seem to stop the breath. i went into the front room and the back 
room, and the kitchen downstairs; they were all dirty and dusty 
enough, as you would expect, but there was something strange about them 
all. i couldn't define it to you, i only know i felt queer. it was 
one of the rooms on the first floor, though, that was the worst. it 
was a largish room, and once on a time the paper must have been 
cheerful enough, but when i saw it, paint, paper, and everything were 
most doleful. but the room was full of horror; i felt my teeth 
grind as i put my hand on the door, and when i went in, i thought i 
should have fallen faint to the floor. however, i pull myself 
together, and stood against the end wall, wonder what on earth there 
could be about the room to make my limb tremble, and my heart beat as 
if i were at the hour of death. in one corner there was a pile of 
newspaper litter on the floor, and i began look at them; they 
were papers of three or four years ago, some of them half torn, and 
some crumple as if they had been use for packing. i turn the whole 
pile over, and amongst them i found a curious drawing; i will show it 
to you presently. but i couldn't stay in the room; i felt it was 
overpowering me. i was thankful to come out, safe and sound, into the 
open air. people stare at me as i walk along the street, and one 
man said i was drunk. i was staggering about from one side of the 
pavement to the other, and it was as much as i could do to take the key 
back to the agent and get home. i was in bed for a week, suffering 
from what my doctor call nervous shock and exhaustion. one of those 
days i was reading the evening paper, and happen to notice a 
paragraph headed: 'starved to death.' it was the usual style of thing; 
a model lodging-house in marylebone, a door lock for several days, 
and a dead man in his chair when they broke in. 'the deceased,' said 
the paragraph, 'was known as charles herbert, and is believe to have 
been once a prosperous country gentleman. his name was familiar to the 
public three years ago in connection with the mysterious death in paul 
street, tottenham court road, the deceased being the tenant of the 
house number 20, in the area of which a gentleman of good position was 
found dead under circumstances not devoid of suspicion.' a tragic 
ending, wasn't it? but after all, if what he told me were true, which 
i am sure it was, the man's life was all a tragedy, and a tragedy of a 
stranger sort than they put on the boards." 

"and that is the story, is it?" said clarke musingly. 

"yes, that is the story." 

"well, really, villiers, i scarcely know what to say about it. there 
are, no doubt, circumstances in the case which seem peculiar, the 
finding of the dead man in the area of herbert's house, for instance, 
and the extraordinary opinion of the physician as to the cause of 
death; but, after all, it is conceivable that the fact may be 
explain in a straightforward manner. as to your own sensations, when 
you went to see the house, i would suggest that they were due to a 
vivid imagination; you must have been brooding, in a semi-conscious 
way, over what you had heard. i don't exactly see what more can be 
said or done in the matter; you evidently think there is a mystery of 
some kind, but herbert is dead; where then do you propose to look?" 

"i propose to look for the woman; the woman whom he married. she is 
the mystery." 

the two men sat silent by the fireside; clarke secret congratulate 
himself on have successful kept up the character of advocate of the 
commonplace, and villier wrap in his gloomy fancies. 

"i think i will have a cigarette," he said at last, and put his hand in 
his pocket to feel for the cigarette-case. 

"ah!" he said, start slightly, "i forgot i had something to show 
you. you remember my saying that i had found a rather curious sketch 
amongst the pile of old newspaper at the house in paul street? here 
it is." 

villier drew out a small thin parcel from his pocket. it was cover 
with brown paper, and secure with string, and the knot were 
troublesome. in spite of himself clarke felt inquisitive; he bent 
forward on his chair as villier painful undid the string, and 
unfold the outer covering. inside was a second wrapping of tissue, 
and villier took it off and hand the small piece of paper to clarke 
without a word. 

there was dead silence in the room for five minutes or more; the two 
men sat so still that they could hear the ticking of the tall 
old-fashioned clock that stood outside in the hall, and in the mind of 
one of them the slow monotony of sound woke up a far, far memory. he 
was look intent at the small pen-and-ink sketch of the woman's 
head; it had evidently been drawn with great care, and by a true 
artist, for the woman's soul look out of the eyes, and the lip were 
part with a strange smile. clarke gaze still at the face; it 
brought to his memory one summer evening, long ago; he saw again the 
long lovely valley, the river winding between the hills, the meadow 
and the cornfields, the dull red sun, and the cold white mist rising 
from the water. he heard a voice speak to him across the wave of 
many years, and saying "clarke, mary will see the god pan!" and then he 
was standing in the grim room beside the doctor, listen to the heavy 
ticking of the clock, wait and watching, watch the figure lie 
on the green chair beneath the lamplight. mary rose up, and he look 
into her eyes, and his heart grew cold within him. 

"who is this woman?" he said at last. his voice was dry and hoarse. 

"that is the woman who herbert married." 

clarke look again at the sketch; it was not mary after all. there 
certainly was mary's face, but there was something else, something he 
had not seen on mary's features when the white-clad girl enter the 
laboratory with the doctor, nor at her terrible awakening, nor when she 
lay grin on the bed. whatever it was, the glance that came from 
those eyes, the smile on the full lips, or the expression of the whole 
face, clarke shudder before it at his inmost soul, and thought, 
unconsciously, of dr. phillip's words, "the most vivid present of 
evil i have ever seen." he turn the paper over mechanical in his 
hand and glance at the back. 

"good god! clarke, what is the matter? you are as white as death." 

villier had start wildly from his chair, as clarke fell back with a 
groan, and let the paper drop from his hands. 

"i don't feel very well, villiers, i am subject to these attacks. pour 
me out a little wine; thanks, that will do. i shall feel better in a 
few minutes." 

villier picked up the fallen sketch and turn it over as clarke had 
done. 

"you saw that?" he said. "that's how i identify it as being a 
portrait of herbert's wife, or i should say his widow. how do you feel 
now?" 

"better, thanks, it was only a passing faintness. i don't think i 
quite catch your meaning. what did you say enable you to identify the 
picture?" 

"this word--'helen'--was written on the back. didn't i tell you her 
name was helen? yes; helen vaughan." 

clarke groaned; there could be no shadow of doubt. 

"now, don't you agree with me," said villiers, "that in the story i 
have told you to-night, and in the part this woman play in it, there 
are some very strange points?" 

"yes, villiers," clarke muttered, "it is a strange story indeed; a 
strange story indeed. you must give me time to think it over; i may be 
able to help you or i may not. must you be go now? well, 
good-night, villiers, good-night. come and see me in the course of a 
week." 



v 

the letter of advice 

"do you know, austin," said villiers, as the two friends were pace 
sedate along piccadil one pleasant morning in may, "do you know i 
am convinced that what you told me about paul street and the herbert 
is a mere episode in an extraordinary history? i may as well confess 
to you that when i ask you about herbert a few month ago i had just 
seen him." 

"you had seen him? where?" 

"he beg of me in the street one night. he was in the most pitiable 
plight, but i recognize the man, and i got him to tell me his history, 
or at least the outline of it. in brief, it amount to this--he had 
been ruin by his wife." 

"in what manner?" 

"he would not tell me; he would only say that she had destroy him, 
body and soul. the man is dead now." 

"and what has become of his wife?" 

"ah, that's what i should like to know, and i mean to find her soon 
or later. i know a man name clarke, a dry fellow, in fact a man of 
business, but shrewd enough. you understand my meaning; not shrewd in 
the mere business sense of the word, but a man who really know 
something about men and life. well, i laid the case before him, and he 
was evidently impressed. he said it need consideration, and ask me 
to come again in the course of a week. a few days later i received 
this extraordinary letter." 

austin took the envelope, drew out the letter, and read it curiously. 
it ran as follows:-- 

"my dear villiers,--i have thought over the matter on which you 
consult me the other night, and my advice to you is this. throw the 
portrait into the fire, blot out the story from your mind. never give 
it another thought, villiers, or you will be sorry. you will think, no 
doubt, that i am in possession of some secret information, and to a 
certain extent that is the case. but i only know a little; i am like a 
traveller who has peer over an abyss, and has drawn back in terror. 
what i know is strange enough and horrible enough, but beyond my 
knowledge there are depths and horrors more frightful still, more 
incredible than any tale told of winter nights about the fire. i have 
resolved, and nothing shall shake that resolve, to explore no whit 
farther, and if you value your happiness you will make the same 
determination. 

"come and see me by all means; but we will talk on more cheerful topic 
than this." 

austin fold the letter methodically, and return it to villiers. 

"it is certainly an extraordinary letter," he said, "what do he mean 
by the portrait?" 

"ah! i forgot to tell you i have been to paul street and have made a 
discovery." 

villier told his story as he had told it to clarke, and austin 
listen in silence. he seem puzzled. 

"how very curious that you should experience such an unpleasant 
sensation in that room!" he said at length. "i hardly gather that it 
was a mere matter of the imagination; a feeling of repulsion, in short." 

"no, it was more physical than mental. it was as if i were inhale at 
every breath some deadly fume, which seem to penetrate to every nerve 
and bone and sinew of my body. i felt rack from head to foot, my 
eyes began to grow dim; it was like the entrance of death." 

"yes, yes, very strange certainly. you see, your friend confess that 
there is some very black story connected with this woman. did you 
notice any particular emotion in him when you were telling your tale?" 

"yes, i did. he became very faint, but he assured me that it was a 
mere passing attack to which he was subject." 

"did you believe him?" 

"i did at the time, but i don't now. he heard what i had to say with a 
good deal of indifference, till i show him the portrait. it was then 
that he was seize with the attack of which i spoke. he look 
ghastly, i assure you." 

"then he must have seen the woman before. but there might be another 
explanation; it might have been the name, and not the face, which was 
familiar to him. what do you think?" 

"i couldn't say. to the best of my belief it was after turning the 
portrait in his hand that he nearly drop from the chair. the name, 
you know, was written on the back." 

"quite so. after all, it is impossible to come to any resolution in a 
case like this. i hate melodrama, and nothing strike me as more 
commonplace and tedious than the ordinary ghost story of commerce; but 
really, villiers, it looks as if there were something very queer at the 
bottom of all this." 

the two men had, without notice it, turn up ashley street, leading 
northward from piccadilly. it was a long street, and rather a gloomy 
one, but here and there a bright taste had illuminate the dark 
house with flowers, and gay curtains, and a cheerful paint on the 
doors. villier glance up as austin stop speaking, and look at 
one of these houses; geraniums, red and white, droop from every sill, 
and daffodil-coloured curtains were drape back from each window. 

"it looks cheerful, doesn't it?" he said. 

"yes, and the inside is still more cheery. one of the pleasantest 
house of the season, so i have heard. i haven't been there myself, 
but i've met several men who have, and they tell me it's uncommonly 
jovial." 

"whose house is it?" 

"a mrs. beaumont's." 

"and who is she?" 

"i couldn't tell you. i have heard she come from south america, but 
after all, who she is is of little consequence. she is a very wealthy 
woman, there's no doubt of that, and some of the best people have taken 
her up. i hear she has some wonderful claret, really marvellous wine, 
which must have cost a fabulous sum. lord argentina was telling me 
about it; he was there last sunday evening. he assure me he has never 
taste such a wine, and argentine, as you know, is an expert. by the 
way, that remind me, she must be an oddish sort of woman, this mrs. 
beaumont. argentina ask her how old the wine was, and what do you 
think she said? 'about a thousand years, i believe.' lord argentina 
thought she was chaff him, you know, but when he laugh she said 
she was speak quite seriously and offer to show him the jar. of 
course, he couldn't say anything more after that; but it seem rather 
antiquated for a beverage, doesn't it? why, here we are at my rooms. 
come in, won't you?" 

"thanks, i think i will. i haven't seen the curiosity-shop for a 
while." 

it was a room furnish richly, yet oddly, where every jar and bookcase 
and table, and every rug and jar and ornament seem to be a thing 
apart, preserve each its own individuality. 

"anything fresh lately?" said villier after a while. 

"no; i think not; you saw those queer jugs, didn't you? i thought so. 
i don't think i have come across anything for the last few weeks." 

austin glance around the room from cupboard to cupboard, from shelf to 
shelf, in search of some new oddity. his eyes fell at last on an odd 
chest, pleasant and quaint carved, which stood in a dark corner of 
the room. 

"ah," he said, "i was forgetting, i have got something to show you." 
austin unlock the chest, drew out a thick quarto volume, laid it on 
the table, and resume the cigar he had put down. 

"did you know arthur meyrick the painter, villiers?" 

"a little; i met him two or three times at the house of a friend of 
mine. what has become of him? i haven't heard his name mention for 
some time." 

"he's dead." 

"you don't say so! quite young, wasn't he?" 

"yes; only thirty when he died." 

"what did he die of?" 

"i don't know. he was an intimate friend of mine, and a thorough 
good fellow. he use to come here and talk to me for hours, and he was 
one of the best talker i have met. he could even talk about painting, 
and that's more than can be said of most painters. about eighteen 
month ago he was feeling rather overworked, and partly at my 
suggestion he went off on a sort of rove expedition, with no very 
definite end or aim about it. i believe new york was to be his first 
port, but i never heard from him. three month ago i got this book, 
with a very civil letter from an english doctor practise at buenos 
ayres, state that he had attend the late mr. meyrick during his 
illness, and that the deceased had express an earnest wish that the 
enclose packet should be sent to me after his death. that was all." 

"and haven't you written for further particulars?" 

"i have been thinking of do so. you would advise me to write to the 
doctor?" 

"certainly. and what about the book?" 

"it was seal up when i got it. i don't think the doctor had seen it." 

"it is something very rare? meyrick was a collector, perhaps?" 

"no, i think not, hardly a collector. now, what do you think of these 
ainu jugs?" 

"they are peculiar, but i like them. but aren't you go to show me 
poor meyrick's legacy?" 

"yes, yes, to be sure. the fact is, it's rather a peculiar sort of 
thing, and i haven't shown it to any one. i wouldn't say anything 
about it if i were you. there it is." 

villier took the book, and open it at haphazard. 

"it isn't a print volume, then?" he said. 

"no. it is a collection of drawing in black and white by my poor 
friend meyrick." 

villier turn to the first page, it was blank; the second bore a 
brief inscription, which he read: 


silet per diem universus, nec sine horrore secretu est; lucet 
nocturni ignibus, chorus aegipanum undique personatur: audiuntur et 
cantu tibiarum, et tinnitu cymbalorum per oram maritimam. 


on the third page was a design which made villier start and look up at 
austin; he was gaze abstracted out of the window. villier turn 
page after page, absorbed, in spite of himself, in the frightful 
walpurgi night of evil, strange monstrous evil, that the dead artist 
had set forth in hard black and white. the figures of faun and satyr 
and aegipan dance before his eyes, the dark of the thicket, the 
dance on the mountain-top, the scene by lonely shores, in green 
vineyards, by rocks and desert places, pass before him: a world 
before which the human soul seem to shrink back and shudder. villier 
whirl over the remain pages; he had seen enough, but the picture 
on the last leaf caught his eye, as he almost closed the book. 

"austin!" 

"well, what is it?" 

"do you know who that is?" 

it was a woman's face, alone on the white page. 

"know who it is? no, of course not." 

"i do." 

"who is it?" 

"it is mrs. herbert." 

"are you sure?" 

"i am perfectly sure of it. poor meyrick! he is one more chapter in 
her history." 

"but what do you think of the designs?" 

"they are frightful. lock the book up again, austin. if i were you i 
would burn it; it must be a terrible companion even though it be in a 
chest." 

"yes, they are singular drawings. but i wonder what connection there 
could be between meyrick and mrs. herbert, or what link between her and 
these designs?" 

"ah, who can say? it is possible that the matter may end here, and we 
shall never know, but in my own opinion this helen vaughan, or mrs. 
herbert, is only the beginning. she will come back to london, austin; 
depend on it, she will come back, and we shall hear more about her 
then. i doubt it will be very pleasant news." 



vi 

the suicide 

lord argentina was a great favourite in london society. at twenty he 
had been a poor man, deck with the surname of an illustrious family, 
but forced to earn a livelihood as best he could, and the most 
speculative of money-lenders would not have entrust him with fifty 
pound on the chance of his ever change his name for a title, and his 
poverty for a great fortune. his father had been near enough to the 
fountain of good things to secure one of the family livings, but the 
son, even if he had taken orders, would scarcely have obtain so much 
as this, and moreover felt no vocation for the ecclesiastical estate. 
thus he front the world with no better armour than the bachelor's 
gown and the wit of a younger son's grandson, with which equipment he 
contrived in some way to make a very tolerable fight of it. at 
twenty-five mr. charles aubernon saw himself still a man of struggle 
and of warfare with the world, but out of the seven who stood before 
him and the high place of his family three only remained. these 
three, however, were "good lives," but yet not proof against the zulu 
assegai and typhoid fever, and so one morning aubernon woke up and 
found himself lord argentine, a man of thirty who had face the 
difficulty of existence, and had conquered. the situation amuse him 
immensely, and he resolve that riches should be as pleasant to him as 
poverty had always been. argentine, after some little consideration, 
came to the conclusion that dining, regard as a fine art, was perhaps 
the most amuse pursuit open to fallen humanity, and thus his dinner 
became famous in london, and an invitation to his table a thing 
covetous desired. after ten years of lordship and dinner argentina 
still decline to be jaded, still persist in enjoy life, and by a 
kind of infection had become recognize as the cause of joy in others, 
in short, as the best of company. his sudden and tragic death 
therefore cause a wide and deep sensation. people could scarcely 
believe it, even though the newspaper was before their eyes, and the 
cry of "mysterious death of a nobleman" came ring up from the 
street. but there stood the brief paragraph: "lord argentina was found 
dead this morning by his valet under distressing circumstances. it is 
state that there can be no doubt that his lordship committed suicide, 
though no motive can be assign for the act. the deceased nobleman 
was widely known in society, and much like for his genial manner and 
sumptuous hospitality. he is succeed by," etc., etc. 

by slow degree the detail came to light, but the case still remain 
a mystery. the chief witness at the inquest was the deceased's valet, 
who said that the night before his death lord argentina had dine with 
a lady of good position, whose name was suppress in the newspaper 
reports. at about eleven o'clock lord argentina had returned, and 
informed his man that he should not require his service till the next 
morning. a little later the valet had occasion to cross the hall and 
was somewhat astonish to see his master quiet letting himself out 
at the front door. he had taken off his evening clothes, and was 
dress in a norfolk coat and knickerbockers, and wore a low brown hat. 
the valet had no reason to suppose that lord argentina had seen him, 
and though his master rarely kept late hours, thought little of the 
occurrence till the next morning, when he knock at the bedroom door 
at a quarter to nine as usual. he received no answer, and, after 
knock two or three times, enter the room, and saw lord argentine's 
body leaning forward at an angle from the bottom of the bed. he found 
that his master had tie a cord secure to one of the short bed-posts, 
and, after making a running noose and slip it round his neck, the 
unfortunate man must have resolute fallen forward, to die by slow 
strangulation. he was dress in the light suit in which the valet had 
seen him go out, and the doctor who was summon pronounced that life 
had been extinct for more than four hours. all papers, letters, and so 
forth seem in perfect order, and nothing was discover which pointed 
in the most remote way to any scandal either great or small. here the 
evidence ended; nothing more could be discovered. several person had 
been present at the dinner-party at which lord argentina had assisted, 
and to all these he seem in his usual genial spirits. the valet, 
indeed, said he thought his master appear a little excited when he 
came home, but confessed that the alteration in his manner was very 
slight, hardly noticeable, indeed. it seem hopeless to seek for any 
clue, and the suggestion that lord argentina had been sudden attack 
by acute suicidal mania was generally accepted. 

it was otherwise, however, when within three weeks, three more 
gentlemen, one of them a nobleman, and the two other men of good 
position and ample means, perish miserably in the almost precisely 
the same manner. lord swanleigh was found one morning in his 
dressing-room, hanging from a peg affix to the wall, and mr. 
collier-stuart and mr. herry had chosen to die as lord argentine. 
there was no explanation in either case; a few bald facts; a living man 
in the evening, and a body with a black swollen face in the morning. 
the police had been forced to confess themselves powerless to arrest or 
to explain the sordid murder of whitechapel; but before the horrible 
suicide of piccadil and mayfair they were dumbfoundered, for not 
even the mere ferocity which did duty as an explanation of the crime 
of the east end, could be of service in the west. each of these men who 
had resolve to die a torture shameful death was rich, prosperous, and 
to all appearances in love with the world, and not the acutest research 
should ferret out any shadow of a lurk motive in either case. there 
was a horror in the air, and men look at one another's face when 
they met, each wonder whether the other was to be the victim of the 
fifth nameless tragedy. journalist sought in vain for their scrapbook 
for material whereof to concoct reminiscent articles; and the morning 
paper was unfold in many a house with a feeling of awe; no man knew 
when or where the next blow would light. 

a short while after the last of these terrible events, austin came to 
see mr. villiers. he was curious to know whether villier had 
succeed in discover any fresh trace of mrs. herbert, either 
through clarke or by other sources, and he ask the question soon 
after he had sat down. 

"no," said villiers, "i wrote to clarke, but he remains obdurate, and i 
have try other channels, but without any result. i can't find out 
what became of helen vaughan after she left paul street, but i think 
she must have gone abroad. but to tell the truth, austin, i haven't 
paid much attention to the matter for the last few weeks; i knew poor 
herry intimately, and his terrible death has been a great shock to 
me, a great shock." 

"i can well believe it," answer austin gravely, "you know argentina 
was a friend of mine. if i remember rightly, we were speak of him 
that day you came to my rooms." 

"yes; it was in connection with that house in ashley street, mrs. 
beaumont's house. you said something about argentine's dine there." 

"quite so. of course you know it was there argentina dine the night 
before--before his death." 

"no, i had not heard that." 

"oh, yes; the name was kept out of the papers to spare mrs. beaumont. 
argentina was a great favourite of hers, and it is said she was in a 
terrible state for sometime after." 

a curious look came over villiers' face; he seem undecided whether to 
speak or not. austin began again. 

"i never experienced such a feeling of horror as when i read the 
account of argentine's death. i didn't understand it at the time, and 
i don't now. i knew him well, and it completely pass my 
understanding for what possible cause he--or any of the other for the 
matter of that--could have resolve in cold blood to die in such an 
awful manner. you know how men babble away each other's character in 
london, you may be sure any bury scandal or hidden skeleton would 
have been brought to light in such a case as this; but nothing of the 
sort has taken place. as for the theory of mania, that is very well, 
of course, for the coroner's jury, but everybody know that it's all 
nonsense. suicidal mania is not small-pox." 

austin relapse into gloomy silence. villier sat silent, also, 
watch his friend. the expression of indecision still fleet across 
his face; he seem as if weigh his thought in the balance, and the 
consideration he was resolve left him still silent. austin try to 
shake off the remembrance of tragedy as hopeless and perplexed as the 
labyrinth of daedalus, and began to talk in an indifferent voice of the 
more pleasant incident and adventure of the season. 

"that mrs. beaumont," he said, "of whom we were speaking, is a great 
success; she has taken london almost by storm. i met her the other 
night at fulham's; she is really a remarkable woman." 

"you have met mrs. beaumont?" 

"yes; she had quite a court around her. she would be call very 
handsome, i suppose, and yet there is something about her face which i 
didn't like. the features are exquisite, but the expression is 
strange. and all the time i was look at her, and afterwards, when i 
was go home, i had a curious feeling that very expression was in 
some way or another familiar to me." 

"you must have seen her in the row." 

"no, i am sure i never set eyes on the woman before; it is that which 
make it puzzling. and to the best of my belief i have never seen 
anyone like her; what i felt was a kind of dim far-off memory, vague 
but persistent. the only sensation i can compare it to, is that odd 
feeling one sometimes has in a dream, when fantastic city and 
wondrous lands and phantom personage appear familiar and accustomed." 

villier nod and glance aimless round the room, possibly in 
search of something on which to turn the conversation. his eyes fell 
on an old chest somewhat like that in which the artist's strange legacy 
lay hid beneath a gothic scutcheon. 

"have you written to the doctor about poor meyrick?" he asked. 

"yes; i wrote ask for full particulars as to his illness and death. 
i don't expect to have an answer for another three week or a month. i 
thought i might as well inquire whether meyrick knew an englishwoman 
name herbert, and if so, whether the doctor could give me any 
information about her. but it's very possible that meyrick fell in 
with her at new york, or mexico, or san francisco; i have no idea as to 
the extent or direction of his travels." 

"yes, and it's very possible that the woman may have more than one 
name." 

"exactly. i wish i had thought of ask you to lend me the portrait 
of her which you possess. i might have enclose it in my letter to dr. 
matthews." 

"so you might; that never occur to me. we might send it now. hark! 
what are those boys calling?" 

while the two men had been talk together a confuse noise of 
shouting had been gradual grow louder. the noise rose from the 
eastward and swell down piccadilly, drawing near and nearer, a very 
torrent of sound; surge up street usually quiet, and making every 
window a frame for a face, curious or excited. the cries and voice 
came echo up the silent street where villier lived, grow more 
distinct as they advanced, and, as villier spoke, an answer rang up 
from the pavement: 

"the west end horrors; another awful suicide; full details!" 

austin rush down the stairs and bought a paper and read out the 
paragraph to villier as the uproar in the street rose and fell. the 
window was open and the air seem full of noise and terror. 

"another gentleman has fallen a victim to the terrible epidemic of 
suicide which for the last month has prevail in the west end. mr. 
sidney crashaw, of stoke house, fulham, and king's pomeroy, devon, was 
found, after a prolonged search, hanging dead from the branch of a tree 
in his garden at one o'clock today. the deceased gentleman dine last 
night at the carlton club and seem in his usual health and spirits. 
he left the club at about ten o'clock, and was seen walking leisurely 
up st. james's street a little later. subsequent to this his movements 
cannot be traced. on the discovery of the body medical aid was at once 
summoned, but life had evidently been long extinct. so far as is 
known, mr. crashaw had no trouble or anxiety of any kind. this painful 
suicide, it will be remembered, is the fifth of the kind in the last 
month. the authority at scotland yard are unable to suggest any 
explanation of these terrible occurrences." 

austin put down the paper in mute horror. 

"i shall leave london to-morrow," he said, "it is a city of nightmares. 
how awful this is, villiers!" 

mr. villier was sitting by the window quiet look out into the 
street. he had listen to the newspaper report attentively, and the 
hint of indecision was no long on his face. 

"wait a moment, austin," he replied, "i have made up my mind to mention 
a little matter that occur last night. it stated, i think, that 
crashaw was last seen alive in st. james's street shortly after ten?" 

"yes, i think so. i will look again. yes, you are quite right." 

"quite so. well, i am in a position to contradict that statement at 
all events. crashaw was seen after that; considerably later indeed." 

"how do you know?" 

"because i happen to see crashaw myself at about two o'clock this 
morning." 

"you saw crashaw? you, villiers?" 

"yes, i saw him quite distinctly; indeed, there were but a few feet 
between us." 

"where, in heaven's name, did you see him?" 

"not far from here. i saw him in ashley street. he was just leave a 
house." 

"did you notice what house it was?" 

"yes. it was mrs. beaumont's." 

"villiers! think what you are saying; there must be some mistake. how 
could crashaw be in mrs. beaumont's house at two o'clock in the 
morning? surely, surely, you must have been dreaming, villiers; you 
were always rather fanciful." 

"no; i was wide awake enough. even if i had been dream as you say, 
what i saw would have rouse me effectually." 

"what you saw? what did you see? was there anything strange about 
crashaw? but i can't believe it; it is impossible." 

"well, if you like i will tell you what i saw, or if you please, what i 
think i saw, and you can judge for yourself." 

"very good, villiers." 

the noise and clamour of the street had die away, though now and then 
the sound of shouting still came from the distance, and the dull, 
leaden silence seem like the quiet after an earthquake or a storm. 
villier turn from the window and began speaking. 

"i was at a house near regent's park last night, and when i came away 
the fancy took me to walk home instead of taking a hansom. it was a 
clear pleasant night enough, and after a few minutes i had the street 
pretty much to myself. it's a curious thing, austin, to be alone in 
london at night, the gas-lamps stretch away in perspective, and the 
dead silence, and then perhaps the rush and clatter of a hansom on the 
stones, and the fire start up under the horse's hoofs. i walk 
along pretty briskly, for i was feeling a little tired of being out in 
the night, and as the clock were striking two i turn down ashley 
street, which, you know, is on my way. it was quiet than ever there, 
and the lamp were fewer; altogether, it look as dark and gloomy as a 
forest in winter. i had done about half the length of the street when i 
heard a door closed very softly, and naturally i look up to see who 
was abroad like myself at such an hour. as it happens, there is a 
street lamp close to the house in question, and i saw a man standing on 
the step. he had just shut the door and his face was towards me, and i 
recognize crashaw directly. i never knew him to speak to, but i had 
often seen him, and i am positive that i was not mistaken in my man. i 
look into his face for a moment, and then--i will confess the 
truth--i set off at a good run, and kept it up till i was within my own 
door." 

"why?" 

"why? because it made my blood run cold to see that man's face. i 
could never have supposed that such an infernal medley of passion 
could have glare out of any human eyes; i almost faint as i looked. 
i knew i had look into the eyes of a lost soul, austin, the man's 
outward form remained, but all hell was within it. furious lust, and 
hate that was like fire, and the loss of all hope and horror that 
seem to shriek aloud to the night, though his teeth were shut; and 
the utter black of despair. i am sure that he did not see me; he 
saw nothing that you or i can see, but what he saw i hope we never 
shall. i do not know when he died; i suppose in an hour, or perhaps 
two, but when i pass down ashley street and heard the close door, 
that man no long belong to this world; it was a devil's face i 
look upon." 

there was an interval of silence in the room when villier cease 
speaking. the light was failing, and all the tumult of an hour ago was 
quite hushed. austin had bent his head at the close of the story, and 
his hand cover his eyes. 

"what can it mean?" he said at length. 

"who knows, austin, who knows? it's a black business, but i think we 
had better keep it to ourselves, for the present at any rate. i will 
see if i cannot learn anything about that house through private 
channel of information, and if i do light upon anything i will let you 
know." 



vii 

the encounter in soho 

three week later austin received a note from villiers, ask him to 
call either that afternoon or the next. he chose the near date, and 
found villier sitting as usual by the window, apparently lost in 
meditation on the drowsy traffic of the street. there was a bamboo 
table by his side, a fantastic thing, enrich with gilding and queer 
paint scenes, and on it lay a little pile of papers arrange and 
docket as neat as anything in mr. clarke's office. 

"well, villiers, have you made any discovery in the last three weeks?" 

"i think so; i have here one or two memoranda which struck me as 
singular, and there is a statement to which i shall call your 
attention." 

"and these document relate to mrs. beaumont? it was really crashaw 
whom you saw that night standing on the doorstep of the house in ashley 
street?" 

"as to that matter my belief remains unchanged, but neither my 
inquiry nor their result have any special relation to crashaw. but 
my investigate have had a strange issue. i have found out who mrs. 
beaumont is!" 

"who is she? in what way do you mean?" 

"i mean that you and i know her better under another name." 

"what name is that?" 

"herbert." 

"herbert!" austin repeated the word, daze with astonishment. 

"yes, mrs. herbert of paul street, helen vaughan of early adventure 
unknown to me. you had reason to recognize the expression of her face; 
when you go home look at the face in meyrick's book of horrors, and you 
will know the source of your recollection." 

"and you have proof of this?" 

"yes, the best of proof; i have seen mrs. beaumont, or shall we say 
mrs. herbert?" 

"where did you see her?" 

"hardly in a place where you would expect to see a lady who lives in 
ashley street, piccadilly. i saw her enter a house in one of the 
meanest and most disreputable street in soho. in fact, i had made an 
appointment, though not with her, and she was precise to both time and 
place." 

"all this seem very wonderful, but i cannot call it incredible. you 
must remember, villiers, that i have seen this woman, in the ordinary 
adventure of london society, talk and laughing, and sip her 
coffee in a commonplace drawing-room with commonplace people. but you 
know what you are saying." 

"i do; i have not allow myself to be led by surmise or fancies. it 
was with no thought of finding helen vaughan that i search for mrs. 
beaumont in the dark waters of the life of london, but such has been 
the issue." 

"you must have been in strange places, villiers." 

"yes, i have been in very strange places. it would have been useless, 
you know, to go to ashley street, and ask mrs. beaumont to give me a 
short sketch of her previous history. no; assuming, as i had to 
assume, that her record was not of the cleanest, it would be pretty 
certain that at some previous time she must have move in circle not 
quite so refined as her present ones. if you see mud at the top of a 
stream, you may be sure that it was once at the bottom. i went to the 
bottom. i have always been fond of dive into queer street for my 
amusement, and i found my knowledge of that locality and its 
inhabitant very useful. it is, perhaps, needless to say that my 
friends had never heard the name of beaumont, and as i had never seen 
the lady, and was quite unable to describe her, i had to set to work in 
an indirect way. the people there know me; i have been able to do some 
of them a service now and again, so they made no difficulty about 
give their information; they were aware i had no communication direct 
or indirect with scotland yard. i had to cast out a good many lines, 
though, before i got what i wanted, and when i landed the fish i did 
not for a moment suppose it was my fish. but i listen to what i was 
told out of a constitutional liking for useless information, and i 
found myself in possession of a very curious story, though, as i 
imagined, not the story i was look for. it was to this effect. 
some five or six years ago, a woman name raymond sudden made her 
appearance in the neighbourhood to which i am referring. she was 
describe to me as being quite young, probably not more than seventeen 
or eighteen, very handsome, and look as if she came from the 
country. i should be wrong in saying that she found her level in go 
to this particular quarter, or associate with these people, for from 
what i was told, i should think the worst den in london far too good 
for her. the person from whom i got my information, as you may 
suppose, no great puritan, shudder and grew sick in telling me of the 
nameless infamy which were laid to her charge. after living there for 
a year, or perhaps a little more, she disappear as sudden as she 
came, and they saw nothing of her till about the time of the paul 
street case. at first she came to her old haunt only occasionally, 
then more frequently, and finally took up her abode there as before, 
and remain for six or eight months. it's of no use my go into 
detail as to the life that woman led; if you want particulars you can 
look at meyrick's legacy. those designs were not drawn from his 
imagination. she again disappeared, and the people of the place saw 
nothing of her till a few month ago. my informant told me that she 
had taken some rooms in a house which he pointed out, and these rooms 
she was in the habit of visiting two or three times a week and always 
at ten in the morning. i was led to expect that one of these visit 
would be paid on a certain day about a week ago, and i accordingly 
manage to be on the look-out in company with my cicerone at a quarter 
to ten, and the hour and the lady came with equal punctuality. my 
friend and i were standing under an archway, a little way back from the 
street, but she saw us, and gave me a glance that i shall be long in 
forgetting. that look was quite enough for me; i knew miss raymond to 
be mrs. herbert; as for mrs. beaumont she had quite gone out of my 
head. she went into the house, and i watch it till four o'clock, 
when she came out, and then i follow her. it was a long chase, and i 
had to be very careful to keep a long way in the background, and yet 
not lose sight of the woman. she took me down to the strand, and then 
to westminster, and then up st. james's street, and along piccadilly. 
i felt queerish when i saw her turn up ashley street; the thought that 
mrs. herbert was mrs. beaumont came into my mind, but it seem too 
impossible to be true. i wait at the corner, keeping my eye on her 
all the time, and i took particular care to note the house at which she 
stopped. it was the house with the gay curtains, the home of flowers, 
the house out of which crashaw came the night he hang himself in his 
garden. i was just go away with my discovery, when i saw an empty 
carriage come round and draw up in front of the house, and i came to 
the conclusion that mrs. herbert was go out for a drive, and i was 
right. there, as it happened, i met a man i know, and we stood talk 
together a little distance from the carriage-way, to which i had my 
back. we had not been there for ten minutes when my friend took off 
his hat, and i glance round and saw the lady i had been following all 
day. 'who is that?' i said, and his answer was 'mrs. beaumont; lives in 
ashley street.' of course there could be no doubt after that. i don't 
know whether she saw me, but i don't think she did. i went home at 
once, and, on consideration, i thought that i had a sufficient good 
case with which to go to clarke." 

"why to clarke?" 

"because i am sure that clarke is in possession of fact about this 
woman, fact of which i know nothing." 

"well, what then?" 

mr. villier lean back in his chair and look reflective at austin 
for a moment before he answered: 

"my idea was that clarke and i should call on mrs. beaumont." 

"you would never go into such a house as that? no, no, villiers, you 
cannot do it. besides, consider; what result..." 

"i will tell you soon. but i was go to say that my information do 
not end here; it has been complete in an extraordinary manner. 

"look at this neat little packet of manuscript; it is paginated, you 
see, and i have indulge in the civil coquetry of a ribbon of red tape. 
it has almost a legal air, hasn't it? run your eye over it, austin. it 
is an account of the entertainment mrs. beaumont provided for her 
choice guests. the man who wrote this escape with his life, but i do 
not think he will live many years. the doctor tell him he must have 
sustain some severe shock to the nerves." 

austin took the manuscript, but never read it. opening the neat page 
at haphazard his eye was caught by a word and a phrase that follow 
it; and, sick at heart, with white lip and a cold sweat pour like 
water from his temples, he flung the paper down. 

"take it away, villiers, never speak of this again. are you made of 
stone, man? why, the dread and horror of death itself, the thought of 
the man who stand in the keen morning air on the black platform, 
bound, the bell toll in his ears, and waits for the harsh rattle of 
the bolt, are as nothing compare to this. i will not read it; i 
should never sleep again." 

"very good. i can fancy what you saw. yes; it is horrible enough; but 
after all, it is an old story, an old mystery play in our day, and in 
dim london street instead of amidst the vineyard and the olive 
gardens. we know what happen to those who chance to meet the great 
god pan, and those who are wise know that all symbol are symbol of 
something, not of nothing. it was, indeed, an exquisite symbol beneath 
which men long ago veiled their knowledge of the most awful, most 
secret forces which lie at the heart of all things; forces before which 
the soul of men must wither and die and blacken, as their body 
blacken under the electric current. such forces cannot be named, cannot 
be spoken, cannot be imagine except under a veil and a symbol, a 
symbol to the most of us appear a quaint, poetic fancy, to some a 
foolish tale. but you and i, at all events, have known something of the 
terror that may dwell in the secret place of life, manifest under 
human flesh; that which is without form taking to itself a form. oh, 
austin, how can it be? how is it that the very sunlight do not turn 
to black before this thing, the hard earth melt and boil beneath 
such a burden?" 

villier was pace up and down the room, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on his forehead. austin sat silent for a while, but villier saw 
him make a sign upon his breast. 

"i say again, villiers, you will surely never enter such a house as 
that? you would never pass out alive." 

"yes, austin, i shall go out alive--i, and clarke with me." 

"what do you mean? you cannot, you would not dare..." 

"wait a moment. the air was very pleasant and fresh this morning; 
there was a breeze blowing, even through this dull street, and i 
thought i would take a walk. piccadil stretch before me a clear, 
bright vista, and the sun flash on the carriage and on the quiver 
leaves in the park. it was a joyous morning, and men and women look 
at the sky and smile as they went about their work or their pleasure, 
and the wind blew as blithe as upon the meadow and the scent 
gorse. but somehow or other i got out of the bustle and the gaiety, 
and found myself walking slow along a quiet, dull street, where there 
seem to be no sunshine and no air, and where the few foot-passengers 
loiter as they walked, and hung indecisive about corner and 
archways. i walk along, hardly knowing where i was go or what i 
did there, but feeling impelled, as one sometimes is, to explore still 
further, with a vague idea of reach some unknown goal. thus i 
forge up the street, note the small traffic of the milk-shop, and 
wonder at the incongruous medley of penny pipes, black tobacco, 
sweets, newspapers, and comic song which here and there jostle one 
another in the short compass of a single window. i think it was a cold 
shudder that sudden pass through me that first told me that i had 
found what i wanted. i look up from the pavement and stop before 
a dusty shop, above which the lettering had faded, where the red brick 
of two hundred years ago had grime to black; where the window had 
gather to themselves the dust of winter innumerable. i saw what i 
required; but i think it was five minutes before i had steady myself 
and could walk in and ask for it in a cool voice and with a calm face. 
i think there must even then have been a tremor in my words, for the 
old man who came out of the back parlour, and fumble slow amongst 
his goods, look oddly at me as he tie the parcel. i paid what he 
asked, and stood leaning by the counter, with a strange reluctance to 
take up my goods and go. i ask about the business, and learnt that 
trade was bad and the profit cut down sadly; but then the street was 
not what it was before traffic had been diverted, but that was done 
forty years ago, 'just before my father died,' he said. i got away at 
last, and walk along sharply; it was a dismal street indeed, and i 
was glad to return to the bustle and the noise. would you like to see 
my purchase?" 

austin said nothing, but nod his head slightly; he still look 
white and sick. villier pull out a drawer in the bamboo table, and 
show austin a long coil of cord, hard and new; and at one end was a 
running noose. 

"it is the best hempen cord," said villiers, "just as it use to be 
made for the old trade, the man told me. not an inch of jute from end 
to end." 

austin set his teeth hard, and stare at villiers, grow white as he 
looked. 

"you would not do it," he murmur at last. "you would not have blood 
on your hands. my god!" he exclaimed, with sudden vehemence, "you 
cannot mean this, villiers, that you will make yourself a hangman?" 

"no. i shall offer a choice, and leave helen vaughan alone with this 
cord in a lock room for fifteen minutes. if when we go in it is not 
done, i shall call the nearest policeman. that is all." 

"i must go now. i cannot stay here any longer; i cannot bear this. 
good-night." 

"good-night, austin." 

the door shut, but in a moment it was open again, and austin stood, 
white and ghastly, in the entrance. 

"i was forgetting," he said, "that i too have something to tell. i 
have received a letter from dr. harding of buenos ayres. he say that 
he attend meyrick for three week before his death." 

"and do he say what carry him off in the prime of life? it was not 
fever?" 

"no, it was not fever. according to the doctor, it was an utter 
collapse of the whole system, probably cause by some severe shock. 
but he states that the patient would tell him nothing, and that he was 
consequently at some disadvantage in treat the case." 

"is there anything more?" 

"yes. dr. harding end his letter by saying: 'i think this is all the 
information i can give you about your poor friend. he had not been 
long in buenos ayres, and knew scarcely any one, with the exception of 
a person who did not bear the best of characters, and has since left--a 
mrs. vaughan.'" 



viii 

the fragment 

[amongst the papers of the well-known physician, dr. robert matheson, 
of ashley street, piccadilly, who die suddenly, of apoplectic seizure, 
at the beginning of 1892, a leaf of manuscript paper was found, cover 
with pencil jottings. these note were in latin, much abbreviated, and 
had evidently been made in great haste. the ms. was only decipher 
with difficulty, and some words have up to the present time evade all 
the effort of the expert employed. the date, "xxv jul. 1888," is 
written on the right-hand corner of the ms. the following is a 
translate of dr. matheson's manuscript.] 

"whether science would benefit by these brief note if they could be 
published, i do not know, but rather doubt. but certainly i shall 
never take the responsibility of publishing or divulge one word of 
what is here written, not only on account of my oath given freely to 
those two person who were present, but also because the detail are 
too abominable. it is probably that, upon mature consideration, and 
after weighting the good and evil, i shall one day destroy this paper, 
or at least leave it under seal to my friend d., trust in his 
discretion, to use it or to burn it, as he may think fit. 

"as was befitting, i did all that my knowledge suggest to make sure 
that i was suffering under no delusion. at first astounded, i could 
hardly think, but in a minute's time i was sure that my pulse was 
steady and regular, and that i was in my real and true senses. i then 
fixed my eyes quiet on what was before me. 

"though horror and revolting nausea rose up within me, and an odour of 
corruption choke my breath, i remain firm. i was then privileged or 
accursed, i dare not say which, to see that which was on the bed, lie 
there black like ink, transform before my eyes. the skin, and the 
flesh, and the muscles, and the bones, and the firm structure of the 
human body that i had thought to be unchangeable, and permanent as 
adamant, began to melt and dissolve. 

"i know that the body may be separate into its elements by external 
agencies, but i should have refuse to believe what i saw. for here 
there was some internal force, of which i knew nothing, that cause 
dissolution and change. 

"here too was all the work by which man had been made repeated before 
my eyes. i saw the form waver from sex to sex, divide itself from 
itself, and then again reunited. then i saw the body descend to the 
beast whence it ascended, and that which was on the heights go down to 
the depths, even to the abyss of all being. the principle of life, 
which make organism, always remained, while the outward form changed. 

"the light within the room had turn to blackness, not the dark of 
night, in which object are seen dimly, for i could see clearly and 
without difficulty. but it was the negate of light; object were 
present to my eyes, if i may say so, without any medium, in such a 
manner that if there had been a prism in the room i should have seen no 
colours represent in it. 

"i watched, and at last i saw nothing but a substance as jelly. then 
the ladder was ascend again... [here the ms. is illegible] ...for one 
instance i saw a form, shaped in dim before me, which i will not 
farther describe. but the symbol of this form may be seen in ancient 
sculptures, and in painting which survive beneath the lava, too foul 
to be spoken of... as a horrible and unspeakable shape, neither man nor 
beast, was change into human form, there came finally death. 

"i who saw all this, not without great horror and loathing of soul, 
here write my name, declare all that i have set on this paper to be 
true. 

"robert matheson, med. dr." 

* * * * * 

...such, raymond, is the story of what i know and what i have seen. 
the burden of it was too heavy for me to bear alone, and yet i could 
tell it to none but you. villiers, who was with me at the last, know 
nothing of that awful secret of the wood, of how what we both saw die, 
lay upon the smooth, sweet turf amidst the summer flowers, half in sun 
and half in shadow, and holding the girl rachel's hand, call and 
summon those companions, and shaped in solid form, upon the earth we 
tread upon, the horror which we can but hint at, which we can only name 
under a figure. i would not tell villier of this, nor of that 
resemblance, which struck me as with a blow upon my heart, when i saw 
the portrait, which fill the cup of terror at the end. what this can 
mean i dare not guess. i know that what i saw perish was not mary, and 
yet in the last agony mary's eyes look into mine. whether there can 
be any one who can show the last link in this chain of awful mystery, i 
do not know, but if there be any one who can do this, you, raymond, are 
the man. and if you know the secret, it rest with you to tell it or 
not, as you please. 

i am writing this letter to you immediately on my get back to town. 
i have been in the country for the last few days; perhaps you may be 
able to guess in which part. while the horror and wonder of london was 
at its height--for "mrs. beaumont," as i have told you, was well known 
in society--i wrote to my friend dr. phillips, give some brief 
outline, or rather hint, of what happened, and ask him to tell me 
the name of the village where the event he had related to me occurred. 
he gave me the name, as he said with the less hesitation, because 
rachel's father and mother were dead, and the rest of the family had 
gone to a relative in the state of washington six month before. the 
parents, he said, had undoubted die of grief and horror cause by 
the terrible death of their daughter, and by what had gone before that 
death. on the evening of the day which i received phillips' letter i 
was at caermaen, and standing beneath the moulder roman walls, white 
with the winter of seventeen hundred years, i look over the meadow 
where once had stood the old temple of the "god of the deeps," and 
saw a house gleam in the sunlight. it was the house where helen had 
lived. i stay at caermaen for several days. the people of the 
place, i found, knew little and had guess less. those whom i spoke 
to on the matter seem surprise that an antiquarian (as i professed 
myself to be) should trouble about a village tragedy, of which they 
gave a very commonplace version, and, as you may imagine, i told 
nothing of what i knew. most of my time was spent in the great wood 
that rise just above the village and climb the hillside, and go 
down to the river in the valley; such another long lovely valley, 
raymond, as that on which we look one summer night, walking to and 
fro before your house. for many an hour i stray through the maze of 
the forest, turning now to right and now to left, pace slow down 
long alley of undergrowth, shadowy and chill, even under the midday 
sun, and halting beneath great oaks; lie on the short turf of a 
clearing where the faint sweet scent of wild rose came to me on the 
wind and mixed with the heavy perfume of the elder, whose mingle odour 
is like the odour of the room of the dead, a vapour of incense and 
corruption. i stood at the edge of the wood, gaze at all the pomp 
and procession of the foxglove towering amidst the bracken and shining 
red in the broad sunshine, and beyond them into deep thicket of close 
undergrowth where spring boil up from the rock and nourish the 
water-weeds, dank and evil. but in all my wanderings i avoid one 
part of the wood; it was not till yesterday that i climb to the 
summit of the hill, and stood upon the ancient roman road that thread 
the highest ridge of the wood. here they had walked, helen and rachel, 
along this quiet causeway, upon the pavement of green turf, shut in on 
either side by high bank of red earth, and tall hedge of shining 
beech, and here i follow in their steps, look out, now and again, 
through parting in the boughs, and seeing on one side the sweep of the 
wood stretch far to right and left, and sink into the broad 
level, and beyond, the yellow sea, and the land over the sea. on the 
other side was the valley and the river and hill following hill as wave 
on wave, and wood and meadow, and cornfield, and white house gleaming, 
and a great wall of mountain, and far blue peak in the north. and so 
at last i came to the place. the track went up a gentle slope, and 
widen out into an open space with a wall of thick undergrowth around 
it, and then, narrow again, pass on into the distance and the 
faint blue mist of summer heat. and into this pleasant summer glade 
rachel pass a girl, and left it, who shall say what? i did not stay 
long there. 

in a small town near caermaen there is a museum, contain for the 
most part roman remains which have been found in the neighbourhood at 
various times. on the day after my arrival in caermaen i walk over 
to the town in question, and took the opportunity of inspect the 
museum. after i had seen most of the sculpture stones, the coffins, 
rings, coins, and fragment of tessellated pavement which the place 
contains, i was shown a small square pillar of white stone, which had 
been recently discover in the wood of which i have been speaking, 
and, as i found on inquiry, in that open space where the roman road 
broaden out. on one side of the pillar was an inscription, of which i 
took a note. some of the letters have been defaced, but i do not think 
there can be any doubt as to those which i supply. the inscription is 
as follows: 

devomnodent--i-- 
fla--v--ivssenilispossv--it-- 
propternvp--tias-- 
--qua--sviditsvbvmb--ra-- 

"to the great god noden (the god of the great deep or abyss) flaviu 
senili has erect this pillar on account of the marriage which he saw 
beneath the shade." 

the custodian of the museum informed me that local antiquary were 
much puzzled, not by the inscription, or by any difficulty in 
translate it, but as to the circumstance or rite to which allusion is 
made. 

* * * * * 

...and now, my dear clarke, as to what you tell me about helen vaughan, 
whom you say you saw die under circumstances of the utmost and almost 
incredible horror. i was interested in your account, but a good deal, 
nay all, of what you told me i knew already. i can understand the 
strange likeness you remark in both the portrait and in the actual 
face; you have seen helen's mother. you remember that still summer 
night so many years ago, when i talk to you of the world beyond the 
shadows, and of the god pan. you remember mary. she was the mother of 
helen vaughan, who was born nine month after that night. 

mary never recover her reason. she lay, as you saw her, all the 
while upon her bed, and a few days after the child was born she died. 
i fancy that just at the last she knew me; i was standing by the bed, 
and the old look came into her eyes for a second, and then she 
shudder and groan and died. it was an ill work i did that night 
when you were present; i broke open the door of the house of life, 
without knowing or care what might pass forth or enter in. i 
recollect your telling me at the time, sharp enough, and rightly too, 
in one sense, that i had ruin the reason of a human being by a 
foolish experiment, base on an absurd theory. you did well to blame 
me, but my theory was not all absurdity. what i said mary would see 
she saw, but i forgot that no human eyes can look on such a sight with 
impunity. and i forgot, as i have just said, that when the house of 
life is thus thrown open, there may enter in that for which we have no 
name, and human flesh may become the veil of a horror one dare not 
express. i play with energy which i did not understand, you have 
seen the ending of it. helen vaughan did well to bind the cord about 
her neck and die, though the death was horrible. the blacken face, 
the hideous form upon the bed, change and melting before your eyes 
from woman to man, from man to beast, and from beast to worse than 
beast, all the strange horror that you witness, surprise me but 
little. what you say the doctor whom you sent for saw and shudder at 
i notice long ago; i knew what i had done the moment the child was 
born, and when it was scarcely five years old i surprise it, not once 
or twice but several times with a playmate, you may guess of what kind. 
it was for me a constant, an incarnate horror, and after a few years i 
felt i could bear it no more, and i sent helen vaughan away. you know 
now what frightened the boy in the wood. the rest of the strange 
story, and all else that you tell me, as discover by your friend, i 
have contrived to learn from time to time, almost to the last chapter. 
and now helen is with her companions... 









end of the project gutenberg ebook of the great god pan, by arthur machen 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the great god pan *** 

***** this file should be name 389.txt or 389.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/389/ 

produce by brandi weed. html version by al haines. 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
