the project gutenberg ebook of the dunwich horror, by h. p. lovecraft 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 

title: the dunwich horror 

author: h. p. lovecraft 

release date: october 4, 2015 [ebook #50133] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the dunwich horror *** 




produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









_the_ dunwich horror 

by h. p. lovecraft 


"gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras--dire story of celæno and 
the harpies--may reproduce themselves in the brain of 
superstition--_but they were there before_. they are transcripts, 
types--the archetype are in us, and eternal. how else should the 
recital of that which we know in a waking sense to be false come 
to affect us at all? is it that we naturally conceive terror from 
such objects, considered in their capacity of being able to 
inflict upon us bodily injury? oh, least of all! _these terror 
are of old standing. they date beyond body_--or without the 
body, they would have been the same.... that the kind of fear here 
treat is purely spiritual--that it is strong in proportion as it 
is objectless on earth, that it predominate in the period of our 
sinless infancy--are difficulty the solution of which might 
afford some probable insight into our ante-mundane condition, and 
a peep at least into the shadowland of pre-existence."--charles 
lamb: _witches and other night-fears_. 


1 
preface 
when a traveler in north central massachusetts take the wrong fork 
at the junction of the aylesbury pike just beyond dean's corner he 
come upon a lonely and curious country. the ground get higher, and 
the brier-bordered stone wall press close and close against the rut 
of the dusty, curve road. the tree of the frequent forest belt 
seem too large, and the wild weeds, brambles, and grass attain a 
luxuriance not often found in settled regions. at the same time the 
plant field appear singularly few and barren; while the sparse 
scattered house wear a surprize uniform aspect of age, squalor, and 
dilapidation. without knowing why, one hesitate to ask directions 
from the gnarled, solitary figures spy now and then on crumble 
doorstep or in the sloping, rock-strewn meadows. those figures are 
so silent and furtive that one feel somehow confront by forbidden 
things, with which it would be better to have nothing to do. when a 
rise in the road bring the mountain in view above the deep woods, 
the feeling of strange uneasy is increased. the summit are too 
round and symmetrical to give a sense of comfort and naturalness, and 
sometimes the sky silhouette with especial clear the queer circle 
of tall stone pillar with which most of them are crowned. 

gorge and ravine of problematic depth intersect the way, and the 
crude wooden bridge always seem of dubious safety. when the road 
dip again there are stretch of marshland that one instinctive 
dislikes, and indeed almost fear at evening when unseen whippoorwill 
chatter and the firefly come out in abnormal profusion to dance to 
the raucous, creepy insistent rhythm of strident piping bullfrogs. 
the thin, shining line of the miskatonic's upper reach has an oddly 
serpentlike suggestion as it wind close to the feet of the domed hill 
among which it rises. 

as the hill draw nearer, one heed their wooded side more than their 
stone-crowned tops. those side loom up so dark and precipitous 
that one wish they would keep their distance, but there is no road by 
which to escape them. across a cover bridge one see a small village 
huddle between the stream and the vertical slope of round mountain, 
and wonders at the cluster of rot gambrel roof bespeak an 
early architecture period than that of the neighboring region. it 
is not reassure to see, on a close glance, that most of the house 
are desert and fall to ruin, and that the broken-steepled church 
now harbor the one slovenly mercantile establishment of the hamlet. 
one dread to trust the tenebrous tunnel of the bridge, yet there is no 
way to avoid it. once across, it is hard to prevent the impression of a 
faint, malign odor about the village street, as of the mass mold and 
decay of centuries. it is always a relief to get clear of the place, 
and to follow the narrow road around the base of the hill and across 
the level country beyond till it rejoin the aylesbury pike. afterward 
one sometimes learn that one has been through dunwich. 

outsider visit dunwich as seldom as possible, and since a certain 
season of horror all the signboard point toward it have been taken 
down. the scenery, judge by any ordinary esthetic canon, is more 
than commonly beautiful; yet there is no influx of artist or summer 
tourists. two century ago, when talk of witch-blood, satan-worship, 
and strange forest presence was not laugh at, it was the custom to 
give reason for avoid the locality. in our sensible age--since 
the dunwich horror of 1928 was hush up by those who had the town's 
and the world's welfare at heart--people shun it without knowing 
exactly why. perhaps one reason--though it can not apply to uninformed 
strangers--is that the native are now repellent decadent, have 
gone far along that path of retrogress so common in many new england 
backwaters. they have come to form a race by themselves, with the 
well-defined mental and physical stigmata of degeneracy and inbreeding. 
the average of their intelligence is woful low, whilst their annals 
reek of overt vicious and of half-hidden murders, incests, and 
deed of almost unnamable violence and perversity. the old gentry, 
represent the two or three armigerous family which came from 
salem in 1692, have kept somewhat above the general level of decay; 
though many branch are sunk into the sordid populace so deep that 
only their name remain as a key to the origin they disgrace. some of 
the whateley and bishop still send their eldest son to harvard and 
miskatonic, though those son seldom return to the molder gambrel 
roof under which they and their ancestor were born. 

no one, even those who have the fact concerning the recent horror, 
can say just what is the matter with dunwich; though old legend speak 
of unhallowed rite and conclave of the indians, amidst which they 
call forbidden shape of shadow out of the great round hills, and 
made wild orgiastic prayer that were answer by loud crack and 
rumbling from the ground below. in 1747 the reverend abijah hoadley, 
newly come to the congregational church at dunwich village, preach a 
memorable sermon on the close presence of satan and his imps, in which 
he said: 

it must be allow'd that these blasphemy of an infernall train 
of dæmons are matter of too common knowledge to be deny'd; the 
cursed voice of _azazel_ and _buzrael_, of _beelzebub_ and 
_belial_, being heard from under ground by above a score of 
credible witness now living. i myself did not more than a 
fortnight ago catch a very plain discourse of evill powers in the 
hill behind my house; wherein there were a rattling and rolling, 
groaning, screeching, and hissing, such as no things of this earth 
cou'd raise up, and which must needs have come from those cave 
that only black magick can discover, and only the divell unlock. 

mr. hoadley disappear soon after deliver this sermon; but the 
text, print in springfield, is still extant. noise in the hill 
continue to be report from year to year, and still form a puzzle to 
geologist and physiographers. 

other tradition tell of foul odor near the hill-crowning circle of 
stone pillars, and of rush airy presence to be heard faint at 
certain hour from state points at the bottom of the great ravines; 
while still other try to explain the devil's hop yard--a bleak, 
blasted hillside where no tree, shrub, or grass-blade will grow. then, 
too, the native are mortally afraid of the numerous whippoorwill 
which grow vocal on warm nights. it is vow that the bird are 
psychopomp lie in wait for the soul of the dying, and that they 
time their eery cries in unison with the sufferer's struggle breath. 
if they can catch the flee soul when it leaves the body, they 
instantly flutter away chittere in demoniac laughter; but if they 
fail, they subside gradual into a disappointed silence. 

these tales, of course, are obsolete and ridiculous; because they come 
down from very old times. dunwich is indeed ridiculous old--older by 
far than any of the community within thirty mile of it. south of the 
village one may still spy the cellar wall and chimney of the ancient 
bishop house, which was built before 1700; whilst the ruins of the mill 
at the falls, built in 1806, form the most modern piece of architecture 
to be seen. industry did not flourish here, and the nineteenth century 
factory movement prove short-lived. oldest of all are the great 
ring of rough-hewn stone column on the hilltops, but these are more 
generally attribute to the indian than to the settlers. deposit of 
skull and bones, found within these circle and around the sizable 
table-like rock on sentinel hill, sustain the popular belief that such 
spot were once the burial-places of the pocumtucks; even though many 
ethnologists, disregard the absurd improbability of such a theory, 
persist in believe the remains caucasian. 


2 

it was in the township of dunwich, in a large and partly inhabit 
farmhouse set against a hillside four mile from the village and a mile 
and a half from any other dwelling, that wilbur whateley was born at 5 
a. m. on sunday, the second of february, 1913. this date was recall 
because it was candlemas, which people in dunwich curious observe 
under another name; and because the noise in the hill had sounded, 
and all the dogs of the countryside had bark persistently, throughout 
the night before. less worthy of notice was the fact that the mother 
was one of the decadent whateleys, a somewhat deformed, unattractive 
albino woman of 35, living with an age and half-insane father 
about whom the most frightful tale of wizardry had been whisper 
in his youth. lavinia whateley had no known husband, but according 
to the custom of the region made no attempt to disavow the child; 
concerning the other side of whose ancestry the country folk might--and 
did--speculate as widely as they chose. on the contrary, she seem 
strange proud of the dark, goatish-looking infant who form such a 
contrast to her own sickly and pink-eyed albinism, and was heard to 
mutter many curious prophecy about its unusual powers and tremendous 
future. 

lavinia was one who would be apt to mutter such things, for she was a 
lone creature given to wandering amidst thunderstorm in the hill and 
try to read the great odorous books which her father had inherit 
through two century of whateleys, and which were fast fall to 
pieces with age and worm-holes. she had never been to school, but was 
fill with disjointed scraps of ancient lore that old whateley had 
taught her. the remote farmhouse had always been fear because of old 
whateley's reputation for black magic, and the unexplained death by 
violence of mrs. whateley when lavinia was twelve years old had not 
help to make the place popular. isolated among strange influences, 
lavinia was fond of wild and grandiose daydream and singular 
occupations; nor was her leisure much taken up by household care in a 
home from which all standard of order and cleanliness had long since 
disappeared. 

there was a hideous scream which echo above even the hill noise 
and the dogs' bark on the night wilbur was born, but no known doctor 
or midwife preside at his coming. neighbor knew nothing of him till 
a week afterward, when old whateley drove his sleigh through the snow 
into dunwich village and discourse incoherent to the group of 
lounger at osborn's general store. there seem to be a change in the 
old man--an add element of furtive in the cloud brain which 
subtle transform him from an object to a subject of fear--though he 
was not one to be perturb by any common family event. amidst it all 
he show some trace of the pride later notice in his daughter, and 
what he said of the child's paternity was remember by many of his 
hearer years afterward. 

"i dun't keer what folks think--ef lavinny's boy look like his pa, he 
wouldn't look like nothin' ye expeck. ye needn't think the only folks 
is the folks hereabouts. lavinny's read some, an' has seed some things 
the most o' ye only tell abaout. i calc'late her man is as good a 
husban' as ye kin find this side of aylesbury; an' ef ye know as much 
abaout the hill as i dew, ye wouldn't ast no better church weddin' nor 
her'n. let me tell ye suthin'--_some day yew folks'll hear a child o' 
lavinny's a-callin' its father's name on the top o' sentinel hill!_" 

the only person who saw wilbur during the first month of his life 
were old zechariah whateley, of the undecayed whateleys, and earl 
sawyer's common-law wife, mamie bishop. mamie's visit was frankly one 
of curiosity, and her subsequent tale did justice to her observations; 
but zechariah came to lead a pair of alderney cow which old whateley 
had bought of his son curtis. this marked the beginning of a course of 
cattle-buying on the part of small wilbur's family which end only 
in 1928, when the dunwich horror came and went; yet at no time did 
the ramshackle whateley barn seem over-crowded with livestock. there 
came a period when people were curious enough to steal up and count 
the herd that graze precarious on the steep hillside above the old 
farmhouse, and they could never find more than ten or twelve anemic, 
bloodless-looking specimens. evidently some blight or distemper, 
perhaps sprung from the unwholesome pasturage or the disease fungi 
and timber of the filthy barn, cause a heavy mortality amongst the 
whateley animals. odd wound or sores, have something of the aspect 
of incisions, seem to afflict the visible cattle; and once or twice 
during the early month certain caller fancy they could discern 
similar sore about the throat of the gray, unshaven old man and his 
slatternly, crinkly-haired albino daughter. 

in the spring after wilbur's birth lavinia resume her customary 
ramble in the hills, bearing in her misproportione arms the swarthy 
child. public interest in the whateley subside after most of the 
country folk had seen the baby, and no one bother to comment on the 
swift development which that newcomer seem every day to exhibit. 
wilbur's growth was indeed phenomenal, for within three month of his 
birth he had attain a size and muscular power not usually found in 
infant under a full year of age. his motions and even his vocal sound 
show a restraint and deliberate highly peculiar in an infant, 
and no one was really unprepared when, at seven months, he began to 
walk unassisted, with falter which another month was sufficient to 
remove. 

it was somewhat after this time--on hallowe'en--that a great blaze was 
seen at midnight on the top of sentinel hill where the old table-like 
stone stand amidst its tumulus of ancient bones. considerable talk 
was start when sila bishop--of the undecayed bishops--mentioned 
have seen the boy running sturdy up that hill ahead of his mother 
about an hour before the blaze was remarked. sila was round up a 
stray heifer, but he nearly forgot his mission when he fleeting spy 
the two figures in the dim light of his lantern. they dart almost 
noiseless through the underbrush, and the astonish watch seem 
to think they were entire unclothed. afterward he could not be sure 
about the boy, who may have had some kind of a fringe belt and a pair 
of dark blue trunks or trousers on. wilbur was never subsequent seen 
alive and conscious without complete and tight button attire, the 
disarrange or threaten disarrange of which always seem to 
fill him with anger and alarm. his contrast with his squalid mother and 
grandfather in this respect was thought very notable until the horror 
of 1928 suggest the most valid of reasons. 

the next january gossip were mildly interested in the fact that 
"lavinny's black brat" had commence to talk, and at the age of only 
eleven months. his speech was somewhat remarkable both because of its 
difference from the ordinary accent of the region, and because it 
display a freedom from infantile lisp of which many children of 
three or four might well be proud. the boy was not talkative, yet when 
he spoke he seem to reflect some elusive element wholly unpossess 
by dunwich and its denizens. the strange did not reside in what he 
said, or even in the simple idiom he used; but seem vague link 
with his intonation or with the internal organ that produce the 
spoken sounds. his facial aspect, too, was remarkable for its maturity; 
for though he share his mother's and grandfather's chinlessness, his 
firm and precocious shaped nose united with the expression on his 
large, dark, almost latin eyes to give him an air of quasi-adulthood 
and well-nigh preternatural intelligence. he was, however, exceedingly 
ugly despite his appearance of brilliancy; there being something almost 
goatish or animalistic about his thick lips, large-pored, yellowish 
skin, coarse crinkly hair, and oddly elongate ears. he was soon 
dislike even more decidedly than his mother and grandsire, and all 
conjecture about him were spice with reference to the bygone magic 
of old whateley, and how the hill once shook when he shriek the 
dreadful name of _yog-sothoth_ in the midst of a circle of stone with 
a great book open in his arms before him. dogs abhor the boy, and 
he was always oblige to take various defensive measure against their 
bark menace. 


3 

meanwhile old whateley continue to buy cattle without measurable 
increase the size of his herd. he also cut timber and began to 
repair the unused parts of his house--a spacious, peaked-roofed affair 
whose rear end was bury entire in the rocky hillside, and whose 
three least-ruined ground-floor rooms had always been sufficient for 
himself and his daughter. there must have been prodigious reserve 
of strength in the old man to enable him to accomplish so much hard 
labor; and though he still babble demented at times, his carpentry 
seem to show the effects of sound calculation. it had really begun 
as soon as wilbur was born, when one of the many tool-sheds had been 
put sudden in order, clapboarded, and fitted with a stout fresh lock. 
now, in restore the abandoned upper story of the house, he was a no 
less thorough craftsman. his mania show itself only in his tight 
boarding-up of all the window in the reclaim section--though many 
declared that it was a crazy thing to bother with the reclamation at 
all. less inexplicable was his fitting-up of another downstairs room 
for his new grandson--a room which several caller saw, though no one 
was ever admitted to the closely-boarded upper story. this chamber 
he line with tall, firm shelving; along which he began gradual to 
arrange, in apparently careful order, all the rot ancient books and 
parts of books which during his own day had been heap promiscuous 
in odd corner of the various rooms. 

"i made some use of 'em," he would say as he try to mend a torn 
black-letter page with paste prepared on the rusty kitchen stove, "but 
the boy's fitten to make better use of 'em. he'd orter hev 'em as well 
sot as he kin for they're goin' to be all of his larnin'." 

when wilbur was a year and seven month old--in september of 1914--his 
size and accomplishment were almost alarming. he had grown as large as 
a child of four, and was a fluent and incredible intelligent talker. 
he ran freely about the field and hills, and accompany his mother 
on all her wanderings. at home he would pore diligent over the queer 
pictures and chart in his grandfather's books, while old whateley 
would instruct and catechize him through long, hush afternoons. by 
this time the restoration of the house was finished, and those who 
watch it wonder why one of the upper window had been made into a 
solid plank door. it was a window in the rear of the east gable end, 
close against the hill; and no one could imagine why a cleat wooden 
runway was built up to it from the ground. about the period of this 
work's completion people notice that the old tool-house, tight 
lock and windowless clapboard since wilbur's birth, had been 
abandoned again. the door swung listless open, and when earl sawyer 
once step within after a cattle-selling call on old whateley he was 
quite discompose by the singular odor he encountered--such a stench, 
he averred, as he had never before smelt in all his life except near 
the indian circle on the hills, and which could not come from anything 
sane or of this earth. but then, the home and shed of dunwich folk 
have never been remarkable for olfactory immaculateness. 

the following month were void of visible events, save that everyone 
swore to a slow but steady increase in the mysterious hill noises. on 
may eve of 1915 there were tremor which even the aylesbury people 
felt, whilst the following hallowe'en produce an underground rumbling 
queer synchronize with burst of flame--"them witch whateleys' 
doin's"--from the summit of sentinel hill. wilbur was grow up 
uncannily, so that he look like a boy of ten as he enter his 
fourth year. he read avid by himself now; but talk much less than 
formerly. a settled taciturn was absorbing him, and for the first 
time people began to speak specifically of the dawn look of evil in 
his goatish face. he would sometimes mutter an unfamiliar jargon, and 
chant in bizarre rhythm which chill the listener with a sense of 
unexplainable terror. the aversion display toward him by dogs had now 
become a matter of wide remark, and he was oblige to carry a pistol 
in order to traverse the countryside in safety. his occasional use of 
the weapon did not enhance his popularity amongst the owner of canine 
guardians. 

the few caller at the house would often find lavinia alone on the 
ground floor, while odd cries and footstep resound in the boarded-up 
second story. she would never tell what her father and the boy were 
do up there, though once she turn pale and display an abnormal 
degree of fear when a jocose fish-peddler try the lock door leading 
to the stairway. that peddler told the store lounger at dunwich 
village that he thought he heard a horse stamp on that floor above. 
the lounger reflected, thinking of the door and runway, and of 
the cattle that so swift disappeared. then they shudder as they 
recall tale of old whateley's youth, and of the strange things that 
are call out of the earth when a bullock is sacrifice at the proper 
time to certain heathen gods. it had for some time been notice that 
dogs had begun to hate and fear the whole whateley place as violent 
as they hate and fear young wilbur personally. 

in 1917 the war came, and squire sawyer whateley, as chairman of the 
local draft board, had hard work finding a quota of young dunwich men 
fit even to be sent to a development camp. the government, alarm at 
such sign of wholesale regional decadence, sent several officer and 
medical expert to investigate; conduct a survey which new england 
newspaper reader may still recall. it was the publicity attend this 
investigate which set reporter on the track of the whateleys, and 
cause the _boston globe_ and _arkham advertiser_ to print flamboyant 
sunday story of young wilbur's precociousness, old whateley's black 
magic, the shelves of strange books, the seal second story of the 
ancient farmhouse, and the weird of the whole region and its hill 
noises. wilbur was four and a half then, and look like a lad of 
fifteen. his lip and cheek were fuzzy with a coarse dark down, and his 
voice had begun to break. earl sawyer went out to the whateley place 
with both set of reporter and camera men, and call their attention 
to the queer stench which now seem to trickle down from the seal 
upper spaces. it was, he said, exactly like a smell he had found in the 
tool-shed abandoned when the house was finally repaired, and like the 
faint odor which he sometimes thought he caught near the stone circle 
on the mountains. dunwich folk read the story when they appeared, and 
grin over the obvious mistakes. they wondered, too, why the writer 
made so much of the fact that old whateley always paid for his cattle 
in gold pieces of extremely ancient date. the whateley had received 
their visitor with ill-concealed distaste, though they did not dare 
court further publicity by a violent resistance or refusal to talk. 


4 

for a decade the annals of the whateley sink indistinguishable into 
the general life of a morbid community use to their queer ways and 
harden to their may eve and all-hallow orgies. twice a year they 
would light fire on the top of sentinel hill, at which times the 
mountain rumbling would recur with greater and greater violence; while 
at all season there were strange and portentous doings at the lonely 
farmhouse. in the course of time caller professed to hear sound 
in the seal upper story even when all the family were downstairs, 
and they wonder how swift or how lingering a cow or bullock 
was usually sacrificed. there was talk of a complaint to the society 
for the prevention of cruelty to animals; but nothing ever came of 
it, since dunwich folk are never anxious to call the outside world's 
attention to themselves. 

about 1923, when wilbur was a boy of ten whose mind, voice, stature, 
and bearded face gave all the impression of maturity, a second great 
siege of carpentry went on at the old house. it was all inside the 
seal upper part, and from bit of discard lumber people conclude 
that the youth and his grandfather had knock out all the partition 
and even remove the attic floor, leave only one vast open void 
between the ground story and the peaked roof. they had torn down the 
great central chimney, too, and fitted the rusty range with a flimsy 
outside tin stove-pipe. 

in the spring after this event old whateley notice the grow number 
of whippoorwill that would come out of cold spring glen to chirp under 
his window at night. he seem to regard the circumstance as one of 
great significance, and told the lounger at osborn's that he thought 
his time had almost come. 

"they whistle jest in tune with my breathin' naow," he said, "an' i 
guess they're gittin' ready to ketch my soul. they know it's a-goin' 
aout, an' dun't calc'late to miss it. yew'll know, boys, art i'm 
gone, whether they git me er not. ef they dew, they'll keep up 
a-singin' an' laffin' till break o' day. ef they dun't, they'll kind 
quiet daown like. i expeck them an' the soul they hunt fer hev some 
pretty tough tussle sometimes." 

on lamma night, 1924, dr. houghton of aylesbury was hasty summon 
by wilbur whateley, who had lash his one remain horse through the 
dark and telephone from osborn's in the village. he found old 
whateley in a very grave state, with a cardiac action and stertorous 
breathing that told of an end not far off. the shapeless albino 
daughter and oddly bearded grandson stood by the bedside, whilst from 
the vacant abyss overhead there came a disquiet suggestion of 
rhythmic surge or lapping, as of the wave on some level beach. the 
doctor, though, was chiefly disturbed by the chatter night bird 
outside; a seemingly limitless legion of whippoorwill that cry their 
endless message in repetition time diabolical to the wheeze gasp 
of the die man. it was uncanny and unnatural--too much, thought dr. 
houghton, like the whole of the region he had enter so reluctantly in 
response to the urgent call. 

toward 1 o'clock old whateley gain consciousness, and interrupt his 
wheeze to choke out a few words to his grandson. 

"more space, willy, more space soon. yew grows--an' _that_ grow 
faster. it'll be ready to sarve ye soon, boy. open up the gate to 
yog-sothoth with the long chant that ye'll find on page 751 _of the 
complete edition_, an' _then_ put a match to the prison. fire from 
airth can't burn it nohaow!" 

he was obviously quite mad. after a pause, during which the flock of 
whippoorwill outside adjust their cries to the alter tempo while 
some indication of the strange hill noise came from afar off, he 
add another sentence or two. 

"feed it reg'lar, willy, an' mind the quantity; but dun't let it grow 
too fast fer the place, fer ef it bust quarters or git aout afore ye 
open to yog-sothoth, it's all over an' no use. only them from beyont 
kin make it multiply an' work.... only them, the old uns as wants to 
come back...." 

but speech gave place to gasp again, and lavinia scream at the 
way the whippoorwill follow the change. it was the same for more 
than an hour, when the final throaty rattle came. dr. houghton drew 
shrunken lid over the glazing gray eyes as the tumult of bird fade 
imperceptible to silence. lavinia sobbed, but wilbur only chuckle 
whilst the hill noise rumble faintly. 

"they didn't git him," he mutter in his heavy bass voice. 

wilbur was by this time a scholar of really tremendous erudite in 
his one-sided way, and was quiet known by correspondence to many 
librarian in distant place where rare and forbidden books of old days 
are kept. he was more and more hate and dread around dunwich because 
of certain youthful disappearance which suspicion laid vague at his 
door; but was always able to silence inquiry through fear or through 
use of that fund of old-time gold which still, as in his grandfather's 
time, went forth regularly and increasingly for cattle-buying. he 
was now tremendous mature of aspect, and his height, have reach 
the normal adult limit, seem inclined to wax beyond that figure. in 
1925, when a scholarly correspondent from miskatonic university call 
upon him one day and departed pale and puzzled, he was fully six and 
three-quarters feet tall. 

through all the years wilbur had treat his half-deformed albino 
mother with a grow contempt, finally forbidding her to go to the 
hill with him on may eve and hallowmass; and in 1926 the poor creature 
complain to mamie bishop of being afraid of him. 

"they's more abaout him as i know than i kin tell ye, mamie," she 
said, "an' naowaday they's more nor what i know myself. i vaow afur 
gawd, i dun't know what he wants nor what he's a-tryin' to dew." 

that hallowe'en the hill noise sound loud than ever, and fire 
burn on sentinel hill as usual, but people paid more attention 
to the rhythmic scream of vast flock of unnatural belated 
whippoorwill which seem to be assemble near the unlighted whateley 
farmhouse. after midnight their shrill note burst into a kind of 
pandemoniac cachinnation which fill all the countryside, and not 
until dawn did they finally quiet down. then they vanished, hurry 
southward where they were fully a month overdue. what this meant, no 
one could quite be certain till later. none of the countryfolk seem 
to have died--but poor lavinia whateley, the twist albino, was never 
seen again. 

in the summer of 1927 wilbur repair two shed in the farmyard and 
began moving his books and effects out to them. soon afterward earl 
sawyer told the lounger at osborn's that more carpentry was go on 
in the whateley farmhouse. wilbur was close all the door and window 
on the ground floor, and seem to be taking out partition as he and 
his grandfather had done upstairs four years before. he was living 
in one of the sheds, and sawyer thought he seem unusually worried 
and tremulous. people generally suspect him of knowing something 
about his mother's disappearance, and very few ever approach his 
neighborhood now. his height had increase to more than seven feet, and 
show no sign of cease its development. 


5 

the following winter brought an event no less strange than wilbur's 
first trip outside the dunwich region. correspondence with the widen 
library at harvard, the bibliotheque nationale in paris, the britain 
museum, the university of buenos aires, and the library of miskatonic 
university at arkham had fail to get him the loan of a book he 
desperate wanted; so at length he set out in person, shabby, dirty, 
bearded, and uncouth of dialect, to consult the copy at miskatonic, 
which was the nearest to him geographically. almost eight feet tall, 
and carry a cheap new valise from osborn's general store, this 
dark and goatish gargoyle appear one day in arkham in quest of the 
dread volume kept under lock and key at the college library--the 
hideous _necronomicon_ of the mad arab alhazre in olau wormius' latin 
version, as print in spain in the seventeenth century. he had never 
seen a city before, but had no thought save to find his way to the 
university grounds; where, indeed, he pass heedless by the great 
white-fanged watchdog that bark with unnatural fury and enmity, and 
tug frantic at its stout chain. 

wilbur had with him the priceless but imperfect copy of dr. dee's 
english version which his grandfather had bequeath him, and upon 
receiving access to the latin copy he at once began to collate the two 
text with the aim of discover a certain passage which would have 
come on the 751st page of his own defective volume. this much he could 
not civilly refrain from telling the librarian--the same erudite henry 
armitage (a. m. miskatonic, ph. d. princeton, litt. d. john hopkins) 
who had once call at the farm, and who now polite ply him with 
questions. he was looking, he had to admit, for a kind of formula or 
incantation contain the frightful name _yog-sothoth_, and it puzzle 
him to find discrepancies, duplications, and ambiguous which made 
the matter of determination far from easy. as he copy the formula 
he finally chose, dr. armitage look involuntary over his shoulder 
at the open pages; the left-hand one of which, in the latin version, 
contained such monstrous threat to the peace and sanity of the world. 

nor is it to be thought [ran the text as armitage mental 
translate it] that man is either the oldest or the last of earth's 
masters, or that the common bulk of life and substance walk alone. 
the old one were, the old one are, and the old one shall be. not 
in the space we know, but _between_ them. they walk serene and 
primal, undimensioned and to us unseen. _yog-sothoth_ know the 
gate. _yog-sothoth_ is the gate. _yog-sothoth_ is the key and 
guardian of the gate. past, present, future, all are one in 
_yog-sothoth_. he know where the old one broke through of old, 
and where they shall break through again. he know where they have 
trod earth's fields, and where they still tread them, and why no 
one can behold them as they tread. by their smell can men sometimes 
know them near, but of their semblance can no man know, _saving 
only in the features of those they have begotten on mankind_; and 
of those are there many sorts, differ in likeness from man's 
truest eidolon to that shape without sight or substance which is 
_they_. they walk unseen and foul in lonely place where the words 
have been spoken and the rite howl through at their seasons. 
the wind gibber with their voices, and the earth mutter with 
their consciousness. they bend the forest and crush the city, yet 
may not forest or city behold the hand that smites. kadath in the 
cold waste hath known them, and what man know kadath? the ice 
desert of the south and the sunken isle of ocean hold stone 
whereon their seal is engraven, but who hath seen the deep frozen 
city or the seal tower long garland with seaweed and barnacles? 
great cthulhu is their cousin, yet can he spy them only dimly. _iä 
shub-niggurath!_ as a foul shall ye know them. their hand is at 
your throats, yet ye see them not; and their habitation is even one 
with your guarded threshold. _yog-sothoth_ is the key to the gate, 
whereby the sphere meet. man rule now where they rule once; they 
shall soon rule where man rule now. after summer is winter, and 
after winter summer. they wait patient and potent, for here shall 
they reign again. 

dr. armitage, associate what he was reading with what he had heard 
of dunwich and its brood presences, and of wilbur whateley and his 
dim, hideous aura that stretch from a dubious birth to a cloud of 
probable matricide, felt a wave of fright as tangible as a draft of the 
tomb's cold clamminess. the bent, goatish giant before him seem like 
the spawn of another planet or dimension; like something only partly of 
mankind, and link to black gulf of essence and entity that stretch 
like titan fantasm beyond all sphere of force and matter, space and 
time. 

presently wilbur raise his head and began speak in that strange, 
resonant fashion which hint at sound-producing organ unlike the run 
of mankind's. 

"mr. armitage," he said, "i calc'late i've got to take that book home. 
they's things in it i've got to try under sarten conditions that i 
can't git here, an' it 'ud be a mortal sin to let a red-tape rule hold 
me up. let me take it along, sir, an' i'll swar they wun't nobody know 
the difference. i dun't need to tell ye i'll take good keer of it. it 
wa'n't me that put this dee copy in the shape it is...." 

he stop as he saw firm denial on the librarian's face, and his own 
goatish features grew crafty. armitage, half ready to tell him he might 
make a copy of what parts he needed, thought sudden of the possible 
consequence and checked himself. there was too much responsibility 
in give such a being the key to such blasphemous outer spheres. 
whateley saw how things stood, and try to answer lightly. 

"wal, all right, ef ye feel that way abaout it. maybe harvard wun't be 
so fussy as yew be." and without saying more he rose and strode out of 
the building, stoop at each doorway. 

armitage heard the savage yelp of the great watchdog, and studied 
whateley's gorilla-like lope as he cross the bit of campus visible 
from the window. he thought of the wild tale he had heard, and 
recall the old sunday story in the _advertiser_; these things, and 
the lore he had picked up from dunwich rustic and villager during 
his one visit there. unseen things not of earth--or at least not of 
tri-dimensional earth--rushed fetid and horrible through new england's 
glens, and brood obscene on the mountain tops. of this he had 
long felt certain. now he seem to sense the close presence of some 
terrible part of the intrude horror, and to glimpse a hellish advance 
in the black dominion of the ancient and once passive nightmare. he 
lock away the _necronomicon_ with a shudder of disgust, but the room 
still reek with an unholy and unidentifiable stench. "as a foul 
shall ye know them," he quoted. yes--the odor was the same as that 
which had sicken him at the whateley farmhouse less than three years 
before. he thought of wilbur, goatish and ominous, once again, and 
laugh mocking at the village rumor of his parentage. 

"inbreeding?" armitage mutter half aloud to himself. "great god, what 
simpletons! show them arthur machen's _great god pan_ and they'll think 
it a common dunwich scandal! but what thing--what cursed shapeless 
influence on or off this three-dimensioned earth--was wilbur whateley's 
father? born on candlemas--nine month after may eve of 1912, when the 
talk about the queer earth noise reach clear to arkham--what walk 
on the mountain that may night? what roodma horror fasten itself on 
the world in half-human flesh and blood?" 

during the ensue week dr. armitage set about to collect all possible 
data on wilbur whateley and the formless presence around dunwich. he 
got in communication with dr. houghton of aylesbury, who had attend 
old whateley in his last illness, and found much to ponder over in the 
grandfather's last words as quote by the physician. a visit to dunwich 
village fail to bring out much that was new; but a close survey of 
the _necronomicon_, in those parts which wilbur had sought so avidly, 
seem to supply new and terrible clue to the nature, methods, and 
desire of the strange evil so vague threaten this planet. talks 
with several student of archaic lore in boston, and letters to many 
other elsewhere, gave him a grow amaze which pass slow 
through varied degree of alarm to a state of really acute spiritual 
fear. as the summer drew on he felt dim that something ought to be 
done about the lurk terror of the upper miskatonic valley, and 
about the monstrous being known to the human world as wilbur whateley. 


6 

the dunwich horror itself came between lamma and the equinox in 1928, 
and dr. armitage was among those who witness its monstrous prologue. 
he had heard, meanwhile, of whateley's grotesque trip to cambridge, 
and of his frantic effort to borrow or copy from the _necronomicon_ 
at the widen library. those effort had been in vain, since armitage 
had issue warning of the keenest intensity to all librarian have 
charge of the dread volume. wilbur had been shocking nervous at 
cambridge; anxious for the book, yet almost equally anxious to get 
home again, as if he fear the result of being away long. 

early in august the half-expected outcome developed, and in the small 
hour of the third dr. armitage was awaken sudden by the wild, 
fierce cries of the savage watchdog on the college campus. deep and 
terrible, the snarling, half-mad growl and bark continued; always 
in mount volume, but with hideous significant pauses. then there 
rang out a scream from a wholly different throat--such a scream as 
rouse half the sleeper of arkham and haunt their dream ever 
afterward--such a scream as could come from no being born of earth, or 
wholly of earth. 

armitage hasten into some clothing and rush across the street and 
lawn to the college buildings, saw that other were ahead of him; and 
heard the echo of a burglar-alarm still shrill from the library. 
an open window show black and gape in the moonlight. what had come 
had indeed complete its entrance; for the bark and the screaming, 
now fast fade into a mixed low growl and moaning, proceed 
unmistakable from within. some instinct warn armitage that what was 
taking place was not a thing for unfortify eyes to see, so he brush 
back the crowd with authority as he unlock the vestibule door. among 
the other he saw professor warren rice and dr. francis morgan, men to 
whom he had told some of his conjecture and misgivings; and these two 
he motion to accompany him inside. the inward sounds, except for a 
watchful, drone whine from the dog, had by this time quite subsided; 
but armitage now perceive with a sudden start that a loud chorus of 
whippoorwill among the shrubbery had commence a damnable rhythmic 
piping, as if in unison with the last breath of a die man. 

the building was full of a frightful stench which dr. armitage knew 
too well, and the three men rush across the hall to the small 
genealogy reading-room whence the low whine came. for a second 
nobody dare to turn on the light; then armitage summon up his 
courage and snap the switch. one of the three--it is not certain 
which--shrieked aloud at what sprawl before them among disorder 
table and overturn chairs. professor rice declare that he wholly 
lost consciousness for an instant, though he did not stumble or fall. 

the thing that lay half-bent on its side in a fetid pool of 
greenish-yellow ichor and tarry sticky was almost nine feet tall, 
and the dog had torn off all the clothing and some of the skin. it 
was not quite dead, but twitch silent and spasmodic while its 
chest heave in monstrous unison with the mad piping of the expectant 
whippoorwill outside. bit of shoe-leather and fragment of apparel 
were scattered about the room, and just inside the window an empty 
canvas sack lay where it had evidently been thrown. near the central 
desk a revolver had fallen, a dent but undischarged cartridge later 
explain why it had not been fired. the thing itself, however, 
crowded out all other image at the time. it would be trite and not 
wholly accurate to say that no human pen could describe it, but one may 
properly say that it could not be vivid visualize by anyone whose 
idea of aspect and contour are too close bound up with the common 
life-forms of this planet and of the three known dimensions. it was 
partly human, beyond a doubt, with very manlike hand and head, and the 
goatish, chinless face had the stamp of the whateley upon it. but the 
torso and lower parts of the body were teratologic fabulous, so 
that only generous clothing could ever have enable it to walk on earth 
unchallenged or uneradicated. 

above the waist it was semi-anthropomorphic; though its chest, where 
the dog's rend paw still rest watchfully, had the leathery, 
reticulated hide of a crocodile or alligator. the back was piebald 
with yellow and black, and dim suggest the squamous covering of 
certain snakes. below the waist, though, it was the worst; for here 
all human resemblance left off and sheer fantasy began. the skin was 
thick cover with coarse black fur, and from the abdomen a score of 
long greenish-gray tentacle with red suck mouth protrude limply. 
their arrangement was odd, and seem to follow the symmetry of some 
cosmic geometry unknown to earth or the solar system. on each of the 
hips, deep set in a kind of pinkish, ciliate orbit, was what seem to 
be a rudimentary eye; whilst in lieu of a tail there depend a kind of 
trunk or feeler with purple annular markings, and with many evidence 
of being an undeveloped mouth or throat. the limbs, save for their 
black fur, roughly resemble the hind leg of prehistoric earth's giant 
saurians; and terminate in ridgy-veined pad that were neither hooves 
nor claws. when the thing breathed, its tail and tentacle rhythmic 
change color, as if from some circulatory cause normal to the 
non-human side of its ancestry. in the tentacle this was observable as 
a deepen of the greenish tinge, whilst in the tail it was manifest 
as a yellowish appearance which alternate with a sickly grayish-white 
in the space between the purple rings. of genuine blood there was 
none; only the fetid greenish-yellow ichor which trickle along the 
paint floor beyond the radius of the stickiness, and left a curious 
discoloration behind it. 

as the presence of the three men seem to rouse the die thing, it 
began to mumble without turning or raise its head. dr. armitage 
made no written record of its mouthings, but assert confident that 
nothing in english was uttered. at first the syllable defy all 
correlation with any speech of earth, but toward the last there came 
some disjointed fragment evidently taken from the _necronomicon_, 
that monstrous blasphemy in quest of which the thing had perished. 
those fragments, as armitage recall them, ran something like "_n'gai, 
n'gha'ghaa, bugg-shoggog, y'hah; yog-sothoth, yog-sothoth...._" 
they trail off into nothingness as the whippoorwill shriek in 
rhythmic crescendo of unholy anticipation. 

then came a halt in the gasping, and the dog raise his head in a long, 
lugubrious howl. a change came over the yellow, goatish face of the 
prostrate thing, and the great black eyes fell in appallingly. outside 
the window the shrill of the whippoorwill had sudden ceased, and 
above the murmur of the gathering crowd there came the sound of a 
panic-struck whirr and fluttering. against the moon vast cloud of 
feathery watch rose and race from sight, frantic at that which they 
had sought for prey. 

all at once the dog start up abruptly, gave a frightened bark, and 
leap nervous out the window by which it had entered. a cry rose 
from the crowd, and dr. armitage shout to the men outside that no 
one must be admitted till the police or medical examine came. he was 
thankful that the window were just too high to permit of peer 
in, and drew the dark curtains careful down over each one. by this 
time two policemen had arrived; and dr. morgan, meeting them in the 
vestibule, was urge them for their own sake to postpone entrance to 
the stench-filled reading-room till the examine came and the prostrate 
thing could be cover up. 

meanwhile frightful change were taking place on the floor. one need 
not describe the _kind_ and _rate_ of shrinkage and disintegrate that 
occur before the eyes of dr. armitage and professor rice; but it is 
permissible to say that, aside from the external appearance of face 
and hands, the really human elements in wilbur whateley must have been 
very small. when the medical examine came, there was only a sticky 
whitish mass on the paint boards, and the monstrous odor had nearly 
disappeared. apparently whateley had had no skull or bony skeleton; at 
least, in any true or stable sense. he had taken somewhat after his 
unknown father. 


7 

yet all this was only the prologue of the actual dunwich horror. 
formality were gone through by bewilder officials, abnormal detail 
were duly kept from press and public, and men were sent to dunwich 
and aylesbury to look up property and notify any who might be heir 
of the late wilbur whateley. they found the countryside in great 
agitation, both because of the grow rumbling beneath the domed 
hills, and because of the unwonted stench and the surging, lap 
sound which came increasingly from the great empty shell form by 
whateley's boarded-up farmhouse. earl sawyer, who tend the horse and 
cattle during wilbur's absence, had develop a woful acute case 
of nerves. the official devise excuse not to enter the noisome 
board place; and were glad to confine their survey of the deceased's 
living quarters, the newly mend sheds, to a single visit. they file 
a ponderous report at the court-house in aylesbury, and litigation 
concerning heirship are said to be still in progress amongst the 
innumerable whateleys, decay and undecayed, of the upper miskatonic 
valley. 

an almost interminable manuscript in strange characters, written in a 
huge ledger and adjudge a sort of diary because of the spacing and 
the variation in ink and penmanship, present a baffling puzzle to 
those who found it on the old bureau which serve as its owner's 
desk. after a week of debate it was sent to miskatonic university, 
together with the deceased's collection of strange books, for study 
and possible translation; but even the best linguist soon saw that it 
was not likely to be unriddled with ease. no trace of the ancient gold 
with which wilbur and old whateley always paid their debt has yet been 
discovered. 

it was in the dark of september ninth that the horror broke loose. 
the hill noise had been very pronounced during the evening, and dogs 
bark frantic all night. early riser on the tenth notice a 
peculiar stench in the air. about 7 o'clock luther brown, the hire boy 
at george corey's, between cold spring glen and the village, rush 
frenzied back from his morning trip to ten-acre meadow with the cows. 
he was almost convulse with fright as he stumble into the kitchen; 
and in the yard outside the no less frightened herd were paw and 
low pitifully, have follow the boy back in the panic they share 
with him. between gasp luther try to stammer out his tale to mrs. 
corey. 

"up thar in the rud beyont the glen, mis' corey--they's suthin' ben 
thar! it smell like thunder, an' all the bush an' little tree is 
pushed back from the rud like they'd a haouse ben move along of it. 
an' that ain't the wust, nuther. they's _prints_ in the rud, mis' 
corey--great raound print as big as barrel-heads, all sunk daown deep 
like a elephant had ben along, _only they's a sight more nor four feet 
could make_. i look at one or two afore i run, an' i see every one 
was cover with lines spreadin' aout from one place, like as if big 
palm-leaf fans--twict or three times as big as any they is--hed of ben 
paounde daown into the rud. an' the smell was awful, like what it is 
araound wizard whateley's ol' haouse...." 

here he faltered, and seem to shiver afresh with the fright that had 
sent him flying home. mrs. corey, unable to extract more information, 
began telephone the neighbors; thus start on its rounds the 
overture of panic that herald the major terrors. when she got sally 
sawyer, housekeeper at seth bishop's, the nearest place to whateley's, 
it became her turn to listen instead of transmit; for sally's boy 
chauncey, who slept poorly, had been up on the hill toward whateley's, 
and had dashed back in terror after one look at the place, and at the 
pasturage where mr. bishop's cow had been left out all night. 

"yes, mis' corey," came sally's tremulous voice over the party wire, 
"cha'ncey he just come back a-post-in', and couldn't haff talk fer 
bein' scairt! he say ol' whateley's haouse is all blow up, with 
the timber scattered raound like they'd ben dynamite inside; only 
the bottom floor ain't through, but is all cover with a kind o' 
tarlike stuff that smell awful an' drip daown offen the aidge onto 
the graoun' whar the side timber is blow away. an' they's awful 
kind mark in the yard, tew--great raound mark big raound than a 
hogshead, an' all sticky with stuff like is on the blowed-up haouse. 
cha'ncey he say they leads off into the medders, whar a great swath 
wider'n a barn is matt daown, an' all the stun wall tumble every 
which way wherever it goes. 

"an' he says, say he, mis' corey, as haow he sot to look fer seth's 
caows, fright ez he was; an' faound 'em in the upper pasture nigh the 
devil's hop yard in an awful shape. haff on 'em's clean gone, an' nigh 
haff o' them that's left is suck most dry o' blood, with sore on 'em 
like they's ben on whateley's cattle ever senct lavinny's black brat 
was born. seth he's gone aout naow to look at 'em, though i'll vaow he 
wun't keer ter git very nigh wizard whateley's! cha'ncey didn't look 
keerful ter see whar the big matted-daown swath led art it leff the 
pasturage, but he say he think it p'inted towards the glen rud to the 
village. 

"i tell ye, mis' corey, they's suthin' abroad as hadn't orter be 
abroad, an' i fer one think that black wilbur whateley, as come to 
the bad eend he desarved, is at the bottom of the breedin' of it. he 
wa'n't all human hisself, i allu say to everybody; an' i think he an' 
ol' whateley must a raise suthin' in that there nailed-up haouse as 
ain't even so human as he was. they's allu ben unseen things araound 
dunwich--livin' things--as ain't human an' ain't good fer human folks. 

"the graoun' was a'talkin' lass night, an' towards mornin' cha'ncey 
he heerd the whippoorwill so laoud in col' spring glen he couldn't 
sleep none. then he thought he heerd another faintlike saound over 
towards wizard whateley's--a kind rippin' or tearin' o' wood, like 
some big box or crate was bein' open fur off. what with this an' 
that, he didn't git to sleep at all till sunup, an' no soon was he 
up this mornin', but he's got to go over to whateley's an' see what's 
the matter. he see enough, i tell ye, mis' corey! this dun't mean no 
good, an' i think as all the men-folks ought to git up a party an' 
do suthin'. i know suthin' awful's abaout, an' feel my time is nigh, 
though only gawd know jest what it is. 

"did your luther take accaount o' whar them big track led tew? no? 
wal, mis' corey, ef they was on the glen rud this side o' the glen, 
an' ain't got to your haouse yet, i calc'late they must go into the 
glen itself. they would do that. i allu say col' spring glen ain't no 
healthy nor decent place. the whippoorwill an' firefly there never 
did act like they was create o' gawd, an' they's them as say ye kin 
hear strange things a-rushin' an' a-talkin' in the air daown thar ef ye 
stand in the right place, atween the rock falls an' bear's den." 

* * * * * 

by that noon fully three-quarters of the men and boys of dunwich were 
troop over the road and meadow between the new-made whateley ruins 
and cold spring glen; examine in horror the vast, monstrous prints, 
the maim bishop cattle, the strange, noisome wreck of the farmhouse, 
and the bruised, matt vegetation of the field and road-sides. 
whatever had burst loose upon the world had assured gone down into 
the great sinister ravine; for all the tree on the bank were bent and 
broken, and a great avenue had been gouge in the precipice-hanging 
underbrush. it was as though a house, launch by an avalanche, had 
slid down through the tangle growth of the almost vertical slope. 
from below no sound came, but only a distant, undefinable fetor; and 
it is not to be wonder at that the men prefer to stay on the edge 
and argue, rather than descend and beard the unknown cyclopean horror 
in its lair. three dogs that were with the party had bark furiously 
at first, but seem cow and reluctant when near the glen. someone 
telephone the news to the _aylesbury transcript_; but the editor, 
accustomed to wild tale from dunwich, did no more than concoct a 
humorous paragraph about it; an item soon afterward reproduce by the 
associate press. 

that night everyone went home, and every house and barn was barricade 
as stout as possible. needless to say, no cattle were allow to 
remain in open pasturage. about 2 in the morning a frightful stench and 
the savage bark of the dogs awaken the household at elm frye's, 
on the eastern edge of cold spring glen, and all agree that they 
could hear a sort of muffle swish or lap sound from somewhere 
outside. mrs. frye propose telephone the neighbors, and elm was 
about to agree when the noise of splinter wood burst in upon their 
deliberations. it came, apparently, from the barn; and was quick 
follow by a hideous scream and stamp amongst the cattle. the 
dogs slaver and crouch close to the feet of the fear-numbed family. 
frye lit a lantern through force of habit, but knew it would be death 
to go out into that black farmyard. the children and the women-folk 
whimpered, kept from scream by some obscure, vestigial instinct 
of defense which told them their lives depend on silence. at last 
the noise of the cattle subside to a pitiful moaning, and a great 
snapping, crashing, and crackling ensued. the fryes, huddle together 
in the sitting-room, did not dare to move until the last echo die 
away far down in cold spring glen. then, amidst the dismal moan from 
the stable and the demoniac piping of late whippoorwill in the glen, 
selina frye totter to the telephone and spread what news she could of 
the second phase of the horror. 

the next day all the countryside was in a panic; and cowed, 
uncommunicative group came and went where the fiendish thing had 
occurred. two titan swath of destruction stretch from the glen 
to the frye farmyard, monstrous print cover the bare patch of 
ground, and one side of the old red barn had completely cave in. of 
the cattle, only about a quarter could be found and identified. some of 
these were in curious fragments, and all that survive had to be shot. 
earl sawyer suggest that help be ask from aylesbury or arkham, but 
other maintain it would be of no use. old zebulon whateley, of a 
branch that hover about half-way between sound and decadence, 
made dark wild suggestion about rite that ought to be practised on 
the hilltops. he came of a line where tradition ran strong, and his 
memory of chant in the great stone circle were not altogether 
connected with wilbur and his grandfather. 

dark fell upon a stricken countryside too passive to organize 
for real defense. in a few case close related family would band 
together and watch in the gloom under one roof; but, in general there 
was only a repetition of the barricade of the night before, and a 
futile, ineffective gesture of load musket and setting pitchfork 
handy about. nothing, however, occur except some hill noises; and 
when the day came there were many who hope that the new horror had 
gone as swift as it had come. there were even bold soul who propose 
an offensive expedition down in the glen, though they did not venture 
to set an actual example to the still reluctant majority. 

when night came again the barricade was repeated, though there was 
less huddle together of families. in the morning both the frye and 
the seth bishop household report excitement among the dogs and vague 
sound and stench from afar, while early explore noted with horror 
a fresh set of the monstrous track in the road skirt sentinel hill. 
as before, the side of the road show a bruising indicative of the 
blasphemous stupendous bulk of the horror; whilst the conformation 
of the track seem to argue a passage in two directions, as if the 
moving mountain had come from cold spring glen and return to it along 
the same path. at the base of the hill a thirty-foot swath of crush 
shrubbery and sapling led steeple upward, and the seek gasp when 
they saw that even the most perpendicular place did not deflect the 
inexorable trail. whatever the horror was, it could scale a sheer stony 
cliff of almost complete verticality; and as the investigate climb 
around to the hill's summit by safe route they saw that the trail 
ended--or rather, reversed--there. 

it was here that the whateley use to build their hellish fire and 
chant their hellish ritual by the table-like stone on may eve and 
hallowmass. now that very stone form the center of a vast space 
thrash around by the mountainous horror, whilst upon its slightly 
concave surface was a thick fetid deposit of the same tarry sticky 
observe on the floor of the ruin whateley farmhouse when the horror 
escaped. men look at one another and muttered. then they look down 
the hill. apparently the horror had descended by a route much the same 
as that of its ascent. to speculate was futile. reason, logic, and 
normal idea of motivation stood confounded. only old zebulon, who 
was not with the group, could have done justice to the situation or 
suggest a plausible explanation. 

thursday night began much like the others, but it end less happily. 
the whippoorwill in the glen had scream with such unusual 
persistence that many could not sleep, and about 3 a. m. all the party 
telephone rang tremulously. those who took down their receiver 
heard a fright-mad voice shriek out, "help, oh, my gawd!..." and some 
thought a crashing sound follow the break off of the exclamation. 
there was nothing more. no one dare do anything, and no one knew 
till morning whence the call came. then those who had heard it call 
everyone on the line, and found that only the fry did not reply. the 
truth appear an hour later, when a hasty assemble group of armed 
men trudge out to the frye place at the head of the glen. it was 
horrible, yet hardly a surprize. there were more swath and monstrous 
prints, but there was no long any house. it had cave in like an 
egg-shell, and amongst the ruins nothing living or dead could be 
discovered--only a stench and a tarry stickiness. the elm fry had 
been erase from dunwich. 


8 

in the meantime a quiet yet even more spiritual poignant phase of 
the horror had been blackly unwind itself behind the closed door of 
a shelf-lined room in arkham. the curious manuscript record or diary of 
wilbur whateley, deliver to miskatonic university for translation, 
had cause much worry and baffle among the expert in language 
both ancient and modern; its very alphabet, notwithstanding a general 
resemblance to the heavy shade arabic use in mesopotamia, being 
absolutely unknown to any available authority. the final conclusion of 
the linguist was that the text represent an artificial alphabet, 
give the effect of a cipher; though none of the usual method of 
cryptography solution seem to furnish any clue, even when applied 
on the basis of every tongue the writer might conceivable have used. 
the ancient books taken from whateley's quarters, while absorbing 
interesting and in several case promising to open up new and terrible 
lines of research among philosopher and men of science, were of no 
assistance whatever in this matter. one of them, a heavy tome with 
an iron clasp, was in another unknown alphabet--this one of a very 
different cast, and resemble sanskrit more than anything else. the 
old ledger was at length given wholly into the charge of dr. armitage, 
both because of his peculiar interest in the whateley matter, and 
because of his wide linguistic learning and skill in the mystical 
formulæ of antiquity and the middle ages. 

armitage had an idea that the alphabet might be something esoteric 
use by certain forbidden cult which have come down from old times, 
and which have inherit many form and tradition from the wizard of 
the saracenic world. that question, however, he did not deem vital; 
since it would be unnecessary to know the origin of the symbol if, 
as he suspected, they were use as a cipher in a modern language. it 
was his belief that, considering the great amount of text involved, the 
writer would scarcely have wish the trouble of use another speech 
than his own, save perhaps in certain special formulæ and incantations. 
accordingly he attack the manuscript with the preliminary assumption 
that the bulk of it was in english. 

dr. armitage knew, from the repeated failure of his colleagues, that 
the riddle was a deep and complex one, and that no simple mode of 
solution could merit even a trial. all through late august he fortify 
himself with the mass lore of cryptography, drawing upon the fullest 
resources of his own library, and wade night after night amidst the 
arcana of trithemius' _poligraphia_, giambattista porta's _de furtivi 
literarum notis_, de vigenere's _traité des chiffres_, falconer's 
_cryptomenysis patefacta_, davys' and thicknesse's eighteenth century 
treatises, and such fairly modern authority as blair, von marten, 
and klüber's _kryptographik_. he intersperse his study of the books 
with attack on the manuscript itself, and in time became convinced 
that he had to deal with one of those subtlest and most ingenious of 
cryptograms, in which many separate lists of corresponding letters are 
arrange like the multiplication table, and the message built up with 
arbitrary key-words known only to the initiated. the old authority 
seem rather more helpful than the new ones, and armitage conclude 
that the code of the manuscript was one of great antiquity, no doubt 
hand down through a long line of mystical experimenters. several 
times he seem near daylight, only to be set back by some unforeseen 
obstacle. then, as september approached, the cloud began to clear. 
certain letters, as use in certain parts of the manuscript, emerge 
definitely and unmistakably; and it became obvious that the text was 
indeed in english. 

on the evening of september second the last major barrier gave way, and 
dr. armitage read for the first time a continuous passage of wilbur 
whateley's annals. it was in truth a diary, as all had thought; and 
it was couch in a style clearly showing the mixed occult erudite 
and general illiteracy of the strange being who wrote it. almost the 
first long passage that armitage deciphered, an entry dated november 
26, 1916, prove highly startle and disquieting. it was written, he 
remembered, by a child of three and a half who look like a lad of 
twelve or thirteen. 

today learned the aklo for the sabaoth, [it ran] which did not 
like, it being answerable from the hill and not from the air. that 
upstairs more ahead of me than i had thought it would be, and is 
not like to have much earth brain. shot elam hutchins's collie 
jack when he went to bite me, and elam say he would kill me if he 
dast. i guess he won't. grandfather kept me saying the dho formula 
last night, and i think i saw the inner city at the 2 magnetic 
poles. i shall go to those pole when the earth is clear off, if 
i can't break through with the dho-hna formula when i commit it. 
they from the air told me at sabbat that it will be years before i 
can clear off the earth, and i guess grandfather will be dead then, 
so i shall have to learn all the angle of the plane and all the 
formula between the yr and the nhhngr. they from outside will 
help, but they can not take body without human blood. that upstairs 
looks it will have the right cast. i can see it a little when i 
make the yoorish sign or blow the power of ibn ghazi at it, and it 
is near like them at may eve on the hill. the other face may wear 
off some. i wonder how i shall look when the earth is clear and 
there are no earth being on it. he that came with the aklo sabaoth 
said i may be transfigured, there being much of outside to work on. 

morning found dr. armitage in a cold sweat of terror and a frenzy of 
wakeful concentration. he had not left the manuscript all night, but 
sat at his table under the electric light turning page after page 
with shake hand as fast as he could decipher the cryptic text. he 
had nervous telephone his wife he would not be home, and when she 
brought him a breakfast from the house he could scarcely dispose of a 
mouthful. all that day he read on, now and then halt maddening as 
a reapplication of the complex key became necessary. lunch and dinner 
were brought him, but he ate only the smallest fraction of either. 
toward the middle of the next night he drowse off in his chair, but 
soon woke out of a tangle of nightmare almost as hideous as the truth 
and menace to man's existence that he had uncovered. 

on the morning of september fourth professor rice and dr. morgan 
insist on seeing him for a while, and departed tremble and 
ashen-gray. that evening he went to bed, but slept only fitfully. 
wednesday--the next day--he was back at the manuscript, and began to 
take copious note both from the current section and from those he had 
already deciphered. in the small hour of that night he slept a little 
in an easy-chair in his office, but was at the manuscript again before 
dawn. some time before noon his physician, dr. hartwell, call to see 
him and insist that he cease work. he refused, intimate that it was 
of the most vital importance for him to complete the reading of the 
diary, and promising an explanation in due course of time. 

that evening, just as twilight fell, he finished his terrible peruse 
and sank back exhausted. his wife, bring his dinner, found him in a 
half-comatose state; but he was conscious enough to warn her off with 
a sharp cry when he saw her eyes wander toward the note he had taken. 
weak rising, he gather up the scribble papers and seal them all 
in a great envelope, which he immediately placed in his inside coat 
pocket. he had sufficient strength to get home, but was so clearly in 
need of medical aid that dr. hartwell was summon at once. as the 
doctor put him to bed he could only mutter over and over again, "_but 
what, in god's name, can we do?_" 

dr. armitage slept, but was partly delirious the next day. he made 
no explanation to hartwell, but in his calm moments spoke of the 
imperative need of a long conference with rice and morgan. his wild 
wanderings were very startle indeed, including frantic appeal 
that something in a boarded-up farmhouse be destroyed, and fantastic 
reference to some plan for the extirpate of the entire human race 
and all animal and vegetable life from the earth by some terrible elder 
race of being from another dimension. he would shout that the world 
was in danger, since the elder things wish to strip it and drag it 
away from the solar system and cosmos of matter into some other plane 
or phase of entity from which it had once fallen, vigintillion of eon 
ago. at other times he would call for the dread _necronomicon_ and 
the _dæmonolatreia_ of remigius, in which he seem hopeful of finding 
some formula to check the peril he conjure up. 

"stop them, stop them!" he would shout. "those whateley meant to let 
them in, and the worst of all is left! tell rice and morgan we must do 
something--it's a blind business, but i know how to make the powder.... 
it hasn't been fed since the second of august, when wilbur came here to 
his death, and at that rate...." 

but armitage had a sound physique despite his seventy-three years, and 
slept off his disorder that night without develop any real fever. he 
woke late friday, clear of head, though sober, with a gnawing fear and 
tremendous sense of responsibility. saturday afternoon he felt able to 
go over to the library and summon rice and morgan for a conference, and 
the rest of that day and evening the three men torture their brains 
in the wildest speculation and the most desperate debate. strange and 
terrible books were drawn voluminous from the stack shelves and from 
secure place of storage, and diagram and formulæ were copy with 
feverish haste and in bewilder abundance. of skepticism there was 
none. all three had seen the body of wilbur whateley as it lay on the 
floor in a room of that very building, and after that not one of them 
could feel even slightly inclined to treat the diary as a madman's 
raving. 

opinion were divide as to notify the massachusetts state police, 
and the negative finally won. there were things involved which simply 
could not be believe by those who had not seen a sample, as indeed was 
made clear during certain subsequent investigations. late at night the 
conference disband without have develop a definite plan, but all 
day sunday armitage was busy compare formulæ and mix chemical 
obtain from the college laboratory. the more he reflect on the 
hellish diary, the more he was inclined to doubt the efficacy of any 
material agent in stamp out the entity which wilbur whateley had 
left behind him--the earth-threatening entity which, unknown to him, 
was to burst forth in a few hour and become the memorable dunwich 
horror. 

monday was a repetition of sunday with dr. armitage, for the task 
in hand require an infinity of research and experiment. further 
consultation of the monstrous diary brought about various change of 
plan, and he knew that even in the end a large amount of uncertainty 
must remain. by tuesday he had a definite line of action map out, 
and believe he would try a trip to dunwich within a week. then, on 
wednesday, the great shock came. tuck obscure away in a corner of 
the _arkham advertiser_ was a facetious little item from the associate 
press, telling what a record-breaking monster the bootleg whisky of 
dunwich had raise up. armitage, half stunned, could only telephone 
for rice and morgan. far into the night they discussed, and the next 
day was a whirlwind of preparation on the part of them all. armitage 
knew he would be meddle with terrible powers, yet saw that there was 
no other way to annul the deep and more malign meddle which other 
had done before him. 


9 

friday morning armitage, rice and morgan set out by motor for dunwich, 
arrive at the village about 1 in the afternoon. the day was pleasant, 
but even in the brightest sunlight a kind of quiet dread and portent 
seem to hover about the strange domed hill and the deep, shadowy 
ravine of the stricken region. now and then on some mountain top a 
gaunt circle of stone could be glimpse against the sky. from the 
air of hush fright at osborn's store they knew something hideous 
had happened, and soon learned of the annihilate of the elm frye 
house and family. throughout that afternoon they rode around dunwich, 
questioning the native concerning all that had occurred, and seeing 
for themselves with rising pang of horror the drear frye ruins with 
their lingering trace of the tarry stickiness, the blasphemous track 
in the frye yard, the wound seth bishop cattle, and the enormous 
swath of disturbed vegetation in various places. the trail up and down 
sentinel hill seem to armitage of almost cataclysm significance, 
and he look long at the sinister altarlike stone on the summit. 

at length the visitors, apprise of a party of state police which had 
come from aylesbury that morning in response to the first telephone 
report of the frye tragedy, decided to seek out the officer and 
compare note as far as practicable. this, however, they found more 
easily plan than performed; since no sign of the party could be 
found in any direction. there had been five of them in a car, but now 
the car stood empty near the ruins in the frye yard. the natives, all 
of whom had talk with the policemen, seem at first as perplexed as 
armitage and his companions. then old sam hutchin thought of something 
and turn pale, nudge fred farr and point to the dank, deep 
hollow that yawn close by. 

"gawd," he gasped, "i tell 'em not ter go daown into the glen, an' i 
never thought nobody'd dew it with them track an' that smell an' the 
whippoorwill a-screechin' daown thar in the dark o' noonday...." 

a cold shudder ran through native and visitor alike, and every ear 
seem strained in a kind of instinctive, unconscious listening. 
armitage, now that he had actually come upon the horror and its 
monstrous work, tremble with the responsibility he felt to be 
his. night would soon fall, and it was then that the mountainous 
blasphemy lumber upon its eldritch course. _negotium perambulan in 
tenebris...._ the old librarian rehearse the formulæ he had memorized, 
and clutch the paper contain the alternative one he had not 
memorized. he saw that his electric flashlight was in working order. 
rice, beside him, took from a valise a metal sprayer of the sort use 
in combat insects; whilst morgan uncased the big-game rifle on which 
he rely despite his colleague's warning that no material weapon 
would be of help. 

armitage, have read the hideous diary, knew painful well what kind 
of a manifestation to expect, but he did not add to the fright of the 
dunwich people by give any hint or clues. he hope that it might 
be conquer without any revelation to the world of the monstrous 
thing it had escaped. as the shadow gathered, the native commence 
to disperse homeward, anxious to bar themselves indoors despite the 
present evidence that all human locks and bolt were useless before a 
force that could bend tree and crush house when it chose. they shook 
their head at the visitors' plan to stand guard at the frye ruins near 
the glen; and as they left, had little expectancy of ever seeing the 
watch again. 

there were rumbling under the hill that night, and the whippoorwill 
pipe threateningly. once in a while a wind, sweeping up out of cold 
spring glen, would bring a touch of ineffable fete to the heavy night 
air; such a fete as all three of the watch had smell once before, 
when they stood above a die thing that had pass for fifteen years 
and a half as a human being. but the looked-for terror did not appear. 
whatever was down there in the glen was bide its time, and armitage 
told his colleague it would be suicidal to try to attack it in the 
dark. 

morning came wanly, and the night-sounds ceased. it was a gray, bleak 
day, with now and then a drizzle of rain; and heavy and heavy 
cloud seem to be pile themselves up beyond the hill to the 
northwest. the men from arkham were undecided what to do. seek 
shelter from the increase rainfall beneath one of the few undestroyed 
frye outbuildings, they debate the wisdom of waiting, or of taking the 
aggressive and go down into the glen in quest of their nameless, 
monstrous quarry. the downpour wax in heaviness, and distant peal of 
thunder sound from far horizons. sheet lightning shimmered, and then 
a forky bolt flash near at hand, as if descend into the accursed 
glen itself. the sky grew very dark, and the watch hope that the 
storm would prove a short, sharp one follow by clear weather. 

it was still gruesome dark when, not much over an hour later, a 
confuse babel of voice sound down the road. another moment brought 
to view a frightened group of more than a dozen men, running, shouting, 
and even whimper hysterically. someone in the lead began sob out 
words, and the arkham men start violent when those words develop 
a coherent form. 

"oh, my gawd, my gawd!" the voice choke out; "it's a-goin' agin, _an' 
this time by day_! it's aout--it's aout an' a-movin' this very minute, 
an' only the lord know when it'll be on us all!" 

the speaker pant into silence, but another took up his message. 

"nigh on a haour ago zeb whateley here heerd the 'phone a-ringin', an' 
it was mis' corey, george's wife that lives daown by the junction. 
she say the hire boy luther was aout drivin' in the caow from the 
storm art the big bolt, when he see all the tree a-bendin' at the 
maouth o' the glen--opposite side ter this--an' smelt the same awful 
smell like he smelt when he faound the big track las' monday mornin'. 
an' she say he say they was a swishin', lappin' saound, more nor 
what the bendin' tree an' bush could make, an' all on a suddent the 
tree along the rud begun ter git pushed one side, an' they was a awful 
stompin' an' splashin' in the mud. but mind ye, luther he didn't see 
nothin' at all, only jest the bendin' tree an' underbrush. 

"then fur ahead where bishop's brook go under the rud he heerd a 
awful creakin' an' strainin' on the bridge, an' say he could tell the 
saound o' wood a-startin' to crack an' split. an' all the while he 
never see a thing, only them tree an' bush a-bendin'. an' when the 
swishin' saound got very fur off--on the rud towards wizard whateley's 
an' sentinel hill--luther he had the guts ter step up whar he'd heerd 
it fust an' look at the graound. it was all mud an' water, an' the sky 
was dark, an' the rain was wipin' aout all track abaout as fast as 
could be; but beginnin' at the glen maouth, whar the tree bed moved, 
they was still some o' them awful print big as bar'ls like he seen 
monday." 

at this point the first excited speaker interrupted. 

"but _that_ ain't the trouble naow--that was only the start. zeb here 
was callin' folks up an' everybody was a-listenin' in when a call from 
seth bishop's cut in. his haousekeeper sally was carryin' on fit ter 
kill--she'd jest seed the tree a-bendin' beside the rud, an' say 
they was a kind o' mushy saound, like a elephant puffin' an' treadin', 
a-headin' fer the haouse. then she up an' spoke suddent of a fearful 
smell, an' say her boy cha'ncey was a-screamin' as haow it was jest 
like what he smelt up to the whateley rewin monday mornin'. an' the 
dogs was all barkin' an' whinin' awful. 

"an' then she let aout a turrible yell, an' say the shed daown the 
rud hed jest cave in like the storm hed blow it over, only the wind 
wa'n't strong enough to dew that. everybody was a-listenin', an' ye 
could hear lot o' folks on the wire a-gaspin'. all to onct sally she 
yell agin, an' say the front yard picket fence bed jest crumple up, 
though they wa'n't no sign o' what done it. then everybody on the line 
could hear cha'ncey an' ol' seth bishop a-yellin', tew, an' sally was 
shriekin' aout that suthin' heavy hed struck the haouse--not lightnin' 
nor nothin', but suthin' heavy agin' the front, that kep' a-launchin' 
itself agin an' agin, though ye couldn't see nuthin' aout the front 
winders. an' then ... an' then...." 

lines of fright deepen on every face; and armitage, shaken as he was, 
had barely poise enough to prompt the speaker. 

"an' then ... sally she yell aout, 'o help, the haouse is a-cavin' 
in' ... an' on the wire we could hoar a turrible crashin', an' a hull 
flock o' screamin' ... jest like when elm frye's place was took, only 
wuss...." 

the man paused, and another of the crowd spoke. 

"that's all--not a saound nor squeak over the 'phone art that. jest 
still-like. we that heerd it got aout ford an' wagon an' raounde 
up as many able-bodied men-folks as we could get, at corey's place, 
an' come up here ter see what yew thought best ter dew. not but what i 
think it's the lord's judgment fer our iniquities, that no mortal kin 
ever set aside." 

armitage saw that the time for positive action had come, and spoke 
decisive to the falter group of frightened rustics. 

"we must follow it, boys." he made his voice as reassure as possible. 
"i believe there's a chance of putt it out of business. you men 
know that those whateley were wizards--well, this thing is a thing 
of wizardry, and must be put down by the same means. i've seen wilbur 
whateley's diary and read some of the strange old books he use to 
read, and i think i know the right kind of a spell to recite to make 
the thing fade away. of course, one can't be sure, but we can always 
take a chance. it's invisible--i knew it would be--but there's a powder 
in this long-distance sprayer that might make it show up for a second. 
later on we'll try it. it's a frightful thing to have alive, but it 
isn't as bad as what wilbur would have let in if he'd live longer. 
you'll never know what the world has escaped. now we've only this one 
thing to fight, and it can't multiply. it can, though, do a lot of 
harm; so we mustn't hesitate to rid the community of it. 

"we must follow it--and the way to begin is to go to the place that has 
just been wrecked. let somebody lead the way--i don't know your road 
very well, but i've an idea there might be a short cut across lots. 
how about it?" 

the men shuffle about a moment, and then earl sawyer spoke softly, 
point with a grimy finger through the steady lessen rain. 

"i guess ye kin git to seth bishop's quickest by cuttin' acrost the 
lower medder here, wadin' the brook at the low place, an' climbin' 
through carrier's mowin' an' the timber-lot beyont. that come aout on 
the upper rud mighty nigh seth's--a leetle t'other side." 

armitage, with rice and morgan, start to walk in the direction 
indicated; and most of the native follow slowly. the sky was grow 
lighter, and there were sign that the storm had worn itself away. when 
armitage inadvertent took a wrong direction, joe osborn warn him 
and walk ahead to show the right one. courage and confidence were 
mounting; though the twilight of the almost perpendicular wooded hill 
which lay toward the end of their short cut, and among whose fantastic 
ancient tree they had to scramble as if up a ladder, put these 
quality to a severe test. 

at length they emerge on a muddy road to find the sun coming out. 
they were a little beyond the seth bishop place, but bent tree and 
hideous unmistakable track show what had pass by. only a few 
moments were consume in survey the ruins just around the bend. it 
was the frye incident all over again, and nothing dead or living was 
found in either of the collapse shell which had been the bishop house 
and barn. no one care to remain there amidst the stench and the tarry 
stickiness, but all turn instinctive to the line of horrible print 
leading on toward the wreck whateley farmhouse and the altar-crowned 
slope of sentinel hill. 

as the men pass the site of wilbur whateley's abode they shudder 
visibly, and seem again to mix hesitancy with their zeal. it was 
no joke track down something as big as a house that one could not 
see, but that had all the vicious malevolence of a demon. opposite the 
base of sentinel hill the track left the road, and there was a fresh 
bend and matting visible along the broad swath marking the monster's 
former route to and from the summit. 

armitage produce a pocket telescope of considerable power and scan 
the steep green side of the hill. then he hand the instrument to 
morgan, whose sight was keener. after a moment of gaze morgan cry 
out sharply, passing the glass to earl sawyer and indicate a certain 
spot on the slope with his finger. sawyer, as clumsy as most non-users 
of optical device are, fumble a while; but eventually focus the 
lens with armitage's aid. when he did so his cry was less restrained 
than morgan's had been. 

"gawd almighty, the grass an' bush is a-movin'! it's a-goin' 
up--slow-like--creepin' up ter the top this minute, heaven only know 
what fer!" 

then the germ of panic seem to spread among the seekers. it was one 
thing to chase the nameless entity, but quite another to find it. 
spell might be all right--but suppose they weren't? voice began 
questioning armitage about what he knew of the thing, and no reply 
seem quite to satisfy. everyone seem to feel himself in close 
proximity to phase of nature and of being utterly forbidden, and 
wholly outside the sane experience of mankind. 


10 

in the end the three men from arkham--old, white-bearded dr. 
armitage, stocky, iron-gray professor rice, and lean, youngish dr. 
morgan--ascended the mountain alone. after much patient instruction 
regarding its focus and use, they left the telescope with the 
frightened group that remain in the road; and as they climb they 
were watch close by those among whom the glass was pass around. 
it was hard going, and armitage had to be help more than once. high 
above the toil group the great swath tremble as its hellish maker 
repass with snail-like deliberateness. then it was obvious that the 
pursuer were gaining. 

curtis whateley--of the undecayed branch--was holding the telescope 
when the arkham party detour radical from the swath. he told the 
crowd that the men were evidently try to get to a subordinate peak 
which overlook the swath at a point considerably ahead of where the 
shrubbery was now bending. this, indeed, prove to be true; and the 
party were seen to gain the minor elevation only a short time after the 
invisible blasphemy had pass it. 

then wesley corey, who had taken the glass, cry out that armitage was 
adjust the sprayer which rice held, and that something must be about 
to happen. the crowd stir uneasily, recall that this sprayer was 
expect to give the unseen horror a moment of visibility. two or three 
men shut their eyes, but curtis whateley snatch back the telescope 
and strained his vision to the utmost. he saw that rice, from the 
party's point of vantage above and behind the entity, had an excellent 
chance of spread the potent powder with marvelous effect. 

those without the telescope saw only an instant's flash of gray 
cloud--a cloud about the size of a moderately large building--near the 
top of the mountain. curtis, who had held the instrument, drop it 
with a piercing shriek into the ankle-deep mud of the road. he reeled, 
and would have crumple to the ground had not two or three other 
seize and steady him. all he could do was moan half-inaudibly: 

"oh, oh, great gawd ... _that ... that_...." 

[illustration: "oh, oh, great gawd ... that ... that."] 

there was a pandemonium of questioning, and only henry wheel thought 
to rescue the fallen telescope and wipe it clean of mud. curtis was 
past all coherence, and even isolated reply were almost too much for 
him. 

"bigger 'n a barn ... all made o' squirmin' ropes ... hull thing sort 
o' shaped like a hen's egg bigger'n anything, with dozen o' leg like 
hogshead that haff shut up when they step ... nothin' solid abaout 
it--all like jelly, an' made o' sep'rit wrigglin' ropes pushed clost 
together ... great bulgin' eyes all over it ... ten or twenty maouth 
or trunks a-stickin' aout all along the sides, big as stovepipes, an' 
all a-tossin' an' openin' an' shuttin' ... all gray, with kind blue 
or purple ring ... _an' gawd in heaven--that haff face on top_!..." 

this final memory, whatever it was, prove too much for poor curtis, 
and he collapse completely before he could say more. fred farr and 
will hutchin carry him to the roadside and laid him on the damp 
grass. henry wheeler, trembling, turn the rescue telescope on the 
mountain to see what he might. through the lens were discern 
three tiny figures, apparently running toward the summit as fast as the 
steep incline allowed. only these--nothing more. then everyone notice 
a strange unseasonable noise in the deep valley behind, and even in 
the underbrush of sentinel hill itself. it was the piping of unnumbered 
whippoorwills, and in their shrill chorus there seem to lurk a note 
of tense and evil expectancy. 

earl sawyer now took the telescope and report the three figures as 
standing on the topmost ridge, virtually level with the altar-stone 
but at a considerable distance from it. one figure, he said, seem 
to be raise its hand above its head at rhythmic intervals; and 
as sawyer mention the circumstance the crowd seem to hear a 
faint, half-musical sound from the distance, as if a loud chant 
were accompany the gestures. the weird silhouette on that 
remote peak must have been a spectacle of infinite grotesque 
and impressiveness, but no observer was in a mood for esthetic 
appreciation. "i guess he's sayin' the spell," whisper wheel as 
he snatch back the telescope. the whippoorwill were piping wildly, 
and in a singularly curious irregular rhythm quite unlike that of the 
visible ritual. 

sudden the sunshine seem to lessen without the intervention of any 
discern cloud. it was a very peculiar phenomenon, and was plainly 
marked by all. a rumbling sound seem brew beneath the hills, mixed 
strange with a concordant rumbling which clearly came from the sky. 
lightning flash aloft, and the wonder crowd look in vain for 
the portent of storm. the chant of the men from arkham now became 
unmistakable, and wheel saw through the glass that they were all 
raise their arms in the rhythmic incantation. from some farmhouse far 
away came the frantic bark of dogs. 

the change in the quality of the daylight increased, and the crowd 
gaze about the horizon in wonder. a purplish darkness, born of 
nothing more than a spectral deepen of the sky's blue, pressed down 
upon the rumbling hills. then the lightning flash again, somewhat 
bright than before, and the crowd fancy that it had show a 
certain misty around the altar-stone on the distant height. no 
one, however, had been use the telescope at that instant. the 
whippoorwill continue their irregular pulsation, and the men of 
dunwich brace themselves tense against some imponderable menace with 
which the atmosphere seem surcharged. 

without warning came those deep, cracked, raucous vocal sound which 
will never leave the memory of the stricken group who heard them. not 
from any human throat were they born, for the organ of man can yield 
no such acoustic perversions. rather would one have said they came 
from the pit itself, had not their source been so unmistakable the 
altar-stone on the peak. it is almost erroneous to call them _sounds_ 
at all, since so much of their ghastly, infra-bass timbre spoke to 
dim seat of consciousness and terror far subtle than the ear; yet 
one must do so, since their form was indisputable though vague that 
of half-articulate _words_. they were loud--loud as the rumbling and 
the thunder above which they echoed--yet did they come from no visible 
being. and because imagination might suggest a conjectural source in 
the world of non-visible beings, the huddle crowd at the mountain's 
base huddle still closer, and wince as if in expectation of a blow. 

"_ygnaiih ... ygnaiih ... thflthkh'ngha ... yog-sothoth...._" rang the 
hideous croak out of space. "_y'bthnk ... h'ehye ... n'grkdl'lh...._" 

the speak impulse seem to falter here, as if some frightful 
psychic struggle were go on. henry wheel strained his eye at 
the telescope, but saw only the three grotesque silhouette human 
figures on the peak, all moving their arms furiously in strange 
gesture as their incantation drew near its culmination. from what 
black well of acherontic fear or feeling, from what unplumbed gulf of 
extra-cosmic consciousness or obscure, long-latent heredity, were those 
half-articulate thunder-croakings drawn? presently they began to gather 
renew force and coherence as they grew in stark, utter, ultimate 
frenzy. 

"_eh-ya-ya-ya-yahaah ... e'yaya-yayaaaa ... ngh'aaaa ... ngh'aaaa_ ... 
h'yuh ... h'yuh ... help! help! ... _ff--ff--ff_--father! father! 
yog-sothoth!..." 

but that was all. the pallid group in the road, still reel at 
the _indisputably english_ syllable that had pour thick and 
thunderous down from the frantic vacancy beside that shocking 
altar-stone, were never to hear such syllable again. instead, they 
jump violent at the terrific report which seem to rend the hills; 
the deafening, cataclysm peal whose source, be it inner earth or 
sky, no hearer was ever able to place. a single lightning bolt shot 
from the purple zenith to the altar-stone, and a great tidal wave of 
viewless force and indescribable stench swept down from the hill to 
all the countryside. trees, grass, and underbrush were whip into a 
fury; and the frightened crowd at the mountain's base, weaken by the 
lethal fete that seem about to asphyxiate them, were almost hurl 
off their feet. dogs howl from the distance, green grass and foliage 
wilt to a curious, sickly yellow-gray, and over field and forest were 
scattered the body of dead whippoorwills. 

the stench left quickly, but the vegetation never came right again. 
to this day there is something queer and unholy about the growth on 
and around that fearsome hill. curtis whateley was only just regain 
consciousness when the arkham men came slow down the mountain in the 
beam of a sunlight once more brilliant and untainted. they were grave 
and quiet, and seem shaken by memory and reflection even more 
terrible than those which had reduce the group of native to a state 
of cow quivering. in reply to a jumble of question they only shook 
their head and reaffirme one vital fact. 

"the thing has gone for ever," armitage said. "it has been split up 
into what it was originally made of, and can never exist again. it was 
an impossible in a normal world. only the least fraction was really 
matter in any sense we know. it was like its father--and most of it has 
gone back to him in some vague realm or dimension outside our material 
universe; some vague abyss out of which only the most accursed rite of 
human blasphemy could ever have call him for a moment on the hills." 

there was a brief silence, and in that pause the scattered senses of 
poor curtis whateley began to knit back into a sort of continuity; so 
that he put his hand to his head with a moan. memory seem to pick 
itself up where it had left off, and the horror of the sight that had 
prostrate him burst in upon him again. 

"_oh, oh, my gawd, that haff face ... that haff face on top of it ... 
that face with the red eyes an' crinkly albino hair, an' no chin, like 
the whateleys.... it was a octopus, centipede, spider kind o' thing, 
but they was a haff-shaped man's face on top of it, an' it look like 
wizard whateley's, only it was yard an' yard acrost...._" 

he pause exhausted, as the whole group of native stare in a 
bewilder not quite crystallize into fresh terror. only old zebulon 
whateley, who wandering remember ancient things but who had been 
silent heretofore, spoke aloud. 

"fifteen year' gone," he rambled, "i heerd ol' whateley say as haow 
some day we'd hear a child o' lavinny's a-callin' its father's name on 
the top o' sentinel hill...." 

but joe osborn interrupt him to question the arkham men anew. 

"_what was it, anyhaow_, an' haowever did young wizard whateley call it 
aout o' the air it come from?" 

armitage chose his words carefully. 

"it was--well, it was mostly a kind of force that doesn't belong in our 
part of space; a kind of force that acts and grow and shape itself 
by other law than those of our sort of nature. we have no business 
calling in such things from outside, and only very wicked people 
and very wicked cult ever try to. there was some of it in wilbur 
whateley himself--enough to make a devil and a precocious monster of 
him, and to make his passing out a pretty terrible sight. i'm go 
to burn his accursed diary, and if you men are wise you'll dynamite 
that altar-stone up there, and pull down all the ring of standing 
stone on the other hills. things like that brought down the being 
those whateley were so fond of--the being they were go to let in 
tangible to wipe out the human race and drag the earth off to some 
nameless place for some nameless purpose. 

"but as to this thing we've just sent back--the whateley raise it for 
a terrible part in the doings that were to come. it grew fast and big 
from the same reason that wilbur grew fast and big--but it beat him 
because it had a greater share of the _outsideness_ in it. you needn't 
ask how wilbur call it out of the air. he didn't call it out. _it was 
his twin brother, but it look more like the father than he did._" 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the dunwich horror, by h. p. lovecraft 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the dunwich horror *** 

***** this file should be name 50133-8.txt or 50133-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/1/3/50133/ 

produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
