the project gutenberg ebook, dracula's guest, by bram stoker 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 





title: dracula's guest 


author: bram stoker 



release date: november 20, 2003 [ebook #10150] 
this revision release november 7, 2006. 
most recently updated: november 10, 2014 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook dracula's guest*** 


e-text prepared by bill keir, susan woodring, and the project gutenberg 
online distribute proofread team and revise by jeannie howse 



+------------------------------------------------------+ 
| transcriber's note: | 
| | 
| inconsistent hyphenate and unusual spelling in the | 
| original document have been preserved. | 
| | 
+------------------------------------------------------+ 





dracula's guest 

by 

bram stoker 

first publish 1914 







to 

my son 




contents 


dracula's guest 9 
the judge's house 26 
the squaw 50 
the secret of the grow gold 67 
the gipsy prophecy 84 
the coming of abel behenna 96 
the burial of the rats 120 
a dream of red hand 152 
crooken sands 165 




preface 


a few month before the lament death of my husband--i might say even 
as the shadow of death was over him--he plan three series of short 
story for publication, and the present volume is one of them. to his 
original list of story in this book, i have add an hitherto 
unpublished episode from _dracula_. it was originally excise owe to 
the length of the book, and may prove of interest to the many reader 
of what is considered my husband's most remarkable work. the other 
story have already been publish in english and america 
periodicals. had my husband live longer, he might have seen fit to 
revise this work, which is mainly from the early years of his 
strenuous life. but, as fate has entrust to me the issue of it, i 
consider it fitting and proper to let it go forth practically as it 
was left by him. 

florence bram stoker 




dracula's guest 


when we start for our drive the sun was shining bright on munich, 
and the air was full of the joyous of early summer. just as we 
were about to depart, herr delbrück (the maître d'hôtel of the quatre 
saisons, where i was staying) came down, bareheaded, to the carriage 
and, after wish me a pleasant drive, said to the coachman, still 
holding his hand on the handle of the carriage door: 

'remember you are back by nightfall. the sky looks bright but there is 
a shiver in the north wind that say there may be a sudden storm. but 
i am sure you will not be late.' here he smiled, and added, 'for you 
know what night it is.' 

johann answer with an emphatic, 'ja, mein herr,' and, touching his 
hat, drove off quickly. when we had clear the town, i said, after 
signal to him to stop: 

'tell me, johann, what is tonight?' 

he cross himself, as he answer laconically: 'walpurgis nacht.' 
then he took out his watch, a great, old-fashioned germany silver thing 
as big as a turnip, and look at it, with his eyebrow gather 
together and a little impatient shrug of his shoulders. i realise 
that this was his way of respectful protest against the 
unnecessary delay, and sank back in the carriage, merely motion 
him to proceed. he start off rapidly, as if to make up for lost 
time. every now and then the horse seem to throw up their head and 
sniff the air suspiciously. on such occasion i often look round 
in alarm. the road was pretty bleak, for we were traverse a sort of 
high, wind-swept plateau. as we drove, i saw a road that look but 
little used, and which seem to dip through a little, winding valley. 
it look so inviting that, even at the risk of offend him, i 
call johann to stop--and when he had pull up, i told him i would 
like to drive down that road. he made all sort of excuses, and 
frequent cross himself as he spoke. this somewhat pique my 
curiosity, so i ask him various questions. he answer fencingly, 
and repeatedly look at his watch in protest. finally i said: 

'well, johann, i want to go down this road. i shall not ask you to 
come unless you like; but tell me why you do not like to go, that is 
all i ask.' for answer he seem to throw himself off the box, so 
quick did he reach the ground. then he stretch out his hand 
appealing to me, and implore me not to go. there was just enough of 
english mixed with the germany for me to understand the drift of his 
talk. he seem always just about to tell me something--the very idea 
of which evidently frightened him; but each time he pull himself up, 
saying, as he cross himself: 'walpurgis-nacht!' 

i try to argue with him, but it was difficult to argue with a man 
when i did not know his language. the advantage certainly rest with 
him, for although he began to speak in english, of a very crude and 
broken kind, he always got excited and broke into his native 
tongue--and every time he did so, he look at his watch. then the 
horse became restless and sniff the air. at this he grew very pale, 
and, look around in a frightened way, he sudden jump forward, 
took them by the bridle and led them on some twenty feet. i followed, 
and ask why he had done this. for answer he cross himself, pointed 
to the spot we had left and drew his carriage in the direction of the 
other road, indicate a cross, and said, first in german, then in 
english: 'buried him--him what kill themselves.' 

i remember the old custom of bury suicide at cross-roads: 'ah! i 
see, a suicide. how interesting!' but for the life of me i could not 
make out why the horse were frightened. 

whilst we were talking, we heard a sort of sound between a yelp and a 
bark. it was far away; but the horse got very restless, and it took 
johann all his time to quiet them. he was pale, and said, 'it sound 
like a wolf--but yet there are no wolf here now.' 

'no?' i said, questioning him; 'isn't it long since the wolf were so 
near the city?' 

'long, long,' he answered, 'in the spring and summer; but with the 
snow the wolf have been here not so long.' 

whilst he was pet the horse and try to quiet them, dark cloud 
drift rapid across the sky. the sunshine pass away, and a breath 
of cold wind seem to drift past us. it was only a breath, however, 
and more in the nature of a warning than a fact, for the sun came out 
bright again. johann look under his lift hand at the horizon and 
said: 

'the storm of snow, he come before long time.' then he look at his 
watch again, and, straightway holding his reins firmly--for the horse 
were still paw the ground restless and shake their heads--he 
climb to his box as though the time had come for proceeding on our 
journey. 

i felt a little obstinate and did not at once get into the carriage. 

'tell me,' i said, 'about this place where the road leads,' and i 
pointed down. 

again he cross himself and mumble a prayer, before he answered, 'it 
is unholy.' 

'what is unholy?' i enquired. 

'the village.' 

'then there is a village?' 

'no, no. no one lives there hundred of years.' my curiosity was 
piqued, 'but you said there was a village.' 

'there was.' 

'where is it now?' 

whereupon he burst out into a long story in germany and english, so 
mixed up that i could not quite understand exactly what he said, but 
roughly i gather that long ago, hundred of years, men had die 
there and been bury in their graves; and sound were heard under the 
clay, and when the grave were opened, men and women were found rosy 
with life, and their mouth red with blood. and so, in haste to save 
their lives (aye, and their souls!--and here he cross himself) those 
who were left flee away to other places, where the living lived, and 
the dead were dead and not--not something. he was evidently afraid to 
speak the last words. as he proceed with his narration, he grew more 
and more excited. it seem as if his imagination had got hold of him, 
and he end in a perfect paroxysm of fear--white-faced, perspiring, 
tremble and look round him, as if expect that some dreadful 
presence would manifest itself there in the bright sunshine on the 
open plain. finally, in an agony of desperation, he cried: 

'walpurgis nacht!' and pointed to the carriage for me to get in. all 
my english blood rose at this, and, standing back, i said: 

'you are afraid, johann--you are afraid. go home; i shall return 
alone; the walk will do me good.' the carriage door was open. i took 
from the seat my oak walking-stick--which i always carry on my holiday 
excursions--and closed the door, point back to munich, and said, 
'go home, johann--walpurgis-nacht doesn't concern englishmen.' 

the horse were now more restive than ever, and johann was try to 
hold them in, while excited implore me not to do anything so 
foolish. i pity the poor fellow, he was deep in earnest; but all 
the same i could not help laughing. his english was quite gone now. in 
his anxiety he had forgotten that his only means of making me 
understand was to talk my language, so he jabber away in his native 
german. it began to be a little tedious. after give the direction, 
'home!' i turn to go down the cross-road into the valley. 

with a despairing gesture, johann turn his horse towards munich. i 
lean on my stick and look after him. he went slow along the road 
for a while: then there came over the crest of the hill a man tall and 
thin. i could see so much in the distance. when he drew near the 
horses, they began to jump and kick about, then to scream with terror. 
johann could not hold them in; they bolt down the road, running away 
madly. i watch them out of sight, then look for the stranger, but 
i found that he, too, was gone. 

with a light heart i turn down the side road through the deepen 
valley to which johann had objected. there was not the slightest 
reason, that i could see, for his objection; and i daresay i tramp 
for a couple of hour without thinking of time or distance, and 
certainly without seeing a person or a house. so far as the place was 
concerned, it was desolate itself. but i did not notice this 
particularly till, on turning a bend in the road, i came upon a 
scattered fringe of wood; then i recognise that i had been impress 
unconscious by the desolate of the region through which i had 
passed. 

i sat down to rest myself, and began to look around. it struck me that 
it was considerably cold than it had been at the commencement of my 
walk--a sort of sigh sound seem to be around me, with, now and 
then, high overhead, a sort of muffle roar. look upwards i notice 
that great thick cloud were drift rapid across the sky from 
north to south at a great height. there were sign of coming storm in 
some lofty stratum of the air. i was a little chilly, and, thinking 
that it was the sitting still after the exercise of walking, i resume 
my journey. 

the ground i pass over was now much more picturesque. there were no 
striking object that the eye might single out; but in all there was a 
charm of beauty. i took little heed of time and it was only when the 
deepen twilight forced itself upon me that i began to think of how 
i should find my way home. the bright of the day had gone. the air 
was cold, and the drift of cloud high overhead was more marked. 
they were accompany by a sort of far-away rush sound, through 
which seem to come at interval that mysterious cry which the driver 
had said came from a wolf. for a while i hesitated. i had said i would 
see the desert village, so on i went, and presently came on a wide 
stretch of open country, shut in by hill all around. their side were 
cover with tree which spread down to the plain, dotting, in clumps, 
the gentle slope and hollow which show here and there. i follow 
with my eye the winding of the road, and saw that it curve close to 
one of the densest of these clump and was lost behind it. 

as i look there came a cold shiver in the air, and the snow began to 
fall. i thought of the mile and mile of bleak country i had passed, 
and then hurried on to seek the shelter of the wood in front. dark 
and dark grew the sky, and fast and heavy fell the snow, till 
the earth before and around me was a glisten white carpet the 
further edge of which was lost in misty vagueness. the road was here 
but crude, and when on the level its boundary were not so marked, as 
when it pass through the cuttings; and in a little while i found 
that i must have stray from it, for i miss underfoot the hard 
surface, and my feet sank deep in the grass and moss. then the wind 
grew strong and blew with ever increase force, till i was fain to 
run before it. the air became icy-cold, and in spite of my exercise i 
began to suffer. the snow was now fall so thick and whirl 
around me in such rapid eddy that i could hardly keep my eyes open. 
every now and then the heaven were torn asunder by vivid lightning, 
and in the flash i could see ahead of me a great mass of trees, 
chiefly yew and cypress all heavy coat with snow. 

i was soon amongst the shelter of the trees, and there, in comparative 
silence, i could hear the rush of the wind high overhead. presently 
the black of the storm had become merge in the dark of the 
night. by-and-by the storm seem to be passing away: it now only came 
in fierce puff or blasts. at such moments the weird sound of the 
wolf appear to be echo by many similar sound around me. 

now and again, through the black mass of drift cloud, came a 
straggle ray of moonlight, which lit up the expanse, and show me 
that i was at the edge of a dense mass of cypress and yew trees. as 
the snow had cease to fall, i walk out from the shelter and began 
to investigate more closely. it appear to me that, amongst so many 
old foundations as i had passed, there might be still standing a house 
in which, though in ruins, i could find some sort of shelter for a 
while. as i skirt the edge of the copse, i found that a low wall 
encircle it, and following this i presently found an opening. here 
the cypress form an alley leading up to a square mass of some kind 
of building. just as i caught sight of this, however, the drift 
cloud obscure the moon, and i pass up the path in darkness. the 
wind must have grown colder, for i felt myself shiver as i walked; but 
there was hope of shelter, and i grope my way blind on. 

i stopped, for there was a sudden stillness. the storm had passed; 
and, perhaps in sympathy with nature's silence, my heart seem to 
cease to beat. but this was only momentarily; for sudden the 
moonlight broke through the clouds, showing me that i was in a 
graveyard, and that the square object before me was a great massive 
tomb of marble, as white as the snow that lay on and all around it. 
with the moonlight there came a fierce sigh of the storm, which 
appear to resume its course with a long, low howl, as of many dogs 
or wolves. i was awed and shocked, and felt the cold perceptible grow 
upon me till it seem to grip me by the heart. then while the flood 
of moonlight still fell on the marble tomb, the storm gave further 
evidence of renewing, as though it was return on its track. 
impel by some sort of fascination, i approach the sepulchre to 
see what it was, and why such a thing stood alone in such a place. i 
walk around it, and read, over the doric door, in german: 

countess dolingen of gratz 
in styria 
sought and found death 
1801 

on the top of the tomb, seemingly driven through the solid marble--for 
the structure was compose of a few vast block of stone--was a great 
iron spike or stake. on go to the back i saw, graven in great 
russia letters: 

'the dead travel fast.' 

there was something so weird and uncanny about the whole thing that it 
gave me a turn and made me feel quite faint. i began to wish, for the 
first time, that i had taken johann's advice. here a thought struck 
me, which came under almost mysterious circumstances and with a 
terrible shock. this was walpurgi night! 

walpurgi night, when, according to the belief of million of people, 
the devil was abroad--when the grave were open and the dead came 
forth and walked. when all evil things of earth and air and water held 
revel. this very place the driver had specially shunned. this was the 
depopulate village of century ago. this was where the suicide lay; 
and this was the place where i was alone--unmanned, shiver with 
cold in a shroud of snow with a wild storm gathering again upon me! it 
took all my philosophy, all the religion i had been taught, all my 
courage, not to collapse in a paroxysm of fright. 

and now a perfect tornado burst upon me. the ground shook as though 
thousand of horse thunder across it; and this time the storm bore 
on its icy wings, not snow, but great hailstone which drove with such 
violence that they might have come from the thong of balearic 
slingers--hailstones that beat down leaf and branch and made the 
shelter of the cypress of no more avail than though their stem were 
standing-corn. at the first i had rush to the nearest tree; but i 
was soon fain to leave it and seek the only spot that seem to afford 
refuge, the deep doric doorway of the marble tomb. there, crouch 
against the massive bronze door, i gain a certain amount of 
protection from the beating of the hailstones, for now they only drove 
against me as they ricochet from the ground and the side of the 
marble. 

as i lean against the door, it move slightly and open inwards. 
the shelter of even a tomb was welcome in that pitiless tempest, and i 
was about to enter it when there came a flash of forked-lightning that 
lit up the whole expanse of the heavens. in the instant, as i am a 
living man, i saw, as my eyes were turn into the dark of the 
tomb, a beautiful woman, with round cheek and red lips, seemingly 
sleep on a bier. as the thunder broke overhead, i was grasp as by 
the hand of a giant and hurl out into the storm. the whole thing was 
so sudden that, before i could realise the shock, moral as well as 
physical, i found the hailstone beating me down. at the same time i 
had a strange, dominate feeling that i was not alone. i look 
towards the tomb. just then there came another blind flash, which 
seem to strike the iron stake that surmount the tomb and to pour 
through to the earth, blast and crumble the marble, as in a burst 
of flame. the dead woman rose for a moment of agony, while she was 
lap in the flame, and her bitter scream of pain was drown in the 
thundercrash. the last thing i heard was this mingle of dreadful 
sound, as again i was seize in the giant-grasp and drag away, 
while the hailstone beat on me, and the air around seem reverberant 
with the howling of wolves. the last sight that i remember was a 
vague, white, moving mass, as if all the grave around me had sent out 
the phantom of their sheeted-dead, and that they were close in on 
me through the white cloudy of the driving hail. 

* * * * * 

gradual there came a sort of vague beginning of consciousness; then 
a sense of weary that was dreadful. for a time i remember 
nothing; but slow my senses returned. my feet seem positively 
rack with pain, yet i could not move them. they seem to be numbed. 
there was an icy feeling at the back of my neck and all down my spine, 
and my ears, like my feet, were dead, yet in torment; but there was in 
my breast a sense of warmth which was, by comparison, delicious. it 
was as a nightmare--a physical nightmare, if one may use such an 
expression; for some heavy weight on my chest made it difficult for me 
to breathe. 

this period of semi-lethargy seem to remain a long time, and as it 
fade away i must have slept or swooned. then came a sort of loathing, 
like the first stage of sea-sickness, and a wild desire to be free 
from something--i knew not what. a vast still envelop me, as 
though all the world were asleep or dead--only broken by the low 
pant as of some animal close to me. i felt a warm rasp at my 
throat, then came a consciousness of the awful truth, which chill me 
to the heart and sent the blood surge up through my brain. some 
great animal was lie on me and now licking my throat. i fear to 
stir, for some instinct of prudence bade me lie still; but the brute 
seem to realise that there was now some change in me, for it raise 
its head. through my eyelash i saw above me the two great flaming 
eyes of a gigantic wolf. its sharp white teeth gleam in the gape 
red mouth, and i could feel its hot breath fierce and acrid upon me. 

for another spell of time i remember no more. then i became 
conscious of a low growl, follow by a yelp, renew again and again. 
then, seemingly very far away, i heard a 'holloa! holloa!' as of many 
voice calling in unison. cautious i raise my head and look in 
the direction whence the sound came; but the cemetery block my view. 
the wolf still continue to yelp in a strange way, and a red glare 
began to move round the grove of cypresses, as though following the 
sound. as the voice drew closer, the wolf yelp fast and louder. i 
fear to make either sound or motion. near came the red glow, over 
the white pall which stretch into the dark around me. then all 
at once from beyond the tree there came at a trot a troop of horsemen 
bearing torches. the wolf rose from my breast and made for the 
cemetery. i saw one of the horsemen (soldiers by their cap and their 
long military cloaks) raise his carbine and take aim. a companion 
knock up his arm, and i heard the ball whizz over my head. he had 
evidently taken my body for that of the wolf. another sighted the 
animal as it slunk away, and a shot followed. then, at a gallop, the 
troop rode forward--some towards me, other following the wolf as it 
disappear amongst the snow-clad cypresses. 

as they drew near i try to move, but was powerless, although i 
could see and hear all that went on around me. two or three of the 
soldier jump from their horse and knelt beside me. one of them 
raise my head, and placed his hand over my heart. 

'good news, comrades!' he cried. 'his heart still beats!' 

then some brandy was pour down my throat; it put vigour into me, and 
i was able to open my eyes fully and look around. lights and shadow 
were moving among the trees, and i heard men call to one another. they 
drew together, utter frightened exclamations; and the lights 
flash as the other came pour out of the cemetery pell-mell, like 
men possessed. when the further one came close to us, those who were 
around me ask them eagerly: 

'well, have you found him?' 

the reply rang out hurriedly: 

'no! no! come away quick--quick! this is no place to stay, and on this 
of all nights!' 

'what was it?' was the question, ask in all manner of keys. the 
answer came variously and all indefinitely as though the men were 
move by some common impulse to speak, yet were restrained by some 
common fear from give their thoughts. 

'it--it--indeed!' gibber one, whose wit had plainly given out for 
the moment. 

'a wolf--and yet not a wolf!' another put in shudderingly. 

'no use try for him without the sacred bullet,' a third remark in 
a more ordinary manner. 

'serve us right for coming out on this night! truly we have earn 
our thousand marks!' were the ejaculation of a fourth. 

'there was blood on the broken marble,' another said after a 
pause--'the lightning never brought that there. and for him--is he 
safe? look at his throat! see, comrades, the wolf has been lie on 
him and keeping his blood warm.' 

the officer look at my throat and replied: 

'he is all right; the skin is not pierced. what do it all mean? we 
should never have found him but for the yelp of the wolf.' 

'what became of it?' ask the man who was holding up my head, and who 
seem the least panic-stricken of the party, for his hand were 
steady and without tremor. on his sleeve was the chevron of a petty 
officer. 

'it went to its home,' answer the man, whose long face was pallid, 
and who actually shook with terror as he glance around him fearfully. 
'there are grave enough there in which it may lie. come, 
comrades--come quickly! let us leave this cursed spot.' 

the officer raise me to a sitting posture, as he utter a word of 
command; then several men placed me upon a horse. he sprang to the 
saddle behind me, took me in his arms, gave the word to advance; and, 
turning our face away from the cypresses, we rode away in swift, 
military order. 

as yet my tongue refuse its office, and i was perforce silent. i must 
have fallen asleep; for the next thing i remember was finding myself 
standing up, support by a soldier on each side of me. it was almost 
broad daylight, and to the north a red streak of sunlight was 
reflected, like a path of blood, over the waste of snow. the officer 
was telling the men to say nothing of what they had seen, except that 
they found an english stranger, guarded by a large dog. 

'dog! that was no dog,' cut in the man who had exhibit such fear. 'i 
think i know a wolf when i see one.' 

the young officer answer calmly: 'i said a dog.' 

'dog!' reiterate the other ironically. it was evident that his 
courage was rising with the sun; and, point to me, he said, 'look 
at his throat. is that the work of a dog, master?' 

instinctive i raise my hand to my throat, and as i touched it i 
cry out in pain. the men crowded round to look, some stoop down 
from their saddles; and again there came the calm voice of the young 
officer: 

'a dog, as i said. if aught else were said we should only be laugh 
at.' 

i was then mount behind a trooper, and we rode on into the suburbs 
of munich. here we came across a stray carriage, into which i was 
lifted, and it was driven off to the quatre saisons--the young officer 
accompany me, whilst a trooper follow with his horse, and the 
other rode off to their barracks. 

when we arrived, herr delbrück rush so quick down the steps to 
meet me, that it was apparent he had been watch within. taking me 
by both hand he solicitous led me in. the officer salute me and 
was turning to withdraw, when i recognise his purpose, and insist 
that he should come to my rooms. over a glass of wine i warm thank 
him and his brave comrade for saving me. he reply simply that he 
was more than glad, and that herr delbrück had at the first taken 
steps to make all the searching party pleased; at which ambiguous 
utterance the maître d'hôtel smiled, while the officer plead duty 
and withdrew. 

'but herr delbrück,' i enquired, 'how and why was it that the soldier 
search for me?' 

he shrug his shoulders, as if in depreciate of his own deed, as 
he replied: 

'i was so fortunate as to obtain leave from the commander of the 
regiment in which i served, to ask for volunteers.' 

'but how did you know i was lost?' i asked. 

'the driver came hither with the remains of his carriage, which had 
been upset when the horse ran away.' 

'but surely you would not send a search-party of soldier merely on 
this account?' 

'oh, no!' he answered; 'but even before the coachman arrived, i had 
this telegram from the boyar whose guest you are,' and he took from 
his pocket a telegram which he hand to me, and i read: 


_bistritz_. 

be careful of my guest--his safety is most precious to me. 
should aught happen to him, or if he be missed, spare nothing 
to find him and ensure his safety. he is english and therefore 
adventurous. there are often danger from snow and wolf and 
night. lose not a moment if you suspect harm to him. i answer 
your zeal with my fortune.--_dracula_. 

as i held the telegram in my hand, the room seem to whirl around me; 
and, if the attentive maître d'hôtel had not caught me, i think i 
should have fallen. there was something so strange in all this, 
something so weird and impossible to imagine, that there grew on me a 
sense of my being in some way the sport of opposite forces--the mere 
vague idea of which seem in a way to paralyse me. i was certainly 
under some form of mysterious protection. from a distant country had 
come, in the very nick of time, a message that took me out of the 
danger of the snow-sleep and the jaws of the wolf. 




the judge's house 


when the time for his examination drew near malcolm malcolmson made up 
his mind to go somewhere to read by himself. he fear the attraction 
of the seaside, and also he fear completely rural isolation, for of 
old he knew it charms, and so he determined to find some unpretentious 
little town where there would be nothing to distract him. he refrain 
from ask suggestion from any of his friends, for he argue that 
each would recommend some place of which he had knowledge, and where 
he had already acquaintances. as malcolmson wish to avoid friends he 
had no wish to encumber himself with the attention of friends' 
friends, and so he determined to look out for a place for himself. he 
packed a portmanteau with some clothes and all the books he required, 
and then took ticket for the first name on the local time-table which 
he did not know. 

when at the end of three hours' journey he alight at benchurch, he 
felt satisfy that he had so far obliterate his track as to be sure 
of have a peaceful opportunity of pursue his studies. he went 
straight to the one inn which the sleepy little place contained, and 
put up for the night. benchurch was a market town, and once in three 
week was crowded to excess, but for the remainder of the twenty-one 
days it was as attractive as a desert. malcolmson look around the 
day after his arrival to try to find quarters more isolated than even 
so quiet an inn as 'the good traveller' afforded. there was only one 
place which took his fancy, and it certainly satisfy his wildest 
idea regarding quiet; in fact, quiet was not the proper word to apply 
to it--desolation was the only term convey any suitable idea of its 
isolation. it was an old rambling, heavy-built house of the jacobean 
style, with heavy gable and windows, unusually small, and set higher 
than was customary in such houses, and was surround with a high 
brick wall massive built. indeed, on examination, it look more 
like a fortify house than an ordinary dwelling. but all these things 
pleased malcolmson. 'here,' he thought, 'is the very spot i have been 
look for, and if i can get opportunity of use it i shall be 
happy.' his joy was increase when he realise beyond doubt that it 
was not at present inhabited. 

from the post-office he got the name of the agent, who was rarely 
surprise at the application to rent a part of the old house. mr. 
carnford, the local lawyer and agent, was a genial old gentleman, and 
frankly confessed his delight at anyone being willing to live in the 
house. 

'to tell you the truth,' said he, 'i should be only too happy, on 
behalf of the owners, to let anyone have the house rent free for a 
term of years if only to accustom the people here to see it inhabited. 
it has been so long empty that some kind of absurd prejudice has grown 
up about it, and this can be best put down by its occupation--if 
only,' he add with a sly glance at malcolmson, 'by a scholar like 
yourself, who wants its quiet for a time.' 

malcolmson thought it needless to ask the agent about the 'absurd 
prejudice'; he knew he would get more information, if he should 
require it, on that subject from other quarters. he paid his three 
months' rent, got a receipt, and the name of an old woman who would 
probably undertake to 'do' for him, and came away with the key in his 
pocket. he then went to the landlady of the inn, who was a cheerful 
and most kindly person, and ask her advice as to such stores and 
provisions as he would be likely to require. she threw up her hand in 
amaze when he told her where he was go to settle himself. 

'not in the judge's house!' she said, and grew pale as she spoke. he 
explain the locality of the house, saying that he did not know its 
name. when he had finished she answered: 

'aye, sure enough--sure enough the very place! it is the judge's house 
sure enough.' he ask her to tell him about the place, why so called, 
and what there was against it. she told him that it was so call 
locally because it had been many years before--how long she could not 
say, as she was herself from another part of the country, but she 
thought it must have been a hundred years or more--the abode of a 
judge who was held in great terror on account of his harsh sentence 
and his hostility to prisoner at assizes. as to what there was 
against the house itself she could not tell. she had often asked, but 
no one could inform her; but there was a general feeling that there 
was _something_, and for her own part she would not take all the money 
in drinkwater's bank and stay in the house an hour by herself. then 
she apologise to malcolmson for her disturb talk. 

'it is too bad of me, sir, and you--and a young gentlemen, too--if you 
will pardon me saying it, go to live there all alone. if you were 
my boy--and you'll excuse me for saying it--you wouldn't sleep there a 
night, not if i had to go there myself and pull the big alarm bell 
that's on the roof!' the good creature was so manifest in earnest, 
and was so kindly in her intentions, that malcolmson, although amused, 
was touched. he told her kindly how much he appreciate her interest 
in him, and added: 

'but, my dear mrs. witham, indeed you need not be concerned about me! 
a man who is reading for the mathematics tripos has too much to think 
of to be disturbed by any of these mysterious "somethings", and his 
work is of too exact and prosaic a kind to allow of his have any 
corner in his mind for mystery of any kind. harmonic progression, 
permutation and combinations, and elliptic function have sufficient 
mystery for me!' mrs. witham kindly undertook to see after his 
commissions, and he went himself to look for the old woman who had 
been recommend to him. when he return to the judge's house with 
her, after an interval of a couple of hours, he found mrs. witham 
herself wait with several men and boys carry parcels, and an 
upholsterer's man with a bed in a car, for she said, though table and 
chair might be all very well, a bed that hadn't been air for mayhap 
fifty years was not proper for young bone to lie on. she was 
evidently curious to see the inside of the house; and though 
manifest so afraid of the 'somethings' that at the slightest sound 
she clutch on to malcolmson, whom she never left for a moment, went 
over the whole place. 

after his examination of the house, malcolmson decided to take up his 
abode in the great dining-room, which was big enough to serve for all 
his requirements; and mrs. witham, with the aid of the charwoman, 
mrs. dempster, proceed to arrange matters. when the hamper were 
brought in and unpacked, malcolmson saw that with much kind 
forethought she had sent from her own kitchen sufficient provisions to 
last for a few days. before go she express all sort of kind 
wishes; and at the door turn and said: 

'and perhaps, sir, as the room is big and draughty it might be well to 
have one of those big screen put round your bed at night--though, 
truth to tell, i would die myself if i were to be so shut in with all 
kind of--of "things", that put their head round the sides, or over 
the top, and look on me!' the image which she had call up was too 
much for her nerves, and she flee incontinently. 

mrs. dempster sniff in a superior manner as the landlady 
disappeared, and remark that for her own part she wasn't afraid of 
all the bogie in the kingdom. 

'i'll tell you what it is, sir,' she said; 'bogies is all kind and 
sort of things--except bogies! rats and mice, and beetles; and creaky 
doors, and loose slates, and broken panes, and stiff drawer handles, 
that stay out when you pull them and then fall down in the middle of 
the night. look at the wainscot of the room! it is old--hundreds of 
years old! do you think there's no rats and beetle there! and do you 
imagine, sir, that you won't see none of them? rats is bogies, i tell 
you, and bogie is rats; and don't you get to think anything else!' 

'mrs. dempster,' said malcolmson gravely, making her a polite bow, 
'you know more than a senior wrangler! and let me say, that, as a mark 
of esteem for your indubitable sound of head and heart, i shall, 
when i go, give you possession of this house, and let you stay here by 
yourself for the last two month of my tenancy, for four week will 
serve my purpose.' 

'thank you kindly, sir!' she answered, 'but i couldn't sleep away 
from home a night. i am in greenhow's charity, and if i slept a night 
away from my rooms i should lose all i have got to live on. the rule 
is very strict; and there's too many watch for a vacancy for me to 
run any risk in the matter. only for that, sir, i'd gladly come here 
and attend on you altogether during your stay.' 

'my good woman,' said malcolmson hastily, 'i have come here on purpose 
to obtain solitude; and believe me that i am grateful to the late 
greenhow for have so organised his admirable charity--whatever it 
is--that i am perforce deny the opportunity of suffering from such a 
form of temptation! saint anthony himself could not be more rigid on 
the point!' 

the old woman laugh harshly. 'ah, you young gentlemen,' she said, 
'you don't fear for naught; and belike you'll get all the solitude you 
want here.' she set to work with her cleaning; and by nightfall, when 
malcolmson return from his walk--he always had one of his books to 
study as he walked--he found the room swept and tidied, a fire burning 
in the old hearth, the lamp lit, and the table spread for supper with 
mrs. witham's excellent fare. 'this is comfort, indeed,' he said, as 
he rub his hands. 

when he had finished his supper, and lift the tray to the other end 
of the great oak dining-table, he got out his books again, put fresh 
wood on the fire, trim his lamp, and set himself down to a spell of 
real hard work. he went on without pause till about eleven o'clock, 
when he knock off for a bit to fix his fire and lamp, and to make 
himself a cup of tea. he had always been a tea-drinker, and during his 
college life had sat late at work and had taken tea late. the rest 
was a great luxury to him, and he enjoy it with a sense of 
delicious, voluptuous ease. the renew fire leap and sparkled, and 
threw quaint shadow through the great old room; and as he sip his 
hot tea he revel in the sense of isolation from his kind. then it 
was that he began to notice for the first time what a noise the rats 
were making. 

'surely,' he thought, 'they cannot have been at it all the time i was 
reading. had they been, i must have notice it!' presently, when the 
noise increased, he satisfy himself that it was really new. it was 
evident that at first the rats had been frightened at the presence of 
a stranger, and the light of fire and lamp; but that as the time went 
on they had grown bold and were now disport themselves as was 
their wont. 

how busy they were! and hark to the strange noises! up and down behind 
the old wainscot, over the ceiling and under the floor they raced, and 
gnawed, and scratched! malcolmson smile to himself as he recall to 
mind the saying of mrs. dempster, 'bogies is rats, and rats is 
bogies!' the tea began to have its effect of intellectual and nervous 
stimulus, he saw with joy another long spell of work to be done before 
the night was past, and in the sense of security which it gave him, he 
allow himself the luxury of a good look round the room. he took his 
lamp in one hand, and went all around, wonder that so quaint and 
beautiful an old house had been so long neglected. the carving of the 
oak on the panel of the wainscot was fine, and on and round the door 
and window it was beautiful and of rare merit. there were some old 
pictures on the walls, but they were coat so thick with dust and 
dirt that he could not distinguish any detail of them, though he held 
his lamp as high as he could over his head. here and there as he went 
round he saw some crack or hole block for a moment by the face of a 
rat with its bright eyes glittering in the light, but in an instant it 
was gone, and a squeak and a scamper followed. the thing that most 
struck him, however, was the rope of the great alarm bell on the roof, 
which hung down in a corner of the room on the right-hand side of the 
fireplace. he pull up close to the hearth a great high-backed carve 
oak chair, and sat down to his last cup of tea. when this was done he 
made up the fire, and went back to his work, sitting at the corner of 
the table, have the fire to his left. for a little while the rats 
disturbed him somewhat with their perpetual scampering, but he got 
accustomed to the noise as one do to the ticking of a clock or to 
the roar of moving water; and he became so immerse in his work that 
everything in the world, except the problem which he was try to 
solve, pass away from him. 

he sudden look up, his problem was still unsolved, and there was 
in the air that sense of the hour before the dawn, which is so dread 
to doubtful life. the noise of the rats had ceased. indeed it seem 
to him that it must have cease but lately and that it was the sudden 
cessation which had disturbed him. the fire had fallen low, but still 
it threw out a deep red glow. as he look he start in spite of his 
_sang froid_. 

there on the great high-backed carve oak chair by the right side of 
the fireplace sat an enormous rat, steady glaring at him with 
baleful eyes. he made a motion to it as though to hunt it away, but it 
did not stir. then he made the motion of throw something. still it 
did not stir, but show its great white teeth angrily, and its cruel 
eyes shone in the lamplight with an add vindictiveness. 

malcolmson felt amazed, and seize the poker from the hearth ran at 
it to kill it. before, however, he could strike it, the rat, with a 
squeak that sound like the concentration of hate, jump upon the 
floor, and, running up the rope of the alarm bell, disappear in the 
dark beyond the range of the green-shaded lamp. instantly, strange 
to say, the noisy scamper of the rats in the wainscot began again. 

by this time malcolmson's mind was quite off the problem; and as a 
shrill cock-crow outside told him of the approach of morning, he went 
to bed and to sleep. 

he slept so sound that he was not even wake by mrs. dempster coming 
in to make up his room. it was only when she had tidy up the place 
and got his breakfast ready and tap on the screen which closed in 
his bed that he woke. he was a little tired still after his night's 
hard work, but a strong cup of tea soon freshen him up and, taking 
his book, he went out for his morning walk, bring with him a few 
sandwich lest he should not care to return till dinner time. he 
found a quiet walk between high elm some way outside the town, and 
here he spent the greater part of the day study his laplace. on his 
return he look in to see mrs. witham and to thank her for her 
kindness. when she saw him coming through the diamond-paned bay window 
of her sanctum she came out to meet him and ask him in. she look 
at him searching and shook her head as she said: 

'you must not overdo it, sir. you are pale this morning than you 
should be. too late hour and too hard work on the brain isn't good 
for any man! but tell me, sir, how did you pass the night? well, i 
hope? but my heart! sir, i was glad when mrs. dempster told me this 
morning that you were all right and sleep sound when she went in.' 

'oh, i was all right,' he answer smiling, 'the "somethings" didn't 
worry me, as yet. only the rats; and they had a circus, i tell you, 
all over the place. there was one wicked look old devil that sat up 
on my own chair by the fire, and wouldn't go till i took the poker to 
him, and then he ran up the rope of the alarm bell and got to 
somewhere up the wall or the ceiling--i couldn't see where, it was so 
dark.' 

'mercy on us,' said mrs. witham, 'an old devil, and sitting on a chair 
by the fireside! take care, sir! take care! there's many a true word 
spoken in jest.' 

'how do you mean? pon my word i don't understand.' 

'an old devil! the old devil, perhaps. there! sir, you needn't laugh,' 
for malcolmson had broken into a hearty peal. 'you young folks think 
it easy to laugh at things that make old one shudder. never mind, 
sir! never mind! please god, you'll laugh all the time. it's what i 
wish you myself!' and the good lady beam all over in sympathy with 
his enjoyment, her fear gone for a moment. 

'oh, forgive me!' said malcolmson presently. 'don't think me rude; but 
the idea was too much for me--that the old devil himself was on the 
chair last night!' and at the thought he laugh again. then he went 
home to dinner. 

this evening the scamper of the rats began earlier; indeed it had 
been go on before his arrival, and only cease whilst his presence 
by its fresh disturbed them. after dinner he sat by the fire for a 
while and had a smoke; and then, have clear his table, began to 
work as before. tonight the rats disturbed him more than they had done 
on the previous night. how they scamper up and down and under and 
over! how they squeaked, and scratched, and gnawed! how they, get 
bold by degrees, came to the mouth of their hole and to the chink 
and crack and cranny in the wainscot till their eyes shone like 
tiny lamp as the firelight rose and fell. but to him, now doubtless 
accustomed to them, their eyes were not wicked; only their playful 
touched him. sometimes the boldest of them made sally out on the 
floor or along the moulding of the wainscot. now and again as they 
disturbed him malcolmson made a sound to frighten them, smite the 
table with his hand or give a fierce 'hsh, hsh,' so that they flee 
straightway to their holes. 

and so the early part of the night wore on; and despite the noise 
malcolmson got more and more immerse in his work. 

all at once he stopped, as on the previous night, being overcome by a 
sudden sense of silence. there was not the faintest sound of gnaw, or 
scratch, or squeak. the silence was as of the grave. he remember the 
odd occurrence of the previous night, and instinctive he look at 
the chair standing close by the fireside. and then a very odd 
sensation thrill through him. 

there, on the great old high-backed carve oak chair beside the 
fireplace sat the same enormous rat, steady glaring at him with 
baleful eyes. 

instinctive he took the nearest thing to his hand, a book of 
logarithms, and flung it at it. the book was badly aim and the rat 
did not stir, so again the poker performance of the previous night was 
repeated; and again the rat, being close pursued, flee up the rope 
of the alarm bell. strange too, the departure of this rat was 
instantly follow by the renewal of the noise made by the general rat 
community. on this occasion, as on the previous one, malcolmson could 
not see at what part of the room the rat disappeared, for the green 
shade of his lamp left the upper part of the room in darkness, and the 
fire had burn low. 

on look at his watch he found it was close on midnight; and, not 
sorry for the _divertissement_, he made up his fire and made himself 
his nightly pot of tea. he had got through a good spell of work, and 
thought himself entitle to a cigarette; and so he sat on the great 
oak chair before the fire and enjoy it. whilst smoking he began to 
think that he would like to know where the rat disappear to, for he 
had certain idea for the morrow not entire disconnected with a 
rat-trap. accordingly he lit another lamp and placed it so that it 
would shine well into the right-hand corner of the wall by the 
fireplace. then he got all the books he had with him, and placed them 
handy to throw at the vermin. finally he lift the rope of the alarm 
bell and placed the end of it on the table, fix the extreme end 
under the lamp. as he handle it he could not help notice how 
pliable it was, especially for so strong a rope, and one not in use. 
'you could hang a man with it,' he thought to himself. when his 
preparation were made he look around, and said complacently: 

'there now, my friend, i think we shall learn something of you this 
time!' he began his work again, and though as before somewhat 
disturbed at first by the noise of the rats, soon lost himself in his 
proposition and problems. 

again he was call to his immediate surroundings suddenly. this time 
it might not have been the sudden silence only which took his 
attention; there was a slight movement of the rope, and the lamp 
moved. without stirring, he look to see if his pile of books was 
within range, and then cast his eye along the rope. as he look he 
saw the great rat drop from the rope on the oak arm-chair and sit 
there glaring at him. he raise a book in his right hand, and taking 
careful aim, flung it at the rat. the latter, with a quick movement, 
sprang aside and dodge the missile. he then took another book, and a 
third, and flung them one after another at the rat, but each time 
unsuccessfully. at last, as he stood with a book poised in his hand to 
throw, the rat squeak and seem afraid. this made malcolmson more 
than ever eager to strike, and the book flew and struck the rat a 
resounding blow. it gave a terrify squeak, and turning on his 
pursuer a look of terrible malevolence, ran up the chair-back and made 
a great jump to the rope of the alarm bell and ran up it like 
lightning. the lamp rock under the sudden strain, but it was a heavy 
one and did not topple over. malcolmson kept his eyes on the rat, and 
saw it by the light of the second lamp leap to a moulding of the 
wainscot and disappear through a hole in one of the great pictures 
which hung on the wall, obscure and invisible through its coating of 
dirt and dust. 

'i shall look up my friend's habitation in the morning,' said the 
student, as he went over to collect his books. 'the third picture from 
the fireplace; i shall not forget.' he picked up the books one by one, 
comment on them as he lift them. '_conic sections_ he do not 
mind, nor _cycloidal oscillations_, nor the _principia_, nor 
_quaternions_, nor _thermodynamics_. now for the book that fetch 
him!' malcolmson took it up and look at it. as he did so he started, 
and a sudden pallor overspread his face. he look round uneasy and 
shiver slightly, as he murmur to himself: 

'the bible my mother gave me! what an odd coincidence.' he sat down to 
work again, and the rats in the wainscot renew their gambols. they 
did not disturb him, however; somehow their presence gave him a sense 
of companionship. but he could not attend to his work, and after 
strive to master the subject on which he was engaged gave it up in 
despair, and went to bed as the first streak of dawn stole in through 
the eastern window. 

he slept heavy but uneasily, and dream much; and when mrs. 
dempster woke him late in the morning he seem ill at ease, and for a 
few minutes did not seem to realise exactly where he was. his first 
request rather surprise the servant. 

'mrs. dempster, when i am out to-day i wish you would get the steps 
and dust or wash those pictures--specially that one the third from the 
fireplace--i want to see what they are.' 

late in the afternoon malcolmson work at his books in the shade 
walk, and the cheerful of the previous day came back to him as the 
day wore on, and he found that his reading was progress well. he 
had work out to a satisfactory conclusion all the problem which had 
as yet baffle him, and it was in a state of jubilation that he paid a 
visit to mrs. witham at 'the good traveller'. he found a stranger in 
the cosy sitting-room with the landlady, who was introduce to him as 
dr. thornhill. she was not quite at ease, and this, combine with the 
doctor's plunge at once into a series of questions, made malcolmson 
come to the conclusion that his presence was not an accident, so 
without preliminary he said: 

'dr. thornhill, i shall with pleasure answer you any question you may 
choose to ask me if you will answer me one question first.' 

the doctor seem surprised, but he smile and answer at once, 
'done! what is it?' 

'did mrs. witham ask you to come here and see me and advise me?' 

dr. thornhill for a moment was taken aback, and mrs. witham got fiery 
red and turn away; but the doctor was a frank and ready man, and he 
answer at once and openly. 

'she did: but she didn't intend you to know it. i suppose it was my 
clumsy haste that made you suspect. she told me that she did not like 
the idea of your being in that house all by yourself, and that she 
thought you took too much strong tea. in fact, she wants me to advise 
you if possible to give up the tea and the very late hours. i was a 
keen student in my time, so i suppose i may take the liberty of a 
college man, and without offence, advise you not quite as a stranger.' 

malcolmson with a bright smile held out his hand. 'shake! as they say 
in america,' he said. 'i must thank you for your kindness and mrs. 
witham too, and your kindness deserve a return on my part. i promise 
to take no more strong tea--no tea at all till you let me--and i shall 
go to bed tonight at one o'clock at latest. will that do?' 

'capital,' said the doctor. 'now tell us all that you notice in the 
old house,' and so malcolmson then and there told in minute detail all 
that had happen in the last two nights. he was interrupt every now 
and then by some exclamation from mrs. witham, till finally when he 
told of the episode of the bible the landlady's pent-up emotion found 
vent in a shriek; and it was not till a stiff glass of brandy and 
water had been administer that she grew compose again. dr. 
thornhill listen with a face of grow gravity, and when the 
narrative was complete and mrs. witham had been restore he asked: 

'the rat always went up the rope of the alarm bell?' 

'always.' 

'i suppose you know,' said the doctor after a pause, 'what the rope 
is?' 

'no!' 

'it is,' said the doctor slowly, 'the very rope which the hangman use 
for all the victim of the judge's judicial rancour!' here he was 
interrupt by another scream from mrs. witham, and steps had to be 
taken for her recovery. malcolmson have look at his watch, and 
found that it was close to his dinner hour, had gone home before her 
complete recovery. 

when mrs. witham was herself again she almost assail the doctor with 
angry question as to what he meant by putt such horrible idea 
into the poor young man's mind. 'he has quite enough there already to 
upset him,' she added. dr. thornhill replied: 

'my dear madam, i had a distinct purpose in it! i want to draw his 
attention to the bell rope, and to fix it there. it may be that he is 
in a highly overwrought state, and has been study too much, 
although i am bound to say that he seem as sound and healthy a young 
man, mental and bodily, as ever i saw--but then the rats--and that 
suggestion of the devil.' the doctor shook his head and went on. 'i 
would have offer to go and stay the first night with him but that i 
felt sure it would have been a cause of offence. he may get in the 
night some strange fright or hallucination; and if he do i want him 
to pull that rope. all alone as he is it will give us warning, and we 
may reach him in time to be of service. i shall be sitting up pretty 
late tonight and shall keep my ear open. do not be alarm if 
benchurch get a surprise before morning.' 

'oh, doctor, what do you mean? what do you mean?' 

'i mean this; that possibly--nay, more probably--we shall hear the 
great alarm bell from the judge's house tonight,' and the doctor made 
about as effective an exit as could be thought of. 

when malcolmson arrive home he found that it was a little after his 
usual time, and mrs. dempster had gone away--the rule of greenhow's 
charity were not to be neglected. he was glad to see that the place 
was bright and tidy with a cheerful fire and a well-trimmed lamp. the 
evening was cold than might have been expect in april, and a heavy 
wind was blow with such rapidly-increasing strength that there was 
every promise of a storm during the night. for a few minutes after his 
entrance the noise of the rats ceased; but so soon as they became 
accustomed to his presence they began again. he was glad to hear them, 
for he felt once more the feeling of companionship in their noise, and 
his mind ran back to the strange fact that they only cease to 
manifest themselves when that other--the great rat with the baleful 
eyes--came upon the scene. the reading-lamp only was lit and its green 
shade kept the ceiling and the upper part of the room in darkness, so 
that the cheerful light from the hearth spread over the floor and 
shining on the white cloth laid over the end of the table was warm and 
cheery. malcolmson sat down to his dinner with a good appetite and a 
buoyant spirit. after his dinner and a cigarette he sat steady down 
to work, determined not to let anything disturb him, for he remember 
his promise to the doctor, and made up his mind to make the best of 
the time at his disposal. 

for an hour or so he work all right, and then his thought began to 
wander from his books. the actual circumstances around him, the call 
on his physical attention, and his nervous susceptibility were not to 
be denied. by this time the wind had become a gale, and the gale a 
storm. the old house, solid though it was, seem to shake to its 
foundations, and the storm roar and rage through its many chimney 
and its queer old gables, produce strange, unearthly sound in the 
empty rooms and corridors. even the great alarm bell on the roof must 
have felt the force of the wind, for the rope rose and fell slightly, 
as though the bell were move a little from time to time and the 
limber rope fell on the oak floor with a hard and hollow sound. 

as malcolmson listen to it he bethought himself of the doctor's 
words, 'it is the rope which the hangman use for the victim of the 
judge's judicial rancour,' and he went over to the corner of the 
fireplace and took it in his hand to look at it. there seem a sort 
of deadly interest in it, and as he stood there he lost himself for a 
moment in speculation as to who these victim were, and the grim wish 
of the judge to have such a ghastly relic ever under his eyes. as he 
stood there the sway of the bell on the roof still lift the rope 
now and again; but presently there came a new sensation--a sort of 
tremor in the rope, as though something was moving along it. 

look up instinctive malcolmson saw the great rat coming slow 
down towards him, glaring at him steadily. he drop the rope and 
start back with a mutter curse, and the rat turning ran up the 
rope again and disappeared, and at the same instant malcolmson became 
conscious that the noise of the rats, which had cease for a while, 
began again. 

all this set him thinking, and it occur to him that he had not 
investigate the lair of the rat or look at the pictures, as he had 
intended. he lit the other lamp without the shade, and, holding it up 
went and stood opposite the third picture from the fireplace on the 
right-hand side where he had seen the rat disappear on the previous 
night. 

at the first glance he start back so sudden that he almost drop 
the lamp, and a deadly pallor overspread his face. his knee shook, 
and heavy drops of sweat came on his forehead, and he tremble like an 
aspen. but he was young and plucky, and pull himself together, and 
after the pause of a few seconds step forward again, raise the 
lamp, and examine the picture which had been dust and washed, and 
now stood out clearly. 

it was of a judge dress in his robe of scarlet and ermine. his face 
was strong and merciless, evil, crafty, and vindictive, with a sensual 
mouth, hooked nose of ruddy colour, and shaped like the beak of a bird 
of prey. the rest of the face was of a cadaverous colour. the eyes 
were of peculiar brilliance and with a terribly malignant expression. 
as he look at them, malcolmson grew cold, for he saw there the very 
counterpart of the eyes of the great rat. the lamp almost fell from 
his hand, he saw the rat with its baleful eyes peer out through the 
hole in the corner of the picture, and noted the sudden cessation of 
the noise of the other rats. however, he pull himself together, and 
went on with his examination of the picture. 

the judge was seat in a great high-backed carve oak chair, on the 
right-hand side of a great stone fireplace where, in the corner, a 
rope hung down from the ceiling, its end lie coil on the floor. 
with a feeling of something like horror, malcolmson recognise the 
scene of the room as it stood, and gaze around him in an awestruck 
manner as though he expect to find some strange presence behind him. 
then he look over to the corner of the fireplace--and with a loud 
cry he let the lamp fall from his hand. 

there, in the judge's arm-chair, with the rope hanging behind, sat the 
rat with the judge's baleful eyes, now intensify and with a fiendish 
leer. save for the howling of the storm without there was silence. 

the fallen lamp recall malcolmson to himself. fortunately it was of 
metal, and so the oil was not spilt. however, the practical need of 
attend to it settled at once his nervous apprehensions. when he had 
turn it out, he wipe his brow and thought for a moment. 

'this will not do,' he said to himself. 'if i go on like this i shall 
become a crazy fool. this must stop! i promise the doctor i would not 
take tea. faith, he was pretty right! my nerves must have been get 
into a queer state. funny i did not notice it. i never felt better in 
my life. however, it is all right now, and i shall not be such a fool 
again.' 

then he mixed himself a good stiff glass of brandy and water and 
resolute sat down to his work. 

it was nearly an hour when he look up from his book, disturbed by 
the sudden stillness. without, the wind howl and roar loud than 
ever, and the rain drove in sheet against the windows, beating like 
hail on the glass; but within there was no sound whatever save the 
echo of the wind as it roar in the great chimney, and now and then a 
hiss as a few raindrop found their way down the chimney in a lull of 
the storm. the fire had fallen low and had cease to flame, though it 
threw out a red glow. malcolmson listen attentively, and presently 
heard a thin, squeak noise, very faint. it came from the corner of 
the room where the rope hung down, and he thought it was the creak 
of the rope on the floor as the sway of the bell raise and lower 
it. look up, however, he saw in the dim light the great rat 
clinging to the rope and gnawing it. the rope was already nearly 
gnaw through--he could see the lighter colour where the strand were 
laid bare. as he look the job was completed, and the sever end of 
the rope fell clatter on the oaken floor, whilst for an instant the 
great rat remain like a knob or tassel at the end of the rope, which 
now began to sway to and fro. malcolmson felt for a moment another 
pang of terror as he thought that now the possibility of calling the 
outer world to his assistance was cut off, but an intense anger took 
its place, and seize the book he was reading he hurl it at the 
rat. the blow was well aimed, but before the missile could reach him 
the rat drop off and struck the floor with a soft thud. malcolmson 
instantly rush over towards him, but it dart away and disappear 
in the dark of the shadow of the room. malcolmson felt that his 
work was over for the night, and determined then and there to vary the 
monotony of the proceedings by a hunt for the rat, and took off the 
green shade of the lamp so as to insure a wide spread light. as he 
did so the gloom of the upper part of the room was relieved, and in 
the new flood of light, great by comparison with the previous 
darkness, the pictures on the wall stood out boldly. from where he 
stood, malcolmson saw right opposite to him the third picture on the 
wall from the right of the fireplace. he rub his eyes in surprise, 
and then a great fear began to come upon him. 

in the centre of the picture was a great irregular patch of brown 
canvas, as fresh as when it was stretch on the frame. the background 
was as before, with chair and chimney-corner and rope, but the figure 
of the judge had disappeared. 

malcolmson, almost in a chill of horror, turn slow round, and then 
he began to shake and tremble like a man in a palsy. his strength 
seem to have left him, and he was incapable of action or movement, 
hardly even of thought. he could only see and hear. 

there, on the great high-backed carve oak chair sat the judge in his 
robe of scarlet and ermine, with his baleful eyes glaring 
vindictively, and a smile of triumph on the resolute, cruel mouth, as 
he lift with his hand a _black cap_. malcolmson felt as if the 
blood was running from his heart, as one do in moments of prolonged 
suspense. there was a singing in his ears. without, he could hear the 
roar and howl of the tempest, and through it, swept on the storm, came 
the striking of midnight by the great chime in the market place. he 
stood for a space of time that seem to him endless still as a 
statue, and with wide-open, horror-struck eyes, breathless. as the 
clock struck, so the smile of triumph on the judge's face intensified, 
and at the last stroke of midnight he placed the black cap on his 
head. 

slow and deliberate the judge rose from his chair and picked up 
the piece of the rope of the alarm bell which lay on the floor, drew 
it through his hand as if he enjoy its touch, and then deliberate 
began to knot one end of it, fashion it into a noose. this he 
tighten and test with his foot, pull hard at it till he was 
satisfy and then making a running noose of it, which he held in his 
hand. then he began to move along the table on the opposite side to 
malcolmson keeping his eyes on him until he had pass him, when with 
a quick movement he stood in front of the door. malcolmson then began 
to feel that he was trapped, and try to think of what he should do. 
there was some fascination in the judge's eyes, which he never took 
off him, and he had, perforce, to look. he saw the judge 
approach--still keeping between him and the door--and raise the noose 
and throw it towards him as if to entangle him. with a great effort he 
made a quick movement to one side, and saw the rope fall beside him, 
and heard it strike the oaken floor. again the judge raise the noose 
and try to ensnare him, ever keeping his baleful eyes fixed on him, 
and each time by a mighty effort the student just manage to evade it. 
so this went on for many times, the judge seeming never discourage 
nor discompose at failure, but play as a cat do with a mouse. at 
last in despair, which had reach its climax, malcolmson cast a quick 
glance round him. the lamp seem to have blaze up, and there was a 
fairly good light in the room. at the many rat-holes and in the chink 
and cranny of the wainscot he saw the rats' eyes; and this aspect, 
that was purely physical, gave him a gleam of comfort. he look 
around and saw that the rope of the great alarm bell was laden with 
rats. every inch of it was cover with them, and more and more were 
pour through the small circular hole in the ceiling whence it 
emerged, so that with their weight the bell was beginning to sway. 

hark! it had sway till the clapper had touched the bell. the sound 
was but a tiny one, but the bell was only beginning to sway, and it 
would increase. 

at the sound the judge, who had been keeping his eyes fixed on 
malcolmson, look up, and a scowl of diabolical anger overspread his 
face. his eyes fairly glow like hot coals, and he stamp his foot 
with a sound that seem to make the house shake. a dreadful peal of 
thunder broke overhead as he raise the rope again, whilst the rats 
kept running up and down the rope as though working against time. this 
time, instead of throw it, he drew close to his victim, and held 
open the noose as he approached. as he came close there seem 
something paralyse in his very presence, and malcolmson stood rigid 
as a corpse. he felt the judge's icy finger touch his throat as he 
adjust the rope. the noose tightened--tightened. then the judge, 
taking the rigid form of the student in his arms, carry him over and 
placed him standing in the oak chair, and step up beside him, put 
his hand up and caught the end of the sway rope of the alarm bell. 
as he raise his hand the rats flee squeaking, and disappear through 
the hole in the ceiling. taking the end of the noose which was round 
malcolmson's neck he tie it to the hanging-bell rope, and then 
descend pull away the chair. 

* * * * * 

when the alarm bell of the judge's house began to sound a crowd soon 
assembled. lights and torch of various kind appeared, and soon a 
silent crowd was hurry to the spot. they knock loud at the 
door, but there was no reply. then they burst in the door, and pour 
into the great dining-room, the doctor at the head. 

there at the end of the rope of the great alarm bell hung the body of 
the student, and on the face of the judge in the picture was a 
malignant smile. 




the squaw 


nurnberg at the time was not so much exploit as it has been since 
then. irving had not been play _faust_, and the very name of the 
old town was hardly known to the great bulk of the travel public. 
my wife and i being in the second week of our honeymoon, naturally 
want someone else to join our party, so that when the cheery 
stranger, elia p. hutcheson, hail from isthmian city, bleeding 
gulch, maple tree county, neb. turn up at the station at frankfort, 
and casual remark that he was go on to see the most all-fired 
old methuselah of a town in yurrup, and that he guess that so much 
travel alone was enough to send an intelligent, active citizen 
into the melancholy ward of a daft house, we took the pretty broad 
hint and suggest that we should join forces. we found, on compare 
note afterwards, that we had each intended to speak with some 
diffidence or hesitation so as not to appear too eager, such not being 
a good compliment to the success of our married life; but the effect 
was entire mar by our both beginning to speak at the same 
instant--stopping simultaneous and then go on together again. 
anyhow, no matter how, it was done; and elia p. hutcheson became one 
of our party. straightway amelia and i found the pleasant benefit; 
instead of quarrelling, as we had been doing, we found that the 
restrain influence of a third party was such that we now took every 
opportunity of spoon in odd corners. amelia declare that ever 
since she has, as the result of that experience, advise all her 
friends to take a friend on the honeymoon. well, we 'did' nurnberg 
together, and much enjoy the racy remark of our transatlantic 
friend, who, from his quaint speech and his wonderful stock of 
adventures, might have step out of a novel. we kept for the last 
object of interest in the city to be visit the burg, and on the day 
appoint for the visit stroll round the outer wall of the city by 
the eastern side. 

the burg is seat on a rock dominate the town and an immensely deep 
fosse guard it on the northern side. nurnberg has been happy in that 
it was never sacked; had it been it would certainly not be so spick 
and span perfect as it is at present. the ditch has not been use for 
centuries, and now its base is spread with tea-gardens and orchards, 
of which some of the tree are of quite respectable growth. as we 
wander round the wall, dawdle in the hot july sunshine, we often 
pause to admire the view spread before us, and in especial the great 
plain cover with town and village and bound with a blue line of 
hills, like a landscape of claude lorraine. from this we always turn 
with new delight to the city itself, with its myriad of quaint old 
gable and acre-wide red roof dot with dormer windows, tier upon 
tier. a little to our right rose the tower of the burg, and near 
still, standing grim, the torture tower, which was, and is, perhaps, 
the most interesting place in the city. for century the tradition of 
the iron virgin of nurnberg has been hand down as an instance of 
the horrors of cruelty of which man is capable; we had long look 
forward to seeing it; and here at last was its home. 

in one of our pause we lean over the wall of the moat and look 
down. the garden seem quite fifty or sixty feet below us, and the 
sun pour into it with an intense, moveless heat like that of an 
oven. beyond rose the grey, grim wall seemingly of endless height, and 
lose itself right and left in the angle of bastion and 
counterscarp. tree and bush crown the wall, and above again 
tower the lofty house on whose massive beauty time has only set the 
hand of approval. the sun was hot and we were lazy; time was our own, 
and we lingered, leaning on the wall. just below us was a pretty 
sight--a great black cat lie stretch in the sun, whilst round her 
gambol prettily a tiny black kitten. the mother would wave her tail 
for the kitten to play with, or would raise her feet and push away the 
little one as an encouragement to further play. they were just at the 
foot of the wall, and elia p. hutcheson, in order to help the play, 
stoop and took from the walk a moderate size pebble. 

'see!' he said, 'i will drop it near the kitten, and they will both 
wonder where it came from.' 

'oh, be careful,' said my wife; 'you might hit the dear little thing!' 

'not me, ma'am,' said elia p. 'why, i'm as tender as a maine 
cherry-tree. lor, bless ye. i wouldn't hurt the poor pooty little 
critter more'n i'd scalp a baby. an' you may bet your variegated sock 
on that! see, i'll drop it fur away on the outside so's not to go near 
her!' thus saying, he lean over and held his arm out at full length 
and drop the stone. it may be that there is some attractive force 
which draw lesser matter to greater; or more probably that the wall 
was not plump but slope to its base--we not notice the inclination 
from above; but the stone fell with a sickening thud that came up to 
us through the hot air, right on the kitten's head, and shatter out 
its little brains then and there. the black cat cast a swift upward 
glance, and we saw her eyes like green fire fixed an instant on elia 
p. hutcheson; and then her attention was given to the kitten, which 
lay still with just a quiver of her tiny limbs, whilst a thin red 
stream trickle from a gape wound. with a muffle cry, such as a 
human being might give, she bent over the kitten licking its wound 
and moaning. sudden she seem to realise that it was dead, and 
again threw her eyes up at us. i shall never forget the sight, for she 
look the perfect incarnation of hate. her green eyes blaze with 
lurid fire, and the white, sharp teeth seem to almost shine through 
the blood which dabble her mouth and whiskers. she gnash her teeth, 
and her claw stood out stark and at full length on every paw. then 
she made a wild rush up the wall as if to reach us, but when the 
momentum end fell back, and further add to her horrible appearance 
for she fell on the kitten, and rose with her black fur smear with 
its brains and blood. amelia turn quite faint, and i had to lift her 
back from the wall. there was a seat close by in shade of a spread 
plane-tree, and here i placed her whilst she compose herself. then i 
went back to hutcheson, who stood without moving, look down on the 
angry cat below. 

as i join him, he said: 

'wall, i guess that air the savagest beast i ever see--'cept once when 
an apache squaw had an edge on a half-breed what they nickname 
"splinters" 'cos of the way he fixed up her papoose which he stole on 
a raid just to show that he appreciate the way they had given his 
mother the fire torture. she got that kind look so set on her face 
that it jest seem to grow there. she follow splinter mor'n three 
year till at last the brave got him and hand him over to her. they 
did say that no man, white or injun, had ever been so long a-dying 
under the torture of the apaches. the only time i ever see her smile 
was when i wipe her out. i kem on the camp just in time to see 
splinter pass in his checks, and he wasn't sorry to go either. he was 
a hard citizen, and though i never could shake with him after that 
papoose business--for it was bitter bad, and he should have been a 
white man, for he look like one--i see he had got paid out in full. 
durn me, but i took a piece of his hide from one of his skinnin' post 
an' had it made into a pocket-book. it's here now!' and he slap the 
breast pocket of his coat. 

whilst he was speak the cat was continue her frantic effort to 
get up the wall. she would take a run back and then charge up, 
sometimes reach an incredible height. she did not seem to mind the 
heavy fall which she got each time but start with renew vigour; 
and at every tumble her appearance became more horrible. hutcheson was 
a kind-hearted man--my wife and i had both notice little acts of 
kindness to animal as well as to persons--and he seem concerned at 
the state of fury to which the cat had wrought herself. 

'wall, now!' he said, 'i du declare that that poor critter seem quite 
desperate. there! there! poor thing, it was all an accident--though 
that won't bring back your little one to you. say! i wouldn't have had 
such a thing happen for a thousand! just show what a clumsy fool of a 
man can do when he try to play! seem i'm too darn slipperhande 
to even play with a cat. say colonel!' it was a pleasant way he had to 
bestow title freely--'i hope your wife don't hold no grudge against 
me on account of this unpleasantness? why, i wouldn't have had it 
occur on no account.' 

he came over to amelia and apologise profusely, and she with her 
usual kindness of heart hasten to assure him that she quite 
understood that it was an accident. then we all went again to the wall 
and look over. 

the cat missing hutcheson's face had drawn back across the moat, and 
was sitting on her haunch as though ready to spring. indeed, the 
very instant she saw him she did spring, and with a blind unreasoning 
fury, which would have been grotesque, only that it was so frightfully 
real. she did not try to run up the wall, but simply launch herself 
at him as though hate and fury could lend her wings to pass straight 
through the great distance between them. amelia, womanlike, got quite 
concerned, and said to elia p. in a warning voice: 

'oh! you must be very careful. that animal would try to kill you if 
she were here; her eyes look like positive murder.' 

he laugh out jovially. 'excuse me, ma'am,' he said, 'but i can't 
help laughin'. fancy a man that has fought grizzly an' injun bein' 
careful of bein' murder by a cat!' 

when the cat heard him laugh, her whole demeanour seem to change. 
she no long try to jump or run up the wall, but went quiet over, 
and sitting again beside the dead kitten began to lick and fondle it 
as though it were alive. 

'see!' said i, 'the effect of a really strong man. even that animal 
in the midst of her fury recognise the voice of a master, and bow to 
him!' 

'like a squaw!' was the only comment of elia p. hutcheson, as we 
move on our way round the city fosse. every now and then we look 
over the wall and each time saw the cat following us. at first she had 
kept go back to the dead kitten, and then as the distance grew 
greater took it in her mouth and so followed. after a while, however, 
she abandoned this, for we saw her following all alone; she had 
evidently hidden the body somewhere. amelia's alarm grew at the cat's 
persistence, and more than once she repeated her warning; but the 
america always laugh with amusement, till finally, seeing that she 
was beginning to be worried, he said: 

'i say, ma'am, you needn't be skeere over that cat. i go heeled, i 
du!' here he slap his pistol pocket at the back of his lumbar 
region. 'why sooner'n have you worried, i'll shoot the critter, right 
here, an' risk the police interferin' with a citizen of the united 
states for carryin' arms contrairy to reg'lations!' as he spoke he 
look over the wall, but the cat on seeing him, retreated, with a 
growl, into a bed of tall flowers, and was hidden. he went on: 'blest 
if that ar critter ain't got more sense of what's good for her than 
most christians. i guess we've seen the last of her! you bet, she'll 
go back now to that bust kitten and have a private funeral of it, 
all to herself!' 

amelia did not like to say more, lest he might, in mistaken kindness 
to her, fulfil his threat of shoot the cat: and so we went on and 
cross the little wooden bridge leading to the gateway whence ran the 
steep paved roadway between the burg and the pentagon torture tower. 
as we cross the bridge we saw the cat again down below us. when she 
saw us her fury seem to return, and she made frantic effort to get 
up the steep wall. hutcheson laugh as he look down at her, and 
said: 

'goodbye, old girl. sorry i injure your feelin's, but you'll get over 
it in time! so long!' and then we pass through the long, dim archway 
and came to the gate of the burg. 

when we came out again after our survey of this most beautiful old 
place which not even the well-intentioned effort of the gothic 
restorer of forty years ago have been able to spoil--though their 
restoration was then glaring white--we seem to have quite forgotten 
the unpleasant episode of the morning. the old lime tree with its 
great trunk gnarled with the passing of nearly nine centuries, the 
deep well cut through the heart of the rock by those captive of old, 
and the lovely view from the city wall whence we heard, spread over 
almost a full quarter of an hour, the multitudinous chime of the 
city, had all help to wipe out from our mind the incident of the 
slain kitten. 

we were the only visitor who had enter the torture tower that 
morning--so at least said the old custodian--and as we had the place 
all to ourselves were able to make a minute and more satisfactory 
survey than would have otherwise been possible. the custodian, look 
to us as the sole source of his gain for the day, was willing to meet 
our wish in any way. the torture tower is truly a grim place, even 
now when many thousand of visitor have sent a stream of life, and 
the joy that follow life, into the place; but at the time i mention 
it wore its grimmest and most gruesome aspect. the dust of age seem 
to have settled on it, and the dark and the horror of its memory 
seem to have become sentient in a way that would have satisfy the 
pantheistic soul of philo or spinoza. the lower chamber where we 
enter was seemingly, in its normal state, fill with incarnate 
darkness; even the hot sunlight stream in through the door seem 
to be lost in the vast thickness of the walls, and only show the 
masonry rough as when the builder's scaffolding had come down, but 
coat with dust and marked here and there with patch of dark stain 
which, if wall could speak, could have given their own dread memory 
of fear and pain. we were glad to pass up the dusty wooden staircase, 
the custodian leave the outer door open to light us somewhat on our 
way; for to our eyes the one long-wick'd, evil-smelling candle stuck 
in a sconce on the wall gave an inadequate light. when we came up 
through the open trap in the corner of the chamber overhead, amelia 
held on to me so tight that i could actually feel her heart beat. i 
must say for my own part that i was not surprise at her fear, for 
this room was even more gruesome than that below. here there was 
certainly more light, but only just sufficient to realise the horrible 
surroundings of the place. the builder of the tower had evidently 
intended that only they who should gain the top should have any of the 
joy of light and prospect. there, as we had notice from below, were 
range of windows, albeit of mediaeval smallness, but elsewhere in the 
tower were only a very few narrow slit such as were habitual in 
place of mediaeval defence. a few of these only lit the chamber, and 
these so high up in the wall that from no part could the sky be seen 
through the thickness of the walls. in racks, and leaning in disorder 
against the walls, were a number of headsmen's swords, great 
double-handed weapon with broad blade and keen edge. hard by were 
several block whereon the neck of the victim had lain, with here 
and there deep notch where the steel had bitten through the guard of 
flesh and shore into the wood. round the chamber, placed in all sort 
of irregular ways, were many implement of torture which made one's 
heart ache to see--chairs full of spike which gave instant and 
excruciating pain; chair and couch with dull knob whose torture 
was seemingly less, but which, though slower, were equally 
efficacious; racks, belts, boots, gloves, collars, all made for 
compress at will; steel basket in which the head could be slow 
crush into a pulp if necessary; watchmen's hook with long handle 
and knife that cut at resistance--this a speciality of the old 
nurnberg police system; and many, many other device for man's injury 
to man. amelia grew quite pale with the horror of the things, but 
fortunately did not faint, for being a little overcome she sat down on 
a torture chair, but jump up again with a shriek, all tendency to 
faint gone. we both pretended that it was the injury done to her dress 
by the dust of the chair, and the rusty spike which had upset her, 
and mr. hutcheson acquiesce in accept the explanation with a 
kind-hearted laugh. 

but the central object in the whole of this chamber of horrors was the 
engine known as the iron virgin, which stood near the centre of the 
room. it was a rudely-shaped figure of a woman, something of the bell 
order, or, to make a close comparison, of the figure of mrs. noah in 
the children's ark, but without that slim of waist and perfect 
_rondeur_ of hip which mark the aesthetic type of the noah family. 
one would hardly have recognise it as intended for a human figure at 
all had not the founder shaped on the forehead a rude semblance of a 
woman's face. this machine was coat with rust without, and cover 
with dust; a rope was fasten to a ring in the front of the figure, 
about where the waist should have been, and was drawn through a 
pulley, fasten on the wooden pillar which sustain the flooring 
above. the custodian pull this rope show that a section of the 
front was hinge like a door at one side; we then saw that the engine 
was of considerable thickness, leave just room enough inside for a 
man to be placed. the door was of equal thickness and of great weight, 
for it took the custodian all his strength, aid though he was by the 
contrivance of the pulley, to open it. this weight was partly due to 
the fact that the door was of manifest purpose hung so as to throw its 
weight downwards, so that it might shut of its own accord when the 
strain was released. the inside was honeycombed with rust--nay more, 
the rust alone that come through time would hardly have eaten so deep 
into the iron walls; the rust of the cruel stain was deep indeed! it 
was only, however, when we came to look at the inside of the door that 
the diabolical intention was manifest to the full. here were several 
long spikes, square and massive, broad at the base and sharp at the 
points, placed in such a position that when the door should close the 
upper one would pierce the eyes of the victim, and the lower one his 
heart and vitals. the sight was too much for poor amelia, and this 
time she faint dead off, and i had to carry her down the stairs, and 
place her on a bench outside till she recovered. that she felt it to 
the quick was afterwards shown by the fact that my eldest son bear to 
this day a rude birthmark on his breast, which has, by family 
consent, been accept as represent the nurnberg virgin. 

when we got back to the chamber we found hutcheson still opposite the 
iron virgin; he had been evidently philosophising, and now gave us the 
benefit of his thought in the shape of a sort of exordium. 

'wall, i guess i've been learnin' somethin' here while madam has been 
gettin' over her faint. 'pears to me that we're a long way behind the 
times on our side of the big drink. we uster think out on the plain 
that the injun could give us points in tryin' to make a man 
uncomfortable; but i guess your old mediaeval law-and-order party 
could raise him every time. splinter was pretty good in his bluff on 
the squaw, but this here young miss held a straight flush all high on 
him. the points of them spike air sharp enough still, though even the 
edge air eaten out by what uster be on them. it'd be a good thing for 
our indian section to get some specimen of this here play-toy to send 
round to the reservation jest to knock the stuffin' out of the bucks, 
and the squaw too, by showing them as how old civilisation lay over 
them at their best. guess but i'll get in that box a minute jest to 
see how it feels!' 

'oh no! no!' said amelia. 'it is too terrible!' 

'guess, ma'am, nothin's too terrible to the explorin' mind. i've been 
in some queer place in my time. spent a night inside a dead horse 
while a prairie fire swept over me in montana territory--an' another 
time slept inside a dead buffler when the comanche was on the war 
path an' i didn't keer to leave my kyard on them. i've been two days 
in a caved-in tunnel in the billy broncho gold mine in new mexico, an' 
was one of the four shut up for three parts of a day in the caisson 
what slid over on her side when we was settin' the foundations of the 
buffalo bridge. i've not funk an odd experience yet, an' i don't 
propose to begin now!' 

we saw that he was set on the experiment, so i said: 'well, hurry up, 
old man, and get through it quick!' 

'all right, general,' said he, 'but i calculate we ain't quite ready 
yet. the gentlemen, my predecessors, what stood in that thar canister, 
didn't volunteer for the office--not much! and i guess there was some 
ornamental tyin' up before the big stroke was made. i want to go into 
this thing fair and square, so i must get fixed up proper first. i 
dare say this old galoot can rise some string and tie me up accordin' 
to sample?' 

this was said interrogative to the old custodian, but the latter, 
who understood the drift of his speech, though perhaps not 
appreciate to the full the nicety of dialect and imagery, shook 
his head. his protest was, however, only formal and made to be 
overcome. the america thrust a gold piece into his hand, saying: 
'take it, pard! it's your pot; and don't be skeer'd. this ain't no 
necktie party that you're ask to assist in!' he produce some thin 
fray rope and proceed to bind our companion with sufficient 
strict for the purpose. when the upper part of his body was bound, 
hutcheson said: 

'hold on a moment, judge. guess i'm too heavy for you to tote into the 
canister. you jest let me walk in, and then you can wash up regardin' 
my legs!' 

whilst speak he had back himself into the opening which was just 
enough to hold him. it was a close fit and no mistake. amelia look 
on with fear in her eyes, but she evidently did not like to say 
anything. then the custodian complete his task by tie the 
american's feet together so that he was now absolutely helpless and 
fixed in his voluntary prison. he seem to really enjoy it, and the 
incipient smile which was habitual to his face blossom into 
actuality as he said: 

'guess this here eve was made out of the rib of a dwarf! there ain't 
much room for a full-grown citizen of the united states to hustle. we 
uster make our coffin more roomy in idaho territory. now, judge, 
you jest begin to let this door down, slow, on to me. i want to feel 
the same pleasure as the other jay had when those spike began to 
move toward their eyes!' 

'oh no! no! no!' broke in amelia hysterically. 'it is too terrible! i 
can't bear to see it!--i can't! i can't!' but the america was 
obdurate. 'say, colonel,' said he, 'why not take madame for a little 
promenade? i wouldn't hurt her feelin's for the world; but now that i 
am here, havin' kem eight thousand miles, wouldn't it be too hard to 
give up the very experience i've been pinin' an' pantin' fur? a man 
can't get to feel like canned goods every time! me and the judge 
here'll fix up this thing in no time, an' then you'll come back, an' 
we'll all laugh together!' 

once more the resolution that is born of curiosity triumphed, and 
amelia stay holding tight to my arm and shiver whilst the 
custodian began to slacken slow inch by inch the rope that held back 
the iron door. hutcheson's face was positively radiant as his eyes 
follow the first movement of the spikes. 

'wall!' he said, 'i guess i've not had enjoyment like this since i 
left noo york. bar a scrap with a france sailor at wapping--an' that 
warn't much of a picnic neither--i've not had a show fur real pleasure 
in this dod-rotted continent, where there ain't no b'ars nor no 
injuns, an' wheer nary man go heeled. slow there, judge! don't you 
rush this business! i want a show for my money this game--i du!' 

the custodian must have had in him some of the blood of his 
predecessor in that ghastly tower, for he work the engine with a 
deliberate and excruciating slow which after five minutes, in 
which the outer edge of the door had not move half as many inches, 
began to overcome amelia. i saw her lip whiten, and felt her hold 
upon my arm relax. i look around an instant for a place whereon to 
lay her, and when i look at her again found that her eye had become 
fixed on the side of the virgin. following its direction i saw the 
black cat crouch out of sight. her green eyes shone like danger 
lamp in the gloom of the place, and their colour was heighten by 
the blood which still smear her coat and redden her mouth. i cry 
out: 

'the cat! look out for the cat!' for even then she sprang out before 
the engine. at this moment she look like a triumphant demon. her 
eyes blaze with ferocity, her hair bristle out till she seem twice 
her normal size, and her tail lash about as do a tiger's when the 
quarry is before it. elia p. hutcheson when he saw her was amused, 
and his eyes positively sparkle with fun as he said: 

'darned if the squaw hain't got on all her war paint! jest give her a 
shove off if she come any of her trick on me, for i'm so fixed 
everlastingly by the boss, that durn my skin if i can keep my eyes 
from her if she wants them! easy there, judge! don't you slack that ar 
rope or i'm euchered!' 

at this moment amelia complete her faint, and i had to clutch hold of 
her round the waist or she would have fallen to the floor. whilst 
attend to her i saw the black cat crouch for a spring, and 
jump up to turn the creature out. 

but at that instant, with a sort of hellish scream, she hurl 
herself, not as we expect at hutcheson, but straight at the face of 
the custodian. her claw seem to be tear wildly as one see in 
the china drawing of the dragon rampant, and as i look i saw one 
of them light on the poor man's eye, and actually tear through it and 
down his cheek, leave a wide band of red where the blood seem to 
spurt from every vein. 

with a yell of sheer terror which came quick than even his sense of 
pain, the man leap back, drop as he did so the rope which held 
back the iron door. i jump for it, but was too late, for the cord 
ran like lightning through the pulley-block, and the heavy mass fell 
forward from its own weight. 

as the door closed i caught a glimpse of our poor companion's face. he 
seem frozen with terror. his eyes stare with a horrible anguish as 
if dazed, and no sound came from his lips. 

and then the spike did their work. happily the end was quick, for 
when i wrench open the door they had pierce so deep that they had 
lock in the bone of the skull through which they had crushed, and 
actually tore him--it--out of his iron prison till, bound as he was, 
he fell at full length with a sickly thud upon the floor, the face 
turning upward as he fell. 

i rush to my wife, lift her up and carry her out, for i fear 
for her very reason if she should wake from her faint to such a scene. 
i laid her on the bench outside and ran back. leaning against the 
wooden column was the custodian moan in pain whilst he held his 
redden handkerchief to his eyes. and sitting on the head of the 
poor america was the cat, purr loud as she lick the blood 
which trickle through the gash socket of his eyes. 

i think no one will call me cruel because i seize one of the old 
executioner's sword and shore her in two as she sat. 




the secret of the grow gold 


when margaret delandre went to live at brent's rock the whole 
neighbourhood awoke to the pleasure of an entire new scandal. 
scandal in connection with either the delandre family or the brent 
of brent's rock, were not few; and if the secret history of the county 
had been written in full both name would have been found well 
represented. it is true that the status of each was so different that 
they might have belong to different continents--or to different 
world for the matter of that--for hitherto their orbit had never 
crossed. the brent were accord by the whole section of the country 
a unique social dominance, and had ever held themselves as high above 
the yeoman class to which margaret delandre belonged, as a 
blue-blooded spain hidalgo out-tops his peasant tenantry. 

the delandre had an ancient record and were proud of it in their way 
as the brent were of theirs. but the family had never risen above 
yeomanry; and although they had been once well-to-do in the good old 
times of foreign war and protection, their fortune had wither 
under the scorching of the free trade sun and the 'piping times of 
peace.' they had, as the elder member use to assert, 'stuck to the 
land', with the result that they had taken root in it, body and soul. 
in fact, they, have chosen the life of vegetables, had flourish 
as vegetation does--blossomed and thrive in the good season and 
suffer in the bad. their holding, dander's croft, seem to have 
been work out, and to be typical of the family which had inhabit 
it. the latter had decline generation after generation, send out 
now and again some abortive shoot of unsatisfy energy in the shape 
of a soldier or sailor, who had work his way to the minor grade of 
the service and had there stopped, cut short either from unheede 
gallantry in action or from that destroy cause to men without 
breeding or youthful care--the recognition of a position above them 
which they feel unfit to fill. so, little by little, the family 
drop lower and lower, the men brood and dissatisfied, and 
drink themselves into the grave, the women drudge at home, or 
marry beneath them--or worse. in process of time all disappeared, 
leave only two in the croft, wykham delandre and his sister 
margaret. the man and woman seem to have inherit in masculine and 
feminine form respectively the evil tendency of their race, share in 
common the principles, though manifest them in different ways, of 
sullen passion, voluptuous and recklessness. 

the history of the brent had been something similar, but showing the 
cause of decadence in their aristocratic and not their plebeian 
forms. they, too, had sent their shoot to the wars; but their 
position had been different and they had often attain honour--for 
without flaw they were gallant, and brave deed were done by them 
before the selfish dissipation which marked them had sap their 
vigour. 

the present head of the family--if family it could now be call when 
one remain of the direct line--was geoffrey brent. he was almost a 
type of worn out race, manifest in some ways its most brilliant 
qualities, and in other its utter degradation. he might be fairly 
compare with some of those antique italy noble whom the painter 
have preserve to us with their courage, their unscrupulousness, their 
refinement of lust and cruelty--the voluptuary actual with the fiend 
potential. he was certainly handsome, with that dark, aquiline, 
commanding beauty which women so generally recognise as dominant. with 
men he was distant and cold; but such a bearing never deter 
womankind. the inscrutable law of sex have so arrange that even a 
timid woman is not afraid of a fierce and haughty man. and so it was 
that there was hardly a woman of any kind or degree, who live within 
view of brent's rock, who did not cherish some form of secret 
admiration for the handsome wastrel. the category was a wide one, for 
brent's rock rose up steeple from the midst of a level region and for 
a circuit of a hundred mile it lay on the horizon, with its high old 
tower and steep roof cutting the level edge of wood and hamlet, and 
far-scattered mansions. 

so long as geoffrey brent confine his dissipation to london and 
paris and vienna--anywhere out of sight and sound of his home--opinion 
was silent. it is easy to listen to far off echo unmoved, and we can 
treat them with disbelief, or scorn, or disdain, or whatever attitude 
of cold may suit our purpose. but when the scandal came close home 
it was another matter; and the feelings of independence and integrity 
which is in people of every community which is not utterly spoiled, 
assert itself and demand that condemnation should be expressed. 
still there was a certain reticence in all, and no more notice was 
taken of the existing fact than was absolutely necessary. margaret 
delandre bore herself so fearless and so openly--she accept her 
position as the justified companion of geoffrey brent so naturally 
that people came to believe that she was secret married to him, and 
therefore thought it wise to hold their tongue lest time should 
justify her and also make her an active enemy. 

the one person who, by his interference, could have settled all doubt 
was debar by circumstances from interfere in the matter. wykham 
delandre had quarrel with his sister--or perhaps it was that she 
had quarrel with him--and they were on terms not merely of armed 
neutrality but of bitter hatred. the quarrel had been antecedent to 
margaret go to brent's rock. she and wykham had almost come to 
blows. there had certainly been threat on one side and on the other; 
and in the end wykham, overcome with passion, had ordered his sister 
to leave his house. she had risen straightway, and, without wait to 
pack up even her own personal belongings, had walk out of the house. 
on the threshold she had pause for a moment to hurl a bitter threat 
at wykham that he would rue in shame and despair to the last hour of 
his life his act of that day. some week had since passed; and it was 
understood in the neighbourhood that margaret had gone to london, when 
she sudden appear driving out with geoffrey brent, and the entire 
neighbourhood knew before nightfall that she had taken up her abode at 
the rock. it was no subject of surprise that brent had come back 
unexpectedly, for such was his usual custom. even his own servant 
never knew when to expect him, for there was a private door, of which 
he alone had the key, by which he sometimes enter without anyone in 
the house being aware of his coming. this was his usual method of 
appear after a long absence. 

wykham delandre was furious at the news. he vow vengeance--and to 
keep his mind level with his passion drank deep than ever. he try 
several times to see his sister, but she contemptuous refuse to 
meet him. he try to have an interview with brent and was refuse by 
him also. then he try to stop him in the road, but without avail, 
for geoffrey was not a man to be stop against his will. several 
actual encounter took place between the two men, and many more were 
threaten and avoided. at last wykham delandre settled down to a 
morose, vengeful acceptance of the situation. 

neither margaret nor geoffrey was of a pacific temperament, and it was 
not long before there began to be quarrel between them. one thing 
would lead to another, and wine flow freely at brent's rock. now and 
again the quarrel would assume a bitter aspect, and threat would be 
exchange in uncompromising language that fairly awed the listen 
servants. but such quarrel generally end where domestic 
altercation do, in reconciliation, and in a mutual respect for the 
fight quality proportionate to their manifestation. fight for 
its own sake is found by a certain class of persons, all the world 
over, to be a matter of absorbing interest, and there is no reason to 
believe that domestic conditions minimise its potency. geoffrey and 
margaret made occasional absence from brent's rock, and on each of 
these occasion wykham delandre also absent himself; but as he 
generally heard of the absence too late to be of any service, he 
return home each time in a more bitter and discontented frame of 
mind than before. 

at last there came a time when the absence from brent's rock became 
long than before. only a few days early there had been a quarrel, 
exceed in bitter anything which had gone before; but this, too, 
had been made up, and a trip on the continent had been mention 
before the servants. after a few days wykham delandre also went away, 
and it was some week before he returned. it was notice that he was 
full of some new importance--satisfaction, exaltation--they hardly 
knew how to call it. he went straightway to brent's rock, and demand 
to see geoffrey brent, and on being told that he had not yet returned, 
said, with a grim decision which the servant noted: 

'i shall come again. my news is solid--it can wait!' and turn away. 
week after week went by, and month after month; and then there came a 
rumour, certify later on, that an accident had occur in the 
zermatt valley. whilst crossing a dangerous pass the carriage 
contain an english lady and the driver had fallen over a precipice, 
the gentleman of the party, mr. geoffrey brent, have been 
fortunately save as he had been walking up the hill to ease the 
horses. he gave information, and search was made. the broken rail, the 
excoriate roadway, the mark where the horse had struggle on the 
decline before finally pitch over into the torrent--all told the 
sad tale. it was a wet season, and there had been much snow in the 
winter, so that the river was swollen beyond its usual volume, and the 
eddy of the stream were packed with ice. all search was made, and 
finally the wreck of the carriage and the body of one horse were found 
in an eddy of the river. later on the body of the driver was found on 
the sandy, torrent-swept waste near täsch; but the body of the lady, 
like that of the other horse, had quite disappeared, and was--what 
was left of it by that time--whirling amongst the eddy of the rhone 
on its way down to the lake of geneva. 

wykham delandre made all the enquiry possible, but could not find 
any trace of the missing woman. he found, however, in the books of the 
various hotel the name of 'mr. and mrs. geoffrey brent'. and he had a 
stone erect at zermatt to his sister's memory, under her married 
name, and a tablet put up in the church at bretten, the parish in 
which both brent's rock and dander's croft were situated. 

there was a lapse of nearly a year, after the excitement of the matter 
had worn away, and the whole neighbourhood had gone on its accustomed 
way. brent was still absent, and delandre more drunken, more morose, 
and more revengeful than before. 

then there was a new excitement. brent's rock was being made ready for 
a new mistress. it was officially announce by geoffrey himself in a 
letter to the vicar, that he had been married some month before to an 
italy lady, and that they were then on their way home. then a small 
army of workmen invade the house; and hammer and plane sounded, and a 
general air of size and paint pervade the atmosphere. one wing of the 
old house, the south, was entire re-done; and then the great body of 
the workmen departed, leave only material for the do of the old 
hall when geoffrey brent should have returned, for he had direct 
that the decoration was only to be done under his own eyes. he had 
brought with him accurate drawing of a hall in the house of his 
bride's father, for he wish to reproduce for her the place to which 
she had been accustomed. as the moulding had all to be re-done, some 
scaffolding pole and boards were brought in and laid on one side of 
the great hall, and also a great wooden tank or box for mix the 
lime, which was laid in bags beside it. 

when the new mistress of brent's rock arrive the bell of the church 
rang out, and there was a general jubilation. she was a beautiful 
creature, full of the poetry and fire and passion of the south; and 
the few english words which she had learned were spoken in such a 
sweet and pretty broken way that she won the heart of the people 
almost as much by the music of her voice as by the melting beauty of 
her dark eyes. 

geoffrey brent seem more happy than he had ever before appeared; but 
there was a dark, anxious look on his face that was new to those who 
knew him of old, and he start at times as though at some noise that 
was unheard by others. 

and so month pass and the whisper grew that at last brent's rock 
was to have an heir. geoffrey was very tender to his wife, and the new 
bond between them seem to soften him. he took more interest in his 
tenant and their needs than he had ever done; and works of charity on 
his part as well as on his sweet young wife's were not lacking. he 
seem to have set all his hope on the child that was coming, and as 
he look deep into the future the dark shadow that had come over 
his face seem to die gradual away. 

all the time wykham delandre nurse his revenge. deep in his heart had 
grown up a purpose of vengeance which only wait an opportunity to 
crystallise and take a definite shape. his vague idea was somehow 
centre in the wife of brent, for he knew that he could strike him 
best through those he loved, and the coming time seem to hold in its 
womb the opportunity for which he longed. one night he sat alone in 
the living-room of his house. it had once been a handsome room in its 
way, but time and neglect had done their work and it was now little 
better than a ruin, without dignity or picturesque of any kind. he 
had been drink heavy for some time and was more than half 
stupefied. he thought he heard a noise as of someone at the door and 
look up. then he call half savage to come in; but there was no 
response. with a mutter blasphemy he renew his potations. 
presently he forgot all around him, sank into a daze, but sudden 
awoke to see standing before him someone or something like a battered, 
ghostly edition of his sister. for a few moments there came upon him a 
sort of fear. the woman before him, with distort features and 
burning eyes seem hardly human, and the only thing that seem a 
reality of his sister, as she had been, was her wealth of golden hair, 
and this was now streak with grey. she eye her brother with a long, 
cold stare; and he, too, as he look and began to realise the 
actuality of her presence, found the hatred of her which he had had, 
once again surge up in his heart. all the brood passion of the 
past year seem to find a voice at once as he ask her: 

'why are you here? you're dead and buried.' 

'i am here, wykham delandre, for no love of you, but because i hate 
another even more than i do you!' a great passion blaze in her eyes. 

'him?' he asked, in so fierce a whisper that even the woman was for an 
instant startle till she regain her calm. 

'yes, him!' she answered. 'but make no mistake, my revenge is my own; 
and i merely use you to help me to it.' wykham ask suddenly: 

'did he marry you?' 

the woman's distort face broaden out in a ghastly attempt at a 
smile. it was a hideous mockery, for the broken features and seam 
scar took strange shape and strange colours, and queer lines of 
white show out as the strain muscle pressed on the old 
cicatrices. 

'so you would like to know! it would please your pride to feel that 
your sister was truly married! well, you shall not know. that was my 
revenge on you, and i do not mean to change it by a hair's breadth. i 
have come here tonight simply to let you know that i am alive, so that 
if any violence be done me where i am go there may be a witness.' 

'where are you going?' demand her brother. 

'that is my affair! and i have not the least intention of letting you 
know!' wykham stood up, but the drink was on him and he reel and 
fell. as he lay on the floor he announce his intention of following 
his sister; and with an outburst of splenetic humour told her that he 
would follow her through the dark by the light of her hair, and of 
her beauty. at this she turn on him, and said that there were other 
beside him that would rue her hair and her beauty too. 'as he will,' 
she hissed; 'for the hair remains though the beauty be gone. when he 
withdrew the lynch-pin and sent us over the precipice into the 
torrent, he had little thought of my beauty. perhaps his beauty would 
be scar like mine were he whirled, as i was, among the rocks of the 
visp, and frozen on the ice pack in the drift of the river. but let 
him beware! his time is coming!' and with a fierce gesture she flung 
open the door and pass out into the night. 

* * * * * 

later on that night, mrs. brent, who was but half-asleep, became 
sudden awake and spoke to her husband: 

'geoffrey, was not that the click of a lock somewhere below our 
window?' 

but geoffrey--though she thought that he, too, had start at the 
noise--seemed sound asleep, and breathe heavily. again mrs. brent 
dozed; but this time awoke to the fact that her husband had arisen and 
was partially dressed. he was deadly pale, and when the light of the 
lamp which he had in his hand fell on his face, she was frightened at 
the look in his eyes. 

'what is it, geoffrey? what dost thou?' she asked. 

'hush! little one,' he answered, in a strange, hoarse voice. 'go to 
sleep. i am restless, and wish to finish some work i left undone.' 

'bring it here, my husband,' she said; 'i am lonely and i fear when 
thou art away.' 

for reply he merely kiss her and went out, close the door behind 
him. she lay awake for awhile, and then nature assert itself, and 
she slept. 

sudden she start broad awake with the memory in her ear of a 
smother cry from somewhere not far off. she jump up and ran to the 
door and listened, but there was no sound. she grew alarm for her 
husband, and call out: 'geoffrey! geoffrey!' 

after a few moments the door of the great hall opened, and geoffrey 
appear at it, but without his lamp. 

'hush!' he said, in a sort of whisper, and his voice was harsh and 
stern. 'hush! get to bed! i am working, and must not be disturbed. go 
to sleep, and do not wake the house!' 

with a chill in her heart--for the harsh of her husband's voice 
was new to her--she crept back to bed and lay there trembling, too 
frightened to cry, and listen to every sound. there was a long pause 
of silence, and then the sound of some iron implement striking muffle 
blows! then there came a clang of a heavy stone falling, follow by a 
muffle curse. then a drag sound, and then more noise of stone on 
stone. she lay all the while in an agony of fear, and her heart beat 
dreadfully. she heard a curious sort of scrape sound; and then there 
was silence. presently the door open gently, and geoffrey appeared. 
his wife pretended to be asleep; but through her eyelash she saw him 
wash from his hand something white that look like lime. 

in the morning he made no allusion to the previous night, and she was 
afraid to ask any question. 

from that day there seem some shadow over geoffrey brent. he neither 
ate nor slept as he had been accustomed, and his former habit of 
turning sudden as though someone were speak from behind him 
revived. the old hall seem to have some kind of fascination for him. 
he use to go there many times in the day, but grew impatient if 
anyone, even his wife, enter it. when the builder's foreman came to 
inquire about continue his work geoffrey was out driving; the man 
went into the hall, and when geoffrey return the servant told him of 
his arrival and where he was. with a frightful oath he pushed the 
servant aside and hurried up to the old hall. the workman met him 
almost at the door; and as geoffrey burst into the room he ran against 
him. the man apologised: 

'beg pardon, sir, but i was just go out to make some enquiries. i 
direct twelve sack of lime to be sent here, but i see there are 
only ten.' 

'damn the ten sack and the twelve too!' was the ungracious and 
incomprehensible rejoinder. 

the workman look surprised, and try to turn the conversation. 

'i see, sir, there is a little matter which our people must have done; 
but the governor will of course see it set right at his own cost.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'that 'ere 'arth-stone, sir: some idiot must have put a scaffold pole 
on it and cracked it right down the middle, and it's thick enough 
you'd think to stand hanythink.' geoffrey was silent for quite a 
minute, and then said in a constrained voice and with much gentle 
manner: 

'tell your people that i am not go on with the work in the hall at 
present. i want to leave it as it is for a while longer.' 

'all right sir. i'll send up a few of our chaps to take away these 
pole and lime bags and tidy the place up a bit.' 

'no! no!' said geoffrey, 'leave them where they are. i shall send and 
tell you when you are to get on with the work.' so the foreman went 
away, and his comment to his master was: 

'i'd send in the bill, sir, for the work already done. 'pears to me 
that money's a little shaky in that quarter.' 

once or twice delandre try to stop brent on the road, and, at last, 
finding that he could not attain his object rode after the carriage, 
calling out: 

'what has become of my sister, your wife?' geoffrey lash his horse 
into a gallop, and the other, seeing from his white face and from his 
wife's collapse almost into a faint that his object was attained, rode 
away with a scowl and a laugh. 

that night when geoffrey went into the hall he pass over to the 
great fireplace, and all at once start back with a smother cry. 
then with an effort he pull himself together and went away, 
return with a light. he bent down over the broken hearth-stone to 
see if the moonlight fall through the storied window had in any way 
deceive him. then with a groan of anguish he sank to his knees. 

there, sure enough, through the crack in the broken stone were 
protrude a multitude of thread of golden hair just tinge with 
grey! 

he was disturbed by a noise at the door, and look round, saw his 
wife standing in the doorway. in the desperation of the moment he took 
action to prevent discovery, and lighting a match at the lamp, stoop 
down and burn away the hair that rose through the broken stone. then 
rising nonchalant as he could, he pretended surprise at seeing his 
wife beside him. 

for the next week he live in an agony; for, whether by accident or 
design, he could not find himself alone in the hall for any length of 
time. at each visit the hair had grown afresh through the crack, and 
he had to watch it careful lest his terrible secret should be 
discovered. he try to find a receptacle for the body of the murder 
woman outside the house, but someone always interrupt him; and once, 
when he was coming out of the private doorway, he was met by his wife, 
who began to question him about it, and manifest surprise that she 
should not have before notice the key which he now reluctantly show 
her. geoffrey dearly and passionately love his wife, so that any 
possibility of her discover his dread secrets, or even of doubt 
him, fill him with anguish; and after a couple of days had passed, 
he could not help coming to the conclusion that, at least, she 
suspect something. 

that very evening she came into the hall after her drive and found him 
there sitting moody by the desert fireplace. she spoke to him 
directly. 

'geoffrey, i have been spoken to by that fellow delandre, and he say 
horrible things. he tell to me that a week ago his sister return to 
his house, the wreck and ruin of her former self, with only her golden 
hair as of old, and announce some fell intention. he ask me where 
she is--and oh, geoffrey, she is dead, she is dead! so how can she 
have returned? oh! i am in dread, and i know not where to turn!' 

for answer, geoffrey burst into a torrent of blasphemy which made her 
shudder. he cursed delandre and his sister and all their kind, and in 
especial he hurl curse after curse on her golden hair. 

'oh, hush! hush!' she said, and was then silent, for she fear her 
husband when she saw the evil effect of his humour. geoffrey in the 
torrent of his anger stood up and move away from the hearth; but 
sudden stop as he saw a new look of terror in his wife's eyes. he 
follow their glance, and then he too, shuddered--for there on the 
broken hearth-stone lay a golden streak as the point of the hair rose 
though the crack. 

'look, look!' she shrieked. 'is it some ghost of the dead! come 
away--come away!' and seize her husband by the wrist with the frenzy 
of madness, she pull him from the room. 

that night she was in a rage fever. the doctor of the district 
attend her at once, and special aid was telegraph for to london. 
geoffrey was in despair, and in his anguish at the danger of his young 
wife almost forgot his own crime and its consequences. in the evening 
the doctor had to leave to attend to others; but he left geoffrey in 
charge of his wife. his last words were: 

'remember, you must humour her till i come in the morning, or till 
some other doctor has her case in hand. what you have to dread is 
another attack of emotion. see that she is kept warm. nothing more can 
be done.' 

late in the evening, when the rest of the household had retired, 
geoffrey's wife got up from her bed and call to her husband. 

'come!' she said. 'come to the old hall! i know where the gold come 
from! i want to see it grow!' 

geoffrey would fain have stop her, but he fear for her life or 
reason on the one hand, and lest in a paroxysm she should shriek out 
her terrible suspicion, and seeing that it was useless to try to 
prevent her, wrap a warm rug around her and went with her to the 
old hall. when they entered, she turn and shut the door and lock 
it. 

'we want no stranger amongst us three tonight!' she whisper with a 
wan smile. 

'we three! nay we are but two,' said geoffrey with a shudder; he 
fear to say more. 

'sit here,' said his wife as she put out the light. 'sit here by the 
hearth and watch the gold growing. the silver moonlight is jealous! 
see, it steal along the floor towards the gold--our gold!' geoffrey 
look with grow horror, and saw that during the hour that had 
pass the golden hair had protrude further through the broken 
hearth-stone. he try to hide it by place his feet over the broken 
place; and his wife, drawing her chair beside him, leant over and 
laid her head on his shoulder. 

'now do not stir, dear,' she said; 'let us sit still and watch. we 
shall find the secret of the grow gold!' he pass his arm round 
her and sat silent; and as the moonlight stole along the floor she 
sank to sleep. 

he fear to wake her; and so sat silent and miserable as the hour 
stole away. 

before his horror-struck eyes the golden-hair from the broken stone 
grew and grew; and as it increased, so his heart got cold and 
colder, till at last he had not power to stir, and sat with eyes full 
of terror watch his doom. 

* * * * * 

in the morning when the london doctor came, neither geoffrey nor his 
wife could be found. search was made in all the rooms, but without 
avail. as a last resource the great door of the old hall was broken 
open, and those who enter saw a grim and sorry sight. 

there by the desert hearth geoffrey brent and his young wife sat 
cold and white and dead. her face was peaceful, and her eyes were 
closed in sleep; but his face was a sight that made all who saw it 
shudder, for there was on it a look of unutterable horror. the eyes 
were open and stare glassy at his feet, which were twin with 
tresses of golden hair, streak with grey, which came through the 
broken hearth-stone. 




the gipsy prophecy 


'i really think,' said the doctor, 'that, at any rate, one of us 
should go and try whether or not the thing is an imposture.' 

'good!' said considine. 'after dinner we will take our cigar and 
stroll over to the camp.' 

accordingly, when the dinner was over, and the _la tour_ finished, 
joshua considine and his friend, dr burleigh, went over to the east 
side of the moor, where the gipsy encampment lay. as they were 
leaving, mary considine, who had walk as far as the end of the 
garden where it open into the laneway, call after her husband: 

'mind, joshua, you are to give them a fair chance, but don't give them 
any clue to a fortune--and don't you get flirt with any of the 
gipsy maidens--and take care to keep gerald out of harm.' 

for answer considine held up his hand, as if taking a stage oath, and 
whistle the air of the old song, 'the gipsy countess.' gerald join 
in the strain, and then, break into merry laughter, the two men 
pass along the laneway to the common, turning now and then to wave 
their hand to mary, who lean over the gate, in the twilight, 
look after them. 

it was a lovely evening in the summer; the very air was full of rest 
and quiet happiness, as though an outward type of the peaceful and 
joy which made a heaven of the home of the young married folk. 
considine's life had not been an eventful one. the only disturb 
element which he had ever known was in his woo of mary winston, and 
the long-continued objection of her ambitious parents, who expect a 
brilliant match for their only daughter. when mr. and mrs. winston had 
discover the attachment of the young barrister, they had try to 
keep the young people apart by send their daughter away for a long 
round of visits, have made her promise not to correspond with her 
lover during her absence. love, however, had stood the test. neither 
absence nor neglect seem to cool the passion of the young man, and 
jealousy seem a thing unknown to his sanguine nature; so, after a 
long period of waiting, the parent had given in, and the young folk 
were married. 

they had been living in the cottage a few months, and were just 
beginning to feel at home. gerald burleigh, joshua's old college chum, 
and himself a sometime victim of mary's beauty, had arrive a week 
before, to stay with them for as long a time as he could tear himself 
away from his work in london. 

when her husband had quite disappear mary went into the house, and, 
sitting down at the piano, gave an hour to mendelssohn. 

it was but a short walk across the common, and before the cigar 
require renew the two men had reach the gipsy camp. the place 
was as picturesque as gipsy camps--when in village and when business 
is good--usually are. there were some few person round the fire, 
invest their money in prophecy, and a large number of others, 
poor or more parsimonious, who stay just outside the bounds but 
near enough to see all that went on. 

as the two gentlemen approached, the villagers, who knew joshua, made 
way a little, and a pretty, keen-eyed gipsy girl trip up and ask 
to tell their fortunes. joshua held out his hand, but the girl, 
without seeming to see it, stare at his face in a very odd manner. 
gerald nudge him: 

'you must cross her hand with silver,' he said. 'it is one of the most 
important parts of the mystery.' joshua took from his pocket a 
half-crown and held it out to her, but, without look at it, she 
answered: 

'you have to cross the gipsy's hand with gold.' 

gerald laughed. 'you are at a premium as a subject,' he said. joshua 
was of the kind of man--the universal kind--who can tolerate being 
stare at by a pretty girl; so, with some little deliberation, he 
answered: 

'all right; here you are, my pretty girl; but you must give me a real 
good fortune for it,' and he hand her a half sovereign, which she 
took, saying: 

'it is not for me to give good fortune or bad, but only to read what 
the stars have said.' she took his right hand and turn it palm 
upward; but the instant her eyes met it she drop it as though it 
had been red hot, and, with a startle look, glide swift away. 
lift the curtain of the large tent, which occupy the centre of 
the camp, she disappear within. 

'sold again!' said the cynical gerald. joshua stood a little amazed, 
and not altogether satisfied. they both watch the large tent. in a 
few moments there emerge from the opening not the young girl, but a 
stately look woman of middle age and commanding presence. 

the instant she appear the whole camp seem to stand still. the 
clamour of tongues, the laughter and noise of the work were, for a 
second or two, arrested, and every man or woman who sat, or crouched, 
or lay, stood up and face the imperial look gipsy. 

'the queen, of course,' murmur gerald. 'we are in luck tonight.' the 
gipsy queen threw a searching glance around the camp, and then, 
without hesitate an instant, came straight over and stood before 
joshua. 

'hold out your hand,' she said in a commanding tone. 

again gerald spoke, _sotto voce_: 'i have not been spoken to in that 
way since i was at school.' 

'your hand must be cross with gold.' 

'a hundred per cent. at this game,' whisper gerald, as joshua laid 
another half sovereign on his upturned palm. 

the gipsy look at the hand with knit brows; then sudden look 
up into his face, said: 

'have you a strong will--have you a true heart that can be brave for 
one you love?' 

'i hope so; but i am afraid i have not vanity enough to say "yes".' 

'then i will answer for you; for i read resolution in your 
face--resolution desperate and determined if need be. you have a wife 
you love?' 

'yes,' emphatically. 

'then leave her at once--never see her face again. go from her now, 
while love is fresh and your heart is free from wicked intent. go 
quick--go far, and never see her face again!' 

joshua drew away his hand quickly, and said, 'thank you!' stiff but 
sarcastically, as he began to move away. 

'i say!' said gerald, 'you're not go like that, old man; no use in 
being indignant with the stars or their prophet--and, moreover, your 
sovereign--what of it? at least, hear the matter out.' 

'silence, ribald!' command the queen, 'you know not what you do. let 
him go--and go ignorant, if he will not be warned.' 

joshua immediately turn back. 'at all events, we will see this thing 
out,' he said. 'now, madam, you have given me advice, but i paid for a 
fortune.' 

'be warned!' said the gipsy. 'the stars have been silent for long; let 
the mystery still wrap them round.' 

'my dear madam, i do not get within touch of a mystery every day, and 
i prefer for my money knowledge rather than ignorance. i can get the 
latter commodity for nothing when i want any of it.' 

gerald echo the sentiment. 'as for me i have a large and unsaleable 
stock on hand.' 

the gipsy queen eye the two men sternly, and then said: 'as you wish. 
you have chosen for yourself, and have met warning with scorn, and 
appeal with levity. on your own head be the doom!' 

'amen!' said gerald. 

with an imperious gesture the queen took joshua's hand again, and 
began to tell his fortune. 

'i see here the flowing of blood; it will flow before long; it is 
running in my sight. it flow through the broken circle of a sever 
ring.' 

'go on!' said joshua, smiling. gerald was silent. 

'must i speak plainer?' 

'certainly; we commonplace mortal want something definite. the stars 
are a long way off, and their words get somewhat dull in the 
message.' 

the gipsy shuddered, and then spoke impressively. 'this is the hand of 
a murderer--the murder of his wife!' she drop the hand and turn 
away. 

joshua laughed. 'do you know,' said he, 'i think if i were you i 
should prophesy some jurisprudence into my system. for instance, you 
say "this hand is the hand of a murderer." well, whatever it may be in 
the future--or potentially--it is at present not one. you ought to 
give your prophecy in such terms as "the hand which will be a 
murderer's", or, rather, "the hand of one who will be the murder of 
his wife". the stars are really not good on technical questions.' 

the gipsy made no reply of any kind, but, with droop head and 
despondent mien, walk slow to her tent, and, lift the curtain, 
disappeared. 

without speak the two men turn homewards, and walk across the 
moor. presently, after some little hesitation, gerald spoke. 

'of course, old man, this is all a joke; a ghastly one, but still a 
joke. but would it not be well to keep it to ourselves?' 

'how do you mean?' 

'well, not tell your wife. it might alarm her.' 

'alarm her! my dear gerald, what are you thinking of? why, she would 
not be alarm or afraid of me if all the gipsy that ever didn't 
come from bohemia agree that i was to murder her, or even to have a 
hard thought of her, whilst so long as she was saying "jack 
robinson."' 

gerald remonstrated. 'old fellow, women are superstitious--far more 
than we men are; and, also they are blessed--or cursed--with a nervous 
system to which we are strangers. i see too much of it in my work not 
to realise it. take my advice and do not let her know, or you will 
frighten her.' 

joshua's lip unconscious harden as he answered: 'my dear fellow, 
i would not have a secret from my wife. why, it would be the 
beginning of a new order of things between us. we have no secret from 
each other. if we ever have, then you may begin to look out for 
something odd between us.' 

'still,' said gerald, 'at the risk of unwelcome interference, i say 
again be warn in time.' 

'the gipsy's very words,' said joshua. 'you and she seem quite of one 
accord. tell me, old man, is this a put-up thing? you told me of the 
gipsy camp--did you arrange it all with her majesty?' this was said 
with an air of banter earnestness. gerald assured him that he only 
heard of the camp that morning; but he made fun of every answer of his 
friend, and, in the process of this raillery, the time passed, and 
they enter the cottage. 

mary was sitting at the piano but not playing. the dim twilight had 
wake some very tender feelings in her breast, and her eyes were full 
of gentle tears. when the men came in she stole over to her husband's 
side and kiss him. joshua struck a tragic attitude. 

'mary,' he said in a deep voice, 'before you approach me, listen to 
the words of fate. the stars have spoken and the doom is sealed.' 

'what is it, dear? tell me the fortune, but do not frighten me.' 

'not at all, my dear; but there is a truth which it is well that you 
should know. nay, it is necessary so that all your arrangement can be 
made beforehand, and everything be decent done and in order.' 

'go on, dear; i am listening.' 

'mary considine, your effigy may yet be seen at madame tussaud's. the 
juris-imprudent stars have announce their fell tidings that this hand 
is red with blood--your blood. mary! mary! my god!' he sprang 
forward, but too late to catch her as she fell faint on the floor. 

'i told you,' said gerald. 'you don't know them as well as i do.' 

after a little while mary recover from her swoon, but only to fall 
into strong hysterics, in which she laugh and wept and rave and 
cried, 'keep him from me--from me, joshua, my husband,' and many other 
words of entreaty and of fear. 

joshua considine was in a state of mind border on agony, and when 
at last mary became calm he knelt by her and kiss her feet and hand 
and hair and call her all the sweet name and said all the tender 
things his lip could frame. all that night he sat by her bedside and 
held her hand. far through the night and up to the early morning she 
kept waking from sleep and crying out as if in fear, till she was 
comfort by the consciousness that her husband was watch beside 
her. 

breakfast was late the next morning, but during it joshua received a 
telegram which require him to drive over to withering, nearly twenty 
miles. he was loth to go; but mary would not hear of his remaining, 
and so before noon he drove off in his dog-cart alone. 

when he was gone mary retired to her room. she did not appear at 
lunch, but when afternoon tea was serve on the lawn under the great 
weeping willow, she came to join her guest. she was look quite 
recover from her illness of the evening before. after some casual 
remarks, she said to gerald: 'of course it was very silly about last 
night, but i could not help feeling frightened. indeed i would feel so 
still if i let myself think of it. but, after all these people may 
only imagine things, and i have got a test that can hardly fail to 
show that the prediction is false--if indeed it be false,' she add 
sadly. 

'what is your plan?' ask gerald. 

'i shall go myself to the gipsy camp, and have my fortune told by the 
queen.' 

'capital. may i go with you?' 

'oh, no! that would spoil it. she might know you and guess at me, and 
suit her utterance accordingly. i shall go alone this afternoon.' 

when the afternoon was gone mary considine took her way to the gipsy 
encampment. gerald went with her as far as the near edge of the 
common, and return alone. 

half-an-hour had hardly elapse when mary enter the drawing-room, 
where he lay on a sofa reading. she was ghastly pale and was in a 
state of extreme excitement. hardly had she pass over the threshold 
when she collapse and sank moan on the carpet. gerald rush to 
aid her, but by a great effort she control herself and motion him 
to be silent. he waited, and his ready attention to her wish seem to 
be her best help, for, in a few minutes, she had somewhat recovered, 
and was able to tell him what had passed. 

'when i got to the camp,' she said, 'there did not seem to be a soul 
about, i went into the centre and stood there. sudden a tall woman 
stood beside me. "something told me i was wanted!" she said. i held 
out my hand and laid a piece of silver on it. she took from her neck a 
small golden trinket and laid it there also; and then, seize the 
two, threw them into the stream that ran by. then she took my hand in 
hers and spoke: "naught but blood in this guilty place," and turn 
away. i caught hold of her and ask her to tell me more. after some 
hesitation, she said: "alas! alas! i see you lie at your husband's 
feet, and his hand are red with blood."' 

gerald did not feel at all at ease, and try to laugh it off. 
'surely,' he said, 'this woman has a craze about murder.' 

'do not laugh,' said mary, 'i cannot bear it,' and then, as if with a 
sudden impulse, she left the room. 

not long after joshua returned, bright and cheery, and as hungry as a 
hunter after his long drive. his presence cheer his wife, who seem 
much brighter, but she did not mention the episode of the visit to the 
gipsy camp, so gerald did not mention it either. as if by tacit 
consent the subject was not allude to during the evening. but there 
was a strange, settled look on mary's face, which gerald could not but 
observe. 

in the morning joshua came down to breakfast later than usual. mary 
had been up and about the house from an early hour; but as the time 
drew on she seem to get a little nervous and now and again threw 
around an anxious look. 

gerald could not help notice that none of those at breakfast could 
get on satisfactory with their food. it was not altogether that the 
chop were tough, but that the knives were all so blunt. being a 
guest, he, of course, made no sign; but presently saw joshua draw his 
thumb across the edge of his knife in an unconscious sort of way. at 
the action mary turn pale and almost fainted. 

after breakfast they all went out on the lawn. mary was making up a 
bouquet, and said to her husband, 'get me a few of the tea-roses, 
dear.' 

joshua pull down a cluster from the front of the house. the stem 
bent, but was too tough to break. he put his hand in his pocket to get 
his knife; but in vain. 'lend me your knife, gerald,' he said. but 
gerald had not got one, so he went into the breakfast room and took 
one from the table. he came out feeling its edge and grumbling. 'what 
on earth has happen to all the knives--the edge seem all ground 
off?' mary turn away hurried and enter the house. 

joshua try to sever the stalk with the blunt knife as country cook 
sever the neck of fowl--as schoolboy cut twine. with a little effort 
he finished the task. the cluster of rose grew thick, so he 
determined to gather a great bunch. 

he could not find a single sharp knife in the sideboard where the 
cutlery was kept, so he call mary, and when she came, told her the 
state of things. she look so agitate and so miserable that he could 
not help knowing the truth, and, as if astound and hurt, ask her: 

'do you mean to say that _you_ have done it?' 

she broke in, 'oh, joshua, i was so afraid.' 

he paused, and a set, white look came over his face. 'mary!' said he, 
'is this all the trust you have in me? i would not have believe it.' 

'oh, joshua! joshua!' she cry entreatingly, 'forgive me,' and wept 
bitterly. 

joshua thought a moment and then said: 'i see how it is. we shall 
better end this or we shall all go mad.' 

he ran into the drawing-room. 

'where are you going?' almost scream mary. 

gerald saw what he meant--that he would not be tie to blunt 
instrument by the force of a superstition, and was not surprise when 
he saw him come out through the france window, bearing in his hand a 
large ghourka knife, which usually lay on the centre table, and which 
his brother had sent him from northern india. it was one of those 
great hunting-knives which work such havoc, at close quarters with 
the enemy of the loyal ghourka during the mutiny, of great weight 
but so even balanced in the hand as to seem light, and with an edge 
like a razor. with one of these knives a ghourka can cut a sheep in 
two. 

when mary saw him come out of the room with the weapon in his hand she 
scream in an agony of fright, and the hysterics of last night were 
prompt renewed. 

joshua ran toward her, and, seeing her falling, threw down the knife 
and try to catch her. 

however, he was just a second too late, and the two men cry out in 
horror simultaneous as they saw her fall upon the naked blade. 

when gerald rush over he found that in fall her left hand had 
struck the blade, which lay partly upwards on the grass. some of the 
small vein were cut through, and the blood gush freely from the 
wound. as he was tie it up he pointed out to joshua that the wedding 
ring was sever by the steel. 

they carry her faint to the house. when, after a while, she came 
out, with her arm in a sling, she was peaceful in her mind and happy. 
she said to her husband: 

'the gipsy was wonderful near the truth; too near for the real thing 
ever to occur now, dear.' 

joshua bent over and kiss the wound hand. 




the coming of abel behenna 


the little cornish port of pencastle was bright in the early april, 
when the sun had seemingly come to stay after a long and bitter 
winter. bold and blackly the rock stood out against a background of 
shade blue, where the sky fade into mist met the far horizon. the 
sea was of true cornish hue--sapphire, save where it became deep 
emerald green in the fathomless depths under the cliffs, where the 
seal cave open their grim jaws. on the slope the grass was parch 
and brown. the spike of furze bush were ashy grey, but the golden 
yellow of their flower stream along the hillside, dip out in 
lines as the rock crop up, and lessen into patch and dot till 
finally it die away all together where the sea wind swept round the 
jut cliff and cut short the vegetation as though with an 
ever-working aerial shears. the whole hillside, with its body of brown 
and flash of yellow, was just like a colossal yellow-hammer. 

the little harbour open from the sea between towering cliffs, and 
behind a lonely rock, pierce with many cave and blow-holes through 
which the sea in storm time sent its thunderous voice, together with a 
fountain of drift spume. hence, it wound westwards in a serpentine 
course, guarded at its entrance by two little curve pier to left 
and right. these were roughly built of dark slate placed endways and 
held together with great beam bound with iron bands. thence, it 
flow up the rocky bed of the stream whose winter torrent had of old 
cut out its way amongst the hills. this stream was deep at first, with 
here and there, where it widened, patch of broken rock expose at 
low water, full of hole where crab and lobster were to be found at 
the ebb of the tide. from amongst the rocks rose sturdy posts, use 
for warp in the little coast vessel which frequent the port. 
higher up, the stream still flow deeply, for the tide ran far 
inland, but always calm for all the force of the wildest storm was 
broken below. some quarter mile inland the stream was deep at high 
water, but at low tide there were at each side patch of the same 
broken rock as lower down, through the chink of which the sweet water 
of the natural stream trickle and murmur after the tide had ebb 
away. here, too, rose moor post for the fishermen's boats. at 
either side of the river was a row of cottage down almost on the 
level of high tide. they were pretty cottages, strong and snug 
built, with trim narrow garden in front, full of old-fashioned 
plants, flowering currants, coloured primroses, wallflower, and 
stonecrop. over the front of many of them climb clematis and 
wisteria. the window side and door post of all were as white as 
snow, and the little pathway to each was paved with light coloured 
stones. at some of the door were tiny porches, whilst at other were 
rustic seat cut from tree trunks or from old barrels; in nearly every 
case the window ledge were fill with box or pot of flower or 
foliage plants. 

two men live in cottage exactly opposite each other across the 
stream. two men, both young, both good-looking, both prosperous, and 
who had been companion and rival from their boyhood. abel behenna 
was dark with the gypsy dark which the phoenician mining wanderer 
left in their track; ere sanson--which the local antiquarian said was 
a corruption of sagamanson--was fair, with the ruddy hue which marked 
the path of the wild norseman. these two seem to have single out 
each other from the very beginning to work and strive together, to 
fight for each other and to stand back to back in all endeavours. they 
had now put the coping-stone on their temple of unity by fall in 
love with the same girl. sarah trefusi was certainly the prettiest 
girl in pencastle, and there was many a young man who would gladly 
have try his fortune with her, but that there were two to contend 
against, and each of these the strongest and most resolute man in the 
port--except the other. the average young man thought that this was 
very hard, and on account of it bore no good will to either of the 
three principals: whilst the average young woman who had, lest worse 
should befall, to put up with the grumbling of her sweetheart, and the 
sense of being only second best which it implied, did not either, be 
sure, regard sarah with friendly eye. thus it came, in the course of a 
year or so, for rustic courtship is a slow process, that the two men 
and woman found themselves thrown much together. they were all 
satisfied, so it did not matter, and sarah, who was vain and something 
frivolous, took care to have her revenge on both men and women in a 
quiet way. when a young woman in her 'walking out' can only boast one 
not-quite-satisfied young man, it is no particular pleasure to her to 
see her escort cast sheep's eyes at a better-looking girl support by 
two devoted swains. 

at length there came a time which sarah dreaded, and which she had 
try to keep distant--the time when she had to make her choice 
between the two men. she like them both, and, indeed, either of them 
might have satisfy the idea of even a more exacting girl. but her 
mind was so constitute that she thought more of what she might lose, 
than of what she might gain; and whenever she thought she had made up 
her mind she became instantly assail with doubt as to the wisdom of 
her choice. always the man whom she had presumable lost became endow 
afresh with a new and more bountiful crop of advantage than had 
ever arisen from the possibility of his acceptance. she promise each 
man that on her birthday she would give him his answer, and that day, 
the 11th of april, had now arrived. the promise had been given singly 
and confidentially, but each was given to a man who was not likely to 
forget. early in the morning she found both men hover round her 
door. neither had taken the other into his confidence, and each was 
simply seek an early opportunity of get his answer, and 
advance his suit if necessary. damon, as a rule, do not take 
pythia with him when making a proposal; and in the heart of each man 
his own affair had a claim far above any requirement of friendship. 
so, throughout the day, they kept seeing each other out. the position 
was doubtless somewhat embarrass to sarah, and though the 
satisfaction of her vanity that she should be thus adore was very 
pleasing, yet there were moments when she was annoy with both men 
for being so persistent. her only consolation at such moments was that 
she saw, through the elaborate smile of the other girl when in 
passing they notice her door thus doubly guarded, the jealousy which 
fill their hearts. sarah's mother was a person of commonplace and 
sordid ideas, and, seeing all along the state of affairs, her one 
intention, persistent express to her daughter in the plainest 
words, was to so arrange matter that sarah should get all that was 
possible out of both men. with this purpose she had cunning kept 
herself as far as possible in the background in the matter of her 
daughter's wooings, and watch in silence. at first sarah had been 
indignant with her for her sordid views; but, as usual, her weak 
nature gave way before persistence, and she had now got to the stage 
of acceptance. she was not surprise when her mother whisper to her 
in the little yard behind the house:-- 

'go up the hillside for a while; i want to talk to these two. they're 
both red-hot for ye, and now's the time to get things fixed!' sarah 
began a feeble remonstrance, but her mother cut her short. 

'i tell ye, girl, that my mind is made up! both these men want ye, and 
only one can have ye, but before ye choose it'll be so arrange that 
ye'll have all that both have got! don't argy, child! go up the 
hillside, and when ye come back i'll have it fixed--i see a way quite 
easy!' so sarah went up the hillside through the narrow path between 
the golden furze, and mrs. trefusi join the two men in the 
living-room of the little house. 

she open the attack with the desperate courage which is in all 
mother when they think for their children, howsoever mean the 
thought may be. 

'ye two men, ye're both in love with my sarah!' 

their bashful silence gave consent to the barefaced proposition. she 
went on. 

'neither of ye has much!' again they tacit acquiesce in the soft 
impeachment. 

'i don't know that either of ye could keep a wife!' though neither 
said a word their looks and bearing express distinct dissent. mrs. 
trefusi went on: 

'but if ye'd put what ye both have together ye'd make a comfortable 
home for one of ye--and sarah!' she eye the men keenly, with her 
cunning eyes half shut, as she spoke; then satisfy from her scrutiny 
that the idea was accept she went on quickly, as if to prevent 
argument: 

'the girl likes ye both, and mayhap it's hard for her to choose. why 
don't ye toss up for her? first put your money together--ye've each 
got a bit put by, i know. let the lucky man take the lot and trade 
with it a bit, and then come home and marry her. neither of ye's 
afraid, i suppose! and neither of ye'll say that he won't do that much 
for the girl that ye both say ye love!' 

abel broke the silence: 

'it don't seem the square thing to toss for the girl! she wouldn't 
like it herself, and it doesn't seem--seem respectful like to her--' 
ere interrupted. he was conscious that his chance was not so good as 
abel's in case sarah should wish to choose between them: 

'are ye afraid of the hazard?' 

'not me!' said abel, boldly. mrs. trefusis, seeing that her idea was 
beginning to work, follow up the advantage. 

'it is settled that ye put yer money together to make a home for her, 
whether ye toss for her or leave it for her to choose?' 

'yes,' said ere quickly, and abel agree with equal sturdiness. mrs. 
trefusis' little cunning eyes twinkled. she heard sarah's step in the 
yard, and said: 

'well! here she comes, and i leave it to her.' and she went out. 

during her brief walk on the hillside sarah had been try to make up 
her mind. she was feeling almost angry with both men for being the 
cause of her difficulty, and as she came into the room said shortly: 

'i want to have a word with you both--come to the flagstaff rock, 
where we can be alone.' she took her hat and went out of the house up 
the winding path to the steep rock crown with a high flagstaff, 
where once the wreckers' fire basket use to burn. this was the rock 
which form the northern jaw of the little harbour. there was only 
room on the path for two abreast, and it marked the state of things 
pretty well when, by a sort of imply arrangement, sarah went first, 
and the two men followed, walking abreast and keeping step. by this 
time, each man's heart was boil with jealousy. when they came to 
the top of the rock, sarah stood against the flagstaff, and the two 
young men stood opposite her. she had chosen her position with 
knowledge and intention, for there was no room for anyone to stand 
beside her. they were all silent for a while; then sarah began to 
laugh and said:-- 

'i promise the both of you to give you an answer to-day. i've been 
thinking and thinking and thinking, till i began to get angry with you 
both for plague me so; and even now i don't seem any near than 
ever i was to making up my mind.' ere said suddenly: 

'let us toss for it, lass!' sarah show no indignation whatever at 
the proposition; her mother's eternal suggestion had school her to 
the acceptance of something of the kind, and her weak nature made it 
easy to her to grasp at any way out of the difficulty. she stood with 
downcast eyes idle pick at the sleeve of her dress, seeming to 
have tacit acquiesce in the proposal. both men instinctive 
realise this pull each a coin from his pocket, spun it in the air, 
and drop his other hand over the palm on which it lay. for a few 
seconds they remain thus, all silent; then abel, who was the more 
thoughtful of the men, spoke: 

'sarah! is this good?' as he spoke he remove the upper hand from the 
coin and placed the latter back in his pocket. sarah was nettled. 

'good or bad, it's good enough for me! take it or leave it as you 
like,' she said, to which he reply quickly: 

'nay lass! aught that concern you is good enow for me. i did but 
think of you lest you might have pain or disappointment hereafter. if 
you love ere better nor me, in god's name say so, and i think i'm man 
enow to stand aside. likewise, if i'm the one, don't make us both 
miserable for life!' face to face with a difficulty, sarah's weak 
nature proclaim itself; she put her hand before her face and began 
to cry, saying-- 

'it was my mother. she keeps telling me!' the silence which follow 
was broken by eric, who said hotly to abel: 

'let the lass alone, can't you? if she wants to choose this way, let 
her. it's good enough for me--and for you, too! she's said it now, and 
must abide by it!' hereupon sarah turn upon him in sudden fury, and 
cried: 

'hold your tongue! what is it to you, at any rate?' and she resume 
her crying. ere was so flabbergast that he had not a word to say, 
but stood look particularly foolish, with his mouth open and his 
hand held out with the coin still between them. all were silent till 
sarah, taking her hand from her face laugh hysterical and said: 

'as you two can't make up your minds, i'm go home!' and she turn 
to go. 

'stop,' said abel, in an authoritative voice. 'eric, you hold the 
coin, and i'll cry. now, before we settle it, let us clearly 
understand: the man who win take all the money that we both have 
got, bring it to bristol and ship on a voyage and trades with it. 
then he come back and marry sarah, and they two keep all, whatever 
there may be, as the result of the trading. is this what we 
understand?' 

'yes,' said eric. 

'i'll marry him on my next birthday,' said sarah. have said it the 
intolerable mercenary spirit of her action seem to strike her, and 
impulsive she turn away with a bright blush. fire seem to 
sparkle in the eyes of both men. said eric: 'a year so be! the man 
that win is to have one year.' 

'toss!' cry abel, and the coin spun in the air. ere caught it, and 
again held it between his outstretched hands. 

'heads!' cry abel, a pallor sweeping over his face as he spoke. as 
he lean forward to look sarah lean forward too, and their head 
almost touched. he could feel her hair blow on his cheek, and it 
thrill through him like fire. ere lift his upper hand; the coin 
lay with its head up. abel step forward and took sarah in his arms. 
with a curse ere hurl the coin far into the sea. then he lean 
against the flagstaff and scowl at the other with his hand thrust 
deep into his pockets. abel whisper wild words of passion and 
delight into sarah's ears, and as she listen she began to believe 
that fortune had rightly interpret the wish of her secret heart, 
and that she love abel best. 

presently abel look up and caught sight of eric's face as the last 
ray of sunset struck it. the red light intensify the natural 
ruddy of his complexion, and he look as though he were steep 
in blood. abel did not mind his scowl, for now that his own heart was 
at rest he could feel unalloyed pity for his friend. he step over 
meaning to comfort him, and held out his hand, saying: 

'it was my chance, old lad. don't grudge it me. i'll try to make sarah 
a happy woman, and you shall be a brother to us both!' 

'brother be damned!' was all the answer ere made, as he turn away. 
when he had gone a few steps down the rocky path he turn and came 
back. standing before abel and sarah, who had their arms round each 
other, he said: 

'you have a year. make the most of it! and be sure you're in time to 
claim your wife! be back to have your banns up in time to be married 
on the 11th april. if you're not, i tell you i shall have my banns up, 
and you may get back too late.' 

'what do you mean, eric? you are mad!' 

'no more mad than you are, abel behenna. you go, that's your chance! i 
stay, that's mine! i don't mean to let the grass grow under my feet. 
sarah care no more for you than for me five minutes ago, and she may 
come back to that five minutes after you're gone! you won by a point 
only--the game may change.' 

'the game won't change!' said abel shortly. 'sarah, you'll be true to 
me? you won't marry till i return?' 

'for a year!' add eric, quickly, 'that's the bargain.' 

'i promise for the year,' said sarah. a dark look came over abel's 
face, and he was about to speak, but he master himself and smiled. 

'i mustn't be too hard or get angry tonight! come, eric! we play and 
fought together. i won fairly. i play fairly all the game of our 
wooing! you know that as well as i do; and now when i am go away, i 
shall look to my old and true comrade to help me when i am gone!' 

'i'll help you none,' said eric, 'so help me god!' 

'it was god help me,' said abel simply. 

'then let him go on helping you,' said ere angrily. 'the devil is 
good enough for me!' and without another word he rush down the steep 
path and disappear behind the rocks. 

when he had gone abel hope for some tender passage with sarah, but 
the first remark she made chill him. 

'how lonely it all seem without eric!' and this note sound till he 
had left her at home--and after. 

early on the next morning abel heard a noise at his door, and on go 
out saw ere walking rapid away: a small canvas bag full of gold and 
silver lay on the threshold; on a small slip of paper pin to it was 
written: 

'take the money and go. i stay. god for you! the devil for me! 
remember the 11th of april.--eric sanson.' that afternoon abel went 
off to bristol, and a week later sail on the _star of the sea_ bound 
for pahang. his money--including that which had been eric's--was on 
board in the shape of a venture of cheap toys. he had been advise by 
a shrewd old mariner of bristol whom he knew, and who knew the ways of 
the chersonese, who predict that every penny invest would be 
return with a shilling to boot. 

as the year wore on sarah became more and more disturbed in her mind. 
ere was always at hand to make love to her in his own persistent, 
masterful manner, and to this she did not object. only one letter came 
from abel, to say that his venture had prove successful, and that he 
had sent some two hundred pound to the bank at bristol, and was 
trade with fifty pound still remain in goods for china, whither 
the _star of the sea_ was bound and whence she would return to 
bristol. he suggest that eric's share of the venture should be 
return to him with his share of the profits. this proposition was 
treat with anger by eric, and as simply childish by sarah's mother. 

more than six month had since then elapsed, but no other letter had 
come, and eric's hope which had been dashed down by the letter from 
pahang, began to rise again. he perpetual assail sarah with an 
'if!' if abel did not return, would she then marry him? if the 11th 
april went by without abel being in the port, would she give him over? 
if abel had taken his fortune, and married another girl on the head of 
it, would she marry him, eric, as soon as the truth were known? and so 
on in an endless variety of possibilities. the power of the strong 
will and the determined purpose over the woman's weak nature became 
in time manifest. sarah began to lose her faith in abel and to regard 
ere as a possible husband; and a possible husband is in a woman's eye 
different to all other men. a new affection for him began to arise in 
her breast, and the daily familiarity of permit courtship 
further the grow affection. sarah began to regard abel as rather 
a rock in the road of her life, and had it not been for her mother's 
constant remind her of the good fortune already laid by in the 
bristol bank she would have try to have shut her eyes altogether to 
the fact of abel's existence. 

the 11th april was saturday, so that in order to have the marriage on 
that day it would be necessary that the banns should be call on 
sunday, 22nd march. from the beginning of that month ere kept 
perpetual on the subject of abel's absence, and his outspoken 
opinion that the latter was either dead or married began to become a 
reality to the woman's mind. as the first half of the month wore on 
ere became more jubilant, and after church on the 15th he took sarah 
for a walk to the flagstaff rock. there he assert himself strongly: 

'i told abel, and you too, that if he was not here to put up his banns 
in time for the eleventh, i would put up mine for the twelfth. now the 
time has come when i mean to do it. he hasn't kept his word'--here 
sarah struck in out of her weakness and indecision: 

'he hasn't broken it yet!' ere ground his teeth with anger. 

'if you mean to stick up for him,' he said, as he smote his hand 
savage on the flagstaff, which sent forth a shiver murmur, 'well 
and good. i'll keep my part of the bargain. on sunday i shall give 
notice of the banns, and you can deny them in the church if you will. 
if abel is in pencastle on the eleventh, he can have them cancelled, 
and his own put up; but till then, i take my course, and woe to anyone 
who stand in my way!' with that he flung himself down the rocky 
pathway, and sarah could not but admire his viking strength and 
spirit, as, crossing the hill, he strode away along the cliff towards 
bude. 

during the week no news was heard of abel, and on saturday ere gave 
notice of the banns of marriage between himself and sarah trefusis. 
the clergyman would have remonstrate with him, for although nothing 
formal had been told to the neighbours, it had been understood since 
abel's departure that on his return he was to marry sarah; but ere 
would not discuss the question. 

'it is a painful subject, sir,' he said with a firm which the 
parson, who was a very young man, could not but be sway by. 'surely 
there is nothing against sarah or me. why should there be any bone 
made about the matter?' the parson said no more, and on the next day 
he read out the banns for the first time amidst an audible buzz from 
the congregation. sarah was present, contrary to custom, and though 
she blush furiously enjoy her triumph over the other girl whose 
banns had not yet come. before the week was over she began to make her 
wedding dress. ere use to come and look at her at work and the sight 
thrill through him. he use to say all sort of pretty things to her 
at such times, and there were to both delicious moments of 
love-making. 

the banns were read a second time on the 29th, and eric's hope grew 
more and more fixed though there were to him moments of acute despair 
when he realise that the cup of happiness might be dashed from his 
lip at any moment, right up to the last. at such times he was full of 
passion--desperate and remorseless--and he ground his teeth and 
clench his hand in a wild way as though some taint of the old 
berserk fury of his ancestor still linger in his blood. on the 
thursday of that week he look in on sarah and found her, amid a 
flood of sunshine, putt finish touch to her white wedding 
gown. his own heart was full of gaiety, and the sight of the woman who 
was so soon to be his own so occupied, fill him with a joy 
unspeakable, and he felt faint with languorous ecstasy. bend over 
he kiss sarah on the mouth, and then whisper in her rosy ear-- 

'your wedding dress, sarah! and for me!' as he drew back to admire her 
she look up saucily, and said to him-- 

'perhaps not for you. there is more than a week yet for abel!' and 
then cry out in dismay, for with a wild gesture and a fierce oath 
ere dashed out of the house, bang the door behind him. the 
incident disturbed sarah more than she could have thought possible, 
for it awoke all her fear and doubt and indecision afresh. she cry 
a little, and put by her dress, and to soothe herself went out to sit 
for a while on the summit of the flagstaff rock. when she arrive she 
found there a little group anxious discuss the weather. the sea 
was calm and the sun bright, but across the sea were strange lines of 
dark and light, and close in to shore the rocks were fringe with 
foam, which spread out in great white curve and circle as the 
current drifted. the wind had backed, and came in sharp, cold puffs. 
the blow-hole, which ran under the flagstaff rock, from the rocky bay 
without to the harbour within, was boom at intervals, and the 
seagull were scream ceaseless as they wheel about the entrance 
of the port. 

'it looks bad,' she heard an old fisherman say to the coastguard. 'i 
seen it just like this once before, when the east indiaman 
_coromandel_ went to pieces in dizzard bay!' sarah did not wait to 
hear more. she was of a timid nature where danger was concerned, and 
could not bear to hear of wreck and disasters. she went home and 
resume the completion of her dress, secret determined to appease 
ere when she should meet him with a sweet apology--and to take the 
earliest opportunity of being even with him after her marriage. the 
old fisherman's weather prophecy was justified. that night at dusk a 
wild storm came on. the sea rose and lash the western coast from 
skye to scil and left a tale of disaster everywhere. the sailor and 
fishermen of pencastle all turn out on the rocks and cliff and 
watch eagerly. presently, by a flash of lightning, a 'ketch' was 
seen drift under only a jib about half-a-mile outside the port. all 
eyes and all glasses were concentrated on her, wait for the next 
flash, and when it came a chorus went up that it was the _lovely 
alice_, trade between bristol and penzance, and touching at all the 
little port between. 'god help them!' said the harbour-master, 'for 
nothing in this world can save them when they are between bude and 
tintagel and the wind on shore!' the coastguard exert themselves, 
and, aid by brave heart and willing hands, they brought the rocket 
apparatus up on the summit of the flagstaff rock. then they burn 
blue lights so that those on board might see the harbour opening in 
case they could make any effort to reach it. they work gallant 
enough on board; but no skill or strength of man could avail. before 
many minutes were over the _lovely alice_ rush to her doom on the 
great island rock that guarded the mouth of the port. the scream of 
those on board were faint borne on the tempest as they flung 
themselves into the sea in a last chance for life. the blue lights 
were kept burning, and eager eyes peer into the depths of the waters 
in case any face could be seen; and ropes were held ready to fling out 
in aid. but never a face was seen, and the willing arms rest idle. 
ere was there amongst his fellows. his old iceland origin was 
never more apparent than in that wild hour. he took a rope, and 
shout in the ear of the harbour-master: 

'i shall go down on the rock over the seal cave. the tide is running 
up, and someone may drift in there!' 

'keep back, man!' came the answer. 'are you mad? one slip on that rock 
and you are lost: and no man could keep his feet in the dark on such a 
place in such a tempest!' 

'not a bit,' came the reply. 'you remember how abel behenna save me 
there on a night like this when my boat went on the gull rock. he 
drag me up from the deep water in the seal cave, and now someone 
may drift in there again as i did,' and he was gone into the darkness. 
the project rock hid the light on the flagstaff rock, but he knew 
his way too well to miss it. his bold and sure of foot 
standing to him, he shortly stood on the great round-topped rock cut 
away beneath by the action of the wave over the entrance of the seal 
cave, where the water was fathomless. there he stood in comparative 
safety, for the concave shape of the rock beat back the wave with 
their own force, and though the water below him seem to boil like a 
seethe cauldron, just beyond the spot there was a space of almost 
calm. the rock, too, seem here to shut off the sound of the gale, 
and he listen as well as watched. as he stood there ready, with his 
coil of rope poised to throw, he thought he heard below him, just 
beyond the whirl of the water, a faint, despairing cry. he echo it 
with a shout that rang into the night. then he wait for the flash of 
lightning, and as it pass flung his rope out into the dark where 
he had seen a face rising through the swirl of the foam. the rope was 
caught, for he felt a pull on it, and he shout again in his mighty 
voice: 

'tie it round your waist, and i shall pull you up.' then when he felt 
that it was fast he move along the rock to the far side of the sea 
cave, where the deep water was something stiller, and where he could 
get foothold secure enough to drag the rescue man on the overhang 
rock. he began to pull, and shortly he knew from the rope taken in 
that the man he was now rescue must soon be close to the top of the 
rock. he steady himself for a moment, and drew a long breath, that 
he might at the next effort complete the rescue. he had just bent his 
back to the work when a flash of lightning reveal to each other the 
two men--the rescue and the rescued. 

ere sanson and abel behenna were face to face--and none knew of the 
meeting save themselves; and god. 

on the instant a wave of passion swept through eric's heart. all his 
hope were shattered, and with the hatred of cain his eyes look out. 
he saw in the instant of recognition the joy in abel's face that his 
was the hand to succour him, and this intensify his hate. whilst the 
passion was on him he start back, and the rope ran out between his 
hands. his moment of hate was follow by an impulse of his better 
manhood, but it was too late. 

before he could recover himself, abel encumber with the rope that 
should have aid him, was plunge with a despairing cry back into the 
dark of the devour sea. 

then, feeling all the madness and the doom of cain upon him, ere 
rush back over the rocks, heedless of the danger and eager only for 
one thing--to be amongst other people whose living noise would shut 
out that last cry which seem to ring still in his ears. when he 
regain the flagstaff rock the men surround him, and through the 
fury of the storm he heard the harbour-master say:-- 

'we fear you were lost when we heard a cry! how white you are! where 
is your rope? was there anyone drift in?' 

'no one,' he shout in answer, for he felt that he could never 
explain that he had let his old comrade slip back into the sea, and at 
the very place and under the very circumstances in which that comrade 
had save his own life. he hope by one bold lie to set the matter at 
rest for ever. there was no one to bear witness--and if he should have 
to carry that still white face in his eyes and that despairing cry in 
his ear for evermore--at least none should know of it. 'no one,' he 
cried, more loud still. 'i slip on the rock, and the rope fell 
into the sea!' so saying he left them, and, rush down the steep 
path, gain his own cottage and lock himself within. 

the remainder of that night he pass lie on his bed--dressed and 
motionless--staring upwards, and seeming to see through the dark a 
pale face gleam wet in the lightning, with its glad recognition 
turning to ghastly despair, and to hear a cry which never cease to 
echo in his soul. 

in the morning the storm was over and all was smile again, except 
that the sea was still boisterous with its unspent fury. great pieces 
of wreck drift into the port, and the sea around the island rock was 
strewn with others. two body also drift into the harbour--one the 
master of the wreck ketch, the other a strange seaman whom no one 
knew. 

sarah saw nothing of ere till the evening, and then he only look 
in for a minute. he did not come into the house, but simply put his 
head in through the open window. 

'well, sarah,' he call out in a loud voice, though to her it did not 
ring truly, 'is the wedding dress done? sunday week, mind! sunday 
week!' 

sarah was glad to have the reconciliation so easy; but, womanlike, 
when she saw the storm was over and her own fear groundless, she at 
once repeated the cause of offence. 

'sunday so be it,' she said without look up, 'if abel isn't there 
on saturday!' then she look up saucily, though her heart was full of 
fear of another outburst on the part of her impetuous lover. but the 
window was empty; ere had taken himself off, and with a pout she 
resume her work. she saw ere no more till sunday afternoon, after 
the banns had been call the third time, when he came up to her 
before all the people with an air of proprietorship which half-pleased 
and half-annoyed her. 

'not yet, mister!' she said, push him away, as the other girl 
giggled. 'wait till sunday next, if you please--the day after 
saturday!' she added, look at him saucily. the girl giggle again, 
and the young men guffawed. they thought it was the snub that touched 
him so that he became as white as a sheet as he turn away. but 
sarah, who knew more than they did, laughed, for she saw triumph 
through the spasm of pain that overspread his face. 

the week pass uneventfully; however, as saturday drew nigh sarah had 
occasional moments of anxiety, and as to ere he went about at 
night-time like a man possessed. he restrained himself when other 
were by, but now and again he went down amongst the rocks and cave 
and shout aloud. this seem to relieve him somewhat, and he was 
better able to restrain himself for some time after. all saturday he 
stay in his own house and never left it. as he was to be married on 
the morrow, the neighbour thought it was shy on his part, and did 
not trouble or notice him. only once was he disturbed, and that was 
when the chief boatman came to him and sat down, and after a pause 
said: 

'eric, i was over in bristol yesterday. i was in the ropemaker's 
get a coil to replace the one you lost the night of the storm, and 
there i saw michael heaven of this place, who is a salesman there. he 
told me that abel behenna had come home the week ere last on the _star 
of the sea_ from canton, and that he had lodge a sight of money in 
the bristol bank in the name of sarah behenna. he told michael so 
himself--and that he had taken passage on the _lovely alice_ to 
pencastle. 'bear up, man,' for ere had with a groan drop his head 
on his knees, with his face between his hands. 'he was your old 
comrade, i know, but you couldn't help him. he must have gone down 
with the rest that awful night. i thought i'd better tell you, lest it 
might come some other way, and you might keep sarah trefusi from 
being frightened. they were good friends once, and women take these 
things to heart. it would not do to let her be pained with such a 
thing on her wedding day!' then he rose and went away, leave ere 
still sitting disconsolate with his head on his knees. 

'poor fellow!' murmur the chief boatman to himself; 'he take it to 
heart. well, well! right enough! they were true comrade once, and 
abel save him!' 

the afternoon of that day, when the children had left school, they 
stray as usual on half-holidays along' the quay and the path by the 
cliffs. presently some of them came running in a state of great 
excitement to the harbour, where a few men were unload a coal 
ketch, and a great many were superintend the operation. one of the 
children call out: 

'there is a porpoise in the harbour mouth! we saw it come through the 
blow-hole! it had a long tail, and was deep under the water!' 

'it was no porpoise,' said another; 'it was a seal; but it had a long 
tail! it came out of the seal cave!' the other children bore various 
testimony, but on two points they were unanimous--it, whatever 'it' 
was, had come through the blow-hole deep under the water, and had a 
long, thin tail--a tail so long that they could not see the end of it. 
there was much unmerciful chaff of the children by the men on this 
point, but as it was evident that they had seen something, quite a 
number of persons, young and old, male and female, went along the high 
path on either side of the harbour mouth to catch a glimpse of this 
new addition to the fauna of the sea, a long-tailed porpoise or seal. 
the tide was now coming in. there was a slight breeze, and the surface 
of the water was ripple so that it was only at moments that anyone 
could see clearly into the deep water. after a spell of watch a 
woman call out that she saw something moving up the channel, just 
below where she was standing. there was a stampede to the spot, but by 
the time the crowd had gather the breeze had freshened, and it was 
impossible to see with any distinct below the surface of the 
water. on being question the woman describe what she had seen, but 
in such an incoherent way that the whole thing was put down as an 
effect of imagination; had it not been for the children's report she 
would not have been credit at all. her semi-hysterical statement 
that what she saw was 'like a pig with the entrails out' was only 
thought anything of by an old coastguard, who shook his head but did 
not make any remark. for the remainder of the daylight this man was 
seen always on the bank, look into the water, but always with 
disappointment manifest on his face. 

ere arose early on the next morning--he had not slept all night, and 
it was a relief to him to move about in the light. he shave himself 
with a hand that did not tremble, and dress himself in his wedding 
clothes. there was a haggard look on his face, and he seem as though 
he had grown years old in the last few days. still there was a wild, 
uneasy light of triumph in his eyes, and he kept murmur to himself 
over and over again: 

'this is my wedding-day! abel cannot claim her now--living or 
dead!--living or dead! living or dead!' he sat in his arm-chair, 
wait with an uncanny quiet for the church hour to arrive. when 
the bell began to ring he arose and pass out of his house, close 
the door behind him. he look at the river and saw the tide had just 
turned. in the church he sat with sarah and her mother, holding 
sarah's hand tight in his all the time, as though he fear to lose 
her. when the service was over they stood up together, and were 
married in the presence of the entire congregation; for no one left 
the church. both made the response clearly--eric's being even on the 
defiant side. when the wedding was over sarah took her husband's arm, 
and they walk away together, the boys and younger girl being cuff 
by their elder into a decorous behaviour, for they would fain have 
follow close behind their heels. 

the way from the church led down to the back of eric's cottage, a 
narrow passage being between it and that of his next neighbour. when 
the bridal couple had pass through this the remainder of the 
congregation, who had follow them at a little distance, were 
startle by a long, shrill scream from the bride. they rush through 
the passage and found her on the bank with wild eyes, point to the 
river bed opposite ere sanson's door. 

the fall tide had deposit there the body of abel behenna stark 
upon the broken rocks. the rope trail from its waist had been 
twist by the current round the moor post, and had held it back 
whilst the tide had ebb away from it. the right elbow had fallen in 
a chink in the rock, leave the hand outstretched toward sarah, with 
the open palm upward as though it were extend to receive hers, the 
pale droop finger open to the clasp. 

all that happen afterwards was never quite known to sarah sanson. 
whenever she would try to recollect there would become a buzz in 
her ear and a dim in her eyes, and all would pass away. the only 
thing that she could remember of it all--and this she never 
forgot--was eric's breathing heavily, with his face white than that 
of the dead man, as he mutter under his breath: 

'devil's help! devil's faith! devil's price!' 




the burial of the rats 


leave paris by the orleans road, cross the enceinte, and, turning to 
the right, you find yourself in a somewhat wild and not at all savoury 
district. right and left, before and behind, on every side rise great 
heap of dust and waste accumulate by the process of time. 

paris has its night as well as its day life, and the sojourn who 
enter his hotel in the rue de rivoli or the rue st. honore late at 
night or leaves it early in the morning, can guess, in coming near 
montrouge--if he has not done so already--the purpose of those great 
waggon that look like boiler on wheels which he find halting 
everywhere as he passes. 

every city has its peculiar institution create out of its own needs; 
and one of the most notable institution of paris is its rag-picking 
population. in the early morning--and parisian life commence at an 
early hour--may be seen in most street standing on the pathway 
opposite every court and alley and between every few houses, as still 
in some america cities, even in parts of new york, large wooden box 
into which the domestic or tenement-holders empty the accumulate 
dust of the past day. round these box gather and pass on, when the 
work is done, to fresh field of labour and pasture new, squalid 
hungry-looking men and women, the implement of whose craft consist 
of a coarse bag or basket slung over the shoulder and a little rake 
with which they turn over and probe and examine in the minutest manner 
the dustbins. they pick up and deposit in their baskets, by aid of 
their rakes, whatever they may find, with the same facility as a 
chinaman use his chopsticks. 

paris is a city of centralisation--and centralise and 
classification are close allied. in the early times, when 
centralise is becoming a fact, its forerunner is classification. 
all things which are similar or analogous become group together, and 
from the grouping of group rise one whole or central point. we see 
radiate many long arms with innumerable tentaculae, and in the 
centre rise a gigantic head with a comprehensive brain and keen eyes 
to look on every side and ear sensitive to hear--and a voracious 
mouth to swallow. 

other city resemble all the bird and beast and fish whose 
appetite and digestion are normal. paris alone is the analog 
apotheosis of the octopus. product of centralise carry to an _ad 
absurdum_, it fairly represent the devil fish; and in no respects is 
the resemblance more curious than in the similarity of the digestive 
apparatus. 

those intelligent tourist who, have surrender their individuality 
into the hand of messrs. cook or gaze, 'do' paris in three days, are 
often puzzle to know how it is that the dinner which in london would 
cost about six shillings, can be had for three franc in a café in the 
palais royal. they need have no more wonder if they will but consider 
the classification which is a theoretical speciality of parisian life, 
and adopt all round the fact from which the chiffonier has his 
genesis. 

the paris of 1850 was not like the paris of to-day, and those who see 
the paris of napoleon and baron hausseman can hardly realise the 
existence of the state of things forty-five years ago. 

amongst other things, however, which have not change are those 
district where the waste is gathered. dust is dust all the world 
over, in every age, and the family likeness of dust-heaps is perfect. 
the traveller, therefore, who visit the environs of montrouge can go 
go back in fancy without difficulty to the year 1850. 

in this year i was making a prolonged stay in paris. i was very much 
in love with a young lady who, though she return my passion, so far 
yield to the wish of her parent that she had promise not to see 
me or to correspond with me for a year. i, too, had been compel to 
accede to these conditions under a vague hope of parental approval. 
during the term of probation i had promise to remain out of the 
country and not to write to my dear one until the expiration of the 
year. 

naturally the time went heavy with me. there was not one of my own 
family or circle who could tell me of alice, and none of her own folk 
had, i am sorry to say, sufficient generous to send me even an 
occasional word of comfort regarding her health and well-being. i 
spent six month wandering about europe, but as i could find no 
satisfactory distraction in travel, i determined to come to paris, 
where, at least, i would be within easy hail of london in case any 
good fortune should call me thither before the appoint time. that 
'hope defer maketh the heart sick' was never better exemplify 
than in my case, for in addition to the perpetual longing to see the 
face i love there was always with me a harrowing anxiety lest some 
accident should prevent me showing alice in due time that i had, 
throughout the long period of probation, been faithful to her trust 
and my own love. thus, every adventure which i undertook had a fierce 
pleasure of its own, for it was fraught with possible consequence 
greater than it would have ordinarily borne. 

like all traveller i exhaust the place of most interest in the 
first month of my stay, and was driven in the second month to look for 
amusement whithersoever i might. have made sundry journey to the 
better-known suburbs, i began to see that there was a _terra 
incognita_, in so far as the guide book was concerned, in the social 
wilderness lie between these attractive points. accordingly i began 
to systematise my researches, and each day took up the thread of my 
exploration at the place where i had on the previous day drop it. 

in the process of time my wanderings led me near montrouge, and i saw 
that hereabouts lay the ultima thule of social exploration--a country 
as little known as that round the source of the white nile. and so i 
determined to investigate philosophical the chiffonier--his habitat, 
his life, and his means of life. 

the job was an unsavoury one, difficult of accomplishment, and with 
little hope of adequate reward. however, despite reason, obstinacy 
prevailed, and i enter into my new investigate with a keen 
energy than i could have summon to aid me in any investigate 
leading to any end, valuable or worthy. 

one day, late in a fine afternoon, toward the end of september, i 
enter the holy of holy of the city of dust. the place was 
evidently the recognise abode of a number of chiffoniers, for some 
sort of arrangement was manifest in the formation of the dust heap 
near the road. i pass amongst these heaps, which stood like orderly 
sentries, determined to penetrate further and trace dust to its 
ultimate location. 

as i pass along i saw behind the dust heap a few form that flit 
to and fro, evidently watch with interest the advent of any 
stranger to such a place. the district was like a small switzerland, 
and as i went forward my tortuous course shut out the path behind me. 

presently i got into what seem a small city or community of 
chiffoniers. there were a number of shanty or huts, such as may be 
met with in the remote parts of the bog of allan--rude place with 
wattle walls, plastered with mud and roof of rude thatch made from 
stable refuse--such place as one would not like to enter for any 
consideration, and which even in water-colour could only look 
picturesque if judicious treated. in the midst of these hut was one 
of the strangest adaptations--i cannot say habitations--i had ever 
seen. an immense old wardrobe, the colossal remnant of some boudoir of 
charles vii, or henry ii, had been convert into a dwelling-house. 
the double door lay open, so that the entire ménage was open to 
public view. in the open half of the wardrobe was a common 
sitting-room of some four feet by six, in which sat, smoking their 
pipes round a charcoal brazier, no few than six old soldier of the 
first republic, with their uniform torn and worn threadbare. 
evidently they were of the _mauvais sujet_ class; their bleary eyes 
and limp jaws told plainly of a common love of absinthe; and their 
eyes had that haggard, worn look of slumber ferocity which follow 
hard in the wake of drink. the other side stood as of old, with its 
shelves intact, save that they were cut to half their depth, and in 
each shelf of which there were six, was a bed made with rag and 
straw. the half-dozen of worthy who inhabit this structure look 
at me curious as i passed; and when i look back after go a 
little way i saw their head together in a whisper conference. i did 
not like the look of this at all, for the place was very lonely, and 
the men look very, very villainous. however, i did not see any cause 
for fear, and went on my way, penetrating further and further into the 
sahara. the way was tortuous to a degree, and from go round in a 
series of semi-circles, as one go in skate with the dutch roll, i 
got rather confuse with regard to the points of the compass. 

when i had penetrate a little way i saw, as i turn the corner of a 
half-made heap, sitting on a heap of straw an old soldier with 
threadbare coat. 

'hallo!' said i to myself; 'the first republic is well represent 
here in its soldiery.' 

as i pass him the old man never even look up at me, but gaze on 
the ground with stolid persistency. again i remark to myself: 'see 
what a life of rude warfare can do! this old man's curiosity is a 
thing of the past.' 

when i had gone a few steps, however, i look back suddenly, and saw 
that curiosity was not dead, for the veteran had raise his head and 
was regarding me with a very queer expression. he seem to me to look 
very like one of the six worthy in the press. when he saw me look 
he drop his head; and without thinking further of him i went on my 
way, satisfy that there was a strange likeness between these old 
warriors. 

presently i met another old soldier in a similar manner. he, too, did 
not notice me whilst i was passing. 

by this time it was get late in the afternoon, and i began to 
think of retrace my steps. accordingly i turn to go back, but 
could see a number of track leading between different mound and 
could not ascertain which of them i should take. in my perplexity i 
want to see someone of whom to ask the way, but could see no one. i 
determined to go on a few mound further and so try to see 
someone--not a veteran. 

i gain my object, for after go a couple of hundred yard i saw 
before me a single shanty such as i had seen before--with, however, 
the difference that this was not one for living in, but merely a roof 
with three wall open in front. from the evidence which the 
neighbourhood exhibit i took it to be a place for sorting. within it 
was an old woman wrinkle and bent with age; i approach her to ask 
the way. 

she rose as i came close and i ask her my way. she immediately 
commence a conversation; and it occur to me that here in the very 
centre of the kingdom of dust was the place to gather detail of the 
history of parisian rag-picking--particularly as i could do so from 
the lip of one who look like the oldest inhabitant. 

i began my inquiries, and the old woman gave me most interesting 
answers--she had been one of the ceteuce who sat daily before the 
guillotine and had taken an active part among the women who signalise 
themselves by their violence in the revolution. while we were talk 
she said suddenly: 'but m'sieur must be tired standing,' and dust a 
rickety old stool for me to sit down. i hardly like to do so for many 
reasons; but the poor old woman was so civil that i did not like to 
run the risk of hurt her by refusing, and moreover the conversation 
of one who had been at the taking of the bastille was so interesting 
that i sat down and so our conversation went on. 

while we were talk an old man--older and more bent and wrinkle 
even than the woman--appeared from behind the shanty. 'here is 
pierre,' said she. 'm'sieur can hear story now if he wishes, for 
pierre was in everything, from the bastille to waterloo.' the old man 
took another stool at my request and we plunge into a sea of 
revolutionary reminiscences. this old man, albeit clothe like a 
scarecrow, was like any one of the six veterans. 

i was now sitting in the centre of the low hut with the woman on my 
left hand and the man on my right, each of them being somewhat in 
front of me. the place was full of all sort of curious object of 
lumber, and of many things that i wish far away. in one corner was a 
heap of rag which seem to move from the number of vermin it 
contained, and in the other a heap of bone whose odour was something 
shocking. every now and then, glancing at the heaps, i could see the 
gleam eyes of some of the rats which infest the place. these 
loathsome object were bad enough, but what look even more dreadful 
was an old butcher's axe with an iron handle stain with clot of 
blood leaning up against the wall on the right hand side. still, these 
things did not give me much concern. the talk of the two old people 
was so fascinating that i stay on and on, till the evening came and 
the dust heap threw dark shadow over the vale between them. 

after a time i began to grow uneasy. i could not tell how or why, but 
somehow i did not feel satisfied. uneasy is an instinct and means 
warning. the psychic faculty are often the sentry of the 
intellect, and when they sound alarm the reason begin to act, 
although perhaps not consciously. 

this was so with me. i began to bethink me where i was and by what 
surrounded, and to wonder how i should fare in case i should be 
attacked; and then the thought sudden burst upon me, although 
without any overt cause, that i was in danger. prudence whispered: 'be 
still and make no sign,' and so i was still and made no sign, for i 
knew that four cunning eyes were on me. 'four eyes--if not more.' my 
god, what a horrible thought! the whole shanty might be surround on 
three side with villains! i might be in the midst of a band of such 
desperado as only half a century of periodic revolution can produce. 

with a sense of danger my intellect and observation quickened, and i 
grew more watchful than was my wont. i notice that the old woman's 
eyes were constant wandering towards my hands. i look at them too, 
and saw the cause--my rings. on my left little finger i had a large 
signet and on the right a good diamond. 

i thought that if there was any danger my first care was to avert 
suspicion. accordingly i began to work the conversation round to 
rag-picking--to the drains--of the things found there; and so by easy 
stage to jewels. then, seize a favourable opportunity, i ask the 
old woman if she knew anything of such things. she answer that she 
did, a little. i held out my right hand, and, showing her the diamond, 
ask her what she thought of that. she answer that her eyes were 
bad, and stoop over my hand. i said as nonchalant as i could: 
'pardon me! you will see better thus!' and taking it off hand it to 
her. an unholy light came into her wither old face, as she touched 
it. she stole one glance at me swift and keen as a flash of lightning. 

she bent over the ring for a moment, her face quite conceal as 
though examine it. the old man look straight out of the front of 
the shanty before him, at the same time fumble in his pocket and 
produce a screw of tobacco in a paper and a pipe, which he proceed 
to fill. i took advantage of the pause and the momentary rest from the 
searching eyes on my face to look careful round the place, now dim 
and shadowy in the gloaming. there still lay all the heap of varied 
reek foulness; there the terrible blood-stained axe leaning against 
the wall in the right hand corner, and everywhere, despite the gloom, 
the baleful glitter of the eyes of the rats. i could see them even 
through some of the chink of the boards at the back low down close to 
the ground. but stay! these latter eyes seem more than usually large 
and bright and baleful! 

for an instant my heart stood still, and i felt in that whirl 
condition of mind in which one feel a sort of spiritual drunkenness, 
and as though the body is only maintain erect in that there is no 
time for it to fall before recovery. then, in another second, i was 
calm--coldly calm, with all my energy in full vigour, with a 
self-control which i felt to be perfect and with all my feeling and 
instinct alert. 

now i knew the full extent of my danger: i was watch and surround 
by desperate people! i could not even guess at how many of them were 
lie there on the ground behind the shanty, wait for the moment to 
strike. i knew that i was big and strong, and they knew it, too. they 
knew also, as i did, that i was an englishman and would make a fight 
for it; and so we waited. i had, i felt, gain an advantage in the 
last few seconds, for i knew my danger and understood the situation. 
now, i thought, is the test of my courage--the enduring test: the 
fight test may come later! 

the old woman raise her head and said to me in a satisfy kind of 
way: 

'a very fine ring, indeed--a beautiful ring! oh, me! i once had such 
rings, plenty of them, and bracelets and earrings! oh! for in those 
fine days i led the town a dance! but they've forgotten me now! 
they've forgotten me! they? why they never heard of me! perhaps their 
grandfather remember me, some of them!' and she laugh a harsh, 
croak laugh. and then i am bound to say that she astonish me, for 
she hand me back the ring with a certain suggestion of old-fashioned 
grace which was not without its pathos. 

the old man eye her with a sort of sudden ferocity, half rising from 
his stool, and said to me sudden and hoarsely: 

'let me see!' 

i was about to hand the ring when the old woman said: 

'no! no, do not give it to pierre! pierre is eccentric. he lose 
things; and such a pretty ring!' 

'cat!' said the old man, savagely. sudden the old woman said, rather 
more loud than was necessary: 

'wait! i shall tell you something about a ring.' there was something 
in the sound of her voice that jar upon me. perhaps it was my 
hyper-sensitiveness, wrought up as i was to such a pitch of nervous 
excitement, but i seem to think that she was not address me. as i 
stole a glance round the place i saw the eyes of the rats in the bone 
heaps, but miss the eyes along the back. but even as i look i saw 
them again appear. the old woman's 'wait!' had given me a respite from 
attack, and the men had sunk back to their recline posture. 

'i once lost a ring--a beautiful diamond hoop that had belong to a 
queen, and which was given to me by a farmer of the taxes, who 
afterwards cut his throat because i sent him away. i thought it must 
have been stolen, and tax my people; but i could get no trace. the 
police came and suggest that it had found its way to the drain. we 
descended--i in my fine clothes, for i would not trust them with my 
beautiful ring! i know more of the drain since then, and of rats, 
too! but i shall never forget the horror of that place--alive with 
blazing eyes, a wall of them just outside the light of our torches. 
well, we got beneath my house. we search the outlet of the drain, 
and there in the filth found my ring, and we came out. 

'but we found something else also before we came! as we were coming 
toward the opening a lot of sewer rats--human one this time--came 
towards us. they told the police that one of their number had gone 
into the drain, but had not returned. he had gone in only shortly 
before we had, and, if lost, could hardly be far off. they ask help 
to seek him, so we turn back. they try to prevent me going, but i 
insisted. it was a new excitement, and had i not recover my ring? 
not far did we go till we came on something. there was but little 
water, and the bottom of the drain was raise with brick, rubbish, and 
much matter of the kind. he had made a fight for it, even when his 
torch had gone out. but they were too many for him! they had not been 
long about it! the bone were still warm; but they were picked clean. 
they had even eaten their own dead one and there were bone of rats 
as well as of the man. they took it cool enough those other--the human 
ones--and joke of their comrade when they found him dead, though they 
would have help him living. bah! what matter it--life or death?' 

'and had you no fear?' i ask her. 

'fear!' she said with a laugh. 'me have fear? ask pierre! but i was 
younger then, and, as i came through that horrible drain with its wall 
of greedy eyes, always moving with the circle of the light from the 
torches, i did not feel easy. i kept on before the men, though! it is 
a way i have! i never let the men get it before me. all i want is a 
chance and a means! and they ate him up--took every trace away except 
the bones; and no one knew it, nor no sound of him was ever heard!' 
here she broke into a chuckle fit of the ghastliest merriment which 
it was ever my lot to hear and see. a great poetess describe her 
heroine singing: 'oh! to see or hear her singing! scarce i know which 
is the divinest.' 

and i can apply the same idea to the old crone--in all save the 
divinity, for i scarce could tell which was the most hellish--the 
harsh, malicious, satisfied, cruel laugh, or the leer grin, and the 
horrible square opening of the mouth like a tragic mask, and the 
yellow gleam of the few discolour teeth in the shapeless gums. in 
that laugh and with that grin and the chuckle satisfaction i knew as 
well as if it had been spoken to me in words of thunder that my murder 
was settled, and the murder only bide the proper time for its 
accomplishment. i could read between the lines of her gruesome story 
the command to her accomplices. 'wait,' she seem to say, 'bide your 
time. i shall strike the first blow. find the weapon for me, and i 
shall make the opportunity! he shall not escape! keep him quiet, and 
then no one will be wiser. there will be no outcry, and the rats will 
do their work!' 

it was grow dark and darker; the night was coming. i stole a 
glance round the shanty, still all the same! the bloody axe in the 
corner, the heap of filth, and the eyes on the bone heap and in the 
cranny of the floor. 

pierre had been still ostensible filling his pipe; he now struck a 
light and began to puff away at it. the old woman said: 

'dear heart, how dark it is! pierre, like a good lad, light the lamp!' 

pierre got up and with the light match in his hand touched the wick 
of a lamp which hung at one side of the entrance to the shanty, and 
which had a reflector that threw the light all over the place. it was 
evidently that which was use for their sort at night. 

'not that, stupid! not that! the lantern!' she call out to him. 

he immediately blew it out, saying: 'all right, mother i'll find it,' 
and he hustle about the left corner of the room--the old woman saying 
through the darkness: 

'the lantern! the lantern! oh! that is the light that is most useful to 
us poor folks. the lantern was the friend of the revolution! it is the 
friend of the chiffonier! it help us when all else fails.' 

hardly had she said the word when there was a kind of creak of the 
whole place, and something was steady drag over the roof. 

again i seem to read between the lines of her words. i knew the 
lesson of the lantern. 

'one of you get on the roof with a noose and strangle him as he pass 
out if we fail within.' 

as i look out of the opening i saw the loop of a rope outline black 
against the lurid sky. i was now, indeed, beset! 

pierre was not long in finding the lantern. i kept my eyes fixed 
through the dark on the old woman. pierre struck his light, and by 
its flash i saw the old woman raise from the ground beside her where 
it had mysterious appeared, and then hide in the fold of her gown, 
a long sharp knife or dagger. it seem to be like a butcher's 
sharpen iron fine to a keen point. 

the lantern was lit. 

'bring it here, pierre,' she said. 'place it in the doorway where we 
can see it. see how nice it is! it shut out the dark from us; it 
is just right!' 

just right for her and her purposes! it threw all its light on my 
face, leave in gloom the face of both pierre and the woman, who sat 
outside of me on each side. 

i felt that the time of action was approaching, but i knew now that 
the first signal and movement would come from the woman, and so 
watch her. 

i was all unarmed, but i had made up my mind what to do. at the first 
movement i would seize the butcher's axe in the right-hand corner and 
fight my way out. at least, i would die hard. i stole a glance round 
to fix its exact locality so that i could not fail to seize it at the 
first effort, for then, if ever, time and accuracy would be precious. 

good god! it was gone! all the horror of the situation burst upon me; 
but the bitterest thought of all was that if the issue of the terrible 
position should be against me alice would infallibly suffer. either 
she would believe me false--and any lover, or any one who has ever 
been one, can imagine the bitter of the thought--or else she would 
go on loving long after i had been lost to her and to the world, so 
that her life would be broken and embittered, shatter with 
disappointment and despair. the very magnitude of the pain brace me 
up and nerve me to bear the dread scrutiny of the plotters. 

i think i did not betray myself. the old woman was watch me as a 
cat do a mouse; she had her right hand hidden in the fold of her 
gown, clutching, i knew, that long, cruel-looking dagger. had she seen 
any disappointment in my face she would, i felt, have known that the 
moment had come, and would have sprung on me like a tigress, certain 
of taking me unprepared. 

i look out into the night, and there i saw new cause for danger. 
before and around the hut were at a little distance some shadowy 
forms; they were quite still, but i knew that they were all alert and 
on guard. small chance for me now in that direction. 

again i stole a glance round the place. in moments of great excitement 
and of great danger, which is excitement, the mind works very quickly, 
and the keen of the faculty which depend on the mind grow in 
proportion. i now felt this. in an instant i took in the whole 
situation. i saw that the axe had been taken through a small hole made 
in one of the rotten boards. how rotten they must be to allow of such 
a thing being done without a particle of noise. 

the hut was a regular murder-trap, and was guarded all around. a 
garrote lay on the roof ready to entangle me with his noose if i 
should escape the dagger of the old hag. in front the way was guarded 
by i know not how many watchers. and at the back was a row of 
desperate men--i had seen their eyes still through the crack in the 
boards of the floor, when last i looked--as they lay prone wait for 
the signal to start erect. if it was to be ever, now for it! 

as nonchalant as i could i turn slightly on my stool so as to get 
my right leg well under me. then with a sudden jump, turning my head, 
and guard it with my hands, and with the fight instinct of the 
knight of old, i breathe my lady's name, and hurl myself against 
the back wall of the hut. 

watchful as they were, the sudden of my movement surprise both 
pierre and the old woman. as i crash through the rotten timber i 
saw the old woman rise with a leap like a tiger and heard her low gasp 
of baffle rage. my feet lit on something that moved, and as i jump 
away i knew that i had step on the back of one of the row of men 
lie on their face outside the hut. i was torn with nail and 
splinters, but otherwise unhurt. breathless i rush up the mound in 
front of me, hearing as i went the dull crash of the shanty as it 
collapse into a mass. 

it was a nightmare climb. the mound, though but low, was awfully 
steep, and with each step i took the mass of dust and cinders tore 
down with me and gave way under my feet. the dust rose and choke me; 
it was sickening, foetid, awful; but my climb was, i felt, for life or 
death, and i struggle on. the seconds seem hours; but the few 
moments i had in starting, combine with my youth and strength, gave 
me a great advantage, and, though several form struggle after me in 
deadly silence which was more dreadful than any sound, i easily 
reach the top. since then i have climb the cone of vesuvius, and 
as i struggle up that dreary steep amid the sulphurous fumes the 
memory of that awful night at montrouge came back to me so vivid 
that i almost grew faint. 

the mound was one of the tallest in the region of dust, and as i 
struggle to the top, pant for breath and with my heart beating 
like a sledge-hammer, i saw away to my left the dull red gleam of the 
sky, and near still the flash of lights. thank god! i knew where 
i was now and where lay the road to paris! 

for two or three seconds i pause and look back. my pursuer were 
still well behind me, but struggle up resolutely, and in deadly 
silence. beyond, the shanty was a wreck--a mass of timber and moving 
forms. i could see it well, for flame were already burst out; the 
rag and straw had evidently caught fire from the lantern. still 
silence there! not a sound! these old wretch could die game, anyhow. 

i had no time for more than a passing glance, for as i cast an eye 
round the mound preparatory to making my descent i saw several dark 
form rush round on either side to cut me off on my way. it was now 
a race for life. they were try to head me on my way to paris, and 
with the instinct of the moment i dashed down to the right-hand side. 
i was just in time, for, though i came as it seem to me down the 
steep in a few steps, the wary old men who were watch me turn 
back, and one, as i rush by into the opening between the two mound 
in front, almost struck me a blow with that terrible butcher's axe. 
there could surely not be two such weapon about! 

then began a really horrible chase. i easily ran ahead of the old men, 
and even when some younger one and a few women join in the hunt i 
easily distance them. but i did not know the way, and i could not 
even guide myself by the light in the sky, for i was running away from 
it. i had heard that, unless of conscious purpose, hunt men turn 
always to the left, and so i found it now; and so, i suppose, knew 
also my pursuers, who were more animal than men, and with cunning or 
instinct had found out such secret for themselves: for on finish 
a quick spurt, after which i intended to take a moment's breathing 
space, i sudden saw ahead of me two or three form swift passing 
behind a mound to the right. 

i was in the spider's web now indeed! but with the thought of this new 
danger came the resource of the hunted, and so i dart down the next 
turning to the right. i continue in this direction for some hundred 
yards, and then, making a turn to the left again, felt certain that i 
had, at any rate, avoid the danger of being surrounded. 

but not of pursuit, for on came the rabble after me, steady, dogged, 
relentless, and still in grim silence. 

in the greater dark the mound seem now to be somewhat small 
than before, although--for the night was closing--they look big 
in proportion. i was now well ahead of my pursuers, so i made a dart 
up the mound in front. 

oh joy of joys! i was close to the edge of this inferno of dustheaps. 
away behind me the red light of paris was in the sky, and towering up 
behind rose the heights of montmarte--a dim light, with here and there 
brilliant points like stars. 

restore to vigour in a moment, i ran over the few remain mound of 
decrease size, and found myself on the level land beyond. even then, 
however, the prospect was not inviting. all before me was dark and 
dismal, and i had evidently come on one of those dank, low-lying waste 
place which are found here and there in the neighbourhood of great 
cities. place of waste and desolation, where the space is require 
for the ultimate agglomerate of all that is noxious, and the ground 
is so poor as to create no desire of occupancy even in the lowest 
squatter. with eyes accustomed to the gloom of the evening, and away 
now from the shadow of those dreadful dustheaps, i could see much 
more easily than i could a little while ago. it might have been, of 
course, that the glare in the sky of the lights of paris, though the 
city was some mile away, was reflect here. howsoever it was, i saw 
well enough to take bearings for certainly some little distance around 
me. 

in front was a bleak, flat waste that seem almost dead level, with 
here and there the dark shimmer of stagnant pools. seemingly far 
off on the right, amid a small cluster of scattered lights, rose a 
dark mass of fort montrouge, and away to the left in the dim distance, 
pointed with stray gleam from cottage windows, the lights in the sky 
show the locality of bicêtre. a moment's thought decided me to take 
to the right and try to reach montrouge. there at least would be some 
sort of safety, and i might possibly long before come on some of the 
cross road which i knew. somewhere, not far off, must lie the 
strategic road made to connect the outlying chain of fort circle 
the city. 

then i look back. coming over the mounds, and outline black against 
the glare of the parisian horizon, i saw several moving figures, and 
still a way to the right several more deploy out between me and my 
destination. they evidently meant to cut me off in this direction, and 
so my choice became constricted; it lay now between go straight 
ahead or turning to the left. stoop to the ground, so as to get the 
advantage of the horizon as a line of sight, i look careful in 
this direction, but could detect no sign of my enemies. i argue that 
as they had not guarded or were not try to guard that point, there 
was evidently danger to me there already. so i made up my mind to go 
straight on before me. 

it was not an inviting prospect, and as i went on the reality grew 
worse. the ground became soft and oozy, and now and again gave way 
beneath me in a sickening kind of way. i seem somehow to be go 
down, for i saw round me place seemingly more elevated than where i 
was, and this in a place which from a little way back seem dead 
level. i look around, but could see none of my pursuers. this was 
strange, for all along these bird of the night had follow me 
through the dark as well as though it was broad daylight. how i 
blame myself for coming out in my light-coloured tourist suit of 
tweed. the silence, and my not being able to see my enemies, whilst i 
felt that they were watch me, grew appalling, and in the hope of 
some one not of this ghastly crew hearing me i raise my voice and 
shout several times. there was not the slightest response; not even 
an echo reward my efforts. for a while i stood stock still and kept 
my eyes in one direction. on one of the rising place around me i saw 
something dark move along, then another, and another. this was to my 
left, and seemingly moving to head me off. 

i thought that again i might with my skill as a runner elude my 
enemy at this game, and so with all my speed dart forward. 

splash! 

my feet had given way in a mass of slimy rubbish, and i had fallen 
headlong into a reeking, stagnant pool. the water and the mud in which 
my arms sank up to the elbow was filthy and nauseous beyond 
description, and in the sudden of my fall i had actually swallow 
some of the filthy stuff, which nearly choke me, and made me gasp 
for breath. never shall i forget the moments during which i stood 
try to recover myself almost faint from the foetid odour of the 
filthy pool, whose white mist rose ghostlike around. worst of all, 
with the acute despair of the hunt animal when he see the pursue 
pack close on him, i saw before my eyes whilst i stood helpless the 
dark form of my pursuer moving swift to surround me. 

it is curious how our mind work on odd matter even when the energy 
of thought are seemingly concentrated on some terrible and pressing 
need. i was in momentary peril of my life: my safety depend on my 
action, and my choice of alternative coming now with almost every 
step i took, and yet i could not but think of the strange dogged 
persistent of these old men. their silent resolution, their 
steadfast, grim, persistent even in such a cause commanded, as well 
as fear, even a measure of respect. what must they have been in the 
vigour of their youth. i could understand now that whirlwind rush on 
the bridge of arcola, that scornful exclamation of the old guard at 
waterloo! unconscious cerebration has its own pleasures, even at such 
moments; but fortunately it do not in any way clash with the thought 
from which action springs. 

i realise at a glance that so far i was defeat in my object, my 
enemy as yet had won. they had succeed in surrounding me on three 
sides, and were bent on driving me off to the left-hand, where there 
was already some danger for me, for they had left no guard. i accept 
the alternative--it was a case of hobson's choice and run. i had to 
keep the lower ground, for my pursuer were on the higher places. 
however, though the ooze and broken ground impede me my youth and 
training made me able to hold my ground, and by keeping a diagonal 
line i not only kept them from gain on me but even began to 
distance them. this gave me new heart and strength, and by this time 
habitual training was beginning to tell and my second wind had come. 
before me the ground rose slightly. i rush up the slope and found 
before me a waste of watery slime, with a low dyke or bank look 
black and grim beyond. i felt that if i could but reach that dyke in 
safety i could there, with solid ground under my feet and some kind of 
path to guide me, find with comparative ease a way out of my troubles. 
after a glance right and left and seeing no one near, i kept my eyes 
for a few minutes to their rightful work of aid my feet whilst i 
cross the swamp. it was rough, hard work, but there was little 
danger, merely toil; and a short time took me to the dyke. i rush up 
the slope exulting; but here again i met a new shock. on either side 
of me rose a number of crouch figures. from right and left they 
rush at me. each body held a rope. 

the cordon was nearly complete. i could pass on neither side, and the 
end was near. 

there was only one chance, and i took it. i hurl myself across the 
dyke, and escape out of the very clutches of my foe threw myself 
into the stream. 

at any other time i should have thought that water foul and filthy, 
but now it was as welcome as the most crystal stream to the parch 
traveller. it was a highway of safety! 

my pursuer rush after me. had only one of them held the rope it 
would have been all up with me, for he could have entangle me before 
i had time to swim a stroke; but the many hand holding it embarrass 
and delay them, and when the rope struck the water i heard the 
splash well behind me. a few minutes' hard swimming took me across 
the stream. refresh with the immersion and encourage by the escape, 
i climb the dyke in comparative gaiety of spirits. 

from the top i look back. through the dark i saw my assailant 
scatter up and down along the dyke. the pursuit was evidently not 
ended, and again i had to choose my course. beyond the dyke where i 
stood was a wild, swampy space very similar to that which i had 
crossed. i determined to shun such a place, and thought for a moment 
whether i would take up or down the dyke. i thought i heard a 
sound--the muffle sound of oars, so i listened, and then shouted. 

no response; but the sound ceased. my enemy had evidently got a boat 
of some kind. as they were on the up side of me i took the down path 
and began to run. as i pass to the left of where i had enter the 
water i heard several splashes, soft and stealthy, like the sound a 
rat make as he plunge into the stream, but vastly greater; and as i 
look i saw the dark sheen of the water broken by the ripple of 
several advance heads. some of my enemy were swimming the stream 
also. 

and now behind me, up the stream, the silence was broken by the quick 
rattle and creak of oars; my enemy were in hot pursuit. i put my 
best leg foremost and ran on. after a break of a couple of minutes i 
look back, and by a gleam of light through the ragged cloud i saw 
several dark form climb the bank behind me. the wind had now begun 
to rise, and the water beside me was ruffle and beginning to break in 
tiny wave on the bank. i had to keep my eyes pretty well on the 
ground before me, lest i should stumble, for i knew that to stumble 
was death. after a few minutes i look back behind me. on the dyke 
were only a few dark figures, but crossing the waste, swampy ground 
were many more. what new danger this portend i did not know--could 
only guess. then as i ran it seem to me that my track kept ever 
slope away to the right. i look up ahead and saw that the river 
was much wide than before, and that the dyke on which i stood fell 
quite away, and beyond it was another stream on whose near bank i saw 
some of the dark form now across the marsh. i was on an island of 
some kind. 

my situation was now indeed terrible, for my enemy had hem me in 
on every side. behind came the quicken roll of the oars, as though 
my pursuer knew that the end was close. around me on every side was 
desolation; there was not a roof or light, as far as i could see. far 
off to the right rose some dark mass, but what it was i knew not. for 
a moment i pause to think what i should do, not for more, for my 
pursuer were drawing closer. then my mind was made up. i slip down 
the bank and took to the water. i struck out straight ahead so as to 
gain the current by clearing the backwater of the island, for such i 
presume it was, when i had pass into the stream. i wait till a 
cloud came driving across the moon and leave all in darkness. then i 
took off my hat and laid it soft on the water floating with the 
stream, and a second after dive to the right and struck out under 
water with all my might. i was, i suppose, half a minute under water, 
and when i rose came up as soft as i could, and turning, look 
back. there went my light brown hat floating merry away. close 
behind it came a rickety old boat, driven furiously by a pair of oars. 
the moon was still partly obscure by the drift clouds, but in the 
partial light i could see a man in the bow holding aloft ready to 
strike what appear to me to be that same dreadful pole-axe which i 
had before escaped. as i look the boat drew closer, closer, and the 
man struck savagely. the hat disappeared. the man fell forward, almost 
out of the boat. his comrade drag him in but without the axe, and 
then as i turn with all my energy bent on reach the further 
bank, i heard the fierce whirr of the mutter 'sacre!' which marked 
the anger of my baffle pursuers. 

that was the first sound i had heard from human lip during all this 
dreadful chase, and full as it was of menace and danger to me it was a 
welcome sound for it broke that awful silence which shroud and 
appall me. it was as though an overt sign that my opponent were men 
and not ghosts, and that with them i had, at least, the chance of a 
man, though but one against many. 

but now that the spell of silence was broken the sound came thick and 
fast. from boat to shore and back from shore to boat came quick 
question and answer, all in the fiercest whispers. i look back--a 
fatal thing to do--for in the instant someone caught sight of my face, 
which show white on the dark water, and shouted. hand pointed to 
me, and in a moment or two the boat was under weigh, and following 
hard after me. i had but a little way to go, but quick and quick 
came the boat after me. a few more stroke and i would be on the 
shore, but i felt the oncoming of the boat, and expect each second 
to feel the crash of an oar or other weapon on my head. had i not seen 
that dreadful axe disappear in the water i do not think that i could 
have won the shore. i heard the mutter curse of those not rowing 
and the labour breath of the rowers. with one supreme effort for 
life or liberty i touched the bank and sprang up it. there was not a 
single second to spare, for hard behind me the boat ground and 
several dark form sprang after me. i gain the top of the dyke, and 
keeping to the left ran on again. the boat put off and follow down 
the stream. seeing this i fear danger in this direction, and quick 
turning, ran down the dyke on the other side, and after passing a 
short stretch of marshy ground gain a wild, open flat country and 
sped on. 

still behind me came on my relentless pursuers. far away, below me, i 
saw the same dark mass as before, but now grown close and greater. my 
heart gave a great thrill of delight, for i knew that it must be the 
fortress of bicêtre, and with new courage i ran on. i had heard that 
between each and all of the protect fort of paris there are 
strategic ways, deep sunk road where soldier march should be 
sheltered from an enemy. i knew that if i could gain this road i would 
be safe, but in the dark i could not see any sign of it, so, in 
blind hope of striking it, i ran on. 

presently i came to the edge of a deep cut, and found that down below 
me ran a road guarded on each side by a ditch of water fence on 
either side by a straight, high wall. 

get faint and dizzier, i ran on; the ground got more 
broken--more and more still, till i stagger and fell, and rose 
again, and ran on in the blind anguish of the hunted. again the 
thought of alice nerve me. i would not be lost and wreck her life: i 
would fight and struggle for life to the bitter end. with a great 
effort i caught the top of the wall. as, scramble like a catamount, 
i drew myself up, i actually felt a hand touch the sole of my foot. i 
was now on a sort of causeway, and before me i saw a dim light. blind 
and dizzy, i ran on, staggered, and fell, rising, cover with dust 
and blood. 

'halt la!' 

the words sound like a voice from heaven. a blaze of light seem to 
enwrap me, and i shout with joy. 

'qui va la?' the rattle of musketry, the flash of steel before my 
eyes. instinctive i stopped, though close behind me came a rush of 
my pursuers. 

another word or two, and out from a gateway poured, as it seem to 
me, a tide of red and blue, as the guard turn out. all around seem 
blazing with light, and the flash of steel, the clink and rattle of 
arms, and the loud, harsh voice of command. as i fell forward, 
utterly exhausted, a soldier caught me. i look back in dreadful 
expectation, and saw the mass of dark form disappear into the 
night. then i must have fainted. when i recover my senses i was in 
the guard room. they gave me brandy, and after a while i was able to 
tell them something of what had passed. then a commissary of police 
appeared, apparently out of the empty air, as is the way of the 
parisian police officer. he listen attentively, and then had a 
moment's consultation with the officer in command. apparently they 
were agreed, for they ask me if i were ready now to come with them. 

'where to?' i asked, rising to go. 

'back to the dust heaps. we shall, perhaps, catch them yet!' 

'i shall try!' said i. 

he eye me for a moment keenly, and said suddenly: 

'would you like to wait a while or till tomorrow, young englishman?' 
this touched me to the quick, as, perhaps, he intended, and i jump 
to my feet. 

'come now!' i said; 'now! now! an englishman is always ready for his 
duty!' 

the commissary was a good fellow, as well as a shrewd one; he slap 
my shoulder kindly. 'brave garçon!' he said. 'forgive me, but i knew 
what would do you most good. the guard is ready. come!' 

and so, passing right through the guard room, and through a long 
vaulted passage, we were out into the night. a few of the men in front 
had powerful lanterns. through courtyard and down a slope way we 
pass out through a low archway to a sunken road, the same that i had 
seen in my flight. the order was given to get at the double, and with 
a quick, spring stride, half run, half walk, the soldier went 
swift along. i felt my strength renew again--such is the 
difference between hunter and hunted. a very short distance took us to 
a low-lying pontoon bridge across the stream, and evidently very 
little higher up than i had struck it. some effort had evidently been 
made to damage it, for the ropes had all been cut, and one of the 
chain had been broken. i heard the officer say to the commissary: 

'we are just in time! a few more minutes, and they would have 
destroy the bridge. forward, quick still!' and on we went. again 
we reach a pontoon on the winding stream; as we came up we heard the 
hollow boom of the metal drum as the effort to destroy the bridge 
was again renewed. a word of command was given, and several men raise 
their rifles. 

'fire!' a volley rang out. there was a muffle cry, and the dark form 
dispersed. but the evil was done, and we saw the far end of the 
pontoon swing into the stream. this was a serious delay, and it was 
nearly an hour before we had renew ropes and restore the bridge 
sufficient to allow us to cross. 

we renew the chase. quicker, quick we went towards the dust 
heaps. 

after a time we came to a place that i knew. there were the remains of 
a fire--a few smoulder wood ashes still cast a red glow, but the 
bulk of the ashes were cold. i knew the site of the hut and the hill 
behind it up which i had rushed, and in the flicker glow the eyes 
of the rats still shone with a sort of phosphorescence. the commissary 
spoke a word to the officer, and he cried: 

'halt!' 

the soldier were ordered to spread around and watch, and then we 
commence to examine the ruins. the commissary himself began to lift 
away the char boards and rubbish. these the soldier took and pile 
together. presently he start back, then bent down and rising 
beckon me. 

'see!' he said. 

it was a gruesome sight. there lay a skeleton face downwards, a woman 
by the lines--an old woman by the coarse fibre of the bone. between 
the rib rose a long spike-like dagger made from a butcher's 
sharpen knife, its keen point bury in the spine. 

'you will observe,' said the commissary to the officer and to me as he 
took out his note book, 'that the woman must have fallen on her 
dagger. the rats are many here--see their eyes glisten among that 
heap of bones--and you will also notice'--i shudder as he placed his 
hand on the skeleton--'that but little time was lost by them, for the 
bone are scarcely cold!' 

there was no other sign of any one near, living or dead; and so 
deploy again into line the soldier pass on. presently we came to 
the hut made of the old wardrobe. we approached. in five of the six 
compartment was an old man sleeping--sleeping so sound that even 
the glare of the lantern did not wake them. old and grim and grizzled 
they looked, with their gaunt, wrinkled, bronze face and their white 
moustaches. 

the officer call out harsh and loud a word of command, and in an 
instant each one of them was on his feet before us and standing at 
'attention!' 

'what do you here?' 

'we sleep,' was the answer. 

'where are the other chiffoniers?' ask the commissary. 

'gone to work.' 

'and you?' 

'we are on guard!' 

'peste!' laugh the officer grimly, as he look at the old men one 
after the other in the face and add with cool deliberate cruelty: 
'asleep on duty! is this the manner of the old guard? no wonder, then, 
a waterloo!' 

by the gleam of the lantern i saw the grim old face grow deadly pale, 
and almost shudder at the look in the eyes of the old men as the 
laugh of the soldier echo the grim pleasantry of the officer. 

i felt in that moment that i was in some measure avenged. 

for a moment they look as if they would throw themselves on the 
taunter, but years of their life had school them and they remain 
still. 

'you are but five,' said the commissary; 'where is the sixth?' the 
answer came with a grim chuckle. 

'he is there!' and the speaker pointed to the bottom of the wardrobe. 
'he die last night. you won't find much of him. the burial of the 
rats is quick!' 

the commissary stoop and look in. then he turn to the officer 
and said calmly: 

'we may as well go back. no trace here now; nothing to prove that man 
was the one wound by your soldiers' bullets! probably they murder 
him to cover up the trace. see!' again he stoop and placed his hand 
on the skeleton. 'the rats work quick and they are many. these bone 
are warm!' 

i shuddered, and so did many more of those around me. 

'form!' said the officer, and so in march order, with the lantern 
swinging in front and the manacle veteran in the midst, with steady 
tramp we took ourselves out of the dustheap and turn backward to 
the fortress of bicêtre. 

* * * * * 

my year of probation has long since ended, and alice is my wife. but 
when i look back upon that try twelvemonth one of the most vivid 
incident that memory recall is that associate with my visit to the 
city of dust. 




a dream of red hand 


the first opinion given to me regarding jacob settle was a simple 
descriptive statement, 'he's a down-in-the-mouth chap': but i found 
that it embody the thought and idea of all his fellow-workmen. 
there was in the phrase a certain easy tolerance, an absence of 
positive feeling of any kind, rather than any complete opinion, which 
marked pretty accurate the man's place in public esteem. still, 
there was some dissimilarity between this and his appearance which 
unconscious set me thinking, and by degrees, as i saw more of the 
place and the workmen, i came to have a special interest in him. he 
was, i found, for ever do kindnesses, not involve money expenses 
beyond his humble means, but in the manifold ways of forethought and 
forbearance and self-repression which are of the true charity of 
life. women and children trust him implicitly, though, strange 
enough, he rather shun them, except when anyone was sick, and then 
he made his appearance to help if he could, timid and awkwardly. he 
led a very solitary life, keeping house by himself in a tiny cottage, 
or rather hut, of one room, far on the edge of the moorland. his 
existence seem so sad and solitary that i wish to cheer it up, and 
for the purpose took the occasion when we had both been sitting up 
with a child, injure by me through accident, to offer to lend him 
books. he gladly accepted, and as we part in the grey of the dawn i 
felt that something of mutual confidence had been establish between 
us. 

the books were always most careful and punctual returned, and in 
time jacob settle and i became quite friends. once or twice as i 
cross the moorland on sunday i look in on him; but on such 
occasion he was shy and ill at ease so that i felt diffident about 
calling to see him. he would never under any circumstances come into 
my own lodgings. 

one sunday afternoon, i was coming back from a long walk beyond the 
moor, and as i pass settle's cottage stop at the door to say 'how 
do you do?' to him. as the door was shut, i thought that he was out, 
and merely knock for form's sake, or through habit, not expect to 
get any answer. to my surprise, i heard a feeble voice from within, 
though what was said i could not hear. i enter at once, and found 
jacob lie half-dressed upon his bed. he was as pale as death, and 
the sweat was simply rolling off his face. his hand were 
unconscious gripping the bedclothes as a drown man hold on to 
whatever he may grasp. as i came in he half arose, with a wild, hunt 
look in his eyes, which were wide open and staring, as though 
something of horror had come before him; but when he recognise me he 
sank back on the couch with a smother sob of relief and closed his 
eyes. i stood by him for a while, quite a minute or two, while he 
gasped. then he open his eyes and look at me, but with such a 
despairing, woeful expression that, as i am a living man, i would have 
rather seen that frozen look of horror. i sat down beside him and 
ask after his health. for a while he would not answer me except to 
say that he was not ill; but then, after scrutinise me closely, he 
half arose on his elbow and said: 

'i thank you kindly, sir, but i'm simply telling you the truth. i am 
not ill, as men call it, though god know whether there be not worse 
sickness than doctor know of. i'll tell you, as you are so kind, 
but i trust that you won't even mention such a thing to a living soul, 
for it might work me more and greater woe. i am suffering from a bad 
dream.' 

'a bad dream!' i said, hope to cheer him; 'but dream pass away with 
the light--even with waking.' there i stopped, for before he spoke i 
saw the answer in his desolate look round the little place. 

'no! no! that's all well for people that live in comfort and with 
those they love around them. it is a thousand times worse for those 
who live alone and have to do so. what cheer is there for me, waking 
here in the silence of the night, with the wide moor around me full of 
voice and full of face that make my waking a worse dream than my 
sleep? ah, young sir, you have no past that can send its legion to 
people the dark and the empty space, and i pray the good god that 
you may never have!' as he spoke, there was such an almost 
irresistible gravity of conviction in his manner that i abandoned my 
remonstrance about his solitary life. i felt that i was in the 
presence of some secret influence which i could not fathom. to my 
relief, for i knew not what to say, he went on: 

'two nights past have i dream it. it was hard enough the first 
night, but i came through it. last night the expectation was in itself 
almost worse than the dream--until the dream came, and then it swept 
away every remembrance of lesser pain. i stay awake till just 
before the dawn, and then it came again, and ever since i have been in 
such an agony as i am sure the die feel, and with it all the dread 
of tonight.' before he had got to the end of the sentence my mind was 
made up, and i felt that i could speak to him more cheerfully. 

'try and get to sleep early tonight--in fact, before the evening has 
pass away. the sleep will refresh you, and i promise you there will 
not be any bad dream after tonight.' he shook his head hopelessly, so 
i sat a little long and then left him. 

when i got home i made my arrangement for the night, for i had made 
up my mind to share jacob settle's lonely vigil in his cottage on the 
moor. i judge that if he got to sleep before sunset he would wake 
well before midnight, and so, just as the bell of the city were 
striking eleven, i stood opposite his door armed with a bag, in which 
were my supper, an extra large flask, a couple of candles, and a book. 
the moonlight was bright, and flood the whole moor, till it was 
almost as light as day; but ever and anon black cloud drove across 
the sky, and made a dark which by comparison seem almost 
tangible. i open the door softly, and enter without waking jacob, 
who lay asleep with his white face upward. he was still, and again 
bath in sweat. i try to imagine what vision were passing before 
those closed eyes which could bring with them the misery and woe which 
were stamp on the face, but fancy fail me, and i wait for the 
awakening. it came suddenly, and in a fashion which touched me to the 
quick, for the hollow groan that broke from the man's white lip as he 
half arose and sank back was manifest the realisation or completion 
of some train of thought which had gone before. 

'if this be dreaming,' said i to myself, 'then it must be base on 
some very terrible reality. what can have been that unhappy fact that 
he spoke of?' 

while i thus spoke, he realise that i was with him. it struck me as 
strange that he had no period of that doubt as to whether dream or 
reality surround him which commonly mark an expect environment of 
waking men. with a positive cry of joy, he seize my hand and held it 
in his two wet, tremble hands, as a frightened child cling on to 
someone whom it loves. i try to soothe him: 

'there, there! it is all right. i have come to stay with you tonight, 
and together we will try to fight this evil dream.' he let go my hand 
suddenly, and sank back on his bed and cover his eyes with his 
hands. 

'fight it?--the evil dream! ah! no, sir, no! no mortal power can fight 
that dream, for it come from god--and is burn in here;' and he beat 
upon his forehead. then he went on: 

'it is the same dream, ever the same, and yet it grow in its power to 
torture me every time it comes.' 

'what is the dream?' i asked, thinking that the speak of it might 
give him some relief, but he shrank away from me, and after a long 
pause said: 

'no, i had better not tell it. it may not come again.' 

there was manifest something to conceal from me--something that lay 
behind the dream, so i answered: 

'all right. i hope you have seen the last of it. but if it should come 
again, you will tell me, will you not? i ask, not out of curiosity, 
but because i think it may relieve you to speak.' he answer with 
what i thought was almost an undue amount of solemnity: 

'if it come again, i shall tell you all.' 

then i try to get his mind away from the subject to more mundane 
things, so i produce supper, and made him share it with me, including 
the contents of the flask. after a little he brace up, and when i lit 
my cigar, have given him another, we smoke a full hour, and talk 
of many things. little by little the comfort of his body stole over 
his mind, and i could see sleep lay her gentle hand on his 
eyelids. he felt it, too, and told me that now he felt all right, and 
i might safe leave him; but i told him that, right or wrong, i was 
go to see in the daylight. so i lit my other candle, and began to 
read as he fell asleep. 

by degree i got interested in my book, so interested that presently i 
was startle by its drop out of my hands. i look and saw that 
jacob was still asleep, and i was rejoice to see that there was on 
his face a look of unwonted happiness, while his lip seem to move 
with unspoken words. then i turn to my work again, and again woke, 
but this time to feel chill to my very marrow by hearing the voice 
from the bed beside me: 

'not with those red hands! never! never!' on look at him, i found 
that he was still asleep. he woke, however, in an instant, and did not 
seem surprise to see me; there was again that strange apathy as to 
his surroundings. then i said: 

'settle, tell me your dream. you may speak freely, for i shall hold 
your confidence sacred. while we both live i shall never mention what 
you may choose to tell me.' 

he replied: 

'i said i would; but i had better tell you first what go before the 
dream, that you may understand. i was a schoolmaster when i was a very 
young man; it was only a parish school in a little village in the 
west country. no need to mention any names. better not. i was engaged 
to be married to a young girl whom i love and almost reverenced. it 
was the old story. while we were wait for the time when we could 
afford to set up house together, another man came along. he was nearly 
as young as i was, and handsome, and a gentleman, with all a 
gentleman's attractive ways for a woman of our class. he would go 
fishing, and she would meet him while i was at my work in school. i 
reasoned with her and implore her to give him up. i offer to get 
married at once and go away and begin the world in a strange country; 
but she would not listen to anything i could say, and i could see that 
she was infatuated with him. then i took it on myself to meet the man 
and ask him to deal well with the girl, for i thought he might mean 
honestly by her, so that there might be no talk or chance of talk on 
the part of others. i went where i should meet him with none by, and 
we met!' here jacob settle had to pause, for something seem to rise 
in his throat, and he almost gasp for breath. then he went on: 

'sir, as god is above us, there was no selfish thought in my heart 
that day, i love my pretty mabel too well to be content with a part 
of her love, and i had thought of my own unhappy too often not to 
have come to realise that, whatever might come to her, my hope was 
gone. he was insolent to me--you, sir, who are a gentleman, cannot 
know, perhaps, how gall can be the insole of one who is above 
you in station--but i bore with that. i implore him to deal well with 
the girl, for what might be only a pastime of an idle hour with him 
might be the break of her heart. for i never had a thought of her 
truth, or that the worst of harm could come to her--it was only the 
unhappy to her heart i feared. but when i ask him when he 
intended to marry her his laughter gall me so that i lost my temper 
and told him that i would not stand by and see her life made unhappy. 
then he grew angry too, and in his anger said such cruel things of her 
that then and there i swore he should not live to do her harm. god 
know how it came about, for in such moments of passion it is hard to 
remember the steps from a word to a blow, but i found myself standing 
over his dead body, with my hand crimson with the blood that well 
from his torn throat. we were alone and he was a stranger, with none 
of his kin to seek for him and murder do not always out--not all at 
once. his bone may be whitening still, for all i know, in the pool of 
the river where i left him. no one suspect his absence, or why it 
was, except my poor mabel, and she dare not speak. but it was all in 
vain, for when i came back again after an absence of months--for i 
could not live in the place--i learned that her shame had come and 
that she had die in it. hitherto i had been borne up by the thought 
that my ill deed had save her future, but now, when i learned that i 
had been too late, and that my poor love was smirch with that man's 
sin, i flee away with the sense of my useless guilt upon me more 
heavy than i could bear. ah! sir, you that have not done such a sin 
don't know what it is to carry it with you. you may think that custom 
make it easy to you, but it is not so. it grow and grow with every 
hour, till it become intolerable, and with it growing, too, the 
feeling that you must for ever stand outside heaven. you don't know 
what that means, and i pray god that you never may. ordinary men, to 
whom all things are possible, don't often, if ever, think of heaven. 
it is a name, and nothing more, and they are content to wait and let 
things be, but to those who are doom to be shut out for ever you 
cannot think what it means, you cannot guess or measure the terrible 
endless longing to see the gate opened, and to be able to join the 
white figures within. 

'and this bring me to my dream. it seem that the portal was before 
me, with great gate of massive steel with bar of the thickness of a 
mast, rising to the very clouds, and so close that between them was 
just a glimpse of a crystal grotto, on whose shining wall were 
figured many white-clad form with face radiant with joy. when i 
stood before the gate my heart and my soul were so full of rapture and 
longing that i forgot. and there stood at the gate two mighty angel 
with sweeping wings, and, oh! so stern of countenance. they held each 
in one hand a flaming sword, and in the other the latchet, which move 
to and fro at their lightest touch. near were figures all drape in 
black, with head cover so that only the eyes were seen, and they 
hand to each who came white garment such as the angel wear. a low 
murmur came that told that all should put on their own robes, and 
without soil, or the angel would not pass them in, but would smite 
them down with the flaming swords. i was eager to don my own garment, 
and hurried threw it over me and step swift to the gate; but it 
move not, and the angels, loose the latchet, pointed to my dress, i 
look down, and was aghast, for the whole robe was smear with 
blood. my hand were red; they glitter with the blood that drip 
from them as on that day by the river bank. and then the angel raise 
their flaming sword to smite me down, and the horror was complete--i 
awoke. again, and again, and again, that awful dream come to me. i 
never learn from the experience, i never remember, but at the 
beginning the hope is ever there to make the end more appalling; and i 
know that the dream do not come out of the common dark where the 
dream abide, but that it is sent from god as a punishment! never, 
never shall i be able to pass the gate, for the soil on the angel 
garment must ever come from these bloody hands!' 

i listen as in a spell as jacob settle spoke. there was something so 
far away in the tone of his voice--something so dreamy and mystic in 
the eyes that look as if through me at some spirit beyond--something 
so lofty in his very diction and in such marked contrast to his 
workworn clothes and his poor surroundings that i wonder if the 
whole thing were not a dream. 

we were both silent for a long time. i kept look at the man before 
me in grow wonderment. now that his confession had been made, his 
soul, which had been crush to the very earth, seem to leap back 
again to upright with some resilient force. i suppose i ought to 
have been horrify with his story, but, strange to say, i was not. it 
certainly is not pleasant to be made the recipient of the confidence 
of a murderer, but this poor fellow seem to have had, not only so 
much provocation, but so much self-denying purpose in his deed of 
blood that i did not feel call upon to pass judgment upon him. my 
purpose was to comfort, so i spoke out with what calm i could, for 
my heart was beating fast and heavily: 

'you need not despair, jacob settle. god is very good, and his mercy 
is great. live on and work on in the hope that some day you may feel 
that you have atone for the past.' here i paused, for i could see 
that deep, natural sleep this time, was creep upon him. 'go to 
sleep,' i said; 'i shall watch with you here and we shall have no more 
evil dream tonight.' 

he made an effort to pull himself together, and answered: 

'i don't know how to thank you for your goodness to me this night, but 
i think you had best leave me now. i'll try and sleep this out; i feel 
a weight off my mind since i have told you all. if there's anything of 
the man left in me, i must try and fight out life alone.' 

'i'll go tonight, as you wish it,' i said; 'but take my advice, and do 
not live in such a solitary way. go among men and women; live among 
them. share their joy and sorrows, and it will help you to forget. 
this solitude will make you melancholy mad.' 

'i will!' he answered, half unconsciously, for sleep was overmaster 
him. 

i turn to go, and he look after me. when i had touched the latch i 
drop it, and, coming back to the bed, held out my hand. he grasp 
it with both his as he rose to a sitting posture, and i said my 
goodnight, try to cheer him: 

'heart, man, heart! there is work in the world for you to do, jacob 
settle. you can wear those white robe yet and pass through that gate 
of steel!' 

then i left him. 

a week after i found his cottage deserted, and on ask at the works 
was told that he had 'gone north', no one exactly knew whither. 

two years afterwards, i was stay for a few days with my friend dr. 
munro in glasgow. he was a busy man, and could not spare much time for 
go about with me, so i spent my days in excursion to the trossach 
and loch katrine and down the clyde. on the second last evening of my 
stay i came back somewhat later than i had arranged, but found that 
my host was late too. the maid told me that he had been sent for to 
the hospital--a case of accident at the gas-works, and the dinner was 
postpone an hour; so telling her i would stroll down to find her 
master and walk back with him, i went out. at the hospital i found him 
washing his hand preparatory to start for home. casually, i ask 
him what his case was. 

'oh, the usual thing! a rotten rope and men's lives of no account. two 
men were working in a gasometer, when the rope that held their 
scaffolding broke. it must have occur just before the dinner hour, 
for no one notice their absence till the men had returned. there was 
about seven feet of water in the gasometer, so they had a hard fight 
for it, poor fellows. however, one of them was alive, just alive, but 
we have had a hard job to pull him through. it seem that he owe his 
life to his mate, for i have never heard of greater heroism. they swam 
together while their strength lasted, but at the end they were so done 
up that even the lights above, and the men slung with ropes, coming 
down to help them, could not keep them up. but one of them stood on 
the bottom and held up his comrade over his head, and those few 
breath made all the difference between life and death. they were a 
shocking sight when they were taken out, for that water is like a 
purple dye with the gas and the tar. the man upstairs look as if he 
had been wash in blood. ugh!' 

'and the other?' 

'oh, he's worse still. but he must have been a very noble fellow. that 
struggle under the water must have been fearful; one can see that by 
the way the blood has been drawn from the extremities. it make the 
idea of the _stigmata_ possible to look at him. resolution like this 
could, you would think, do anything in the world. ay! it might almost 
unbar the gate of heaven. look here, old man, it is not a very 
pleasant sight, especially just before dinner, but you are a writer, 
and this is an odd case. here is something you would not like to miss, 
for in all human probability you will never see anything like it 
again.' while he was speak he had brought me into the mortuary of 
the hospital. 

on the bier lay a body cover with a white sheet, which was wrap 
close round it. 

'looks like a chrysalis, don't it? i say, jack, if there be anything 
in the old myth that a soul is typify by a butterfly, well, then the 
one that this chrysalis sent forth was a very noble specimen and took 
all the sunlight on its wings. see here!' he uncover the face. 
horrible, indeed, it looked, as though stain with blood. but i knew 
him at once, jacob settle! my friend pull the winding sheet further 
down. 

the hand were cross on the purple breast as they had been 
reverent placed by some tender-hearted person. as i saw them my 
heart throb with a great exultation, for the memory of his 
harrowing dream rush across my mind. there was no stain now on those 
poor, brave hands, for they were blanch white as snow. 

and somehow as i look i felt that the evil dream was all over. that 
noble soul had won a way through the gate at last. the white robe had 
now no stain from the hand that had put it on. 




crooken sands 


mr arthur fernlee markam, who took what was known as the red house 
above the mains of crooken, was a london merchant, and being 
essentially a cockney, thought it necessary when he went for the 
summer holiday to scotland to provide an entire rig-out as a highland 
chieftain, as manifest in chromolithograph and on the music-hall 
stage. he had once seen in the empire the great prince--'the bounder 
king'--bring down the house by appear as 'the macslogan of that 
ilk,' and singing the celebrated scotch song, 'there's naeth like 
haggis to mak a mon dry!' and he had ever since preserve in his mind 
a faithful image of the picturesque and warlike appearance which he 
presented. indeed, if the true inwardness of mr. markam's mind on the 
subject of his selection of aberdeenshire as a summer resort were 
known, it would be found that in the foreground of the holiday 
locality which his fancy paint stalk the many hue figure of the 
macslogan of that ilk. however, be this as it may, a very kind 
fortune--certainly so far as external beauty was concerned--led him to 
the choice of crooken bay. it is a lovely spot, between aberdeen and 
peterhead, just under the rock-bound headland whence the long, 
dangerous reef known as the spur run out into the north sea. 
between this and the 'mains of crooken'--a village sheltered by the 
northern cliffs--lies the deep bay, back with a multitude of 
bent-grown dune where the rabbit are to be found in thousands. thus 
at either end of the bay is a rocky promontory, and when the dawn or 
the sunset falls on the rocks of red syenite the effect is very 
lovely. the bay itself is floor with level sand and the tide runs 
far out, leave a smooth waste of hard sand on which are dot here 
and there the stake nets and bag nets of the salmon fishers. at one 
end of the bay there is a little group or cluster of rocks whose head 
are raise something above high water, except when in rough weather 
the wave come over them green. at low tide they are expose down to 
sand level; and here is perhaps the only little bit of dangerous sand 
on this part of the eastern coast. between the rocks, which are apart 
about some fifty feet, is a small quicksand, which, like the goodwins, 
is dangerous only with the incoming tide. it extend outwards till it 
is lost in the sea, and inwards till it fade away in the hard sand of 
the upper beach. on the slope of the hill which rise beyond the 
dunes, midway between the spur and the port of crooken, is the red 
house. it rise from the midst of a clump of fir-trees which protect 
it on three sides, leave the whole sea front open. a trim 
old-fashioned garden stretch down to the roadway, on crossing which 
a grassy path, which can be use for light vehicles, thread a way to 
the shore, winding amongst the sand hills. 

when the markam family arrive at the red house after their thirty-six 
hour of pitch on the aberdeen steamer _ban righ_ from blackwall, 
with the subsequent train to yellon and drive of a dozen miles, they 
all agree that they had never seen a more delightful spot. the 
general satisfaction was more marked as at that very time none of the 
family were, for several reasons, inclined to find favourable anything 
or any place over the scotland border. though the family was a large 
one, the prosperity of the business allow them all sort of personal 
luxuries, amongst which was a wide latitude in the way of dress. the 
frequency of the markam girls' new frock was a source of envy to 
their bosom friends and of joy to themselves. 

arthur fernlee markam had not taken his family into his confidence 
regarding his new costume. he was not quite certain that he should be 
free from ridicule, or at least from sarcasm, and as he was sensitive 
on the subject, he thought it better to be actually in the suitable 
environment before he allow the full splendour to burst upon them. 
he had taken some pains, to insure the complete of the highland 
costume. for the purpose he had paid many visit to 'the scotch 
all-wool tartan clothing mart' which had been lately establish in 
copthall-court by the messrs. maccallum more and roderick macdhu. he 
had anxious consultation with the head of the firm--maccallum as he 
call himself, resent any such addition as 'mr.' or 'esquire.' 
the known stock of buckles, buttons, straps, brooch and ornament of 
all kind were examine in critical detail; and at last an eagle's 
feather of sufficient magnificent proportions was discovered, and 
the equipment was complete. it was only when he saw the finished 
costume, with the vivid hue of the tartan seemingly modify into 
comparative sobriety by the multitude of silver fittings, the 
cairngorm brooches, the philibeg, dirk and sporran that he was fully 
and absolutely satisfy with his choice. at first he had thought of 
the royal stuart dress tartan, but abandoned it on the maccallum 
point out that if he should happen to be in the neighbourhood of 
balmoral it might lead to complications. the maccallum, who, by the 
way, spoke with a remarkable cockney accent, suggest other plaid in 
turn; but now that the other question of accuracy had been raised, mr. 
markam foresaw difficulty if he should by chance find himself in the 
locality of the clan whose colours he had usurped. the maccallum at 
last undertook to have, at markam's expense, a special pattern woven 
which would not be exactly the same as any existing tartan, though 
partake of the characteristic of many. it was base on the royal 
stuart, but contained suggestion as to simplicity of pattern from the 
macalister and ogilvie clans, and as to neutrality of colour from the 
clan of buchanan, macbeth, chief of macintosh and macleod. when the 
specimen had been shown to markam he had fear somewhat lest it 
should strike the eye of his domestic circle as gaudy; but as roderick 
macdhu fell into perfect ecstasy over its beauty he did not make any 
objection to the completion of the piece. he thought, and wisely, that 
if a genuine scotchman like macdhu like it, it must be 
right--especially as the junior partner was a man very much of his own 
build and appearance. when the maccallum was receiving his 
cheque--which, by the way, was a pretty stiff one--he remarked: 

'i've taken the liberty of have some more of the stuff woven in case 
you or any of your friends should want it.' markam was gratified, and 
told him that he should be only too happy if the beautiful stuff which 
they had originate between them should become a favourite, as he had 
no doubt it would in time. he might make and sell as much as he would. 

markam try the dress on in his office one evening after the clerk 
had all gone home. he was pleased, though a little frightened, at the 
result. the maccallum had done his work thoroughly, and there was 
nothing omit that could add to the martial dignity of the wearer. 

'i shall not, of course, take the claymore and the pistol with me on 
ordinary occasions,' said markam to himself as he began to undress. he 
determined that he would wear the dress for the first time on landing 
in scotland, and accordingly on the morning when the _ban righ_ was 
hanging off the girdle ness lighthouse, wait for the tide to enter 
the port of aberdeen, he emerge from his cabin in all the gaudy 
splendour of his new costume. the first comment he heard was from one 
of his own sons, who did not recognise him at first. 

'here's a guy! great scott! it's the governor!' and the boy flee 
forthwith and try to bury his laughter under a cushion in the 
saloon. markam was a good sailor and had not suffer from the 
pitch of the boat, so that his naturally rubicund face was even 
more rosy by the conscious blush which suffuse his cheek when he had 
found himself at once the cynosure of all eyes. he could have wish 
that he had not been so bold for he knew from the cold that there was 
a big bare spot under one side of his jaunty worn glengarry cap. 
however, he face the group of stranger boldly. he was not, 
outwardly, upset even when some of the comment reach his ears. 

'he's off his bloomin' chump,' said a cockney in a suit of exaggerate 
plaid. 

'there's flies on him,' said a tall thin yankee, pale with 
sea-sickness, who was on his way to take up his residence for a time 
as close as he could get to the gate of balmoral. 

'happy thought! let us fill our mulls; now's the chance!' said a 
young oxford man on his way home to inverness. but presently mr. 
markam heard the voice of his eldest daughter. 

'where is he? where is he?' and she came tear along the deck with 
her hat blow behind her. her face show sign of agitation, for 
her mother had just been telling her of her father's condition; but 
when she saw him she instantly burst into laughter so violent that it 
end in a fit of hysterics. something of the same kind happen to 
each of the other children. when they had all had their turn mr. 
markam went to his cabin and sent his wife's maid to tell each member 
of the family that he want to see them at once. they all made their 
appearance, suppress their feelings as well as they could. he said 
to them very quietly: 

'my dears, don't i provide you all with ample allowances?' 

'yes, father!' they all answer gravely, 'no one could be more 
generous!' 

'don't i let you dress as you please?' 

'yes, father!'--this a little sheepishly. 

'then, my dears, don't you think it would be nice and kind of you 
not to try and make me feel uncomfortable, even if i do assume a dress 
which is ridiculous in your eyes, though quite common enough in the 
country where we are about to sojourn?' there was no answer except 
that which appear in their hanging heads. he was a good father and 
they all knew it. he was quite satisfy and went on: 

'there, now, run away and enjoy yourselves! we shan't have another 
word about it.' then he went on deck again and stood brave the fire 
of ridicule which he recognise around him, though nothing more was 
said within his hearing. 

the astonishment and the amusement which his get-up occasion on the 
_ban righ_ was, however, nothing to that which it create in aberdeen. 
the boys and loafers, and women with babies, who wait at the landing 
shed, follow _en masse_ as the markam party took their way to the 
railway station; even the porter with their old-fashioned knot and 
their new-fashioned barrows, who await the traveller at the foot of 
the gang-plank, follow in wonder delight. fortunately the 
peterhead train was just about to start, so that the martyrdom was not 
unnecessary prolonged. in the carriage the glorious highland costume 
was unseen, and as there were but few person at the station at 
yellon, all went well there. when, however, the carriage drew near the 
mains of crooken and the fisher folk had run to their door to see who 
it was that was passing, the excitement exceed all bounds. the 
children with one impulse wave their bonnet and ran shouting behind 
the carriage; the men forsook their nets and their bait and 
followed; the women clutch their babies, and follow also. the 
horse were tired after their long journey to yellon and back, and the 
hill was steep, so that there was ample time for the crowd to gather 
and even to pass on ahead. 

mrs. markam and the elder girl would have like to make some protest 
or to do something to relieve their feelings of chagrin at the 
ridicule which they saw on all faces, but there was a look of fixed 
determination on the face of the seeming highlander which awed them a 
little, and they were silent. it might have been that the eagle's 
feather, even when arise above the bald head, the cairngorm brooch 
even on the fat shoulder, and the claymore, dirk and pistols, even 
when belted round the extensive paunch and protrude from the 
stocking on the sturdy calf, fulfill their existence as symbol of 
martial and terrify import! when the party arrive at the gate of 
the red house there await them a crowd of crooken inhabitants, 
hatless and respectful silent; the remainder of the population was 
painful toil up the hill. the silence was broken by only one 
sound, that of a man with a deep voice. 

'man! but he's forgotten the pipes!' 

the servant had arrive some days before, and all things were in 
readiness. in the glow consequent on a good lunch after a hard journey 
all the disagreeable of travel and all the chagrin consequent on the 
adoption of the obnoxious costume were forgotten. 

that afternoon markam, still clad in full array, walk through the 
mains of crooken. he was all alone, for, strange to say, his wife and 
both daughter had sick headaches, and were, as he was told, lie 
down to rest after the fatigue of the journey. his eldest son, who 
claim to be a young man, had gone out by himself to explore the 
surroundings of the place, and one of the boys could not be found. the 
other boy, on being told that his father had sent for him to come for 
a walk, had managed--by accident, of course--to fall into the water 
butt, and had to be dry and rig out afresh. his clothes not 
have been as yet unpack this was of course impossible without 
delay. 

mr. markam was not quite satisfy with his walk. he could not meet 
any of his neighbours. it was not that there were not enough people 
about, for every house and cottage seem to be full; but the people 
when in the open were either in their doorway some distance behind 
him, or on the roadway a long distance in front. as he pass he 
could see the tops of head and the whites of eyes in the window or 
round the corner of doors. the only interview which he had was 
anything but a pleasant one. this was with an odd sort of old man who 
was hardly ever heard to speak except to join in the 'amens' in the 
meeting-house. his sole occupation seem to be to wait at the window 
of the post-office from eight o'clock in the morning till the arrival 
of the mail at one, when he carry the letter-bag to a neighbouring 
baronial castle. the remainder of his day was spent on a seat in a 
draughty part of the port, where the offal of the fish, the refuse of 
the bait, and the house rubbish was thrown, and where the ducks were 
accustomed to hold high revel. 

when saft tammie beheld him coming he raise his eyes, which were 
generally fixed on the nothing which lay on the roadway opposite his 
seat, and, seeming dazzle as if by a burst of sunshine, rub them 
and shade them with his hand. then he start up and raise his hand 
aloft in a denunciatory manner as he spoke:-- 

'"vanity of vanities, saith the preacher. all is vanity." mon, be 
warn in time! "behold the lily of the field, they toil not, 
neither do they spin, yet solomon in all his glory was not array 
like one of these." mon! mon! thy vanity is as the quicksand which 
swallow up all which come within its spell. beware vanity! beware 
the quicksand, which yawneth for thee, and which will swallow thee up! 
see thyself! learn thine own vanity! meet thyself face to face, and 
then in that moment thou shalt learn the fatal force of thy vanity. 
learn it, know it, and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' then 
without another word he went back to his seat and sat there immovable 
and expressionless as before. 

markam could not but feel a little upset by this tirade. only that it 
was spoken by a seeming madman, he would have put it down to some 
eccentric exhibition of scotland humour or impudence; but the gravity 
of the message--for it seem nothing else--made such a reading 
impossible. he was, however, determined not to give in to ridicule, 
and although he had not yet seen anything in scotland to remind him 
even of a kilt, he determined to wear his highland dress. when he 
return home, in less than half-an-hour, he found that every member 
of the family was, despite the headaches, out taking a walk. he took 
the opportunity afford by their absence of lock himself in his 
dressing-room, took off the highland dress, and, putt on a suit of 
flannels, lit a cigar and had a snooze. he was awaken by the noise 
of the family coming in, and at once don his dress made his 
appearance in the drawing-room for tea. 

he did not go out again that afternoon; but after dinner he put on his 
dress again--he had, of course dress for dinner as usual--and went 
by himself for a walk on the sea-shore. he had by this time come to 
the conclusion that he would get by degree accustomed to the highland 
dress before making it his ordinary wear. the moon was up and he 
easily follow the path through the sand-hills, and shortly struck 
the shore. the tide was out and the beach firm as a rock, so he 
stroll southwards to nearly the end of the bay. here he was 
attract by two isolated rocks some little way out from the edge of 
the dunes, so he stroll towards them. when he reach the nearest 
one he climb it, and, sitting there elevated some fifteen or twenty 
feet over the waste of sand, enjoy the lovely, peaceful prospect. 
the moon was rising behind the headland of pennyfold, and its light 
was just touching the top of the furthermost rock of the spur some 
three-quarters of a mile out; the rest of the rocks were in dark 
shadow. as the moon rose over the headland, the rocks of the spur and 
then the beach by degree became flood with light. 

for a good while mr. markam sat and look at the rising moon and the 
grow area of light which follow its rise. then he turn and 
face eastward and sat with his chin in his hand look seawards, 
and revel in the peace and beauty and freedom of the scene. the 
roar of london--the dark and the strife and weary of london 
life--seemed to have pass quite away, and he live at the moment a 
free and higher life. he look at the glisten water as it stole 
its way over the flat waste of sand, coming close and close 
insensibly--the tide had turned. presently he heard a distant shouting 
along the beach very far off. 

'the fishermen calling to each other,' he said to himself and look 
around. as he did so he got a horrible shock, for though just then a 
cloud sail across the moon he saw, in spite of the sudden dark 
around him, his own image. for an instant, on the top of the opposite 
rock he could see the bald back of the head and the glengarry cap with 
the immense eagle's feather. as he stagger back his foot slipped, 
and he began to slide down towards the sand between the two rocks. he 
took no concern as to falling, for the sand was really only a few feet 
below him, and his mind was occupy with the figure or simulacrum of 
himself, which had already disappeared. as the easiest way of reach 
_terra firma_ he prepared to jump the remainder of the distance. all 
this had taken but a second, but the brain works quickly, and even as 
he gather himself for the spring he saw the sand below him lie so 
marble level shake and shiver in an odd way. a sudden fear overcame 
him; his knee failed, and instead of jump he slid miserably down 
the rock, scratch his bare leg as he went. his feet touched the 
sand--went through it like water--and he was down below his knee 
before he realise that he was in a quicksand. wildly he grasp at 
the rock to keep himself from sink further, and fortunately there 
was a jut spur or edge which he was able to grasp instinctively. 
to this he clung in grim desperation. he try to shout, but his 
breath would not come, till after a great effort his voice rang out. 
again he shouted, and it seem as if the sound of his own voice gave 
him new courage, for he was able to hold on to the rock for a long 
time than he thought possible--though he held on only in blind 
desperation. he was, however, beginning to find his grasp weakening, 
when, joy of joys! his shout was answer by a rough voice from just 
above him. 

'god be thankit, i'm nae too late!' and a fisherman with great 
thigh-boots came hurried climb over the rock. in an instant he 
recognise the gravity of the danger, and with a cheering 'haud fast, 
mon! i'm comin'!' scramble down till he found a firm foothold. then 
with one strong hand holding the rock above, he lean down, and 
catching markam's wrist, call out to him, 'haud to me, mon! haud to 
me wi' ither hond!' 

then he lent his great strength, and with a steady, sturdy pull, 
drag him out of the hungry quicksand and placed him safe upon the 
rock. hardly give him time to draw breath, he pull and pushed 
him--never letting him go for an instant--over the rock into the firm 
sand beyond it, and finally deposit him, still shake from the 
magnitude of his danger, high upon the beach. then he began to speak: 

'mon! but i was just in time. if i had no laucht at yon foolish lad 
and begun to rin at the first you'd a bin sinkin' doon to the bowels 
o' the airth be the noo! wul beagrie thocht you was a ghaist, and 
tom macphail swore ye was only like a goblin on a puddick-steel! "na!" 
said i. "yon's but the daft englishman--the loony that had escapit 
frae the waxwarks." i was thinkin' that bein' strange and silly--if 
not a whole-made feel--ye'd no ken the ways o' the quicksan'! i 
shout till warn ye, and then ran to drag ye aff, if need be. but god 
be thankit, be ye fule or only half-daft wi' yer vanity, that i was no 
that late!' and he reverent lift his cap as he spoke. 

mr. markam was deep touched and thankful for his escape from a 
horrible death; but the sting of the charge of vanity thus made once 
more against him came through his humility. he was about to reply 
angrily, when sudden a great awe fell upon him as he remember the 
warning words of the half-crazy letter-carrier: 'meet thyself face to 
face, and repent ere the quicksand shall swallow thee!' 

here, too, he remember the image of himself that he had seen and the 
sudden danger from the deadly quicksand that had followed. he was 
silent a full minute, and then said: 

'my good fellow, i owe you my life!' 

the answer came with reverence from the hardy fisherman, 'na! na! ye 
owe that to god; but, as for me, i'm only too glad till be the humble 
instrument o' his mercy.' 

'but you will let me thank you,' said mr. markam, taking both the 
great hand of his deliver in his and holding them tight. 'my heart 
is too full as yet, and my nerves are too much shaken to let me say 
much; but, believe me, i am very, very grateful!' it was quite evident 
that the poor old fellow was deep touched, for the tear were 
running down his cheeks. 

the fisherman said, with a rough but true courtesy: 

'ay, sir! thank me and ye will--if it'll do yer poor heart good. an' 
i'm thinking that if it were me i'd be thankful too. but, sir, as for 
me i need no thanks. i am glad, so i am!' 

that arthur fernlee markam was really thankful and grateful was shown 
practically later on. within a week's time there sail into port 
crooken the finest fishing smack that had ever been seen in the 
harbour of peterhead. she was fully found with sail and gear of all 
kinds, and with nets of the best. her master and men went away by the 
coach, after have left with the salmon-fisher's wife the papers 
which made her over to him. 

as mr. markam and the salmon-fisher walk together along the shore 
the former ask his companion not to mention the fact that he had 
been in such imminent danger, for that it would only distress his dear 
wife and children. he said that he would warn them all of the 
quicksand, and for that purpose he, then and there, ask question 
about it till he felt that his information on the subject was 
complete. before they part he ask his companion if he had happen 
to see a second figure, dress like himself on the other rock as he 
had approach to succour him. 

'na! na!' came the answer, 'there is nae sic another fule in these 
parts. nor has there been since the time o' jamie fleeman--him that 
was fule to the laird o' udny. why, mon! sic a heathenish dress as ye 
have on till ye has nae been seen in these pairt within the memory o' 
mon. an' i'm thinkin' that sic a dress never was for sittin' on the 
cauld rock, as ye done beyont. mon! but do ye no fear the rheumatism 
or the lumbagy wi' floppin' doon on to the cauld stane wi' yer bare 
flesh? i was thinking that it was daft ye waur when i see ye the 
mornin' doon be the port, but it's fule or eediot ye maun be for the 
like o' thot!' mr. markam did not care to argue the point, and as they 
were now close to his own home he ask the salmon-fisher to have a 
glass of whisky--which he did--and they part for the night. he took 
good care to warn all his family of the quicksand, telling them that 
he had himself been in some danger from it. 

all that night he never slept. he heard the hour strike one after the 
other; but try how he would he could not get to sleep. over and over 
again he went through the horrible episode of the quicksand, from the 
time that saft tammie had broken his habitual silence to preach to him 
of the sin of vanity and to warn him. the question kept ever arise 
in his mind: 'am i then so vain as to be in the ranks of the foolish?' 
and the answer ever came in the words of the crazy prophet: '"vanity 
of vanities! all is vanity." meet thyself face to face, and repent ere 
the quicksand shall swallow thee!' somehow a feeling of doom began to 
shape itself in his mind that he would yet perish in that same 
quicksand, for there he had already met himself face to face. 

in the grey of the morning he doze off, but it was evident that he 
continue the subject in his dreams, for he was fully awaken by his 
wife, who said: 

'do sleep quietly! that blessed highland suit has got on your brain. 
don't talk in your sleep, if you can help it!' he was somehow 
conscious of a glad feeling, as if some terrible weight had been 
lift from him, but he did not know any cause of it. he ask his 
wife what he had said in his sleep, and she answered: 

'you said it often enough, goodness knows, for one to remember 
it--"not face to face! i saw the eagle plume over the bald head! there 
is hope yet! not face to face!" go to sleep! do!' and then he did go 
to sleep, for he seem to realise that the prophecy of the crazy man 
had not yet been fulfilled. he had not met himself face to face--as 
yet at all events. 

he was awaken early by a maid who came to tell him that there was a 
fisherman at the door who want to see him. he dress himself as 
quick as he could--for he was not yet expert with the highland 
dress--and hurried down, not wish to keep the salmon-fisher 
waiting. he was surprise and not altogether pleased to find that his 
visitor was none other than saft tammie, who at once open fire on 
him: 

'i maun gang awa' t' the post; but i thocht that i would waste an hour 
on ye, and ca' roond just to see if ye waur still that fou wi' vanity 
as on the nicht gane by. an i see that ye've no learned the lesson. 
well! the time is comin', sure eneucht! however i have all the time i' 
the marnin to my ain sel', so i'll aye look roond jist till see how 
ye gang yer ain gait to the quicksan', and then to the de'il! i'm aff 
till ma wark the noo!' and he went straightway, leave mr. markam 
considerably vexed, for the maid within earshot were vain try to 
conceal their giggles. he had fairly made up his mind to wear on that 
day ordinary clothes, but the visit of saft tammie reverse his 
decision. he would show them all that he was not a coward, and he 
would go on as he had begun--come what might. when he came to 
breakfast in full martial panoply the children, one and all, held down 
their head and the back of their neck became very red indeed. as, 
however, none of them laughed--except titus, the youngest boy, who was 
seize with a fit of hysterical choke and was prompt banish from 
the room--he could not reprove them, but began to break his egg with a 
stern determined air. it was unfortunate that as his wife was 
hand him a cup of tea one of the buttons of his sleeve caught in 
the lace of her morning wrapper, with the result that the hot tea was 
spilt over his bare knees. not unnaturally, he made use of a swear 
word, whereupon his wife, somewhat nettled, spoke out: 

'well, arthur, if you will make such an idiot of yourself with that 
ridiculous costume what else can you expect? you are not accustomed to 
it--and you never will be!' in answer he began an indignant speech 
with: 'madam!' but he got no further, for now that the subject was 
broached, mrs. markam intended to have her say out. it was not a 
pleasant say, and, truth to tell, it was not said in a pleasant 
manner. a wife's manner seldom is pleasant when she undertake to tell 
what she consider 'truths' to her husband. the result was that arthur 
fernlee markam undertook, then and there, that during his stay in 
scotland he would wear no other costume than the one she abused. 
woman-like his wife had the last word--given in this case with tears: 

'very well, arthur! of course you will do as you choose. make me as 
ridiculous as you can, and spoil the poor girls' chance in life. 
young men don't seem to care, as a general rule, for an idiot 
father-in-law! but i must warn you that your vanity will some day get 
a rude shock--if indeed you are not before then in an asylum or dead!' 

it was manifest after a few days that mr. markam would have to take 
the major part of his outdoor exercise by himself. the girl now and 
again took a walk with him, chiefly in the early morning or late at 
night, or on a wet day when there would be no one about; they 
professed to be willing to go out at all times, but somehow something 
always seem to occur to prevent it. the boys could never be found at 
all on such occasions, and as to mrs. markam she stern refuse to go 
out with him on any consideration so long as he should continue to 
make a fool of himself. on the sunday he dress himself in his 
habitual broadcloth, for he rightly felt that church was not a place 
for angry feelings; but on monday morning he resume his highland 
garb. by this time he would have given a good deal if he had never 
thought of the dress, but his britain obstinacy was strong, and he 
would not give in. saft tammie call at his house every morning, and, 
not being able to see him nor to have any message taken to him, use 
to call back in the afternoon when the letter-bag had been deliver 
and watch for his go out. on such occasion he never fail to 
warn him against his vanity in the same words which he had use at the 
first. before many days were over mr. markam had come to look upon him 
as little short of a scourge. 

by the time the week was out the enforce partial solitude, the 
constant chagrin, and the never-ending brood which was thus 
engendered, began to make mr. markam quite ill. he was too proud to 
take any of his family into his confidence since they had in his view 
treat him very badly. then he did not sleep well at night, and when 
he did sleep he had constant bad dreams. merely to assure himself 
that his pluck was not failing him he made it a practice to visit the 
quicksand at least once every day; he hardly ever fail to go there 
the last thing at night. it was perhaps this habit that wrought the 
quicksand with its terrible experience so perpetual into his dreams. 
more and more vivid these became, till on waking at times he could 
hardly realise that he had not been actually in the flesh to visit the 
fatal spot. he sometimes thought that he might have been walking in 
his sleep. 

one night his dream was so vivid that when he awoke he could not 
believe that it had only been a dream. he shut his eyes again and 
again, but each time the vision, if it was a vision, or the reality, 
if it was a reality, would rise before him. the moon was shining full 
and yellow over the quicksand as he approach it; he could see the 
expanse of light shaken and disturbed and full of black shadow as the 
liquid sand quiver and tremble and wrinkle and eddy as was its 
wont between its pause of marble calm. as he drew close to it another 
figure came towards it from the opposite side with equal footsteps. he 
saw that it was his own figure, his very self, and in silent terror, 
compel by what force he knew not, he advanced--charmed as the bird 
is by the snake, mesmerise or hypnotised--to meet this other self. as 
he felt the yielding sand close over him he awoke in the agony of 
death, tremble with fear, and, strange to say, with the silly man's 
prophecy seeming to sound in his ears: '"vanity of vanities! all is 
vanity!" see thyself and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee!' 

so convinced was he that this was no dream that he arose, early as it 
was, and dressing himself without disturb his wife took his way to 
the shore. his heart fell when he came across a series of footstep on 
the sands, which he at once recognise as his own. there was the same 
wide heel, the same square toe; he had no doubt now that he had 
actually been there, and half horrified, and half in a state of dreamy 
stupor, he follow the footsteps, and found them lost in the edge of 
the yielding quicksand. this gave him a terrible shock, for there were 
no return steps marked on the sand, and he felt that there was some 
dread mystery which he could not penetrate, and the penetration of 
which would, he feared, undo him. 

in this state of affair he took two wrong courses. firstly he kept 
his trouble to himself, and, as none of his family had any clue to it, 
every innocent word or expression which they use supply fuel to the 
consume fire of his imagination. second he began to read books 
profess to bear upon the mystery of dream and of mental 
phenomena generally, with the result that every wild imagination of 
every crank or half-crazy philosopher became a living germ of unrest 
in the fertilise soil of his disorder brain. thus negative and 
positively all things began to work to a common end. not the least of 
his disturb cause was saft tammie, who had now become at certain 
times of the day a fixture at his gate. after a while, being 
interested in the previous state of this individual, he made inquiry 
regarding his past with the following result. 

saft tammie was popularly believe to be the son of a laird in one of 
the county round the firth of forth. he had been partially educated 
for the ministry, but for some cause which no one ever knew threw up 
his prospects suddenly, and, go to peterhead in its days of whaling 
prosperity, had there taken service on a whaler. here off and on he 
had remain for some years, get gradual more and more silent in 
his habits, till finally his shipmate protest against so taciturn a 
mate, and he had found service amongst the fishing smack of the 
northern fleet. he had work for many years at the fishing with 
always the reputation of being 'a wee bit daft,' till at length he had 
gradual settled down at crooken, where the laird, doubtless knowing 
something of his family history, had given him a job which practically 
made him a pensioner. the minister who gave the information finished 
thus:-- 

'it is a very strange thing, but the man seem to have some odd kind 
of gift. whether it be that "second sight" which we scotch people are 
so prone to believe in, or some other occult form of knowledge, i know 
not, but nothing of a disastrous tendency ever occur in this place 
but the men with whom he lives are able to quote after the event some 
saying of his which certainly appear to have foretold it. he get 
uneasy or excited--wakes up, in fact--when death is in the air!' 

this did not in any way tend to lessen mr. markam's concern, but on 
the contrary seem to impress the prophecy more deep on his mind. 
of all the books which he had read on his new subject of study none 
interested him so much as a germany one _die döppleganger_, by dr. 
heinrich von aschenberg, formerly of bonn. here he learned for the 
first time of case where men had led a double existence--each nature 
being quite apart from the other--the body being always a reality with 
one spirit, and a simulacrum with the other. needless to say that mr. 
markam realise this theory as exactly suiting his own case. the 
glimpse which he had of his own back the night of his escape from the 
quicksand--his own footmark disappear into the quicksand with no 
return steps visible--the prophecy of saft tammie about his meeting 
himself and perishing in the quicksand--all lent aid to the conviction 
that he was in his own person an instance of the döppleganger. being 
then conscious of a double life he took steps to prove its existence 
to his own satisfaction. to this end on one night before go to bed 
he wrote his name in chalk on the sole of his shoes. that night he 
dream of the quicksand, and of his visiting it--dreamed so vivid 
that on walking in the grey of the dawn he could not believe that he 
had not been there. arising, without disturb his wife, he sought 
his shoes. 

the chalk signature were undisturbed! he dress himself and stole 
out softly. this time the tide was in, so he cross the dune and 
struck the shore on the further side of the quicksand. there, oh, 
horror of horrors! he saw his own footprint die into the abyss! 

he went home a desperate sad man. it seem incredible that he, an 
elderly commercial man, who had pass a long and uneventful life in 
the pursuit of business in the midst of roaring, practical london, 
should thus find himself enmesh in mystery and horror, and that he 
should discover that he had two existences. he could not speak of his 
trouble even to his own wife, for well he knew that she would at once 
require the fullest particulars of that other life--the one which she 
did not know; and that she would at the start not only imagine but 
charge him with all manner of infidelity on the head of it. and so 
his brood grew deep and deep still. one evening--the tide then 
go out and the moon being at the full--he was sitting wait for 
dinner when the maid announce that saft tammie was making a 
disturbance outside because he would not be let in to see him. he was 
very indignant, but did not like the maid to think that he had any 
fear on the subject, and so told her to bring him in. tammie entered, 
walking more brisk than ever with his head up and a look of vigorous 
decision in the eyes that were so generally cast down. as soon as he 
enter he said: 

'i have come to see ye once again--once again; and there ye sit, still 
just like a cockatoo on a pairch. weel, mon, i forgie ye! mind ye 
that, i forgie ye!' and without a word more he turn and walk out 
of the house, leave the master in speechless indignation. 

after dinner he determined to pay another visit to the quicksand--he 
would not allow even to himself that he was afraid to go. and so, 
about nine o'clock, in full array, he march to the beach, and 
passing over the sands sat on the skirt of the near rock. the full 
moon was behind him and its light lit up the bay so that its fringe of 
foam, the dark outline of the headland, and the stakes of the 
salmon-nets were all emphasised. in the brilliant yellow glow the 
lights in the window of port crooken and in those of the distant 
castle of the laird tremble like stars through the sky. for a long 
time he sat and drank in the beauty of the scene, and his soul seem 
to feel a peace that it had not known for many days. all the petty 
and annoyance and silly fear of the past week seem blot out, 
and a new holy calm took the vacant place. in this sweet and solemn 
mood he review his late action calmly, and felt ashamed of himself 
for his vanity and for the obstinacy which had follow it. and then 
and there he made up his mind that the present would be the last time 
he would wear the costume which had estrange him from those whom he 
loved, and which had cause him so many hour and days of chagrin, 
vexation, and pain. 

but almost as soon as he arrive at this conclusion another voice 
seem to speak within him and mocking to ask him if he should ever 
get the chance to wear the suit again--that it was too late--he had 
chosen his course and must now abide the issue. 

'it is not too late,' came the quick answer of his better self; and 
full of the thought, he rose up to go home and divest himself of the 
now hateful costume right away. he pause for one look at the 
beautiful scene. the light lay pale and mellow, soften every 
outline of rock and tree and house-top, and deepen the shadow into 
velvety-black, and lighting, as with a pale flame, the incoming tide, 
that now crept fringe-like across the flat waste of sand. then he left 
the rock and step out for the shore. 

but as he did so a frightful spasm of horror shook him, and for an 
instant the blood rush to his head shut out all the light of the 
full moon. once more he saw that fatal image of himself moving beyond 
the quicksand from the opposite rock to the shore. the shock was all 
the greater for the contrast with the spell of peace which he had just 
enjoyed; and, almost paralyse in every sense, he stood and watch 
the fatal vision and the wrinkly, crawl quicksand that seem to 
writhe and yearn for something that lay between. there could be no 
mistake this time, for though the moon behind threw the face into 
shadow he could see there the same shaven cheek as his own, and the 
small stubby moustache of a few weeks' growth. the light shone on the 
brilliant tartan, and on the eagle's plume. even the bald space at one 
side of the glengarry cap glistened, as did the cairngorm brooch on 
the shoulder and the tops of the silver buttons. as he look he felt 
his feet slightly sinking, for he was still near the edge of the belt 
of quicksand, and he step back. as he did so the other figure 
step forward, so that the space between them was preserved. 

so the two stood facing each other, as though in some weird 
fascination; and in the rush of the blood through his brain markam 
seem to hear the words of the prophecy: 'see thyself face to face, 
and repent ere the quicksand swallow thee.' he did stand face to face 
with himself, he had repented--and now he was sink in the 
quicksand! the warning and prophecy were coming true. 

above him the seagull screamed, circle round the fringe of the 
incoming tide, and the sound being entire mortal recall him to 
himself. on the instant he step back a few quick steps, for as yet 
only his feet were merge in the soft sand. as he did so the other 
figure step forward, and coming within the deadly grip of the 
quicksand began to sink. it seem to markam that he was look at 
himself go down to his doom, and on the instant the anguish of his 
soul found vent in a terrible cry. there was at the same instant a 
terrible cry from the other figure, and as markam threw up his hand 
the figure did the same. with horror-struck eyes he saw him sink 
deep into the quicksand; and then, impel by what power he knew 
not, he advanced again towards the sand to meet his fate. but as his 
more forward foot began to sink he heard again the cries of the 
seagull which seem to restore his benumbed faculties. with a mighty 
effort he drew his foot out of the sand which seem to clutch it, 
leave his shoe behind, and then in sheer terror he turn and ran 
from the place, never stopping till his breath and strength fail 
him, and he sank half swoon on the grassy path through the 
sandhills. 

* * * * * 

arthur markam made up his mind not to tell his family of his terrible 
adventure--until at least such time as he should be complete master of 
himself. now that the fatal double--his other self--had been engulf 
in the quicksand he felt something like his old peace of mind. 

that night he slept sound and did not dream at all; and in the 
morning was quite his old self. it really seem as though his new 
and worse self had disappear for ever; and strange enough saft 
tammie was absent from his post that morning and never appear there 
again, but sat in his old place watch nothing, as of old, with 
lack-lustre eye. in accordance with his resolution he did not wear his 
highland suit again, but one evening tie it up in a bundle, claymore, 
dirk and philibeg and all, and bring it secret with him threw it 
into the quicksand. with a feeling of intense pleasure he saw it 
suck below the sand, which closed above it into marble smoothness. 
then he went home and announce cheery to his family assemble for 
evening prayers: 

'well! my dears, you will be glad to hear that i have abandoned my 
idea of wearing the highland dress. i see now what a vain old fool i 
was and how ridiculous i made myself! you shall never see it again!' 

'where is it, father?' ask one of the girls, wish to say 
something so that such a self-sacrificing announcement as her father's 
should not be pass in absolute silence. his answer was so sweet 
given that the girl rose from her seat and came and kiss him. it 
was: 

'in the quicksand, my dear! and i hope that my worse self is bury 
there along with it--for ever.' 

* * * * * 

the remainder of the summer was pass at crooken with delight by all 
the family, and on his return to town mr. markam had almost forgotten 
the whole of the incident of the quicksand, and all touching on it, 
when one day he got a letter from the maccallum more which cause him 
much thought, though he said nothing of it to his family, and left it, 
for certain reasons, unanswered. it ran as follows:-- 

'the maccallum more and roderick macdhu. 
'the scotch all-wool tartan clothing mart. 
copthall court, e.c., 
30th september, 1892. 

'dear sir,--i trust you will pardon the liberty which i take in 
writing to you, but i am desirous of making an inquiry, and i am 
informed that you have been sojourn during the summer in 
aberdeenshire (scotland, n.b.). my partner, mr. roderick macdhu--as he 
appear for business reason on our bill-heads and in our 
advertisements, his real name being emmanuel moses mark of 
london--went early last month to scotland (n.b.) for a tour, but as i 
have only once heard from him, shortly after his departure, i am 
anxious lest any misfortune may have befallen him. as i have been 
unable to obtain any news of him on making all inquiry in my power, 
i venture to appeal to you. his letter was written in deep dejection 
of spirit, and mention that he fear a judgment had come upon him 
for wish to appear as a scotchman on scotland soil, as he had one 
moonlight night shortly after his arrival seen his 'wraith'. he 
evidently allude to the fact that before his departure he had 
procure for himself a highland costume similar to that which we had 
the honour to supply to you, with which, as perhaps you will remember, 
he was much struck. he may, however, never have worn it, as he was, to 
my own knowledge, diffident about putt it on, and even went so far 
as to tell me that he would at first only venture to wear it late at 
night or very early in the morning, and then only in remote places, 
until such time as he should get accustomed to it. unfortunately he 
did not advise me of his route so that i am in complete ignorance of 
his whereabouts; and i venture to ask if you may have seen or heard of 
a highland costume similar to your own have been seen anywhere in 
the neighbourhood in which i am told you have recently purchase the 
estate which you temporary occupied. i shall not expect an answer to 
this letter unless you can give me some information regarding my 
friend and partner, so pray do not trouble to reply unless there be 
cause. i am encourage to think that he may have been in your 
neighbourhood as, though his letter is not dated, the envelope is 
marked with the postmark of "yellon" which i find is in aberdeenshire, 
and not far from the mains of crooken. 

'i have the honour to be, dear sir, 
'yours very respectfully, 
'joshua sheeny cohen benjamin 
'(the maccallum more.)' 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook dracula's guest*** 


******* this file should be name 10150-8.txt or 10150-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/1/5/10150 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
