america’s public restroom are kind of great now 
by farhad manjoo 
dec. 11, 2019 

in the past few years, something amazing has been quiet happening across the land. public restroom in america — long a flash point of exclusion by race, gender, class and ability — have gotten much, much better. thanks to an increasingly effective campaign by a range of activists, america’s public bathroom are now cleaner, more plentiful, more private, and more accessible and inclusive than ever. in many places, they’re even great. 

this is a story about identity politics, advocacy, design and architecture. it is also a story still in motion, with progress yet to unfold and many people still shut out. there is still much controversy surrounding our bathrooms, who get to use them and how. but it’s important to recognize progress as it’s happening. and if you travel across america, now, it’s undeniable that how we go keeps get better. 

how do i know? 

at the risk of t.m.i., i happen to be an expert on bathrooms. twenty years ago, when i was a senior in college, i was diagnose with a condition call achalasia, a rare, sometimes genetic swallow disorder that i was actually quite familiar with, because when i was a kid, my mother had it, too. 

it began as a blinding, burning bolt of pain in the middle of my chest after eating. imagine heartburn after you’ve eaten something spicy, but amp up to 11, as if the thing you’d eaten was a chain saw douse in ghost peppers. the pain would abate after a few minutes, but it would come back again and again, usually after i’d eaten a big meal. then it began to hurt during big meals, then during every meal, and soon anytime i’d try to swallow anything. for many people the condition is curable through surgery, but for me that long-ago flash of pain turn out to be only the beginning of an all-consuming, chronic and often embarrass disability. 

over the last two decades, though i’ve undergone dozen of invasion procedure and tests, taken a panoply of pill and had various parts of my digestive system remove or surgical rebuilt, my symptom have only gotten more intense and more — how to put this delicately? — expansive. swallow food is now an arduous enough task that i have to get much of my nutrition through liquid: as kanye once rapped, "i drink a boost for breakfast, an ensure for dessert." but it’s no long just eat that’s a pain; it’s what happen after, too. from the nave to the chops, my swallow problem has spawn a gross-out comedy’s worth of g.i. complications. 

the ugly upshot is this: at least once every day and sometimes many times, i have to run to the restroom on a moment’s notice, and what happen to me there is best experienced alone, in blissful, unembarrass solitude. 

i tell you all this, in order to establish my bona fides: i know public bathrooms. in my travels, over the years, i have assemble in my head a veritable michelin guide of private, peaceful place to go. so trust me when i tell you that in the last few years, better public bathroom have start to pop up everywhere. again and again, in big city and small, in red states and blue, in airports, hotels, shop malls, theaters, stadiums, offices and a range of other public venues, i’ve been save by a bounty of better loos. 

more restroom are now explicit inclusive and accessible, design for people who are physically disabled; are gender nonconforming; are travel with children; or are otherwise in need of special accommodation. (for instance, paruresi and parcopresis, phobia that inhibit people from urinate or defecate in public restrooms, are real, debilitate conditions that affect ten of million of people.) 

one innovation that has been of particular use to me is the lockable, single-occupancy, all-gender restroom. a decade ago, in most public places, it was nigh impossible to find a private place to do your business. today, these one-person stalls are a rising trend across the country, especially at airport and other large public facilities. in some place they’re label "all gender" restrooms; in others, they’re call "family" bathrooms; in yet others, sign welcome everyone with broad language, like, "all person may use this restroom." whatever you call them, they’re a haven in a world marked by chaos and disorder. over the last few years, when nature call sudden and panic set in, i’ve had the fortune of finding a clean, private place at, among other locations, the guggenheim in new york; the getty center in los angeles; the mall of america; a dozen airports, at least; and so, so many starbucks. 

of course, things still aren’t perfect. i am a member of a racial minority, but i’m a cisgender person of means and social privilege. it’s likely that a lot of people still find it hard to find clean, private restroom in much of the land. still, the restroom situation in america is much better than it use to be and, i’ve noticed, so much better than in many other parts of the world. 

on a trip to britain and france with my kid last year, i was surprise at how difficult it was to find a clean, private bathroom; when there was one, you often had to pay to use it. i’ve seen some very nice bathroom in dubai, but only in place that cater to the wealthy. in south africa and india? forget about it. america has less and less to be proud of these days; our life expectancy are falling, our infrastructure is crumbling, and our politics are in the toilet. but look at our toilets! while there’s no official metric on this sort of thing, in my estimation america toilet are now likely among the top in the world. japan’s loo are said to be very nice; if we can’t be no. 1, it’s possible we’re at least, you know, no. 2. 

if it’s true that our toilet are get better, it’s worth ask why. in a word: activists. in the last few years, a range of advocate fight on behalf of transgender people, the disabled, homeless people and other have mount a variety of legal and public advocacy campaign aim at making bathroom more accessible. these have sometimes spark backlash and controversy, like the 2016 law in north carolina that roll back gender-inclusive restrooms. at the supreme court this fall, justice considering a case about gay and transgender rights couldn’t stop themselves from considering everything through the lens of the loo. 

despite the politics controversy, on the ground, in facilities all over the country, the moral arc of the bathroom is bend toward inclusion. at starbucks, after a viral incident last year in which two black men who had ask to use the restroom were arrest at a philadelphia location, the restroom are now open to everyone, even people who haven’t purchase anything. city are now spend money to create more public restrooms. and early this year, stalled!, an organization of designer and activist who push for restroom-related social justice, mount a successful campaign to get the international plumbing code — which set standard for bathroom — to adopt new language support all-gender restrooms. 

"inclusive design" has been a hot new term among architect and product designers; the idea, broadly, is that when you create product and space that are accommodating of a broad range of human capacity, they end up being much more useful to everyone in unexpected ways. advocate of inclusive design point to some canonical examples: sidewalk ramp were put in place for people with wheelchairs, but they turn out to be handy for parent with strollers, too. some of the technology in the smartphone’s touchscreen was invent as a way to help people with disability like carpal tunnel syndrome. typewriter and keyboard were first create to help the blind. 

restroom are following a similar path. it’s not just obviously disabled and gender-nonconforming people who need a private, more accessible restroom. everyone, now and again, can do with a nice place to go to the bathroom. in america, at long last, we’re get that. thank you, social justice warriors. 
