elizabeth warren throw down the gauntlet 
by elisabeth rosenthal 
nov. 4, 2019 

lay the table for the next democratic debate, elizabeth warren has issue a plan that explain how she would fund what she call medicare for all. she had studious avoid saying whether it would raise tax for the middle class, and in her proposal, she say (repeatedly) it will not. 

it will instead be finance by a mix of wealth taxes, employer transfer of money they current spend on health care and reduction of the many inefficient in our current byzantine system — among other initiatives. 

but now all the candidate need to tell us more of those detail about their health care strategies. it’s time for the candidate to stop talk slogan and start talk sense — or dollar and cent — so that voter can know what they mean and choose among them. 

medicare for all, medicare for all who want it, a public option, improve the afford care act — those are 30,000-foot concept that, depend on the details, could work (or not) and be popular (or not). 

the candidate (including ms. warren) also need to say more about what they’ll do right now: in one poll, 40 percent of america said they had skip a recommend test or treatment, and 32 percent said they had skip a medicine, because of cost. 

supporter of medicare for all want to tie their future to the popularity of the medicare program. but ms. warren (and bernie sanders) are offering up america a supercharged version of the current government insurance for those over 65. 

it promise to eliminate co-payments for prescription drugs. (under current medicare, many patient contribute thousand of dollar annually.) it include dental and long-term care — a huge expense that is conspicuous missing from current medicare. 

that ambition would make a health care plan vastly more expensive. the national health system of britain and canada, both single payer system like the medicare for all proposal, do not offer comprehensive long-term care coverage. canada’s doesn’t include coverage for prescription drug out of the hospital. 

is the finance ms. warren propose go to be adequate to support the expand goals? economist disagree. 

but in release her proposal, she has thrown down the gauntlet before the other candidate — who support medicare for all who want it or some other type of public option — to be a whole lot clear about what they mean. 

joe biden, kamala harris, pete buttigieg, et al.: do your public option — a government insurance policy that anyone may buy — resemble mr. sanders’s enhance medicare, or current medicare or medicaid, which is far more bare bones? 

voter need to know. 

there’s another obvious reason the candidate have been so close lip on specifics: to calculate how to pay for any of the plans, the candidate have to say how they intend to bring down price — for hospital stays, drugs, procedures, devices, doctors’ visits, surgeries. america often pay two to 10 times what patient pay for these item in other develop countries. 

those price will have to come down to make any plan viable without break the bank. to really assess any plan, we’ll need that kind of information. 

ms. warren has courageous step into that fraught territory, with numbers that have very likely sent shock wave through the health care industry. 

for example, to make her finance proposal work, she suggest pay most hospital on average 110 percent of current medicare rates. she suggest america should pay no more for drug than 110 percent of the average international market price. that may be eminently reasonable, but is it achievable? 

when montana negotiate rate directly with hospital for its state employees, it settled on a deal in which the state agree to pay an average of 234 percent of medicare rates. and it still save money. 

setting lower price is go to bring out strong opposition. remember, patient (or taxpayer) savings mean loss of income for one of america’s most profitable industries, whose lobbyist spent more than half a billion dollar last year and which is flush with dark money to distribute in congress. 

to get the a.c.a. passed, president barack obama gave up on a number of price-lowering idea to get buy-in from the health care industry and its friends in congress. these included jettison the idea of a public option and allow medicare to negotiate drug prices. 

the republican — whose "plans" have been largely proclamation of better, cheap health care without any strategy — will be quick to label any of the democratic plan as a government takeover of health care, or socialism. 

remember, patient (or taxpayer) savings mean loss of income for the united states’ most robust sector in the post-recession economy. in many post-manufacturing city like pittsburgh and cleveland, a single hospital system is the biggest employer. in boston, hospital and hospital corporation make up the top six employers. minnesota and massachusetts have done well with drug and device manufacturing. and let’s not start on insurers, whose lucrative health business would largely disappear. 

any plan to rein in the united states’ bloated $3.5 trillion health care system will be slow going, require not just a footnote blueprint but also the tame of many oppose forces. it took years for canada to move from a market-based system to government run health. it endure lengthy debate and doctors’ strikes. 

ms. warren call her proposal a "long-term plan." but voter want to know how we get from here to anywhere else. in polls, their top health care issue is afford — emphasis on now. 

they need concrete proposal as well as long-term vision. in the next debate, how about talk about h.r. 3, a bill in congress to curb prescription drug prices? that plan would allow the health and human service secretary to negotiate a maximum price that could be charged to medicare for insulin and some of the most expensive medicine in the united states, base on the price paid for those drug in other countries. 

days before the last democratic debate, the congressional budget office said it would save $345 billion over a six-year period (2023-29). 

if the bill were to move to the senate, how would the front-runners vote? what do they have to say about that? 
