the project gutenberg ebook of the willows, by algernon blackwood 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the willow 

author: algernon blackwood 

release date: march 4, 2004 [ebook #11438] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the willow *** 




produce by suzanne shell, david newman and pg distribute proofread 




the willow 

algernon blackwood 
(1907) 



i 

preface 
after leave vienna, and long before you come to budapest, the danube 
enter a region of singular lonely and desolation, where its waters 
spread away on all side regardless of a main channel, and the country 
become a swamp for mile upon miles, cover by a vast sea of low 
willow-bushes. on the big map this desert area is paint in a fluffy 
blue, grow faint in color as it leaves the banks, and across it may be 
seen in large straggle letters the word sumpfe, meaning marshes. 

in high flood this great acreage of sand, shingle-beds, and willow-grown 
island is almost top by the water, but in normal season the bush 
bend and rustle in the free winds, showing their silver leaves to the 
sunshine in an ever-moving plain of bewilder beauty. these willow never 
attain to the dignity of trees; they have no rigid trunks; they remain 
humble bushes, with round tops and soft outline, sway on slender stem 
that answer to the least pressure of the wind; supple as grasses, and so 
continual shift that they somehow give the impression that the entire 
plain is moving and alive. for the wind send wave rising and fall over 
the whole surface, wave of leaves instead of wave of water, green swell 
like the sea, too, until the branch turn and lift, and then silvery white 
as their underside turn to the sun. 

happy to slip beyond the control of the stern banks, the danube here 
wander about at will among the intricate network of channel intersect 
the island everywhere with broad avenue down which the waters pour with a 
shouting sound; making whirlpools, eddies, and foam rapids; tear at 
the sandy banks; carry away masses of shore and willow-clumps; and 
form new island innumerable which shift daily in size and shape and 
possess at best an impermanent life, since the flood-time obliterate their 
very existence. 

properly speaking, this fascinating part of the river's life begin soon 
after leave pressburg, and we, in our canada canoe, with gipsy tent and 
frying-pan on board, reach it on the crest of a rising flood about 
mid-july. that very same morning, when the sky was redden before 
sunrise, we had slip swift through still-sleeping vienna, leave it a 
couple of hour later a mere patch of smoke against the blue hill of the 
wienerwald on the horizon; we had breakfast below fischeramend under a 
grove of birch tree roaring in the wind; and had then swept on the tear 
current past orth, hainburg, petronell (the old roman carnuntum of marcu 
aurelius), and so under the frown heights of thelsen on a spur of the 
carpathians, where the march steal in quiet from the left and the 
frontier is cross between austria and hungary. 

racing along at twelve kilometer an hour soon took us well into hungary, 
and the muddy waters--sure sign of flood--sent us aground on many a 
shingle-bed, and twist us like a cork in many a sudden belch whirlpool 
before the tower of pressburg (hungarian, poszony) show against the sky; 
and then the canoe, leap like a spirited horse, flew at top speed under 
the grey walls, negotiate safe the sunken chain of the fliegende brucke 
ferry, turn the corner sharp to the left, and plunge on yellow foam 
into the wilderness of islands, sandbanks, and swamp-land beyond--the land 
of the willows. 

the change came suddenly, as when a series of bioscope pictures snap down 
on the street of a town and shift without warning into the scenery of 
lake and forest. we enter the land of desolate on wings, and in less 
than half an hour there was neither boat nor fishing-hut nor red roof, nor 
any single sign of human habitation and civilization within sight. the 
sense of remote from the world of humankind, the utter isolation, the 
fascination of this singular world of willows, winds, and waters, instantly 
laid its spell upon us both, so that we allow laughing to one another 
that we ought by rights to have held some special kind of passport to admit 
us, and that we had, somewhat audaciously, come without ask leave into a 
separate little kingdom of wonder and magic--a kingdom that was reserved 
for the use of other who had a right to it, with everywhere unwritten 
warning to trespass for those who had the imagination to discover them. 

though still early in the afternoon, the ceaseless buffet of a most 
tempestuous wind made us feel weary, and we at once began casting about for 
a suitable camping-ground for the night. but the bewilder character of 
the island made landing difficult; the swirl flood carry us in shore 
and then swept us out again; the willow branch tore our hand as we 
seize them to stop the canoe, and we pull many a yard of sandy bank into 
the water before at length we shot with a great sideways blow from the wind 
into a backwater and manage to beach the bow in a cloud of spray. then we 
lay pant and laugh after our exertion on the hot yellow sand, 
sheltered from the wind, and in the full blaze of a scorching sun, a 
cloudless blue sky above, and an immense army of dancing, shouting willow 
bushes, close in from all sides, shining with spray and clap their 
thousand little hand as though to applaud the success of our efforts. 

"what a river!" i said to my companion, thinking of all the way we had 
traveled from the source in the black forest, and how he had often been 
oblige to wade and push in the upper shallows at the beginning of june. 

"won't stand much nonsense now, will it?" he said, pull the canoe a 
little farther into safety up the sand, and then compose himself for a 
nap. 

i lay by his side, happy and peaceful in the bath of the elements--water, 
wind, sand, and the great fire of the sun--thinking of the long journey 
that lay behind us, and of the great stretch before us to the black sea, 
and how lucky i was to have such a delightful and charming travel 
companion as my friend, the swede. 

we had made many similar journey together, but the danube, more than any 
other river i knew, impress us from the very beginning with its 
aliveness. from its tiny bubble entry into the world among the pinewood 
garden of donaueschingen, until this moment when it began to play the 
great river-game of lose itself among the desert swamps, unobserved, 
unrestrained, it had seem to us like following the grown of some living 
creature. sleepy at first, but later develop violent desire as it 
became conscious of its deep soul, it rolled, like some huge fluid being, 
through all the country we had passed, holding our little craft on its 
mighty shoulders, play roughly with us sometimes, yet always friendly 
and well-meaning, till at length we had come inevitable to regard it as a 
great personage. 

how, indeed, could it be otherwise, since it told us so much of its secret 
life? at night we heard it singing to the moon as we lay in our tent, 
utter that odd sibilant note peculiar to itself and said to be cause by 
the rapid tear of the pebble along its bed, so great is its hurry 
speed. we knew, too, the voice of its gurgle whirlpools, sudden 
bubble up on a surface previous quite calm; the roar of its shallows 
and swift rapids; its constant steady thundering below all mere surface 
sounds; and that ceaseless tear of its icy waters at the banks. how it 
stood up and shout when the rains fell flat upon its face! and how its 
laughter roar out when the wind blew up-stream and try to stop its 
grow speed! we knew all its sound and voices, its tumble and 
foamings, its unnecessary splash against the bridges; that 
self-conscious chatter when there were hill to look on; the affected 
dignity of its speech when it pass through the little towns, far too 
important to laugh; and all these faint, sweet whisper when the sun 
caught it fairly in some slow curve and pour down upon it till the steam 
rose. 

it was full of tricks, too, in its early life before the great world knew 
it. there were place in the upper reach among the swabian forests, when 
yet the first whisper of its destiny had not reach it, where it elect 
to disappear through hole in the ground, to appear again on the other side 
of the porous limestone hill and start a new river with another name; 
leaving, too, so little water in its own bed that we had to climb out and 
wade and push the canoe through mile of shallows. 

and a chief pleasure, in those early days of its irresponsible youth, was 
to lie low, like bre fox, just before the little turbulent tributary 
came to join it from the alps, and to refuse to acknowledge them when in, 
but to run for mile side by side, the divide line well marked, the very 
level different, the danube utterly decline to recognize the newcomer. 
below passau, however, it gave up this particular trick, for there the inn 
come in with a thundering power impossible to ignore, and so push and 
incommode the parent river that there is hardly room for them in the long 
twist gorge that follows, and the danube is shove this way and that 
against the cliffs, and forced to hurry itself with great wave and much 
dashing to and fro in order to get through in time. and during the fight 
our canoe slip down from its shoulder to its breast, and had the time of 
its life among the struggle waves. but the inn taught the old river a 
lesson, and after passau it no long pretended to ignore new arrivals. 

this was many days back, of course, and since then we had come to know 
other aspect of the great creature, and across the bavarian wheat plain of 
straube she wander so slow under the blazing june sun that we could 
well imagine only the surface inch were water, while below there moved, 
conceal as by a silken mantle, a whole army of undines, passing silent 
and unseen down to the sea, and very leisurely too, lest they be 
discovered. 

much, too, we forgave her because of her friendly to the bird and 
animal that haunt the shores. cormorant line the bank in lonely 
place in row like short black palings; grey crow crowded the 
shingle-beds; stork stood fishing in the vista of shallow water that 
open up between the islands, and hawks, swans, and marsh bird of all 
sort fill the air with glint wings and singing, petulant cries. it 
was impossible to feel annoy with the river's vagary after seeing a 
deer leap with a splash into the water at sunrise and swim past the bow of 
the canoe; and often we saw fawn peer at us from the underbrush, or 
look straight into the brown eyes of a stag as we charged full tilt round 
a corner and enter another reach of the river. foxes, too, everywhere 
haunt the banks, tripping dainty among the driftwood and disappear 
so sudden that it was impossible to see how they manage it. 

but now, after leave pressburg, everything change a little, and the 
danube became more serious. it cease trifling. it was half-way to the 
black sea, within seeming distance almost of other, stranger country 
where no trick would be permit or understood. it became sudden 
grown-up, and claim our respect and even our awe. it broke out into three 
arms, for one thing, that only met again a hundred kilometer farther down, 
and for a canoe there were no indication which one was intended to be 
followed. 

"if you take a side channel," said the hungary officer we met in the 
pressburg shop while buy provisions, "you may find yourselves, when the 
flood subsides, forty mile from anywhere, high and dry, and you may easily 
starve. there are no people, no farms, no fishermen. i warn you not to 
continue. the river, too, is still rising, and this wind will increase." 

the rising river did not alarm us in the least, but the matter of being 
left high and dry by a sudden subsidence of the waters might be serious, 
and we had consequently laid in an extra stock of provisions. for the rest, 
the officer's prophecy held true, and the wind, blow down a perfectly 
clear sky, increase steady till it reach the dignity of a westerly 
gale. 

it was early than usual when we camped, for the sun was a good hour or 
two from the horizon, and leave my friend still asleep on the hot sand, i 
wander about in desultory examination of our hotel. the island, i found, 
was less than an acre in extent, a mere sandy bank standing some two or 
three feet above the level of the river. the far end, point into the 
sunset, was cover with flying spray which the tremendous wind drove off 
the crest of the broken waves. it was triangular in shape, with the apex 
up stream. 

i stood there for several minutes, watch the impetuous crimson flood 
bearing down with a shouting roar, dashing in wave against the bank as 
though to sweep it bodily away, and then swirl by in two foam stream 
on either side. the ground seem to shake with the shock and rush, while 
the furious movement of the willow bush as the wind pour over them 
increase the curious illusion that the island itself actually moved. 
above, for a mile or two, i could see the great river descend upon me; 
it was like look up the slope of a slide hill, white with foam, and 
leap up everywhere to show itself to the sun. 

the rest of the island was too thick grown with willow to make walking 
pleasant, but i made the tour, nevertheless. from the lower end the light, 
of course, changed, and the river look dark and angry. only the back of 
the flying wave were visible, streak with foam, and pushed forcibly by 
the great puff of wind that fell upon them from behind. for a short mile 
it was visible, pour in and out among the islands, and then disappear 
with a huge sweep into the willows, which closed about it like a herd of 
monstrous antediluvian creature crowd down to drink. they made me think 
of gigantic sponge-like growth that suck the river up into themselves. 
they cause it to vanish from sight. they herd there together in such 
overpowering numbers. 

altogether it was an impressive scene, with its utter loneliness, its 
bizarre suggestion; and as i gazed, long and curiously, a singular emotion 
began to stir somewhere in the depths of me. midway in my delight of the 
wild beauty, there crept, unbidden and unexplained, a curious feeling of 
disquietude, almost of alarm. 

a rising river, perhaps, always suggest something of the ominous; many of 
the little island i saw before me would probably have been swept away by 
the morning; this resistless, thundering flood of water touched the sense 
of awe. yet i was aware that my uneasy lay deep far than the emotion 
of awe and wonder. it was not that i felt. nor had it directly to do with 
the power of the driving wind--this shouting hurricane that might almost 
carry up a few acre of willow into the air and scatter them like so much 
chaff over the landscape. the wind was simply enjoy itself, for nothing 
rose out of the flat landscape to stop it, and i was conscious of share 
its great game with a kind of pleasurable excitement. yet this novel 
emotion had nothing to do with the wind. indeed, so vague was the sense of 
distress i experienced, that it was impossible to trace it to its source 
and deal with it accordingly, though i was aware somehow that it had to do 
with my realization of our utter insignificance before this unrestrained 
power of the elements about me. the huge-grown river had something to do 
with it too--a vague, unpleasant idea that we had somehow trifle with 
these great elemental forces in whose power we lay helpless every hour of 
the day and night. for here, indeed, they were gigantic at play 
together, and the sight appeal to the imagination. 

but my emotion, so far as i could understand it, seem to attach itself 
more particularly to the willow bushes, to these acre and acre of 
willows, crowding, so thick grow there, swarm everywhere the eye 
could reach, pressing upon the river as though to suffocate it, standing in 
dense array mile after mile beneath the sky, watching, waiting, listening. 
and, apart quite from the elements, the willow connected themselves subtle 
with my malaise, attack the mind insidious somehow by reason of their 
vast numbers, and contrive in some way or other to represent to the 
imagination a new and mighty power, a power, moreover, not altogether 
friendly to us. 

great revelation of nature, of course, never fail to impress in one way or 
another, and i was no stranger to mood of the kind. mountain overawe and 
ocean terrify, while the mystery of great forest exercises a spell 
peculiarly its own. but all these, at one point or another, somewhere link 
on intimate with human life and human experience. they stir 
comprehensible, even if alarming, emotions. they tend on the whole to 
exalt. 

with this multitude of willows, however, it was something far different, i 
felt. some essence emanate from them that besiege the heart. a sense of 
awe awakened, true, but of awe touched somewhere by a vague terror. their 
serried ranks, grow everywhere dark about me as the shadow deepened, 
moving furiously yet soft in the wind, woke in me the curious and 
unwelcome suggestion that we had trespass here upon the border of an 
alien world, a world where we were intruders, a world where we were not 
want or invite to remain--where we ran grave risk perhaps! 

the feeling, however, though it refuse to yield its meaning entire to 
analysis, did not at the time trouble me by passing into menace. yet it 
never left me quite, even during the very practical business of putt up 
the tent in a hurricane of wind and building a fire for the stew-pot. it 
remained, just enough to bother and perplex, and to rob a most delightful 
camping-ground of a good portion of its charm. to my companion, however, i 
said nothing, for he was a man i considered devoid of imagination. in the 
first place, i could never have explain to him what i meant, and in the 
second, he would have laugh stupid at me if i had. 

there was a slight depression in the center of the island, and here we 
pitch the tent. the surrounding willow broke the wind a bit. 

"a poor camp," observe the imperturbable swede when at last the tent stood 
upright, "no stone and precious little firewood. i'm for moving on early 
tomorrow--eh? this sand won't hold anything." 

but the experience of a collapse tent at midnight had taught us many 
devices, and we made the cozy gipsy house as safe as possible, and then set 
about collect a store of wood to last till bed-time. willow bush drop 
no branches, and driftwood was our only source of supply. we hunt the 
shore pretty thoroughly. everywhere the bank were crumble as the rising 
flood tore at them and carry away great portion with a splash and a 
gurgle. 

"the island's much small than when we landed," said the accurate swede. 
"it won't last long at this rate. we'd better drag the canoe close to the 
tent, and be ready to start at a moment's notice. i shall sleep in my 
clothes." 

he was a little distance off, climb along the bank, and i heard his 
rather jolly laugh as he spoke. 

"by jove!" i heard him call, a moment later, and turn to see what had 
cause his exclamation. but for the moment he was hidden by the willows, 
and i could not find him. 

"what in the world's this?" i heard him cry again, and this time his voice 
had become serious. 

i ran up quick and join him on the bank. he was look over the river, 
point at something in the water. 

"good heavens, it's a man's body!" he cry excitedly. "look!" 

a black thing, turning over and over in the foam waves, swept rapid 
past. it kept disappear and coming up to the surface again. it was about 
twenty feet from the shore, and just as it was opposite to where we stood 
it lurch round and look straight at us. we saw its eyes reflect the 
sunset, and gleam an odd yellow as the body turn over. then it gave a 
swift, gulp plunge, and dive out of sight in a flash. 

"an otter, by gad!" we exclaim in the same breath, laughing. 

it was an otter, alive, and out on the hunt; yet it had look exactly like 
the body of a drown man turning helpless in the current. far below it 
came to the surface once again, and we saw its black skin, wet and shining 
in the sunlight. 

then, too, just as we turn back, our arms full of driftwood, another 
thing happen to recall us to the river bank. this time it really was a 
man, and what was more, a man in a boat. now a small boat on the danube was 
an unusual sight at any time, but here in this desert region, and at 
flood time, it was so unexpected as to constitute a real event. we stood 
and stared. 

whether it was due to the slant sunlight, or the refract from the 
wonderful illumine water, i cannot say, but, whatever the cause, i found 
it difficult to focus my sight properly upon the flying apparition. it 
seemed, however, to be a man standing upright in a sort of flat-bottomed 
boat, steer with a long oar, and being carry down the opposite shore 
at a tremendous pace. he apparently was look across in our direction, 
but the distance was too great and the light too uncertain for us to make 
out very plainly what he was about. it seem to me that he was 
gesticulate and making sign at us. his voice came across the water to us 
shouting something furiously, but the wind drown it so that no single 
word was audible. there was something curious about the whole 
appearance--man, boat, signs, voice--that made an impression on me out of 
all proportion to its cause. 

"he's crossing himself!" i cried. "look, he's making the sign of the 
cross!" 

"i believe you're right," the swede said, shading his eyes with his hand 
and watch the man out of sight. he seem to be gone in a moment, 
melting away down there into the sea of willow where the sun caught them 
in the bend of the river and turn them into a great crimson wall of 
beauty. mist, too, had begun to ruse, so that the air was hazy. 

"but what in the world is he do at nightfall on this flood river?" i 
said, half to myself. "where is he go at such a time, and what did he 
mean by his sign and shouting? d'you think he wish to warn us about 
something?" 

"he saw our smoke, and thought we were spirits probably," laugh my 
companion. "these hungary believe in all sort of rubbish; you remember 
the shopwoman at pressburg warning us that no one ever landed here because 
it belong to some sort of being outside man's world! i suppose they 
believe in fairy and elementals, possibly demons, too. that peasant in 
the boat saw people on the island for the first time in his life," he 
added, after a slight pause, "and it scared him, that's all." 

the swede's tone of voice was not convincing, and his manner lack 
something that was usually there. i noted the change instantly while he 
talked, though without being able to label it precisely. 

"if they had enough imagination," i laugh loudly--i remember try to 
make as much noise as i could--"they might well people a place like this 
with the old gods of antiquity. the roman must have haunt all this 
region more or less with their shrine and sacred grove and elemental 
deities." 

the subject drop and we return to our stew-pot, for my friend was not 
given to imaginative conversation as a rule. moreover, just then i remember 
feeling distinct glad that he was not imaginative; his stolid, practical 
nature sudden seem to me welcome and comforting. it was an admirable 
temperament, i felt; he could steer down rapids like a red indian, shoot 
dangerous bridge and whirlpool better than any white man i ever saw in a 
canoe. he was a grand fellow for an adventurous trip, a tower of strength 
when untoward things happened. i look at his strong face and light curly 
hair as he stagger along under his pile of driftwood (twice the size of 
mine!), and i experienced a feeling of relief. yes, i was distinct glad 
just then that the swede was--what he was, and that he never made remark 
that suggest more than they said. 

"the river's still rising, though," he added, as if following out some 
thought of his own, and drop his load with a gasp. "this island will 
be under water in two days if it go on." 

"i wish the wind would go down," i said. "i don't care a fig for the 
river." 

the flood, indeed, had no terror for us; we could get off at ten minutes' 
notice, and the more water the better we like it. it meant an increase 
current and the obliterate of the treacherous shingle-beds that so often 
threaten to tear the bottom out of our canoe. 

contrary to our expectations, the wind did not go down with the sun. it 
seem to increase with the darkness, howling overhead and shake the 
willow round us like straws. curious sound accompany it sometimes, like 
the explosion of heavy guns, and it fell upon the water and the island in 
great flat blow of immense power. it made me think of the sound a planet 
must make, could we only hear it, driving along through space. 

but the sky kept wholly clear of clouds, and soon after supper the full 
moon rose up in the east and cover the river and the plain of shouting 
willow with a light like the day. 

we lay on the sandy patch beside the fire, smoking, listen to the noise 
of the night round us, and talk happily of the journey we had already 
made, and of our plan ahead. the map lay spread in the door of the tent, 
but the high wind made it hard to study, and presently we lower the 
curtain and extinguish the lantern. the firelight was enough to smoke and 
see each other's face by, and the sparks flew about overhead like 
fireworks. a few yard beyond, the river gurgle and hissed, and from time 
to time a heavy splash announce the fall away of further portion of 
the bank. 

our talk, i noticed, had to do with the faraway scene and incident of our 
first camp in the black forest, or of other subject altogether remote 
from the present setting, for neither of us spoke of the actual moment more 
than was necessary--almost as though we had agree tacit to avoid 
discussion of the camp and its incidents. neither the otter nor the 
boatman, for instance, received the honor of a single mention, though 
ordinarily these would have furnish discussion for the greater part of 
the evening. they were, of course, distinct event in such a place. 

the scarcity of wood made it a business to keep the fire going, for the 
wind, that drove the smoke in our face wherever we sat, help at the same 
time to make a forced draught. we took it in turn to make some forage 
expedition into the darkness, and the quantity the swede brought back 
always made me feel that he took an absurd long time finding it; for the 
fact was i did not care much about being left alone, and yet it always 
seem to be my turn to grub about among the bush or scramble along the 
slippery bank in the moonlight. the long day's battle with wind and 
water--such wind and such water!--had tired us both, and an early bed was 
the obvious program. yet neither of us made the move for the tent. we lay 
there, tend the fire, talk in desultory fashion, peer about us 
into the dense willow bushes, and listen to the thunder of wind and 
river. the lonely of the place had enter our very bones, and silence 
seem natural, for after a bit the sound of our voice became a trifle 
unreal and forced; whisper would have been the fitting mode of 
communication, i felt, and the human voice, always rather absurd amid the 
roar of the elements, now carry with it something almost illegitimate. it 
was like talk out loud in church, or in some place where it was not 
lawful, perhaps not quite safe, to be overheard. 

the eery of this lonely island, set among a million willows, swept by a 
hurricane, and surround by hurry deep waters, touched us both, i 
fancy. untrodden by man, almost unknown to man, it lay there beneath the 
moon, remote from human influence, on the frontier of another world, an 
alien world, a world tenant by willow only and the soul of willows. and 
we, in our rashness, had dare to invade it, even to make use of it! 
something more than the power of its mystery stir in me as i lay on the 
sand, feet to fire, and peer up through the leaves at the stars. for the 
last time i rose to get firewood. 

"when this has burnt up," i said firmly, "i shall turn in," and my 
companion watch me lazy as i move off into the surrounding shadows. 

for an unimaginative man i thought he seem unusually receptive that 
night, unusually open to suggestion of things other than sensory. he too 
was touched by the beauty and lonely of the place. i was not altogether 
pleased, i remember, to recognize this slight change in him, and instead of 
immediately collect sticks, i made my way to the far point of the island 
where the moonlight on plain and river could be seen to better advantage. 
the desire to be alone had come sudden upon me; my former dread return 
in force; there was a vague feeling in me i wish to face and probe to the 
bottom. 

when i reach the point of sand jut out among the waves, the spell of 
the place descended upon me with a positive shock. no mere "scenery" could 
have produce such an effect. there was something more here, something to 
alarm. 

i gaze across the waste of wild waters; i watch the whisper willows; 
i heard the ceaseless beating of the tireless wind; and, one and all, each 
in its own way, stir in me this sensation of a strange distress. but the 
willow especially; for ever they went on chatter and talk among 
themselves, laugh a little, shril crying out, sometimes sighing--but 
what it was they made so much to-do about belong to the secret life of 
the great plain they inhabited. and it was utterly alien to the world i 
knew, or to that of the wild yet kindly elements. they made me think of a 
host of being from another plane of life, another evolution altogether, 
perhaps, all discuss a mystery known only to themselves. i watch them 
moving busy together, oddly shake their big bushy heads, twirl their 
myriad leaves even when there was no wind. they move of their own will as 
though alive, and they touched, by some incalculable method, my own keen 
sense of the horrible. 

there they stood in the moonlight, like a vast army surrounding our camp, 
shake their innumerable silver spear defiantly, form all ready for an 
attack. 

the psychology of places, for some imagination at least, is very vivid; 
for the wanderer, especially, camp have their "note" either of welcome or 
rejection. at first it may not always be apparent, because the busy 
preparation of tent and cooking prevent, but with the first pause--after 
supper usually--it come and announce itself. and the note of this 
willow-camp now became unmistakable plain to me; we were interlopers, 
trespassers; we were not welcomed. the sense of unfamiliar grew upon me 
as i stood there watching. we touched the frontier of a region where our 
presence was resented. for a night's lodging we might perhaps be tolerated; 
but for a prolonged and inquisitive stay--no! by all the gods of the tree 
and wilderness, no! we were the first human influence upon this island, 
and we were not wanted. the willow were against us. 

strange thought like these, bizarre fancies, borne i know not whence, 
found lodgment in my mind as i stood listening. what, i thought, if, after 
all, these crouch willow prove to be alive; if sudden they should 
rise up, like a swarm of living creatures, marshal by the gods whose 
territory we had invaded, sweep towards us off the vast swamps, boom 
overhead in the night--and then settle down! as i look it was so easy to 
imagine they actually moved, crept nearer, retreat a little, huddle 
together in masses, hostile, wait for the great wind that should finally 
start them a-running. i could have sworn their aspect change a little, and 
their ranks deepen and pressed more close together. 

the melancholy shrill cry of a night-bird sound overhead, and sudden i 
nearly lost my balance as the piece of bank i stood upon fell with a great 
splash into the river, undermine by the flood. i step back just in 
time, and went on hunting for firewood again, half laugh at the odd 
fancies that crowded so thick into my mind and cast their spell upon me. 
i recall the swede's remark about moving on next day, and i was just 
thinking that i fully agree with him, when i turn with a start and saw 
the subject of my thought standing immediately in front of me. he was 
quite close. the roar of the elements had cover his approach. 




ii 


"you've been gone so long," he shout above the wind, "i thought something 
must have happen to you." 

but there was that in his tone, and a certain look in his face as well, 
that convey to me more than his usual words, and in a flash i understood 
the real reason for his coming. it was because the spell of the place had 
enter his soul too, and he did not like being alone. 

"river still rising," he cried, point to the flood in the moonlight, 
"and the wind's simply awful." 

he always said the same things, but it was the cry for companionship that 
gave the real importance to his words. 

"lucky," i cry back, "our tent's in the hollow. i think it'll hold all 
right." i add something about the difficulty of finding wood, in order to 
explain my absence, but the wind caught my words and flung them across the 
river, so that he did not hear, but just look at me through the branches, 
nod his head. 

"lucky if we get away without disaster!" he shouted, or words to that 
effect; and i remember feeling half angry with him for putt the thought 
into words, for it was exactly what i felt myself. there was disaster 
impending somewhere, and the sense of presentiment lay unpleasant upon 
me. 

we went back to the fire and made a final blaze, poke it up with our 
feet. we took a last look round. but for the wind the heat would have been 
unpleasant. i put this thought into words, and i remember my friend's reply 
struck me oddly: that he would rather have the heat, the ordinary july 
weather, than this "diabolical wind." 

everything was snug for the night; the canoe lie turn over beside the 
tent, with both yellow paddle beneath her; the provision sack hanging from 
a willow-stem, and the washed-up dishes remove to a safe distance from the 
fire, all ready for the morning meal. 

we smother the ember of the fire with sand, and then turn in. the flap 
of the tent door was up, and i saw the branch and the stars and the white 
moonlight. the shake willow and the heavy buffet of the wind against 
our taut little house were the last things i remember as sleep came down 
and cover all with its soft and delicious forgetfulness. 

sudden i found myself lie awake, peer from my sandy mattress through 
the door of the tent. i look at my watch pin against the canvas, and 
saw by the bright moonlight that it was past twelve o'clock--the threshold 
of a new day--and i had therefore slept a couple of hours. the swede was 
asleep still beside me; the wind howl as before; something pluck at my 
heart and made me feel afraid. there was a sense of disturbance in my 
immediate neighborhood. 

i sat up quick and look out. the tree were sway violent to and 
fro as the gust smote them, but our little bit of green canvas lay snug 
safe in the hollow, for the wind pass over it without meeting enough 
resistance to make it vicious. the feeling of disquietude did not pass, 
however, and i crawl quiet out of the tent to see if our belongings 
were safe. i move careful so as not to waken my companion. a curious 
excitement was on me. 

i was half-way out, kneel on all fours, when my eye first took in that 
the tops of the bush opposite, with their moving tracery of leaves, made 
shape against the sky. i sat back on my haunch and stared. it was 
incredible, surely, but there, opposite and slightly above me, were shape 
of some indeterminate sort among the willows, and as the branch sway in 
the wind they seem to group themselves about these shapes, form a 
series of monstrous outline that shift rapid beneath the moon. close, 
about fifty feet in front of me, i saw these things. 

my first instinct was to waken my companion, that he too might see them, 
but something made me hesitate--the sudden realization, probably, that i 
should not welcome corroboration; and meanwhile i crouch there staring in 
amaze with smart eyes. i was wide awake. i remember saying to myself 
that i was not dreaming. 

they first became properly visible, these huge figures, just within the 
tops of the bushes--immense, bronze-colored, moving, and wholly independent 
of the sway of the branches. i saw them plainly and noted, now i came to 
examine them more calmly, that they were very much large than human, and 
indeed that something in their appearance proclaim them to be not human 
at all. certainly they were not merely the moving tracery of the branch 
against the moonlight. they shift independently. they rose upwards in a 
continuous stream from earth to sky, vanish utterly as soon as they 
reach the dark of the sky. they were interlace one with another, making 
a great column, and i saw their limb and huge body melting in and out of 
each other, form this serpentine line that bent and sway and twist 
spiral with the contortion of the wind-tossed trees. they were nude, 
fluid shapes, passing up the bushes, within the leaves almost--rising up in 
a living column into the heavens. their face i never could see. 
unceasing they pour upwards, sway in great bend curves, with a 
hue of dull bronze upon their skins. 

i stared, try to force every atom of vision from my eyes. for a long 
time i thought they must every moment disappear and resolve themselves into 
the movements of the branch and prove to be an optical illusion. i 
search everywhere for a proof of reality, when all the while i understood 
quite well that the standard of reality had changed. for the long i 
look the more certain i became that these figures were real and living, 
though perhaps not according to the standard that the camera and the 
biologist would insist upon. 

far from feeling fear, i was possessed with a sense of awe and wonder such 
as i have never known. i seem to be gaze at the personify elemental 
forces of this haunt and primeval region. our intrusion had stir the 
powers of the place into activity. it was we who were the cause of the 
disturbance, and my brain fill to burst with story and legend of 
the spirits and deity of place that have been acknowledge and 
worship by men in all age of the world's history. but, before i could 
arrive at any possible explanation, something impel me to go farther 
out, and i crept forward on the sand and stood upright. i felt the ground 
still warm under my bare feet; the wind tore at my hair and face; and the 
sound of the river burst upon my ear with a sudden roar. these things, i 
knew, were real, and prove that my senses were acting normally. yet the 
figures still rose from earth to heaven, silent, majestically, in a great 
spiral of grace and strength that overwhelm me at length with a genuine 
deep emotion of worship. i felt that i must fall down and 
worship--absolutely worship. 

perhaps in another minute i might have done so, when a gust of wind swept 
against me with such force that it blew me sideways, and i nearly stumble 
and fell. it seem to shake the dream violent out of me. at least it 
gave me another point of view somehow. the figures still remained, still 
ascend into heaven from the heart of the night, but my reason at last 
began to assert itself. it must be a subjective experience, i argued--none 
the less real for that, but still subjective. the moonlight and the 
branch combine to work out these pictures upon the mirror of my 
imagination, and for some reason i project them outwards and made them 
appear objective. i knew this must be the case, of course. i took courage, 
and began to move forward across the open patch of sand. by jove, though, 
was it all hallucination? was it merely subjective? did not my reason argue 
in the old futile way from the little standard of the known? 

i only know that great column of figures ascend dark into the sky for 
what seem a very long period of time, and with a very complete measure of 
reality as most men are accustomed to gauge reality. then sudden they 
were gone! 

and, once they were gone and the immediate wonder of their great presence 
had passed, fear came down upon me with a cold rush. the esoteric meaning 
of this lonely and haunt region sudden flame up within me, and i began 
to tremble dreadfully. i took a quick look round--a look of horror that 
came near to panic--calculating vain ways of escape; and then, realize 
how helpless i was to achieve anything really effective, i crept back 
silent into the tent and lay down again upon my sandy mattress, first 
lower the door-curtain to shut out the sight of the willow in the 
moonlight, and then bury my head as deep as possible beneath the 
blanket to deaden the sound of the terrify wind. 

as though further to convince me that i had not been dreaming, i remember 
that it was a long time before i fell again into a trouble and restless 
sleep; and even then only the upper crust of me slept, and underneath there 
was something that never quite lost consciousness, but lay alert and on the 
watch. 

but this second time i jump up with a genuine start of terror. it was 
neither the wind nor the river that woke me, but the slow approach of 
something that cause the sleep portion of me to grow small and 
small till at last it vanish altogether, and i found myself sitting 
bolt upright--listening. 

outside there was a sound of multitudinous little patterings. they had been 
coming, i was aware, for a long time, and in my sleep they had first become 
audible. i sat there nervous wide awake as though i had not slept at all. 
it seem to me that my breathing came with difficulty, and that there was 
a great weight upon the surface of my body. in spite of the hot night, i 
felt clammy with cold and shivered. something surely was pressing steady 
against the side of the tent and weigh down upon it from above. was it 
the body of the wind? was this the patter rain, the dripping of the 
leaves? the spray blown from the river by the wind and gathering in big 
drops? i thought quick of a dozen things. 

then sudden the explanation leap into my mind: a bough from the poplar, 
the only large tree on the island, had fallen with the wind. still half 
caught by the other branches, it would fall with the next gust and crush 
us, and meanwhile its leaves brush and tap upon the tight canvas 
surface of the tent. i raise a loose flap and rush out, calling to the 
swede to follow. 

but when i got out and stood upright i saw that the tent was free. there 
was no hanging bough; there was no rain or spray; nothing approached. 

a cold, grey light filter down through the bush and lay on the faint 
gleam sand. stars still crowded the sky directly overhead, and the wind 
howl magnificently, but the fire no long gave out any glow, and i saw 
the east redden in streak through the trees. several hour must have 
pass since i stood there before watch the ascend figures, and the 
memory of it now came back to me horribly, like an evil dream. oh, how 
tired it made me feel, that ceaseless rage wind! yet, though the deep 
lassitude of a sleepless night was on me, my nerves were tingle with the 
activity of an equally tireless apprehension, and all idea of repose was 
out of the question. the river i saw had risen further. its thunder fill 
the air, and a fine spray made itself felt through my thin sleep shirt. 

yet nowhere did i discover the slightest evidence of anything to cause 
alarm. this deep, prolonged disturbance in my heart remain wholly 
unaccounted for. 

my companion had not stir when i call him, and there was no need to 
waken him now. i look about me carefully, note everything; the 
turned-over canoe; the yellow paddles--two of them, i'm certain; the 
provision sack and the extra lantern hanging together from the tree; and, 
crowd everywhere about me, envelop all, the willows, those endless, 
shake willows. a bird utter its morning cry, and a string of duck 
pass with whirr flight overhead in the twilight. the sand whirled, dry 
and stinging, about my bare feet in the wind. 

i walk round the tent and then went out a little way into the bush, so 
that i could see across the river to the farther landscape, and the same 
profound yet indefinable emotion of distress seize upon me again as i saw 
the interminable sea of bush stretch to the horizon, look ghostly 
and unreal in the wan light of dawn. i walk soft here and there, still 
puzzle over that odd sound of infinite pattering, and of that pressure 
upon the tent that had waken me. it must have been the wind, i 
reflected--the wind bearing upon the loose, hot sand, driving the dry 
particle smart against the taut canvas--the wind drop heavy upon 
our fragile roof. 

yet all the time my nervous and malaise increase appreciably. 

i cross over to the farther shore and noted how the coast-line had 
alter in the night, and what masses of sand the river had torn away. i 
dip my hand and feet into the cool current, and bath my forehead. 
already there was a glow of sunrise in the sky and the exquisite fresh 
of coming day. on my way back i pass purposely beneath the very bush 
where i had seen the column of figures rising into the air, and midway 
among the clump i sudden found myself overtaken by a sense of vast 
terror. from the shadow a large figure went swift by. someone pass me, 
as sure as ever man did.... 

it was a great staggering blow from the wind that help me forward again, 
and once out in the more open space, the sense of terror diminish 
strangely. the wind were about and walking, i remember saying to myself, 
for the wind often move like great presence under the trees. and 
altogether the fear that hover about me was such an unknown and immense 
kind of fear, so unlike anything i had ever felt before, that it woke a 
sense of awe and wonder in me that did much to counteract its worst 
effects; and when i reach a high point in the middle of the island from 
which i could see the wide stretch of river, crimson in the sunrise, the 
whole magical beauty of it all was so overpowering that a sort of wild 
yearning woke in me and almost brought a cry up into the throat. 

but this cry found no expression, for as my eyes wander from the plain 
beyond to the island round me and noted our little tent half hidden among 
the willows, a dreadful discovery leap out at me, compare to which my 
terror of the walking wind seem as nothing at all. 

for a change, i thought, had somehow come about in the arrangement of the 
landscape. it was not that my point of vantage gave me a different view, 
but that an alteration had apparently been effect in the relation of the 
tent to the willows, and of the willow to the tent. surely the bush now 
crowded much closer--unnecessarily, unpleasant close. they had move 
nearer. 

creep with silent feet over the shift sands, drawing imperceptible 
near by soft, unhurry movements, the willow had come close during the 
night. but had the wind move them, or had they move of themselves? i 
recall the sound of infinite small patter and the pressure upon the 
tent and upon my own heart that cause me to wake in terror. i sway for a 
moment in the wind like a tree, finding it hard to keep my upright position 
on the sandy hillock. there was a suggestion here of personal agency, of 
deliberate intention, of aggressive hostility, and it terrify me into a 
sort of rigidity. 

then the reaction follow quickly. the idea was so bizarre, so absurd, 
that i felt inclined to laugh. but the laughter came no more readily than 
the cry, for the knowledge that my mind was so receptive to such dangerous 
imagine brought the additional terror that it was through our mind and 
not through our physical body that the attack would come, and was coming. 

the wind buffet me about, and, very quick it seemed, the sun came up 
over the horizon, for it was after four o'clock, and i must have stood on 
that little pinnacle of sand long than i knew, afraid to come down to 
close quarters with the willows. i return quietly, creepily, to the tent, 
first taking another exhaustive look round and--yes, i confess it--making a 
few measurements. i pace out on the warm sand the distance between the 
willow and the tent, making a note of the shortest distance particularly. 

i crawl stealthy into my blankets. my companion, to all appearances, 
still slept soundly, and i was glad that this was so. provided my 
experience were not corroborated, i could find strength somehow to deny 
them, perhaps. with the daylight i could persuade myself that it was all a 
subjective hallucination, a fantasy of the night, a projection of the 
excited imagination. 

nothing further came in to disturb me, and i fell asleep almost at once, 
utterly exhausted, yet still in dread of hearing again that weird sound of 
multitudinous pattering, or of feeling the pressure upon my heart that had 
made it difficult to breathe. 

the sun was high in the heaven when my companion woke me from a heavy 
sleep and announce that the porridge was cook and there was just time to 
bathe. the grateful smell of frizzle bacon enter the tent door. 

"river still rising," he said, "and several island out in mid-stream have 
disappear altogether. our own island's much smaller." 

"any wood left?" i ask sleepily. 

"the wood and the island will finish tomorrow in a dead heat," he laughed, 
"but there's enough to last us till then." 

i plunge in from the point of the island, which had indeed alter a lot 
in size and shape during the night, and was swept down in a moment to the 
landing-place opposite the tent. the water was icy, and the bank flew by 
like the country from an express train. bathing under such conditions was 
an exhilarating operation, and the terror of the night seem cleanse out 
of me by a process of evaporate in the brain. the sun was blazing hot; 
not a cloud show itself anywhere; the wind, however, had not abate one 
little jot. 

quite sudden then the imply meaning of the swede's words flash across 
me, showing that he no long wish to leave post-haste, and had change 
his mind. "enough to last till tomorrow"--he assume we should stay on the 
island another night. it struck me as odd. the night before he was so 
positive the other way. how had the change come about? 

great crumble of the bank occur at breakfast, with heavy splash 
and cloud of spray which the wind brought into our frying-pan, and my 
fellow-traveler talk incessant about the difficulty the vienna-pesth 
steamer must have to find the channel in flood. but the state of his mind 
interested and impress me far more than the state of the river or the 
difficulty of the steamers. he had change somehow since the evening 
before. his manner was different--a trifle excited, a trifle shy, with a 
sort of suspicion about his voice and gestures. i hardly know how to 
describe it now in cold blood, but at the time i remember being quite 
certain of one thing--that he had become frightened? 

he ate very little breakfast, and for once omit to smoke his pipe. he 
had the map spread open beside him, and kept study its markings. 

"we'd better get off sharp in an hour," i said presently, feeling for an 
opening that must bring him indirect to a partial confession at any rate. 
and his answer puzzle me uncomfortably: "rather! if they'll let us." 

"who'll let us? the elements?" i ask quickly, with affected indifference. 

"the powers of this awful place, whoever they are," he replied, keeping his 
eyes on the map. "the gods are here, if they are anywhere at all in the 
world." 

"the elements are always the true immortals," i replied, laugh as 
naturally as i could manage, yet knowing quite well that my face reflect 
my true feelings when he look up grave at me and spoke across the 
smoke: 

"we shall be fortunate if we get away without further disaster." 

this was exactly what i had dreaded, and i screw myself up to the point 
of the direct question. it was like agree to allow the dentist to 
extract the tooth; it had to come anyhow in the long run, and the rest was 
all pretence. 

"further disaster! why, what's happened?" 

"for one thing--the steer paddle's gone," he said quietly. 

"the steer paddle gone!" i repeated, greatly excited, for this was our 
rudder, and the danube in flood without a rudder was suicide. "but what--" 

"and there's a tear in the bottom of the canoe," he added, with a genuine 
little tremor in his voice. 

i continue staring at him, able only to repeat the words in his face 
somewhat foolishly. there, in the heat of the sun, and on this burning 
sand, i was aware of a freezing atmosphere descend round us. i got up to 
follow him, for he merely nod his head grave and led the way towards 
the tent a few yard on the other side of the fireplace. the canoe still 
lay there as i had last seen her in the night, rib uppermost, the paddles, 
or rather, the paddle, on the sand beside her. 

"there's only one," he said, stoop to pick it up. "and here's the rent 
in the base-board." 

it was on the tip of my tongue to tell him that i had clearly notice two 
paddle a few hour before, but a second impulse made me think better of 
it, and i said nothing. i approach to see. 

there was a long, finely made tear in the bottom of the canoe where a 
little slither of wood had been neat taken clean out; it look as if the 
tooth of a sharp rock or snag had eaten down her length, and investigate 
show that the hole went through. had we launch out in her without 
observing it we must inevitable have foundered. at first the water would 
have made the wood swell so as to close the hole, but once out in 
mid-stream the water must have pour in, and the canoe, never more than 
two inch above the surface, would have fill and sunk very rapidly. 

"there, you see an attempt to prepare a victim for the sacrifice," i heard 
him saying, more to himself than to me, "two victim rather," he add as 
he bent over and ran his finger along the slit. 

i began to whistle--a thing i always do unconscious when utterly 
nonplussed--and purposely paid no attention to his words. i was determined 
to consider them foolish. 

"it wasn't there last night," he said presently, straighten up from his 
examination and look anywhere but at me. 

"we must have scratch her in landing, of course," i stop whistle to 
say. "the stone are very sharp." 

i stop abruptly, for at that moment he turn round and met my eye 
squarely. i knew just as well as he did how impossible my explanation was. 
there were no stones, to begin with. 

"and then there's this to explain too," he add quietly, hand me the 
paddle and point to the blade. 

a new and curious emotion spread freezing over me as i took and examine 
it. the blade was scrape down all over, beautiful scraped, as though 
someone had sand-papered it with care, making it so thin that the first 
vigorous stroke must have snap it off at the elbow. 

"one of us walk in his sleep and did this thing," i said feebly, "or--or 
it has been file by the constant stream of sand particle blown against it 
by the wind, perhaps." 

"ah," said the swede, turning away, laugh a little, "you can explain 
everything." 

"the same wind that caught the steer paddle and flung it so near the 
bank that it fell in with the next lump that crumbled," i call out after 
him, absolutely determined to find an explanation for everything he show 
me. 

"i see," he shout back, turning his head to look at me before 
disappear among the willow bushes. 

once alone with these perplex evidence of personal agency, i think my 
first thought took the form of "one of us must have done this thing, and 
it certainly was not i." but my second thought decided how impossible it 
was to suppose, under all the circumstances, that either of us had done it. 
that my companion, the trust friend of a dozen similar expeditions, could 
have knowingly had a hand in it, was a suggestion not to be entertain for 
a moment. equally absurd seem the explanation that this imperturbable and 
dense practical nature had sudden become insane and was busy with 
insane purposes. 

yet the fact remain that what disturbed me most, and kept my fear 
active alive even in this blaze of sunshine and wild beauty, was the 
clear certainty that some curious alteration had come about in his 
mind--that he was nervous, timid, suspicious, aware of goings on he did not 
speak about, watch a series of secret and hitherto unmentionable 
events--waiting, in a word, for a climax that he expected, and, i thought, 
expect very soon. this grew up in my mind intuitively--i hardly knew how. 

i made a hurried examination of the tent and its surroundings, but the 
measurement of the night remain the same. there were deep hollow form 
in the sand i now notice for the first time, basin-shaped and of various 
depths and sizes, vary from that of a tea-cup to a large bowl. the wind, 
no doubt, was responsible for these miniature craters, just as it was for 
lift the paddle and toss it towards the water. the rent in the canoe 
was the only thing that seem quite inexplicable; and, after all, it was 
conceivable that a sharp point had caught it when we landed. the 
examination i made of the shore did not assist this theory, but all the 
same i clung to it with that diminish portion of my intelligence which i 
call my "reason." an explanation of some kind was an absolute necessity, 
just as some working explanation of the universe is necessary--however 
absurd--to the happiness of every individual who seek to do his duty in 
the world and face the problem of life. the simile seem to me at the 
time an exact parallel. 

i at once set the pitch melting, and presently the swede join me at the 
work, though under the best conditions in the world the canoe could not be 
safe for travel till the following day. i drew his attention casual to 
the hollow in the sand. 

"yes," he said, "i know. they're all over the island. but you can explain 
them, no doubt!" 

"wind, of course," i answer without hesitation. "have you never watch 
those little whirlwind in the street that twist and twirl everything into 
a circle? this sand's loose enough to yield, that's all." 

he made no reply, and we work on in silence for a bit. i watch him 
surreptitious all the time, and i had an idea he was watch me. he 
seemed, too, to be always listen attentive to something i could not 
hear, or perhaps for something that he expect to hear, for he kept 
turning about and staring into the bushes, and up into the sky, and out 
across the water where it was visible through the opening among the 
willows. sometimes he even put his hand to his ear and held it there for 
several minutes. he said nothing to me, however, about it, and i ask no 
questions. and meanwhile, as he mend that torn canoe with the skill and 
address of a red indian, i was glad to notice his absorption in the work, 
for there was a vague dread in my heart that he would speak of the change 
aspect of the willows. and, if he had notice that, my imagination could no 
long be held a sufficient explanation of it. 




iii 


at length, after a long pause, he began to talk. 

"queer thing," he add in a hurried sort of voice, as though he want to 
say something and get it over. "queer thing. i mean, about that otter last 
night." 

i had expect something so total different that he caught me with 
surprise, and i look up sharply. 

"shows how lonely this place is. otter are awfully shy things--" 

"i don't mean that, of course," he interrupted. "i mean--do you think--did 
you think it really was an otter?" 

"what else, in the name of heaven, what else?" 

"you know, i saw it before you did, and at first it seemed--so much big 
than an otter." 

"the sunset as you look up-stream magnify it, or something," i replied. 

he look at me absently a moment, as though his mind were busy with other 
thoughts. 

"it had such extraordinary yellow eyes," he went on half to himself. 

"that was the sun too," i laughed, a trifle boisterously. "i suppose you'll 
wonder next if that fellow in the boat--" 

i sudden decided not to finish the sentence. he was in the act again of 
listening, turning his head to the wind, and something in the expression of 
his face made me halt. the subject dropped, and we went on with our 
caulking. apparently he had not notice my unfinished sentence. five 
minutes later, however, he look at me across the canoe, the smoking pitch 
in his hand, his face exceedingly grave. 

"i did rather wonder, if you want to know," he said slowly, "what that 
thing in the boat was. i remember thinking at the time it was not a man. 
the whole business seem to rise quite sudden out of the water." 

i laugh again boisterous in his face, but this time there was 
impatience, and a strain of anger too, in my feeling. 

"look here now," i cried, "this place is quite queer enough without go 
out of our way to imagine things! that boat was an ordinary boat, and the 
man in it was an ordinary man, and they were both go down-stream as fast 
as they could lick. and that otter was an otter, so don't let's play the 
fool about it!" 

he look steady at me with the same grave expression. he was not in the 
least annoyed. i took courage from his silence. 

"and, for heaven's sake," i went on, "don't keep pretend you hear 
things, because it only give me the jumps, and there's nothing to hear but 
the river and this cursed old thundering wind." 

"you fool!" he answer in a low, shock voice, "you utter fool. that's 
just the way all victim talk. as if you didn't understand just as well as 
i do!" he sneer with scorn in his voice, and a sort of resignation. "the 
best thing you can do is to keep quiet and try to hold your mind as firm as 
possible. this feeble attempt at self-deception only make the truth hard 
when you're forced to meet it." 

my little effort was over, and i found nothing more to say, for i knew 
quite well his words were true, and that i was the fool, not he. up to a 
certain stage in the adventure he kept ahead of me easily, and i think i 
felt annoy to be out of it, to be thus prove less psychic, less 
sensitive than himself to these extraordinary happenings, and half ignorant 
all the time of what was go on under my very nose. he knew from the very 
beginning, apparently. but at the moment i wholly miss the point of his 
words about the necessity of there being a victim, and that we ourselves 
were destined to satisfy the want. i drop all pretence thenceforward, 
but thenceforward likewise my fear increase steady to the climax. 

"but you're quite right about one thing," he added, before the subject 
passed, "and that is that we're wise not to talk about it, or even to 
think about it, because what one think find expression in words, and what 
one says, happens." 

that afternoon, while the canoe dry and hardened, we spent try to 
fish, test the leak, collect wood, and watch the enormous flood of 
rising water. masses of driftwood swept near our shore sometimes, and we 
fish for them with long willow branches. the island grew perceptible 
small as the bank were torn away with great gulp and splashes. the 
weather kept brilliant fine till about four o'clock, and then for the 
first time for three days the wind show sign of abating. cloud began to 
gather in the south-west, spread thence slow over the sky. 

this lessen of the wind came as a great relief, for the incessant 
roaring, banging, and thundering had irritate our nerves. yet the silence 
that came about five o'clock with its sudden cessation was in a manner 
quite as oppressive. the boom of the river had everything in its own way 
then; it fill the air with deep murmurs, more musical than the wind 
noises, but infinite more monotonous. the wind held many notes, rising, 
fall always beating out some sort of great elemental tune; whereas the 
river's song lay between three note at most--dull pedal notes, that held a 
lugubrious quality foreign to the wind, and somehow seem to me, in my 
then nervous state, to sound wonderful well the music of doom. 

it was extraordinary, too, how the withdrawal sudden of bright sunlight 
took everything out of the landscape that made for cheerfulness; and since 
this particular landscape had already manage to convey the suggestion of 
something sinister, the change of course was all the more unwelcome and 
noticeable. for me, i know, the darken outlook became distinct more 
alarming, and i found myself more than once calculating how soon after 
sunset the full moon would get up in the east, and whether the gathering 
cloud would greatly interfere with her lighting of the little island. 

with this general hush of the wind--though it still indulge in occasional 
brief gusts--the river seem to me to grow blacker, the willow to stand 
more dense together. the latter, too, kept up a sort of independent 
movement of their own, rustling among themselves when no wind stirred, and 
shake oddly from the roots upwards. when common object in this way be 
come charged with the suggestion of horror, they stimulate the imagination 
far more than things of unusual appearance; and these bushes, crowd 
huddle about us, assume for me in the dark a bizarre grotesquerie of 
appearance that lent to them somehow the aspect of purposeful and living 
creatures. their very ordinariness, i felt, masked what was malignant and 
hostile to us. the forces of the region drew near with the coming of 
night. they were focus upon our island, and more particularly upon 
ourselves. for thus, somehow, in the terms of the imagination, did my 
really indescribable sensation in this extraordinary place present 
themselves. 

i had slept a good deal in the early afternoon, and had thus recover 
somewhat from the exhaustion of a disturbed night, but this only serve 
apparently to render me more susceptible than before to the obsess spell 
of the haunting. i fought against it, laugh at my feelings as absurd and 
childish, with very obvious physiology explanations, yet, in spite of 
every effort, they gain in strength upon me so that i dread the night 
as a child lost in a forest must dread the approach of darkness. 

the canoe we had careful cover with a waterproof sheet during the day, 
and the one remain paddle had been secure tie by the swede to the 
base of a tree, lest the wind should rob us of that too. from five o'clock 
onwards i busy myself with the stew-pot and preparation for dinner, it 
being my turn to cook that night. we had potatoes, onions, bit of bacon 
fat to add flavor, and a general thick residue from former stew at the 
bottom of the pot; with black bread broken up into it the result was most 
excellent, and it was follow by a stew of plum with sugar and a brew of 
strong tea with dry milk. a good pile of wood lay close at hand, and the 
absence of wind made my duty easy. my companion sat lazy watch me, 
divide his attention between clean his pipe and give useless 
advice--an admitted privilege of the off-duty man. he had been very quiet 
all the afternoon, engaged in re-caulking the canoe, strengthen the tent 
ropes, and fishing for driftwood while i slept. no more talk about 
undesirable things had pass between us, and i think his only remark had 
to do with the gradual destruction of the island, which he declared was not 
fully a third small than when we first landed. 

the pot had just begun to bubble when i heard his voice calling to me from 
the bank, where he had wander away without my noticing. i ran up. 

"come and listen," he said, "and see what you make of it." he held his hand 
cupwise to his ear, as so often before. 

"now do you hear anything?" he asked, watch me curiously. 

we stood there, listen attentive together. at first i heard only the 
deep note of the water and the hiss rising from its turbulent surface. 
the willows, for once, were motionless and silent. then a sound began to 
reach my ear faintly, a peculiar sound--something like the hum of a 
distant gong. it seem to come across to us in the dark from the waste 
of swamp and willow opposite. it was repeated at regular intervals, but 
it was certainly neither the sound of a bell nor the hoot of a distant 
steamer. i can liken it to nothing so much as to the sound of an immense 
gong, suspend far up in the sky, repeating incessant its muffle 
metallic note, soft and musical, as it was repeatedly struck. my heart 
quicken as i listened. 

"i've heard it all day," said my companion. "while you slept this afternoon 
it came all round the island. i hunt it down, but could never get near 
enough to see--to localize it correctly. sometimes it was overhead, and 
sometimes it seem under the water. once or twice, too, i could have sworn 
it was not outside at all, but within myself--you know--the way a sound in 
the fourth dimension is supposed to come." 

i was too much puzzle to pay much attention to his words. i listen 
carefully, strive to associate it with any known familiar sound i could 
think of, but without success. it change in the direction, too, coming 
nearer, and then sink utterly away into remote distance. i cannot say 
that it was ominous in quality, because to me it seem distinct musical, 
yet i must admit it set go a distressing feeling that made me wish i had 
never heard it. 

"the wind blow in those sand-funnels," i said determined to find an 
explanation, "or the bush rubbing together after the storm perhaps." 

"it come off the whole swamp," my friend answered. "it come from 
everywhere at once." he ignore my explanations. "it come from the willow 
bush somehow--" 

"but now the wind has dropped," i objected. "the willow can hardly make a 
noise by themselves, can they?" 

his answer frightened me, first because i had dread it, and secondly, 
because i knew intuitive it was true. 

"it is because the wind has drop we now hear it. it was drown before. 
it is the cry, i believe, of the--" 

i dashed back to my fire, warn by the sound of bubble that the stew was 
in danger, but determined at the same time to escape further conversation. 
i was resolute, if possible, to avoid the exchange of views. i dreaded, 
too, that he would begin about the gods, or the elemental forces, or 
something else disquieting, and i want to keep myself well in hand for 
what might happen later. there was another night to be face before we 
escape from this distressing place, and there was no knowing yet what it 
might bring forth. 

"come and cut up bread for the pot," i call to him, vigorous stirring 
the appetizing mixture. that stew-pot held sanity for us both, and the 
thought made me laugh. 

he came over slow and took the provision sack from the tree, fumble in 
its mysterious depths, and then empty the entire contents upon the 
ground-sheet at his feet. 

"hurry up!" i cried; "it's boiling." 

the swede burst out into a roar of laughter that startle me. it was forced 
laughter, not artificial exactly, but mirthless. 

"there's nothing here!" he shouted, holding his sides. 

"bread, i mean." 

"it's gone. there is no bread. they've taken it!" 

i drop the long spoon and ran up. everything the sack had contained lay 
upon the ground-sheet, but there was no loaf. 

the whole dead weight of my grow fear fell upon me and shook me. then i 
burst out laugh too. it was the only thing to do: and the sound of my 
laughter also made me understand his. the stain of psychic pressure 
cause it--this explosion of unnatural laughter in both of us; it was an 
effort of repressed forces to seek relief; it was a temporary safety-valve. 
and with both of us it cease quite suddenly. 

"how criminal stupid of me!" i cried, still determined to be consistent 
and find an explanation. "i clean forgot to buy a loaf at pressburg. that 
chatter woman put everything out of my head, and i must have left it 
lie on the counter or--" 

"the oatmeal, too, is much less than it was this morning," the swede 
interrupted. 

why in the world need he draw attention to it? i thought angrily. 

"there's enough for tomorrow," i said, stirring vigorously, "and we can get 
lot more at komorn or gran. in twenty-four hour we shall be mile from 
here." 

"i hope so--to god," he muttered, putt the things back into the sack, 
"unless we're claim first as victim for the sacrifice," he add with a 
foolish laugh. he drag the sack into the tent, for safety's sake, i 
suppose, and i heard him mumble to himself, but so indistinct that it 
seem quite natural for me to ignore his words. 

our meal was beyond question a gloomy one, and we ate it almost in silence, 
avoid one another's eyes, and keeping the fire bright. then we wash up 
and prepared for the night, and, once smoking, our mind unoccupy with 
any definite duties, the apprehension i had felt all day long became more 
and more acute. it was not then active fear, i think, but the very 
vague of its origin distress me far more that if i had been able to 
ticket and face it squarely. the curious sound i have liken to the note 
of a gong became now almost incessant, and fill the still of the 
night with a faint, continuous ring rather than a series of distinct 
notes. at one time it was behind and at another time in front of us. 
sometimes i fancy it came from the bush on our left, and then again 
from the clump on our right. more often it hover directly overhead like 
the whirr of wings. it was really everywhere at once, behind, in front, 
at our side and over our heads, completely surrounding us. the sound 
really defy description. but nothing within my knowledge is like that 
ceaseless muffle hum rising off the desert world of swamp and 
willows. 

we sat smoking in comparative silence, the strain grow every minute 
greater. the worst feature of the situation seem to me that we did not 
know what to expect, and could therefore make no sort of preparation by way 
of defense. we could anticipate nothing. my explanation made in the 
sunshine, moreover, now came to haunt me with their foolish and wholly 
unsatisfactory nature, and it was more and more clear to us that some kind 
of plain talk with my companion was inevitable, whether i like it or not. 
after all, we had to spend the night together, and to sleep in the same 
tent side by side. i saw that i could not get along much long without the 
support of his mind, and for that, of course, plain talk was imperative. as 
long as possible, however, i postpone this little climax, and try to 
ignore or laugh at the occasional sentence he flung into the emptiness. 

some of these sentences, moreover, were confounded disquiet to me, 
coming as they did to corroborate much that i felt myself; corroboration, 
too--which made it so much more convincing--from a total different point 
of view. he compose such curious sentences, and hurl them at me in such 
an inconsequential sort of way, as though his main line of thought was 
secret to himself, and these fragment were mere bit he found it 
impossible to digest. he got rid of them by utter them. speech relieved 
him. it was like being sick. 

"there are things about us, i'm sure, that make for disorder, 
disintegration, destruction, our destruction," he said once, while the fire 
blaze between us. "we've stray out of a safe line somewhere." 

and, another time, when the gong sound had come nearer, ring much 
loud than before, and directly over our heads, he said as though talk 
to himself: 

"i don't think a gramophone would show any record of that. the sound 
doesn't come to me by the ear at all. the vibration reach me in another 
manner altogether, and seem to be within me, which is precisely how a 
fourth dimension sound might be supposed to make itself heard." 

i purposely made no reply to this, but i sat up a little close to the fire 
and peer about me into the darkness. the cloud were mass all over the 
sky, and no trace of moonlight came through. very still, too, everything 
was, so that the river and the frog had things all their own way. 

"it has that about it," he went on, "which is utterly out of common 
experience. it is unknown. only one thing describe it really; it is a 
non-human sound; i mean a sound outside humanity." 

have rid himself of this indigestible morsel, he lay quiet for a time, 
but he had so admirable express my own feeling that it was a relief to 
have the thought out, and to have confine it by the limitation of words 
from dangerous wandering to and fro in the mind. 

the solitude of that danube camping-place, can i ever forget it? the 
feeling of being utterly alone on an empty planet! my thought ran 
incessant upon city and the haunt of men. i would have given my soul, 
as the saying is, for the "feel" of those bavarian village we had pass 
through by the score; for the normal, human commonplaces; peasant drink 
beer, table beneath the trees, hot sunshine, and a ruin castle on the 
rocks behind the red-roofed church. even the tourist would have been 
welcome. 

yet what i felt of dread was no ordinary ghostly fear. it was infinite 
greater, stranger, and seem to arise from some dim ancestral sense of 
terror more profound disturb than anything i had known or dream of. 
we had "strayed," as the swede put it, into some region or some set of 
conditions where the risk were great, yet unintelligible to us; where the 
frontier of some unknown world lay close about us. it was a spot held by 
the dwell in some outer space, a sort of peep-hole whence they could spy 
upon the earth, themselves unseen, a point where the veil between had worn 
a little thin. as the final result of too long a sojourn here, we should be 
carry over the border and deprived of what we call "our lives," yet by 
mental, not physical, processes. in that sense, as he said, we should be 
the victim of our adventure--a sacrifice. 

it took us in different fashion, each according to the measure of his 
sensitive and powers of resistance. i translate it vague into a 
personification of the mightily disturbed elements, invest them with the 
horror of a deliberate and malefic purpose, resentful of our audacious 
intrusion into their breeding-place; whereas my friend threw it into the 
unoriginal form at first of a trespass on some ancient shrine, some place 
where the old gods still held sway, where the emotional forces of former 
worship still clung, and the ancestral portion of him yield to the 
old pagan spell. 

at any rate, here was a place unpolluted by men, kept clean by the wind 
from coarsen human influences, a place where spiritual agency were 
within reach and aggressive. never, before or since, have i been so 
attack by indescribable suggestion of a "beyond region," of another 
scheme of life, another revolution not parallel to the human. and in the 
end our mind would succumb under the weight of the awful spell, and we 
should be drawn across the frontier into their world. 

small things testify to the amazing influence of the place, and now in 
the silence round the fire they allow themselves to be noted by the mind. 
the very atmosphere had prove itself a magnify medium to distort every 
indication: the otter rolling in the current, the hurry boatman making 
signs, the shift willows, one and all had been rob of its natural 
character, and reveal in something of its other aspect--as it exist 
across the border to that other region. and this change aspect i felt was 
now not merely to me, but to the race. the whole experience whose verge we 
touched was unknown to humanity at all. it was a new order of experience, 
and in the true sense of the word unearthly. 

"it's the deliberate, calculating purpose that reduce one's courage to 
zero," the swede said suddenly, as if he had been actually following my 
thoughts. "otherwise imagination might count for much. but the paddle, the 
canoe, the lessen food--" 

"haven't i explain all that once?" i interrupt viciously. 

"you have," he answer dryly; "you have indeed." 

he made other remark too, as usual, about what he call the "plain 
determination to provide a victim"; but, have now arrange my thought 
better, i recognize that this was simply the cry of his frightened soul 
against the knowledge that he was being attack in a vital part, and that 
he would be somehow taken or destroyed. the situation call for a courage 
and calm of reasoning that neither of us could compass, and i have 
never before been so clearly conscious of two person in me--the one that 
explain everything, and the other that laugh at such foolish 
explanations, yet was horrible afraid. 

meanwhile, in the pitchy night the fire die down and the wood pile grew 
small. neither of us move to replenish the stock, and the dark 
consequently came up very close to our faces. a few feet beyond the circle 
of firelight it was inky black. occasional a stray puff of wind set the 
willow shiver about us, but apart from this not very welcome sound a 
deep and depress silence reigned, broken only by the gurgle of the 
river and the hum in the air overhead. 

we both missed, i think, the shouting company of the winds. 

at length, at a moment when a stray puff prolonged itself as though the 
wind were about to rise again, i reach the point for me of saturation, 
the point where it was absolutely necessary to find relief in plain speech, 
or else to betray myself by some hysterical extravagance that must have 
been far worse in its effect upon both of us. i kick the fire into a 
blaze, and turn to my companion abruptly. he look up with a start. 

"i can't disguise it any longer," i said; "i don't like this place, and the 
darkness, and the noises, and the awful feelings i get. there's something 
here that beat me utterly. i'm in a blue funk, and that's the plain truth. 
if the other shore was--different, i swear i'd be inclined to swim for it!" 

the swede's face turn very white beneath the deep tan of sun and wind. he 
stare straight at me and answer quietly, but his voice betray his huge 
excitement by its unnatural calmness. for the moment, at any rate, he was 
the strong man of the two. he was more phlegmatic, for one thing. 

"it's not a physical condition we can escape from by running away," he 
replied, in the tone of a doctor diagnose some grave disease; "we must 
sit tight and wait. there are forces close here that could kill a herd of 
elephant in a second as easily as you or i could squash a fly. our only 
chance is to keep perfectly still. our insignificance perhaps may save us." 

i put a dozen question into my expression of face, but found no words. it 
was precisely like listen to an accurate description of a disease whose 
symptom had puzzle me. 

"i mean that so far, although aware of our disturb presence, they have 
not found us--not 'located' us, as the america say," he went on. "they're 
blunder about like men hunting for a leak of gas. the paddle and canoe 
and provisions prove that. i think they feel us, but cannot actually see 
us. we must keep our mind quiet--it's our mind they feel. we must control 
our thoughts, or it's all up with us." 

"death, you mean?" i stammered, icy with the horror of his suggestion. 

"worse--by far," he said. "death, according to one's belief, means either 
annihilate or release from the limitation of the senses, but it involve 
no change of character. you don't sudden alter just because the body's 
gone. but this means a radical alteration, a complete change, a horrible 
loss of oneself by substitution--far worse than death, and not even 
annihilation. we happen to have camp in a spot where their region touch 
ours, where the veil between has worn thin"--horrors! he was use my very 
own phrase, my actual words--"so that they are aware of our being in their 
neighborhood." 

"but who are aware?" i asked. 

i forgot the shake of the willow in the windless calm, the hum 
overhead, everything except that i was wait for an answer that i dread 
more than i can possibly explain. 

he lower his voice at once to reply, leaning forward a little over the 
fire, an indefinable change in his face that made me avoid his eyes and 
look down upon the ground. 

"all my life," he said, "i have been strangely, vivid conscious of 
another region--not far remove from our own world in one sense, yet wholly 
different in kind--where great things go on unceasingly, where immense and 
terrible personalities hurry by, intent on vast purpose compare to which 
earthly affairs, the rise and fall of nations, the destiny of empires, 
the fate of army and continents, are all as dust in the balance; vast 
purposes, i mean, that deal directly with the soul, and not indirect with 
more expression of the soul--" 

"i suggest just now--" i began, seek to stop him, feeling as though i 
was face to face with a madman. but he instantly overbore me with his 
torrent that had to come. 

"you think," he said, "it is the spirit of the elements, and i thought 
perhaps it was the old gods. but i tell you now it is--neither. these would 
be comprehensible entities, for they have relations with men, depend 
upon them for worship or sacrifice, whereas these being who are now about 
us have absolutely nothing to do with mankind, and it is mere chance that 
their space happen just at this spot to touch our own." 

the mere conception, which his words somehow made so convincing, as i 
listen to them there in the dark still of that lonely island, set me 
shake a little all over. i found it impossible to control my movements. 

"and what do you propose?" i began again. 

"a sacrifice, a victim, might save us by distract them until we could 
get away," he went on, "just as the wolf stop to devour the dogs and give 
the sleigh another start. but--i see no chance of any other victim now." 

i stare blank at him. the gleam in his eye was dreadful. presently he 
continued. 




iv 


"it's the willows, of course. the willow mask the others, but the other 
are feeling about for us. if we let our mind betray our fear, we're lost, 
lost utterly." he look at me with an expression so calm, so determined, 
so sincere, that i no long had any doubt as to his sanity. he was as 
sane as any man ever was. "if we can hold out through the night," he added, 
"we may get off in the daylight unnoticed, or rather, undiscovered." 

"but you really think a sacrifice would--" 

that gong-like hum came down very close over our head as i spoke, but 
it was my friend's scared face that really stop my mouth. 

"hush!" he whispered, holding up his hand. "do not mention them more than 
you can help. do not refer to them by name. to name is to reveal; it is the 
inevitable clue, and our only hope lie in ignore them, in order that 
they may ignore us." 

"even in thought?" he was extraordinarily agitated. 

"especially in thought. our thought make spiral in their world. we must 
keep them out of our mind at all costs if possible." 

i rake the fire together to prevent the dark have everything its own 
way. i never long for the sun as i long for it then in the awful 
black of that summer night. 

"were you awake all last night?" he went on suddenly. 

"i slept badly a little after dawn," i reply evasively, try to follow 
his instructions, which i knew instinctive were true, "but the wind, of 
course--" 

"i know. but the wind won't account for all the noises." 

"then you heard it too?" 

"the multiply countless little footstep i heard," he said, adding, 
after a moment's hesitation, "and that other sound--" 

"you mean above the tent, and the pressing down upon us of something 
tremendous, gigantic?" 

he nod significantly. 

"it was like the beginning of a sort of inner suffocation?" i said. 

"partly, yes. it seem to me that the weight of the atmosphere had been 
altered--had increase enormously, so that we should have been crushed." 

"and that," i went on, determined to have it all out, point upwards 
where the gong-like note hum ceaselessly, rising and fall like wind. 
"what do you make of that?" 

"it's their sound," he whisper gravely. "it's the sound of their world, 
the hum in their region. the division here is so thin that it leak 
through somehow. but, if you listen carefully, you'll find it's not above 
so much as around us. it's in the willows. it's the willow themselves 
humming, because here the willow have been made symbol of the forces that 
are against us." 

i could not follow exactly what he meant by this, yet the thought and idea 
in my mind were beyond question the thought and idea in his. i realize 
what he realized, only with less power of analysis than his. it was on the 
tip of my tongue to tell him at last about my hallucination of the 
ascend figures and the moving bushes, when he sudden thrust his face 
again close into mine across the firelight and began to speak in a very 
earnest whisper. he amaze me by his calm and pluck, his apparent 
control of the situation. this man i had for years deem unimaginative, 
stolid! 

"now listen," he said. "the only thing for us to do is to go on as though 
nothing had happened, follow our usual habits, go to bed, and so forth; 
pretend we feel nothing and notice nothing. it is a question wholly of the 
mind, and the less we think about them the better our chance of escape. 
above all, don't think, for what you think happens!" 

"all right," i manage to reply, simply breathless with his words and the 
strange of it all; "all right, i'll try, but tell me one more thing 
first. tell me what you make of those hollow in the ground all about us, 
those sand-funnels?" 

"no!" he cried, forget to whisper in his excitement. "i dare not, 
simply dare not, put the thought into words. if you have not guess i am 
glad. don't try to. they have put it into my mind; try your hardest to 
prevent their putt it into yours." 

he sank his voice again to a whisper before he finished, and i did not 
press him to explain. there was already just about as much horror in me as 
i could hold. the conversation came to an end, and we smoke our pipes 
busy in silence. 

then something happened, something unimportant apparently, as the way is 
when the nerves are in a very great state of tension, and this small thing 
for a brief space gave me an entire different point of view. i chance to 
look down at my sand-shoe--the sort we use for the canoe--and something to 
do with the hole at the toe sudden recall to me the london shop where i 
had bought them, the difficulty the man had in fitting me, and other 
detail of the uninterest but practical operation. at once, in its 
train, follow a wholesome view of the modern skeptical world i was 
accustomed to move in at home. i thought of roast beef, and ale, 
motor-cars, policemen, brass bands, and a dozen other things that 
proclaim the soul of ordinary or utility. the effect was immediate 
and astonish even to myself. psychologically, i suppose, it was simply a 
sudden and violent reaction after the strain of living in an atmosphere of 
things that to the normal consciousness must seem impossible and 
incredible. but, whatever the cause, it momentarily lift the spell from 
my heart, and left me for the short space of a minute feeling free and 
utterly unafraid. i look up at my friend opposite. 

"you damn old pagan!" i cried, laugh aloud in his face. "you 
imaginative idiot! you superstitious idolater! you--" 

i stop in the middle, seize anew by the old horror. i try to smother 
the sound of my voice as something sacrilegious. the swede, of course, 
heard it too--the strange cry overhead in the darkness--and that sudden 
drop in the air as though something had come nearer. 

he had turn ashen white under the tan. he stood bolt upright in front of 
the fire, stiff as a rod, staring at me. 

"after that," he said in a sort of helpless, frantic way, "we must go! we 
can't stay now; we must strike camp this very instant and go on--down the 
river." 

he was talking, i saw, quite wildly, his words dictate by abject 
terror--the terror he had resist so long, but which had caught him at 
last. 

"in the dark?" i exclaimed, shake with fear after my hysterical outburst, 
but still realize our position better than he did. "sheer madness! the 
river's in flood, and we've only got a single paddle. besides, we only go 
deep into their country! there's nothing ahead for fifty mile but 
willows, willows, willows!" 

he sat down again in a state of semi-collapse. the positions, by one of 
those kaleidoscopic change nature loves, were sudden reversed, and the 
control of our forces pass over into my hands. his mind at last had 
reach the point where it was beginning to weaken. 

"what on earth possessed you to do such a thing?" he whisper with the awe 
of genuine terror in his voice and face. 

i cross round to his side of the fire. i took both his hand in mine, 
kneel down beside him and look straight into his frightened eyes. 

"we'll make one more blaze," i said firmly, "and then turn in for the 
night. at sunrise we'll be off full speed for komorn. now, pull yourself 
together a bit, and remember your own advice about not thinking fear!" 

he said no more, and i saw that he would agree and obey. in some measure, 
too, it was a sort of relief to get up and make an excursion into the 
dark for more wood. we kept close together, almost touching, grope 
among the bush and along the bank. the hum overhead never ceased, but 
seem to me to grow loud as we increase our distance from the fire. it 
was shivery work! 

we were grub away in the middle of a thickish clump of willow where 
some driftwood from a former flood had caught high among the branches, when 
my body was seize in a grip that made me half drop upon the sand. it was 
the swede. he had fallen against me, and was clutch me for support. i 
heard his breath coming and go in short gasps. 

"look! by my soul!" he whispered, and for the first time in my experience i 
knew what it was to hear tear of terror in a human voice. he was point 
to the fire, some fifty feet away. i follow the direction of his finger, 
and i swear my heart miss a beat. 

there, in front of the dim glow, something was moving. 

i saw it through a veil that hung before my eyes like the gauze 
drop-curtain use at the back of a theater--hazily a little. it was neither 
a human figure nor an animal. to me it gave the strange impression of being 
as large as several animal group together, like horses, two or three, 
moving slowly. the swede, too, got a similar result, though express it 
differently, for he thought it was shaped and size like a clump of willow 
bushes, round at the top, and moving all over upon its surface--"coiling 
upon itself like smoke," he said afterwards. 

"i watch it settle downwards through the bushes," he sob at me. "look, 
by god! it's coming this way! oh, oh!"--he gave a kind of whistle cry. 
"they've found us." 

i gave one terrify glance, which just enable me to see that the shadowy 
form was swinging towards us through the bushes, and then i collapse 
backwards with a crash into the branches. these failed, of course, to 
support my weight, so that with the swede on top of me we fell in a 
struggle heap upon the sand. i really hardly knew what was happening. i 
was conscious only of a sort of envelop sensation of icy fear that 
pluck the nerves out of their fleshly covering, twist them this way and 
that, and replace them quivering. my eyes were tight shut; something in 
my throat choke me; a feeling that my consciousness was expanding, 
extend out into space, swift gave way to another feeling that i was 
lose it altogether, and about to die. 

an acute spasm of pain pass through me, and i was aware that the swede 
had hold of me in such a way that he hurt me abominably. it was the way he 
caught at me in falling. 

but it was the pain, he declared afterwards, that save me; it cause me to 
forget them and think of something else at the very instant when they were 
about to find me. it conceal my mind from them at the moment of 
discovery, yet just in time to evade their terrible seize of me. he 
himself, he says, actually swoon at the same moment, and that was what 
save him. 

i only know that at a later date, how long or short is impossible to say, i 
found myself scramble up out of the slippery network of willow branches, 
and saw my companion standing in front of me holding out a hand to assist 
me. i stare at him in a daze way, rubbing the arm he had twist for me. 
nothing came to me to say, somehow. 

"i lost consciousness for a moment or two," i heard him say. "that's what 
save me. it made me stop thinking about them." 

"you nearly broke my arm in two," i said, utter my only connected 
thought at the moment. a numb came over me. 

"that's what save you!" he replied. "between us, we've manage to set them 
off on a false tack somewhere. the hum has ceased. it's gone--for the 
moment at any rate!" 

a wave of hysterical laughter seize me again, and this time spread to my 
friend too--great heal gust of shake laughter that brought a 
tremendous sense of relief in their train. we made our way back to the fire 
and put the wood on so that it blaze at once. then we saw that the tent 
had fallen over and lay in a tangle heap upon the ground. 

we picked it up, and during the process trip more than once and caught 
our feet in sand. 

"it's those sand-funnels," exclaim the swede, when the tent was up again 
and the firelight lit up the ground for several yard about us. "and look 
at the size of them!" 

all round the tent and about the fireplace where we had seen the moving 
shadow there were deep funnel-shaped hollow in the sand, exactly similar 
to the one we had already found over the island, only far big and 
deeper, beautiful formed, and wide enough in some instance to admit the 
whole of my foot and leg. 

neither of us said a word. we both knew that sleep was the safest thing we 
could do, and to bed we went accordingly without further delay, have 
first thrown sand on the fire and taken the provision sack and the paddle 
inside the tent with us. the canoe, too, we prop in such a way at the 
end of the tent that our feet touched it, and the least motion would 
disturb and wake us. 

in case of emergency, too, we again went to bed in our clothes, ready for a 
sudden start. 

it was my firm intention to lie awake all night and watch, but the 
exhaustion of nerves and body decree otherwise, and sleep after a while 
came over me with a welcome blanket of oblivion. the fact that my companion 
also slept quicken its approach. at first he fidget and constant sat 
up, ask me if i "heard this" or "heard that." he toss about on his 
cork mattress, and said the tent was moving and the river had risen over 
the point of the island, but each time i went out to look i return with 
the report that all was well, and finally he grew calm and lay still. 
then at length his breathing became regular and i heard unmistakable sound 
of snoring--the first and only time in my life when snore has been a 
welcome and calm influence. 

this, i remember, was the last thought in my mind before doze off. 

a difficulty in breathing woke me, and i found the blanket over my face. 
but something else besides the blanket was pressing upon me, and my first 
thought was that my companion had roll off his mattress on to my own in 
his sleep. i call to him and sat up, and at the same moment it came to me 
that the tent was surrounded. that sound of multitudinous soft patter 
was again audible outside, filling the night with horror. 

i call again to him, loud than before. he did not answer, but i miss 
the sound of his snoring, and also notice that the flap of the tent was 
down. this was the unpardonable sin. i crawl out in the dark to hook 
it back securely, and it was then for the first time i realize positively 
that the swede was not here. he had gone. 

i dashed out in a mad run, seize by a dreadful agitation, and the moment i 
was out i plunge into a sort of torrent of hum that surround me 
completely and came out of every quarter of the heaven at once. it was 
that same familiar humming--gone mad! a swarm of great invisible bee might 
have been about me in the air. the sound seem to thicken the very 
atmosphere, and i felt that my lung work with difficulty. 

but my friend was in danger, and i could not hesitate. 

the dawn was just about to break, and a faint whitish light spread upwards 
over the cloud from a thin strip of clear horizon. no wind stirred. i 
could just make out the bush and river beyond, and the pale sandy 
patches. in my excitement i ran frantic to and fro about the island, 
calling him by name, shouting at the top of my voice the first words that 
came into my head. but the willow smother my voice, and the hum 
muffle it, so that the sound only traveled a few feet round me. i plunge 
among the bushes, tripping headlong, tumble over roots, and scrape my 
face as i tore this way and that among the prevent branches. 

then, quite unexpectedly, i came out upon the island's point and saw a dark 
figure outline between the water and the sky. it was the swede. and 
already he had one foot in the river! a moment more and he would have taken 
the plunge. 

i threw myself upon him, fling my arms about his waist and drag him 
shoreward with all my strength. of course he struggle furiously, making a 
noise all the time just like that cursed humming, and use the most 
outlandish phrase in his anger about "going inside to them," and "taking 
the way of the water and the wind," and god only know what more besides, 
that i try in vain to recall afterwards, but which turn me sick with 
horror and amaze as i listened. but in the end i manage to get him 
into the comparative safety of the tent, and flung him breathless and 
curse upon the mattress where i held him until the fit had passed. 

i think the sudden with which it all went and he grew calm, coincide 
as it did with the equally abrupt cessation of the hum and patter 
outside--i think this was almost the strangest part of the whole business 
perhaps. for he had just open his eyes and turn his tired face up to me 
so that the dawn threw a pale light upon it through the doorway, and said, 
for all the world just like a frightened child: 

"my life, old man--it's my life i owe you. but it's all over now anyhow. 
they've found a victim in our place!" 

then he drop back upon his blanket and went to sleep literally under my 
eyes. he simply collapsed, and began to snore again as healthy as though 
nothing had happen and he had never try to offer his own life as a 
sacrifice by drowning. and when the sunlight woke him three hour 
later--hours of ceaseless vigil for me--it became so clear to me that he 
remember absolutely nothing of what he had attempt to do, that i deem 
it wise to hold my peace and ask no dangerous questions. 

he woke naturally and easily, as i have said, when the sun was already high 
in a windless hot sky, and he at once got up and set about the preparation 
of the fire for breakfast. i follow him anxious at bathing, but he did 
not attempt to plunge in, merely dip his head and making some remark 
about the extra cold of the water. 

"river's fall at last," he said, "and i'm glad of it." 

"the hum has stop too," i said. 

he look up at me quiet with his normal expression. evidently he 
remember everything except his own attempt at suicide. 

"everything has stopped," he said, "because--" 

he hesitated. but i knew some reference to that remark he had made just 
before he faint was in his mind, and i was determined to know it. 

"because 'they've found another victim'?" i said, force a little laugh. 

"exactly," he answered, "exactly! i feel as positive of it as though--as 
though--i feel quite safe again, i mean," he finished. 

he began to look curious about him. the sunlight lay in hot patch on 
the sand. there was no wind. the willow were motionless. he slow rose to 
feet. 

"come," he said; "i think if we look, we shall find it." 

he start off on a run, and i follow him. he kept to the banks, poke 
with a stick among the sandy bay and cave and little back-waters, myself 
always close on his heels. 

"ah!" he exclaim presently, "ah!" 

the tone of his voice somehow brought back to me a vivid sense of the 
horror of the last twenty-four hours, and i hurried up to join him. he was 
point with his stick at a large black object that lay half in the water 
and half on the sand. it appear to be caught by some twist willow roots 
so that the river could not sweep it away. a few hour before the spot must 
have been under water. 

"see," he said quietly, "the victim that made our escape possible!" 

and when i peer across his shoulder i saw that his stick rest on the 
body of a man. he turn it over. it was the corpse of a peasant, and the 
face was hidden in the sand. clearly the man had been drowned, but a few 
hour before, and his body must have been swept down upon our island 
somewhere about the hour of the dawn--at the very time the fit had passed. 

"we must give it a decent burial, you know." 

"i suppose so," i replied. i shudder a little in spite of myself, for 
there was something about the appearance of that poor drown man that 
turn me cold. 

the swede glance up sharp at me, an undecipherable expression on his 
face, and began clamber down the bank. i follow him more leisurely. 
the current, i noticed, had torn away much of the clothing from the body, 
so that the neck and part of the chest lay bare. 

halfway down the bank my companion sudden stop and held up his hand in 
warning; but either my foot slipped, or i had gain too much momentum to 
bring myself quick to a halt, for i bump into him and sent him forward 
with a sort of leap to save himself. we tumble together on to the hard 
sand so that our feet splash into the water. and, before anything could 
be done, we had collide a little heavy against the corpse. 

the swede utter a sharp cry. and i sprang back as if i had been shot. 

at the moment we touched the body there rose from its surface the loud 
sound of humming--the sound of several hummings--which pass with a vast 
commotion as of wing things in the air about us and disappear upwards 
into the sky, grow faint and faint till they finally cease in the 
distance. it was exactly as though we had disturbed some living yet 
invisible creature at work. 

my companion clutch me, and i think i clutch him, but before either of 
us had time properly to recover from the unexpected shock, we saw that a 
movement of the current was turning the corpse round so that it became 
release from the grip of the willow roots. a moment later it had turn 
completely over, the dead face uppermost, staring at the sky. it lay on the 
edge of the main stream. in another moment it would be swept away. 

the swede start to save it, shouting again something i did not catch 
about a "proper burial"--and then abrupt drop upon his knee on the 
sand and cover his eyes with his hands. i was beside him in an instant. 

i saw what he had seen. 

for just as the body swung round to the current the face and the expose 
chest turn full towards us, and show plainly how the skin and flesh 
were indent with small hollows, beautiful formed, and exactly similar 
in shape and kind to the sand-funnels that we had found all over the 
island. 

"their mark!" i heard my companion mutter under his breath. "their awful 
mark!" 

and when i turn my eyes again from his ghastly face to the river, the 
current had done its work, and the body had been swept away into mid-stream 
and was already beyond our reach and almost out of sight, turning over and 
over on the wave like an otter. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the willows, by algernon blackwood 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the willow *** 

***** this file should be name 11438.txt or 11438.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/4/3/11438/ 

produce by suzanne shell, david newman and pg distribute proofread 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

