the project gutenberg ebook of ghost story of an antiquary, by m. r. james 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: ghost story of an antiquary 

author: m. r. james 

posting date: march 21, 2010 [ebook #8486] 
release date: july, 2005 
first posted: july 15, 2003 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook ghost story of an antiquary *** 




produce by suzanne shell, thomas berger, and the online 
distribute proofread team. 










m. r. james 

ghost story of an antiquary 

* * * * * 

_these story are dedicated to all those who at various times have 
listen to them._ 

* * * * * 

contents 

part 1: ghost story of an antiquary 

canon alberic's scrap-book 
lost heart 
the mezzotint 
the ash-tree 
number 13 
count magnu 
'oh, whistle, and i'll come to you, my lad' 
the treasure of abbot thomas 

part 2: more ghost story 

a school story 
the rose garden 
the tractate middoth 
casting the rune 
the stalls of barchester cathedral 
martin's close 
mr humphreys and his inheritance 

* * * * * 

part 1: ghost story of an antiquary 

* * * * * 

if anyone is curious about my local settings, let it be record that st 
bertrand de comminge and viborg are real places: that in 'oh, whistle, 
and i'll come to you' i had felixstowe in mind. as for the fragment of 
ostensible erudite which are scattered about my pages, hardly anything 
in them is not pure invention; there never was, naturally, any such book 
as that which i quote in 'the treasure of abbot thomas'. 'canon alberic's 
scrap-book' was written in 1894 and print soon after in the _national 
review_, 'lost hearts' appear in the _pall mall magazine_; of the next 
five stories, most of which were read to friends at christmas-time at 
king's college, cambridge, i only recollect that i wrote 'number 13' in 
1899, while 'the treasure of abbot thomas' was compose in the summer of 
1904. 

m. r. james 

* * * * * 

canon alberic's scrap-book 
preface 
st bertrand de comminge is a decay town on the spur of the pyrenees, 
not very far from toulouse, and still near to bagnères-de-luchon. it 
was the site of a bishopric until the revolution, and has a cathedral 
which is visit by a certain number of tourists. in the spring of 1883 
an englishman arrive at this old-world place--i can hardly dignify it 
with the name of city, for there are not a thousand inhabitants. he was a 
cambridge man, who had come specially from toulouse to see st bertrand's 
church, and had left two friends, who were less keen archaeologist than 
himself, in their hotel at toulouse, under promise to join him on the 
following morning. half an hour at the church would satisfy _them_, and 
all three could then pursue their journey in the direction of auch. but 
our englishman had come early on the day in question, and propose to 
himself to fill a note-book and to use several dozen of plate in the 
process of describe and photograph every corner of the wonderful 
church that dominate the little hill of comminges. in order to carry out 
this design satisfactorily, it was necessary to monopolize the verger of 
the church for the day. the verger or sacristan (i prefer the latter 
appellation, inaccurate as it may be) was accordingly sent for by the 
somewhat brusque lady who keeps the inn of the chapeau rouge; and when he 
came, the englishman found him an unexpected interesting object of 
study. it was not in the personal appearance of the little, dry, wizened 
old man that the interest lay, for he was precisely like dozen of other 
church-guardians in france, but in a curious furtive or rather hunt and 
oppress air which he had. he was perpetual half glancing behind him; 
the muscle of his back and shoulder seem to be hunch in a continual 
nervous contraction, as if he were expect every moment to find himself 
in the clutch of an enemy. the englishman hardly knew whether to put him 
down as a man haunt by a fixed delusion, or as one oppress by a 
guilty conscience, or as an unbearably henpecked husband. the 
probabilities, when reckon up, certainly pointed to the last idea; but, 
still, the impression convey was that of a more formidable persecute 
even than a termagant wife. 

however, the englishman (let us call him dennistoun) was soon too deep in 
his note-book and too busy with his camera to give more than an 
occasional glance to the sacristan. whenever he did look at him, he found 
him at no great distance, either huddle himself back against the wall 
or crouch in one of the gorgeous stalls. dennistoun became rather 
fidgety after a time. mingle suspicion that he was keeping the old man 
from his _déjeuner_, that he was regard as likely to make away with st 
bertrand's ivory crozier, or with the dusty stuff crocodile that hang 
over the font, began to torment him. 

'won't you go home?' he said at last; 'i'm quite well able to finish my 
note alone; you can lock me in if you like. i shall want at least two 
hour more here, and it must be cold for you, isn't it?' 

'good heavens!' said the little man, whom the suggestion seem to throw 
into a state of unaccountable terror, 'such a thing cannot be thought of 
for a moment. leave monsieur alone in the church? no, no; two hours, 
three hours, all will be the same to me. i have breakfasted, i am not at 
all cold, with many thanks to monsieur.' 

'very well, my little man,' quoth dennistoun to himself: 'you have been 
warned, and you must take the consequences.' 

before the expiration of the two hours, the stalls, the enormous 
dilapidated organ, the choir-screen of bishop john de mauléon, the 
remnant of glass and tapestry, and the object in the treasure-chamber 
had been well and truly examined; the sacristan still keeping at 
dennistoun's heels, and every now and then whipping round as if he had 
been stung, when one or other of the strange noise that trouble a large 
empty building fell on his ear. curious noise they were, sometimes. 

'once,' dennistoun said to me, 'i could have sworn i heard a thin 
metallic voice laugh high up in the tower. i dart an inquiring 
glance at my sacristan. he was white to the lips. "it is he--that is--it 
is no one; the door is locked," was all he said, and we look at each 
other for a full minute.' 

another little incident puzzle dennistoun a good deal. he was examine 
a large dark picture that hang behind the altar, one of a series 
illustrate the miracle of st bertrand. the composition of the picture 
is well-nigh indecipherable, but there is a latin legend below, which 
runs thus: 

_qualiter s. bertrandu liberavit hominem quem diabolu diu volebat 
strangulare_. (how st bertrand deliver a man whom the devil long 
sought to strangle.) 

dennistoun was turning to the sacristan with a smile and a jocular remark 
of some sort on his lips, but he was confounded to see the old man on his 
knees, gaze at the picture with the eye of a suppliant in agony, his 
hand tight clasped, and a rain of tear on his cheeks. dennistoun 
naturally pretended to have notice nothing, but the question would not 
go away from him,'why should a daub of this kind affect anyone so 
strongly?' he seem to himself to be get some sort of clue to the 
reason of the strange look that had been puzzle him all the day: the 
man must be a monomaniac; but what was his monomania? 

it was nearly five o'clock; the short day was drawing in, and the church 
began to fill with shadows, while the curious noises--the muffle 
footfall and distant talk voice that had been perceptible all 
day--seemed, no doubt because of the fade light and the consequently 
quicken sense of hearing, to become more frequent and insistent. 

the sacristan began for the first time to show sign of hurry and 
impatience. he heave a sigh of relief when camera and note-book were 
finally packed up and stow away, and hurried beckon dennistoun to 
the western door of the church, under the tower. it was time to ring the 
angelus. a few pull at the reluctant rope, and the great bell bertrande, 
high in the tower, began to speak, and swung her voice up among the pine 
and down to the valleys, loud with mountain-streams, calling the dwell 
on those lonely hill to remember and repeat the salutation of the angel 
to her whom he call blessed among women. with that a profound quiet 
seem to fall for the first time that day upon the little town, and 
dennistoun and the sacristan went out of the church. 

on the doorstep they fell into conversation. 

'monsieur seem to interest himself in the old choir-books in the 
sacristy.' 

'undoubtedly. i was go to ask you if there were a library in the 
town.' 

'no, monsieur; perhaps there use to be one belong to the chapter, but 
it is now such a small place--' here came a strange pause of 
irresolution, as it seemed; then, with a sort of plunge, he went on: 'but 
if monsieur is _amateur des vieux livres_, i have at home something that 
might interest him. it is not a hundred yards.' 

at once all dennistoun's cherish dream of finding priceless 
manuscript in untrodden corner of france flash up, to die down again 
the next moment. it was probably a stupid missal of plantin's printing, 
about 1580. where was the likelihood that a place so near toulouse would 
not have been ransack long ago by collectors? however, it would be 
foolish not to go; he would reproach himself for ever after if he 
refused. so they set off. on the way the curious irresolute and sudden 
determination of the sacristan recur to dennistoun, and he wonder in 
a shamefaced way whether he was being decoy into some purlieu to be 
made away with as a supposed rich englishman. he contrived, therefore, to 
begin talk with his guide, and to drag in, in a rather clumsy fashion, 
the fact that he expect two friends to join him early the next morning. 
to his surprise, the announcement seem to relieve the sacristan at once 
of some of the anxiety that oppress him. 

'that is well,' he said quite brightly--'that is very well. monsieur will 
travel in company with his friends: they will be always near him. it is a 
good thing to travel thus in company--sometimes.' 

the last word appear to be add as an afterthought and to bring with 
it a relapse into gloom for the poor little man. 

they were soon at the house, which was one rather large than its 
neighbours, stone-built, with a shield carve over the door, the shield 
of alberic de mauléon, a collateral descendant, dennistoun tell me, of 
bishop john de mauléon. this alberic was a canon of comminge from 1680 
to 1701. the upper window of the mansion were board up, and the whole 
place bore, as do the rest of comminges, the aspect of decay age. 

arrive on his doorstep, the sacristan pause a moment. 

'perhaps,' he said, 'perhaps, after all, monsieur has not the time?' 

'not at all--lots of time--nothing to do till tomorrow. let us see what 
it is you have got.' 

the door was open at this point, and a face look out, a face far 
younger than the sacristan's, but bearing something of the same 
distressing look: only here it seem to be the mark, not so much of fear 
for personal safety as of acute anxiety on behalf of another. plainly the 
owner of the face was the sacristan's daughter; and, but for the 
expression i have described, she was a handsome girl enough. she 
brighten up considerably on seeing her father accompany by an 
able-bodied stranger. a few remark pass between father and daughter of 
which dennistoun only caught these words, said by the sacristan: 'he was 
laugh in the church,' words which were answer only by a look of 
terror from the girl. 

but in another minute they were in the sitting-room of the house, a 
small, high chamber with a stone floor, full of moving shadow cast by a 
wood-fire that flicker on a great hearth. something of the character of 
an oratory was impart to it by a tall crucifix, which reach almost to 
the ceiling on one side; the figure was paint of the natural colours, 
the cross was black. under this stood a chest of some age and solidity, 
and when a lamp had been brought, and chair set, the sacristan went to 
this chest, and produce therefrom, with grow excitement and 
nervousness, as dennistoun thought, a large book, wrap in a white 
cloth, on which cloth a cross was rudely embroider in red thread. even 
before the wrapping had been removed, dennistoun began to be interested 
by the size and shape of the volume. 'too large for a missal,' he 
thought, 'and not the shape of an antiphoner; perhaps it may be something 
good, after all.' the next moment the book was open, and dennistoun felt 
that he had at last lit upon something better than good. before him lay a 
large folio, bound, perhaps, late in the seventeenth century, with the 
arms of canon alberic de mauléon stamp in gold on the sides. there may 
have been a hundred and fifty leaves of paper in the book, and on almost 
every one of them was fasten a leaf from an illuminate manuscript. 
such a collection dennistoun had hardly dream of in his wildest 
moments. here were ten leaves from a copy of genesis, illustrate with 
pictures, which could not be later than a.d. 700. further on was a 
complete set of pictures from a psalter, of english execution, of the 
very finest kind that the thirteenth century could produce; and, perhaps 
best of all, there were twenty leaves of uncial writing in latin, which, 
as a few words seen here and there told him at once, must belong to some 
very early unknown patristic treatise. could it possibly be a fragment of 
the copy of papia 'on the words of our lord', which was known to have 
exist as late as the twelfth century at nimes?[1] in any case, his mind 
was made up; that book must return to cambridge with him, even if he had 
to draw the whole of his balance from the bank and stay at st. bertrand 
till the money came. he glance up at the sacristan to see if his face 
yield any hint that the book was for sale. the sacristan was pale, and 
his lip were working. 

[1] we now know that these leaves did contain a considerable fragment 
of that work, if not of that actual copy of it. 

'if monsieur will turn on to the end,' he said. 

so monsieur turn on, meeting new treasure at every rise of a leaf; and 
at the end of the book he came upon two sheet of paper, of much more 
recent date than anything he had seen yet, which puzzle him 
considerably. they must be contemporary, he decided, with the 
unprincipled canon alberic, who had doubtless plunder the chapter 
library of st bertrand to form this priceless scrap-book. on the first of 
the paper sheet was a plan, careful drawn and instantly recognize 
by a person who knew the ground, of the south aisle and cloister of st 
bertrand's. there were curious sign look like planetary symbols, and 
a few hebrew words in the corners; and in the north-west angle of the 
cloister was a cross drawn in gold paint. below the plan were some lines 
of writing in latin, which ran thus: 

_responsa 12(mi) dec. 1694. interrogatum est: inveniamne? responsum 
est: invenies. fiamne dives? fies. vivamne invidendus? vives. 
moriarne in lecto meo? ita._ (answers of the 12th of december, 1694. 
it was asked: shall i find it? answer: thou shalt. shall i become 
rich? thou wilt. shall i live an object of envy? thou wilt. shall i 
die in my bed? thou wilt.) 

'a good specimen of the treasure-hunter's record--quite remind one of mr 
minor-canon quatremain in _old st paul's_,' was dennistoun's comment, and 
he turn the leaf. 

what he then saw impress him, as he has often told me, more than he 
could have conceive any drawing or picture capable of impress him. 
and, though the drawing he saw is no long in existence, there is a 
photograph of it (which i possess) which fully bear out that statement. 
the picture in question was a sepia drawing at the end of the seventeenth 
century, representing, one would say at first sight, a biblical scene; 
for the architecture (the picture represent an interior) and the 
figures had that semi-classical flavour about them which the artist of 
two hundred years ago thought appropriate to illustration of the bible. 
on the right was a king on his throne, the throne elevated on twelve 
steps, a canopy overhead, soldier on either side--evidently king 
solomon. he was bend forward with outstretched sceptre, in attitude of 
command; his face express horror and disgust, yet there was in it also 
the mark of imperious command and confident power. the left half of the 
picture was the strangest, however. the interest plainly centre there. 

on the pavement before the throne were group four soldiers, surrounding 
a crouch figure which must be describe in a moment. a fifth soldier 
lay dead on the pavement, his neck distorted, and his eye-balls start 
from his head. the four surrounding guard were look at the king. in 
their faces, the sentiment of horror was intensified; they seemed, in 
fact, only restrained from flight by their implicit trust in their 
master. all this terror was plainly excited by the being that crouch in 
their midst. 

i entire despair of convey by any words the impression which this 
figure make upon anyone who looks at it. i recollect once showing the 
photograph of the drawing to a lecturer on morphology--a person of, i was 
go to say, abnormal sane and unimaginative habit of mind. he 
absolutely refuse to be alone for the rest of that evening, and he told 
me afterwards that for many nights he had not dare to put out his light 
before go to sleep. however, the main trait of the figure i can at 
least indicate. 

at first you saw only a mass of coarse, matt black hair; presently it 
was seen that this cover a body of fearful thinness, almost a skeleton, 
but with the muscle standing out like wires. the hand were of a dusky 
pallor, covered, like the body, with long, coarse hairs, and hideous 
taloned. the eyes, touched in with a burning yellow, had intense black 
pupils, and were fixed upon the throne king with a look of beast-like 
hate. imagine one of the awful bird-catching spider of south america 
translate into human form, and endow with intelligence just less than 
human, and you will have some faint conception of the terror inspired by 
the appalling effigy. one remark is universally made by those to whom i 
have shown the picture: 'it was drawn from the life.' 

as soon as the first shock of his irresistible fright had subsided, 
dennistoun stole a look at his hosts. the sacristan's hand were pressed 
upon his eyes; his daughter, look up at the cross on the wall, was 
telling her bead feverishly. 

at last the question was asked: 'is this book for sale?' 

there was the same hesitation, the same plunge of determination that he 
had notice before, and then came the welcome answer: 'if monsieur 
pleases.' 

'how much do you ask for it?' 

'i will take two hundred and fifty francs.' 

this was confounding. even a collector's conscience is sometimes stirred, 
and dennistoun's conscience was tender than a collector's. 

'my good man!' he said again and again, 'your book is worth far more than 
two hundred and fifty francs. i assure you--far more.' 

but the answer did not vary: 'i will take two hundred and fifty 
francs--not more.' 

there was really no possibility of refuse such a chance. the money was 
paid, the receipt signed, a glass of wine drunk over the transaction, and 
then the sacristan seem to become a new man. he stood upright, he 
cease to throw those suspicious glance behind him, he actually laugh 
or try to laugh. dennistoun rose to go. 

'i shall have the honour of accompany monsieur to his hotel?' said the 
sacristan. 

'oh, no, thanks! it isn't a hundred yards. i know the way perfectly, and 
there is a moon.' 

the offer was pressed three or four times and refuse as often. 

'then, monsieur will summon me if--if he find occasion; he will keep the 
middle of the road, the side are so rough.' 

'certainly, certainly,' said dennistoun, who was impatient to examine his 
prize by himself; and he step out into the passage with his book under 
his arm. 

here he was met by the daughter; she, it appeared, was anxious to do a 
little business on her own account; perhaps, like gehazi, to 'take 
somewhat' from the foreigner whom her father had spared. 

'a silver crucifix and chain for the neck; monsieur would perhaps be good 
enough to accept it?' 

well, really, dennistoun hadn't much use for these things. what did 
mademoiselle want for it? 

'nothing--nothing in the world. monsieur is more than welcome to it.' 

the tone in which this and much more was said was unmistakable genuine, 
so that dennistoun was reduce to profuse thanks, and submit to have 
the chain put round his neck. it really seem as if he had render the 
father and daughter some service which they hardly knew how to repay. as 
he set off with his book they stood at the door look after him, and 
they were still look when he wave them a last good night from the 
steps of the chapeau rouge. 

dinner was over, and dennistoun was in his bedroom, shut up alone with 
his acquisition. the landlady had manifest a particular interest in him 
since he had told her that he had paid a visit to the sacristan and 
bought an old book from him. he thought, too, that he had heard a hurried 
dialogue between her and the said sacristan in the passage outside the 
_salle à manger_; some words to the effect that 'pierre and bertrand 
would be sleep in the house' had closed the conversation. 

all this time a grow feeling of discomfort had been creep over 
him--nervous reaction, perhaps, after the delight of his discovery. 
whatever it was, it result in a conviction that there was someone 
behind him, and that he was far more comfortable with his back to the 
wall. all this, of course, weigh light in the balance as against the 
obvious value of the collection he had acquired. and now, as i said, he 
was alone in his bedroom, taking stock of canon alberic's treasures, in 
which every moment reveal something more charming. 

'bless canon alberic!' said dennistoun, who had an inveterate habit of 
talk to himself. 'i wonder where he is now? dear me! i wish that 
landlady would learn to laugh in a more cheering manner; it make one 
feel as if there was someone dead in the house. half a pipe more, did you 
say? i think perhaps you are right. i wonder what that crucifix is that 
the young woman insist on give me? last century, i suppose. yes, 
probably. it is rather a nuisance of a thing to have round one's 
neck--just too heavy. most likely her father has been wearing it for 
years. i think i might give it a clean up before i put it away.' 

he had taken the crucifix off, and laid it on the table, when his 
attention was caught by an object lie on the red cloth just by his left 
elbow. two or three idea of what it might be flit through his brain 
with their own incalculable quickness. 

a penwiper? no, no such thing in the house. a rat? no, too black. a large 
spider? i trust to goodness not--no. good god! a hand like the hand in 
that picture! 

in another infinitesimal flash he had taken it in. pale, dusky skin, 
covering nothing but bone and tendon of appalling strength; coarse 
black hairs, long than ever grew on a human hand; nail rising from the 
end of the finger and curve sharp down and forward, grey, horny, 
and wrinkled. 

he flew out of his chair with deadly, inconceivable terror clutch at 
his heart. the shape, whose left hand rest on the table, was rising to 
a standing posture behind his seat, its right hand crooked above his 
scalp. there was black and tattered drapery about it; the coarse hair 
cover it as in the drawing. the lower jaw was thin--what can i call 
it?--shallow, like a beast's; teeth show behind the black lips; there 
was no nose; the eyes, of a fiery yellow, against which the pupil show 
black and intense, and the exult hate and thirst to destroy life which 
shone there, were the most horrify features in the whole vision. there 
was intelligence of a kind in them--intelligence beyond that of a beast, 
below that of a man. 

the feelings which this horror stir in dennistoun were the intensest 
physical fear and the most profound mental loathing. what did he do? what 
could he do? he has never been quite certain what words he said, but he 
know that he spoke, that he grasp blind at the silver crucifix, that 
he was conscious of a movement towards him on the part of the demon, and 
that he scream with the voice of an animal in hideous pain. 

pierre and bertrand, the two sturdy little serving-men, who rush in, 
saw nothing, but felt themselves thrust aside by something that pass 
out between them, and found dennistoun in a swoon. they sat up with him 
that night, and his two friends were at st bertrand by nine o'clock next 
morning. he himself, though still shaken and nervous, was almost himself 
by that time, and his story found credence with them, though not until 
they had seen the drawing and talk with the sacristan. 

almost at dawn the little man had come to the inn on some pretence, and 
had listen with the deepest interest to the story retail by the 
landlady. he show no surprise. 

'it is he--it is he! i have seen him myself,' was his only comment; and 
to all questioning but one reply was vouchsafed: 'deux foi je l'ai vu: 
mille foi je l'ai senti.' he would tell them nothing of the provenance 
of the book, nor any detail of his experiences. 'i shall soon sleep, and 
my rest will be sweet. why should you trouble me?' he said.[2] 

[2] he die that summer; his daughter married, and settled at st 
papoul. she never understood the circumstances of her father's 
'obsession'. 

we shall never know what he or canon alberic de mauléon suffered. at the 
back of that fateful drawing were some lines of writing which may be 
supposed to throw light on the situation: 

_contradictio salomoni cum demonio nocturno. 
albericu de mauléone delineavit. 
v. deu in adiutorium. ps. qui habitat. 
sancte bertrande, demoniorum effugator, intercede pro me miserrimo. 
primum uidi nocte 12(mi) dec. 1694: 
uidebo mox ultimum. peccaui et passu 
sum, plura adhuc passurus. 
dec. 29, 1701_.[3] 

[3] _i.e._, the dispute of solomon with a demon of the night. drawn by 
alberic de mauléon. _versicle_. o lord, make haste to help me. _psalm_. 
whoso dwelleth xci. 

saint bertrand, who puttest devil to flight, pray for me most unhappy. 
i saw it first on the night of dec. 12, 1694: soon i shall see it for 
the last time. i have sin and suffered, and have more to suffer yet. 
dec. 29, 1701. 

the 'gallia christiana' give the date of the canon's death as december 
31, 1701, 'in bed, of a sudden seizure'. detail of this kind are not 
common in the great work of the sammarthani. 

i have never quite understood what was dennistoun's view of the event i 
have narrated. he quote to me once a text from ecclesiasticus: 'some 
spirits there be that are create for vengeance, and in their fury lay on 
sore strokes.' on another occasion he said: 'isaiah was a very sensible 
man; doesn't he say something about night monster living in the ruins of 
babylon? these things are rather beyond us at present.' 

another confidence of his impress me rather, and i sympathize with it. 
we had been, last year, to comminges, to see canon alberic's tomb. it is 
a great marble erection with an effigy of the canon in a large wig and 
soutane, and an elaborate eulogy of his learning below. i saw dennistoun 
talk for some time with the vicar of st bertrand's, and as we drove 
away he said to me: 'i hope it isn't wrong: you know i am a 
presbyterian--but i--i believe there will be "saying of mass and singing 
of dirges" for alberic de mauléon's rest.' then he added, with a touch of 
the northern britain in his tone, 'i had no notion they came so dear.' 

* * * * * 

the book is in the wentworth collection at cambridge. the drawing was 
photograph and then burnt by dennistoun on the day when he left 
comminge on the occasion of his first visit. 




lost heart 

it was, as far as i can ascertain, in september of the year 1811 that a 
post-chaise drew up before the door of aswarby hall, in the heart of 
lincolnshire. the little boy who was the only passenger in the chaise, 
and who jump out as soon as it had stopped, look about him with the 
keenest curiosity during the short interval that elapse between the 
ring of the bell and the opening of the hall door. he saw a tall, 
square, red-brick house, built in the reign of anne; a stone-pillared 
porch had been add in the pure classical style of 1790; the window of 
the house were many, tall and narrow, with small pane and thick white 
woodwork. a pediment, pierce with a round window, crown the front. 
there were wings to right and left, connected by curious glaze 
galleries, support by colonnades, with the central block. these wings 
plainly contained the stable and offices of the house. each was 
surmount by an ornamental cupola with a gilded vane. 

an evening light shone on the building, making the window-panes glow like 
so many fires. away from the hall in front stretch a flat park stud 
with oak and fringe with firs, which stood out against the sky. the 
clock in the church-tower, bury in tree on the edge of the park, only 
its golden weather-cock catching the light, was striking six, and the 
sound came gently beating down the wind. it was altogether a pleasant 
impression, though tinge with the sort of melancholy appropriate to an 
evening in early autumn, that was convey to the mind of the boy who was 
standing in the porch wait for the door to open to him. 

the post-chaise had brought him from warwickshire, where, some six month 
before, he had been left an orphan. now, owe to the generous offer of 
his elderly cousin, mr abney, he had come to live at aswarby. the offer 
was unexpected, because all who knew anything of mr abney look upon him 
as a somewhat austere recluse, into whose steady-going household the 
advent of a small boy would import a new and, it seemed, incongruous 
element. the truth is that very little was known of mr abney's pursuit 
or temper. the professor of greece at cambridge had been heard to say that 
no one knew more of the religious belief of the later pagan than did 
the owner of aswarby. certainly his library contained all the then 
available books bearing on the mysteries, the orphic poems, the worship 
of mithras, and the neo-platonists. in the marble-paved hall stood a fine 
group of mithra slay a bull, which had been import from the levant 
at great expense by the owner. he had contribute a description of it to 
the _gentleman's magazine_, and he had written a remarkable series of 
articles in the _critical museum_ on the superstition of the roman of 
the lower empire. he was look upon, in fine, as a man wrap up in his 
books, and it was a matter of great surprise among his neighbour that he 
should ever have heard of his orphan cousin, stephen elliott, much more 
that he should have volunteer to make him an inmate of aswarby hall. 

whatever may have been expect by his neighbours, it is certain that mr 
abney--the tall, the thin, the austere--seemed inclined to give his young 
cousin a kindly reception. the moment the front-door was open he dart 
out of his study, rubbing his hand with delight. 

'how are you, my boy?--how are you? how old are you?' said he--'that is, 
you are not too much tired, i hope, by your journey to eat your supper?' 

'no, thank you, sir,' said master elliott; 'i am pretty well.' 

'that's a good lad,' said mr abney. 'and how old are you, my boy?' 

it seem a little odd that he should have ask the question twice in 
the first two minutes of their acquaintance. 

'i'm twelve years old next birthday, sir,' said stephen. 

'and when is your birthday, my dear boy? eleventh of september, eh? 
that's well--that's very well. nearly a year hence, isn't it? i like--ha, 
ha!--i like to get these things down in my book. sure it's twelve? 
certain?' 

'yes, quite sure, sir.' 

'well, well! take him to mrs bunch's room, parkes, and let him have his 
tea--supper--whatever it is.' 

'yes, sir,' answer the staid mr parkes; and conduct stephen to the 
lower regions. 

mrs bunch was the most comfortable and human person whom stephen had as 
yet met at aswarby. she made him completely at home; they were great 
friends in a quarter of an hour: and great friends they remained. mrs 
bunch had been born in the neighbourhood some fifty-five years before the 
date of stephen's arrival, and her residence at the hall was of twenty 
years' standing. consequently, if anyone knew the ins and out of the 
house and the district, mrs bunch knew them; and she was by no means 
disinclined to communicate her information. 

certainly there were plenty of things about the hall and the hall garden 
which stephen, who was of an adventurous and inquiring turn, was anxious 
to have explain to him. 'who built the temple at the end of the laurel 
walk? who was the old man whose picture hung on the staircase, sitting at 
a table, with a skull under his hand?' these and many similar points were 
clear up by the resources of mrs bunch's powerful intellect. there were 
others, however, of which the explanation furnish were less 
satisfactory. 

one november evening stephen was sitting by the fire in the housekeeper's 
room reflect on his surroundings. 

'is mr abney a good man, and will he go to heaven?' he sudden asked, 
with the peculiar confidence which children possess in the ability of 
their elder to settle these questions, the decision of which is believe 
to be reserved for other tribunals. 

'good?--bless the child!' said mrs bunch. 'master's as kind a soul as 
ever i see! didn't i never tell you of the little boy as he took in out 
of the street, as you may say, this seven years back? and the little 
girl, two years after i first come here?' 

'no. do tell me all about them, mrs bunch--now, this minute!' 

'well,' said mrs bunch, 'the little girl i don't seem to recollect so 
much about. i know master brought her back with him from his walk one 
day, and give orders to mrs ellis, as was housekeeper then, as she should 
be took every care with. and the pore child hadn't no one belong to 
her--she tell me so her own self--and here she live with us a matter 
of three week it might be; and then, whether she were somethink of a 
gipsy in her blood or what not, but one morning she out of her bed afore 
any of us had open a eye, and neither track nor yet trace of her have i 
set eyes on since. master was wonderful put about, and had all the pond 
dragged; but it's my belief she was had away by them gipsies, for there 
was singing round the house for as much as an hour the night she went, 
and parkes, he declare as he heard them a-calling in the wood all that 
afternoon. dear, dear! a hodd child she was, so silent in her ways and 
all, but i was wonderful taken up with her, so domesticate she 
was--surprising.' 

'and what about the little boy?' said stephen. 

'ah, that pore boy!' sigh mrs bunch. 'he were a foreigner--jevanny he 
call hisself--and he come a-tweaking his 'urdy-gurdy round and about 
the drive one winter day, and master 'ad him in that minute, and ast all 
about where he came from, and how old he was, and how he made his way, 
and where was his relatives, and all as kind as heart could wish. but it 
went the same way with him. they're a hunru lot, them foreign nations, 
i do suppose, and he was off one fine morning just the same as the girl. 
why he went and what he done was our question for as much as a year 
after; for he never took his 'urdy-gurdy, and there it lay on the 
shelf.' 

the remainder of the evening was spent by stephen in miscellaneous 
cross-examination of mrs bunch and in effort to extract a tune from the 
hurdy-gurdy. 

that night he had a curious dream. at the end of the passage at the top 
of the house, in which his bedroom was situated, there was an old disused 
bathroom. it was kept locked, but the upper half of the door was glazed, 
and, since the muslin curtains which use to hang there had long been 
gone, you could look in and see the lead-lined bath affix to the wall 
on the right hand, with its head towards the window. 

on the night of which i am speaking, stephen elliott found himself, as he 
thought, look through the glaze door. the moon was shining through 
the window, and he was gaze at a figure which lay in the bath. 

his description of what he saw remind me of what i once beheld myself in 
the famous vault of st michan's church in dublin, which possess the 
horrid property of preserve corpse from decay for centuries. a figure 
inexpressible thin and pathetic, of a dusty leaden colour, envelop in a 
shroud-like garment, the thin lip crooked into a faint and dreadful 
smile, the hand pressed tight over the region of the heart. 

as he look upon it, a distant, almost inaudible moan seem to issue 
from its lips, and the arms began to stir. the terror of the sight forced 
stephen backwards and he awoke to the fact that he was indeed standing on 
the cold board floor of the passage in the full light of the moon. with 
a courage which i do not think can be common among boys of his age, he 
went to the door of the bathroom to ascertain if the figure of his dream 
were really there. it was not, and he went back to bed. 

mrs bunch was much impress next morning by his story, and went so far 
as to replace the muslin curtain over the glaze door of the bathroom. mr 
abney, moreover, to whom he confide his experience at breakfast, was 
greatly interested and made note of the matter in what he call 'his 
book'. 

the spring equinox was approaching, as mr abney frequent remind his 
cousin, add that this had been always considered by the ancients to be 
a critical time for the young: that stephen would do well to take care of 
himself, and to shut his bedroom window at night; and that censorinu had 
some valuable remark on the subject. two incident that occur about 
this time made an impression upon stephen's mind. 

the first was after an unusually uneasy and oppress night that he had 
passed--though he could not recall any particular dream that he had had. 

the following evening mrs bunch was occupy herself in mending his 
nightgown. 

'gracious me, master stephen!' she broke forth rather irritably, 'how do 
you manage to tear your nightdress all to flinder this way? look here, 
sir, what trouble you do give to poor servant that have to darn and mend 
after you!' 

there was indeed a most destructive and apparently wanton series of slit 
or score in the garment, which would undoubted require a skilful 
needle to make good. they were confine to the left side of the 
chest--long, parallel slit about six inch in length, some of them not 
quite piercing the texture of the linen. stephen could only express his 
entire ignorance of their origin: he was sure they were not there the 
night before. 

'but,' he said, 'mrs bunch, they are just the same as the scratch on 
the outside of my bedroom door: and i'm sure i never had anything to do 
with making _them_.' 

mrs bunch gaze at him open-mouthed, then snatch up a candle, departed 
hasty from the room, and was heard making her way upstairs. in a few 
minutes she came down. 

'well,' she said, 'master stephen, it's a funny thing to me how them 
mark and scratch can 'a' come there--too high up for any cat or dog to 
'ave made 'em, much less a rat: for all the world like a chinaman's 
finger-nails, as my uncle in the tea-trade use to tell us of when we was 
girl together. i wouldn't say nothing to master, not if i was you, 
master stephen, my dear; and just turn the key of the door when you go to 
your bed.' 

'i always do, mrs bunch, as soon as i've said my prayers.' 

'ah, that's a good child: always say your prayers, and then no one can't 
hurt you.' 

herewith mrs bunch address herself to mending the injure nightgown, 
with interval of meditation, until bed-time. this was on a friday night 
in march, 1812. 

on the following evening the usual duet of stephen and mrs bunch was 
augment by the sudden arrival of mr parkes, the butler, who as a rule 
kept himself rather _to_ himself in his own pantry. he did not see that 
stephen was there: he was, moreover, fluster and less slow of speech 
than was his wont. 

'master may get up his own wine, if he likes, of an evening,' was his 
first remark. 'either i do it in the daytime or not at all, mrs bunch. i 
don't know what it may be: very like it's the rats, or the wind got into 
the cellars; but i'm not so young as i was, and i can't go through with 
it as i have done.' 

'well, mr parkes, you know it is a surprising place for the rats, is the 
hall.' 

'i'm not deny that, mrs bunch; and, to be sure, many a time i've heard 
the tale from the men in the shipyard about the rat that could speak. i 
never laid no confidence in that before; but tonight, if i'd demean 
myself to lay my ear to the door of the further bin, i could pretty much 
have heard what they was saying.' 

'oh, there, mr parkes, i've no patience with your fancies! rats talk 
in the wine-cellar indeed!' 

'well, mrs bunch, i've no wish to argue with you: all i say is, if you 
choose to go to the far bin, and lay your ear to the door, you may prove 
my words this minute.' 

'what nonsense you do talk, mr parkes--not fit for children to listen to! 
why, you'll be frighten master stephen there out of his wits.' 

'what! master stephen?' said parkes, awake to the consciousness of the 
boy's presence. 'master stephen know well enough when i'm a-playing a 
joke with you, mrs bunch.' 

in fact, master stephen knew much too well to suppose that mr park had 
in the first instance intended a joke. he was interested, not altogether 
pleasantly, in the situation; but all his question were unsuccessful in 
induce the butler to give any more detailed account of his experience 
in the wine-cellar. 

* * * * * 

we have now arrive at march 24, 1812. it was a day of curious 
experience for stephen: a windy, noisy day, which fill the house and 
the garden with a restless impression. as stephen stood by the fence of 
the grounds, and look out into the park, he felt as if an endless 
procession of unseen people were sweeping past him on the wind, borne on 
resistless and aimlessly, vain strive to stop themselves, to catch 
at something that might arrest their flight and bring them once again 
into contact with the living world of which they had form a part. after 
luncheon that day mr abney said: 

'stephen, my boy, do you think you could manage to come to me tonight as 
late as eleven o'clock in my study? i shall be busy until that time, and 
i wish to show you something connected with your future life which it is 
most important that you should know. you are not to mention this matter 
to mrs bunch nor to anyone else in the house; and you had better go to 
your room at the usual time.' 

here was a new excitement add to life: stephen eager grasp at the 
opportunity of sitting up till eleven o'clock. he look in at the 
library door on his way upstairs that evening, and saw a brazier, which 
he had often notice in the corner of the room, move out before the 
fire; an old silver-gilt cup stood on the table, fill with red wine, 
and some written sheet of paper lay near it. mr abney was sprinkling 
some incense on the brazier from a round silver box as stephen passed, 
but did not seem to notice his step. 

the wind had fallen, and there was a still night and a full moon. at 
about ten o'clock stephen was standing at the open window of his bedroom, 
look out over the country. still as the night was, the mysterious 
population of the distant moon-lit wood was not yet lull to rest. from 
time to time strange cries as of lost and despairing wanderer sound 
from across the mere. they might be the note of owl or water-birds, yet 
they did not quite resemble either sound. were not they coming nearer? 
now they sound from the near side of the water, and in a few moments 
they seem to be floating about among the shrubberies. then they ceased; 
but just as stephen was thinking of shut the window and resume his 
reading of _robinson crusoe_, he caught sight of two figures standing on 
the gravel terrace that ran along the garden side of the hall--the 
figures of a boy and girl, as it seemed; they stood side by side, look 
up at the windows. something in the form of the girl recall 
irresistible his dream of the figure in the bath. the boy inspired him 
with more acute fear. 

whilst the girl stood still, half smiling, with her hand clasp over 
her heart, the boy, a thin shape, with black hair and ragged clothing, 
raise his arms in the air with an appearance of menace and of 
unappeasable hunger and longing. the moon shone upon his almost 
transparent hands, and stephen saw that the nail were fearful long and 
that the light shone through them. as he stood with his arms thus raised, 
he disclose a terrify spectacle. on the left side of his chest there 
open a black and gape rent; and there fell upon stephen's brain, 
rather than upon his ear, the impression of one of those hungry and 
desolate cries that he had heard resounding over the wood of aswarby all 
that evening. in another moment this dreadful pair had move swift and 
noiseless over the dry gravel, and he saw them no more. 

inexpressible frightened as he was, he determined to take his candle and 
go down to mr abney's study, for the hour appoint for their meeting was 
near at hand. the study or library open out of the front-hall on one 
side, and stephen, urge on by his terrors, did not take long in get 
there. to effect an entrance was not so easy. it was not locked, he felt 
sure, for the key was on the outside of the door as usual. his repeated 
knock produce no answer. mr abney was engaged: he was speaking. what! 
why did he try to cry out? and why was the cry choke in his throat? had 
he, too, seen the mysterious children? but now everything was quiet, and 
the door yield to stephen's terrify and frantic pushing. 

* * * * * 

on the table in mr abney's study certain papers were found which 
explain the situation to stephen elliott when he was of an age to 
understand them. the most important sentence were as follows: 

'it was a belief very strong and generally held by the ancients--of 
whose wisdom in these matter i have had such experience as induce me to 
place confidence in their assertions--that by enact certain processes, 
which to us modern have something of a barbaric complexion, a very 
remarkable enlightenment of the spiritual faculty in man may be 
attained: that, for example, by absorbing the personalities of a certain 
number of his fellow-creatures, an individual may gain a complete 
ascendancy over those orders of spiritual being which control the 
elemental forces of our universe. 

'it is record of simon magus that he was able to fly in the air, to 
become invisible, or to assume any form he pleased, by the agency of the 
soul of a boy whom, to use the libellous phrase employ by the author of 
the _clementine recognitions_, he had "murdered". i find it set down, 
moreover, with considerable detail in the writings of herme 
trismegistus, that similar happy result may be produce by the 
absorption of the heart of not less than three human being below the 
age of twenty-one years. to the test of the truth of this receipt i 
have devoted the greater part of the last twenty years, select as the 
_corpora vilia_ of my experiment such person as could convenient be 
remove without occasion a sensible gap in society. the first step i 
effect by the removal of one phoebe stanley, a girl of gipsy 
extraction, on march 24, 1792. the second, by the removal of a wandering 
italy lad, name giovanni paoli, on the night of march 23, 1805. the 
final "victim"--to employ a word repugnant in the highest degree to my 
feelings--must be my cousin, stephen elliott. his day must be this march 
24, 1812. 

'the best means of effect the require absorption is to remove the 
heart from the _living_ subject, to reduce it to ashes, and to mingle 
them with about a pint of some red wine, preferable port. the remains of 
the first two subjects, at least, it will be well to conceal: a disused 
bathroom or wine-cellar will be found convenient for such a purpose. some 
annoyance may be experienced from the psychic portion of the subjects, 
which popular language dignify with the name of ghosts. but the man of 
philosophical temperament--to whom alone the experiment is 
appropriate--will be little prone to attach importance to the feeble 
effort of these being to wreak their vengeance on him. i contemplate 
with the liveliest satisfaction the enlarge and emancipate existence 
which the experiment, if successful, will confer on me; not only place 
me beyond the reach of human justice (so-called), but eliminate to a 
great extent the prospect of death itself.' 

* * * * * 

mr abney was found in his chair, his head thrown back, his face stamp 
with an expression of rage, fright, and mortal pain. in his left side was 
a terrible lacerate wound, expose the heart. there was no blood on his 
hands, and a long knife that lay on the table was perfectly clean. a 
savage wild-cat might have inflict the injuries. the window of the 
study was open, and it was the opinion of the coroner that mr abney had 
met his death by the agency of some wild creature. but stephen elliott's 
study of the papers i have quote led him to a very different conclusion. 




the mezzotint 

some time ago i believe i had the pleasure of telling you the story of an 
adventure which happen to a friend of mine by the name of dennistoun, 
during his pursuit of object of art for the museum at cambridge. 

he did not publish his experience very widely upon his return to 
england; but they could not fail to become known to a good many of his 
friends, and among other to the gentleman who at that time preside over 
an art museum at another university. it was to be expect that the story 
should make a considerable impression on the mind of a man whose vocation 
lay in lines similar to dennistoun's, and that he should be eager to 
catch at any explanation of the matter which tend to make it seem 
improbable that he should ever be call upon to deal with so agitate 
an emergency. it was, indeed, somewhat console to him to reflect that 
he was not expect to acquire ancient mss. for his institution; that was 
the business of the shelburnian library. the authority of that 
institution might, if they pleased, ransack obscure corner of the 
continent for such matters. he was glad to be oblige at the moment to 
confine his attention to enlarge the already unsurpass collection of 
english topographical drawing and engraving possessed by his museum. 
yet, as it turn out, even a department so homely and familiar as this 
may have its dark corners, and to one of these mr williams was 
unexpected introduced. 

those who have taken even the most limited interest in the acquisition of 
topographical pictures are aware that there is one london dealer whose 
aid is indispensable to their researches. mr j. w. britnell publish at 
short interval very admirable catalogue of a large and constant 
change stock of engravings, plans, and old sketch of mansions, 
churches, and town in england and wales. these catalogue were, of 
course, the abc of his subject to mr williams: but as his museum already 
contained an enormous accumulation of topographical pictures, he was a 
regular, rather than a copious, buyer; and he rather look to mr 
britnell to fill up gap in the rank and file of his collection than to 
supply him with rarities. 

now, in february of last year there appear upon mr williams's desk at 
the museum a catalogue from mr britnell's emporium, and accompany it 
was a typewritten communication from the dealer himself. this latter ran 
as follows: 

dear sir, 

we beg to call your attention to no. 978 in our accompany 
catalogue, which we shall be glad to send on approval. 

yours faithfully, 

j. w. britnell. 

to turn to no. 978 in the accompany catalogue was with mr. williams 
(as he observe to himself) the work of a moment, and in the place 
indicate he found the following entry: 

978.--_unknown._ interesting mezzotint: view of a manor-house, early 
part of the century. 15 by 10 inches; black frame. £2 2s. 

it was not specially exciting, and the price seem high. however, as mr 
britnell, who knew his business and his customer, seem to set store by 
it, mr williams wrote a postcard ask for the article to be sent on 
approval, along with some other engraving and sketch which appear in 
the same catalogue. and so he pass without much excitement of 
anticipation to the ordinary labour of the day. 

a parcel of any kind always arrive a day later than you expect it, and 
that of mr britnell proved, as i believe the right phrase goes, no 
exception to the rule. it was deliver at the museum by the afternoon 
post of saturday, after mr williams had left his work, and it was 
accordingly brought round to his rooms in college by the attendant, in 
order that he might not have to wait over sunday before look through 
it and return such of the contents as he did not propose to keep. and 
here he found it when he came in to tea, with a friend. 

the only item with which i am concerned was the rather large, 
black-framed mezzotint of which i have already quote the short 
description given in mr britnell's catalogue. some more detail of it 
will have to be given, though i cannot hope to put before you the look of 
the picture as clearly as it is present to my own eye. very nearly the 
exact duplicate of it may be seen in a good many old inn parlours, or in 
the passage of undisturbed country mansions at the present moment. it 
was a rather indifferent mezzotint, and an indifferent mezzotint is, 
perhaps, the worst form of engraving known. it present a full-face view 
of a not very large manor-house of the last century, with three row of 
plain sash window with rusticate masonry about them, a parapet with 
balls or vase at the angles, and a small portico in the centre. on 
either side were trees, and in front a considerable expanse of lawn. the 
legend _a. w. f. sculpsit_ was engrave on the narrow margin; and there 
was no further inscription. the whole thing gave the impression that it 
was the work of an amateur. what in the world mr britnell could mean by 
affix the price of £2 2s. to such an object was more than mr williams 
could imagine. he turn it over with a good deal of contempt; upon the 
back was a paper label, the left-hand half of which had been torn off. 
all that remain were the end of two lines of writing; the first had 
the letters--_ngley hall_; the second,--_ssex_. 

it would, perhaps, be just worth while to identify the place represented, 
which he could easily do with the help of a gazetteer, and then he would 
send it back to mr britnell, with some remark reflect upon the 
judgement of that gentleman. 

he light the candles, for it was now dark, made the tea, and supply 
the friend with whom he had been play golf (for i believe the 
authority of the university i write of indulge in that pursuit by way 
of relaxation); and tea was taken to the accompaniment of a discussion 
which golf person can imagine for themselves, but which the 
conscientious writer has no right to inflict upon any non-golfing 
persons. 

the conclusion arrive at was that certain stroke might have been 
better, and that in certain emergency neither player had experienced 
that amount of luck which a human being has a right to expect. it was now 
that the friend--let us call him professor binks--took up the frame 
engraving and said: 

'what's this place, williams?' 

'just what i am go to try to find out,' said williams, go to the 
shelf for a gazetteer. 'look at the back. somethingley hall, either in 
sussex or essex. half the name's gone, you see. you don't happen to know 
it, i suppose?' 

'it's from that man britnell, i suppose, isn't it?' said binks. 'is it 
for the museum?' 

'well, i think i should buy it if the price was five shillings,' said 
williams; 'but for some unearthly reason he wants two guinea for it. i 
can't conceive why. it's a wretched engraving, and there aren't even any 
figures to give it life.' 

'it's not worth two guineas, i should think,' said binks; 'but i don't 
think it's so badly done. the moonlight seem rather good to me; and i 
should have thought there _were_ figures, or at least a figure, just on 
the edge in front.' 

'let's look,' said williams. 'well, it's true the light is rather 
clever given. where's your figure? oh, yes! just the head, in the very 
front of the picture.' 

and indeed there was--hardly more than a black blot on the extreme edge 
of the engraving--the head of a man or woman, a good deal muffle up, the 
back turn to the spectator, and look towards the house. 

williams had not notice it before. 

'still,' he said, 'though it's a clever thing than i thought, i can't 
spend two guinea of museum money on a picture of a place i don't know.' 

professor bink had his work to do, and soon went; and very nearly up to 
hall time williams was engaged in a vain attempt to identify the subject 
of his picture. 'if the vowel before the _ng_ had only been left, it 
would have been easy enough,' he thought; 'but as it is, the name may be 
anything from guestingley to langley, and there are many more name 
ending like this than i thought; and this rotten book has no index of 
terminations.' 

hall in mr williams's college was at seven. it need not be dwelt upon; 
the less so as he met there colleague who had been play golf during 
the afternoon, and words with which we have no concern were freely 
bandy across the table--merely golf words, i would hasten to 
explain. 

i suppose an hour or more to have been spent in what is call 
common-room after dinner. later in the evening some few retired to 
williams's rooms, and i have little doubt that whist was play and 
tobacco smoked. during a lull in these operation williams picked up the 
mezzotint from the table without look at it, and hand it to a person 
mildly interested in art, telling him where it had come from, and the 
other particulars which we already know. 

the gentleman took it carelessly, look at it, then said, in a tone of 
some interest: 

'it's really a very good piece of work, williams; it has quite a feeling 
of the romantic period. the light is admirable managed, it seem to me, 
and the figure, though it's rather too grotesque, is somehow very 
impressive.' 

'yes, isn't it?' said williams, who was just then busy give whisky and 
soda to other of the company, and was unable to come across the room to 
look at the view again. 

it was by this time rather late in the evening, and the visitor were on 
the move. after they went williams was oblige to write a letter or two 
and clear up some odd bit of work. at last, some time past midnight, he 
was disposed to turn in, and he put out his lamp after lighting his 
bedroom candle. the picture lay face upwards on the table where the last 
man who look at it had put it, and it caught his eye as he turn the 
lamp down. what he saw made him very nearly drop the candle on the floor, 
and he declare now if he had been left in the dark at that moment he 
would have had a fit. but, as that did not happen, he was able to put 
down the light on the table and take a good look at the picture. it was 
indubitable--rankly impossible, no doubt, but absolutely certain. in the 
middle of the lawn in front of the unknown house there was a figure where 
no figure had been at five o'clock that afternoon. it was crawl on all 
fours towards the house, and it was muffle in a strange black garment 
with a white cross on the back. 

i do not know what is the ideal course to pursue in a situation of this 
kind, i can only tell you what mr williams did. he took the picture by 
one corner and carry it across the passage to a second set of rooms 
which he possessed. there he lock it up in a drawer, sport the door 
of both set of rooms, and retired to bed; but first he wrote out and 
sign an account of the extraordinary change which the picture had 
undergone since it had come into his possession. 

sleep visit him rather late; but it was console to reflect that the 
behaviour of the picture did not depend upon his own unsupported 
testimony. evidently the man who had look at it the night before had 
seen something of the same kind as he had, otherwise he might have been 
tempt to think that something grave wrong was happening either to his 
eyes or his mind. this possibility being fortunately precluded, two 
matter await him on the morrow. he must take stock of the picture very 
carefully, and call in a witness for the purpose, and he must make a 
determined effort to ascertain what house it was that was represented. he 
would therefore ask his neighbour nisbet to breakfast with him, and he 
would subsequent spend a morning over the gazetteer. 

nisbet was disengaged, and arrive about 9.20. his host was not quite 
dressed, i am sorry to say, even at this late hour. during breakfast 
nothing was said about the mezzotint by williams, save that he had a 
picture on which he wish for nisbet's opinion. but those who are 
familiar with university life can picture for themselves the wide and 
delightful range of subject over which the conversation of two fellow 
of canterbury college is likely to extend during a sunday morning 
breakfast. hardly a topic was left unchallenged, from golf to 
lawn-tennis. yet i am bound to say that williams was rather distraught; 
for his interest naturally centre in that very strange picture which was 
now reposing, face downwards, in the drawer in the room opposite. 

the morning pipe was at last lighted, and the moment had arrive for 
which he looked. with very considerable--almost tremulous--excitement he 
ran across, unlock the drawer, and, extract the picture--still face 
downwards--ran back, and put it into nisbet's hands. 

'now,' he said, 'nisbet, i want you to tell me exactly what you see in 
that picture. describe it, if you don't mind, rather minutely. i'll tell 
you why afterwards.' 

'well,' said nisbet, 'i have here a view of a country-house--english, i 
presume--by moonlight.' 

'moonlight? you're sure of that?' 

'certainly. the moon appear to be on the wane, if you wish for details, 
and there are cloud in the sky.' 

'all right. go on. i'll swear,' add williams in an aside, 'there was no 
moon when i saw it first.' 

'well, there's not much more to be said,' nisbet continued. 'the house 
has one--two--three row of windows, five in each row, except at the 
bottom, where there's a porch instead of the middle one, and--' 

'but what about figures?' said williams, with marked interest. 

'there aren't any,' said nisbet; 'but--' 

'what! no figure on the grass in front?' 

'not a thing.' 

'you'll swear to that?' 

'certainly i will. but there's just one other thing.' 

'what?' 

'why, one of the window on the ground-floor--left of the door--is open.' 

'is it really so? my goodness! he must have got in,' said williams, with 
great excitement; and he hurried to the back of the sofa on which nisbet 
was sitting, and, catching the picture from him, verify the matter for 
himself. 

it was quite true. there was no figure, and there was the open window. 
williams, after a moment of speechless surprise, went to the 
writing-table and scribble for a short time. then he brought two papers 
to nisbet, and ask him first to sign one--it was his own description of 
the picture, which you have just heard--and then to read the other which 
was williams's statement written the night before. 

'what can it all mean?' said nisbet. 

'exactly,' said williams. 'well, one thing i must do--or three things, 
now i think of it. i must find out from garwood'--this was his last 
night's visitor--'what he saw, and then i must get the thing photograph 
before it go further, and then i must find out what the place is.' 

'i can do the photograph myself,' said nisbet, 'and i will. but, you 
know, it looks very much as if we were assist at the working out of a 
tragedy somewhere. the question is, has it happen already, or is it 
go to come off? you must find out what the place is. yes,' he said, 
look at the picture again, 'i expect you're right: he has got in. and 
if i don't mistake, there'll be the devil to pay in one of the rooms 
upstairs.' 

'i'll tell you what,' said williams: 'i'll take the picture across to old 
green' (this was the senior fellow of the college, who had been bursar 
for many years). 'it's quite likely he'll know it. we have property in 
essex and sussex, and he must have been over the two county a lot in 
his time.' 

'quite likely he will,' said nisbet; 'but just let me take my photograph 
first. but look here, i rather think green isn't up today. he wasn't in 
hall last night, and i think i heard him say he was go down for the 
sunday.' 

'that's true, too,' said williams; 'i know he's gone to brighton. well, 
if you'll photograph it now, i'll go across to garwood and get his 
statement, and you keep an eye on it while i'm gone. i'm beginning to 
think two guinea is not a very exorbitant price for it now.' 

in a short time he had returned, and brought mr garwood with him. 
garwood's statement was to the effect that the figure, when he had seen 
it, was clear of the edge of the picture, but had not got far across the 
lawn. he remember a white mark on the back of its drapery, but could 
not have been sure it was a cross. a document to this effect was then 
drawn up and signed, and nisbet proceed to photograph the picture. 

'now what do you mean to do?' he said. 'are you go to sit and watch it 
all day?' 

'well, no, i think not,' said williams. 'i rather imagine we're meant to 
see the whole thing. you see, between the time i saw it last night and 
this morning there was time for lot of things to happen, but the 
creature only got into the house. it could easily have got through its 
business in the time and gone to its own place again; but the fact of the 
window being open, i think, must mean that it's in there now. so i feel 
quite easy about leave it. and besides, i have a kind of idea that it 
wouldn't change much, if at all, in the daytime. we might go out for a 
walk this afternoon, and come in to tea, or whenever it get dark. i 
shall leave it out on the table here, and sport the door. my skip can get 
in, but no one else.' 

the three agree that this would be a good plan; and, further, that if 
they spent the afternoon together they would be less likely to talk about 
the business to other people; for any rumour of such a transaction as was 
go on would bring the whole of the phasmatologic society about their 
ears. 

we may give them a respite until five o'clock. 

at or near that hour the three were enter williams's staircase. they 
were at first slightly annoy to see that the door of his rooms was 
unsported; but in a moment it was remember that on sunday the skip 
came for orders an hour or so early than on weekdays. however, a 
surprise was await them. the first thing they saw was the picture 
leaning up against a pile of books on the table, as it had been left, and 
the next thing was williams's skip, seat on a chair opposite, gaze at 
it with undisguised horror. how was this? mr filch (the name is not my 
own invention) was a servant of considerable standing, and set the 
standard of etiquette to all his own college and to several neighbouring 
ones, and nothing could be more alien to his practice than to be found 
sitting on his master's chair, or appear to take any particular notice 
of his master's furniture or pictures. indeed, he seem to feel this 
himself. he start violent when the three men were in the room, and 
got up with a marked effort. then he said: 

'i ask your pardon, sir, for taking such a freedom as to set down.' 

'not at all, robert,' interpose mr williams. 'i was meaning to ask you 
some time what you thought of that picture.' 

'well, sir, of course i don't set up my opinion against yours, but it 
ain't the pictur i should 'ang where my little girl could see it, sir.' 

'wouldn't you, robert? why not?' 

'no, sir. why, the pore child, i recollect once she see a door bible, 
with pictures not 'alf what that is, and we 'ad to set up with her three 
or four nights afterwards, if you'll believe me; and if she was to ketch 
a sight of this skelinton here, or whatever it is, carry off the pore 
baby, she would be in a taking. you know 'ow it is with children; 'ow 
nervish they git with a little thing and all. but what i should say, it 
don't seem a right pictur to be lay about, sir, not where anyone 
that's liable to be startle could come on it. should you be wanting 
anything this evening, sir? thank you, sir.' 

with these words the excellent man went to continue the round of his 
masters, and you may be sure the gentlemen whom he left lost no time in 
gathering round the engraving. there was the house, as before under the 
wane moon and the drift clouds. the window that had been open was 
shut, and the figure was once more on the lawn: but not this time 
crawl cautious on hand and knees. now it was erect and step 
swiftly, with long strides, towards the front of the picture. the moon 
was behind it, and the black drapery hung down over its face so that only 
hint of that could be seen, and what was visible made the spectator 
profound thankful that they could see no more than a white dome-like 
forehead and a few straggle hairs. the head was bent down, and the arms 
were tight clasp over an object which could be dim seen and 
identify as a child, whether dead or living it was not possible to say. 
the leg of the appearance alone could be plainly discerned, and they 
were horrible thin. 

from five to seven the three companion sat and watch the picture by 
turns. but it never changed. they agree at last that it would be safe to 
leave it, and that they would return after hall and await further 
developments. 

when they assemble again, at the earliest possible moment, the engraving 
was there, but the figure was gone, and the house was quiet under the 
moonbeams. there was nothing for it but to spend the evening over 
gazetteer and guide-books. williams was the lucky one at last, and 
perhaps he deserve it. at 11.30 p.m. he read from murray's _guide to 
essex_ the following lines: 

16-1/2 miles, _anningley_. the church has been an interesting 
building of norman date, but was extensive classic in the last 
century. it contain the tomb of the family of francis, whose 
mansion, anningley hall, a solid queen anne house, stand immediately 
beyond the churchyard in a park of about 80 acres. the family is now 
extinct, the last heir have disappear mysterious in infancy in 
the year 1802. the father, mr arthur francis, was locally known as a 
talented amateur engrave in mezzotint. after his son's disappearance 
he live in complete retirement at the hall, and was found dead in 
his studio on the third anniversary of the disaster, have just 
complete an engraving of the house, impression of which are of 
considerable rarity. 

this look like business, and, indeed, mr green on his return at once 
identify the house as anningley hall. 

'is there any kind of explanation of the figure, green?' was the question 
which williams naturally asked. 

'i don't know, i'm sure, williams. what use to be said in the place when 
i first knew it, which was before i came up here, was just this: old 
francis was always very much down on these poach fellows, and whenever 
he got a chance he use to get a man whom he suspect of it turn off 
the estate, and by degree he got rid of them all but one. squire could 
do a lot of things then that they daren't think of now. well, this man 
that was left was what you find pretty often in that country--the last 
remains of a very old family. i believe they were lords of the manor at 
one time. i recollect just the same thing in my own parish.' 

'what, like the man in _tess o' the durbervilles_?' williams put in. 

'yes, i dare say; it's not a book i could ever read myself. but this 
fellow could show a row of tomb in the church there that belong to his 
ancestors, and all that went to sour him a bit; but francis, they said, 
could never get at him--he always kept just on the right side of the 
law--until one night the keeper found him at it in a wood right at the 
end of the estate. i could show you the place now; it march with some 
land that use to belong to an uncle of mine. and you can imagine there 
was a row; and this man gawdy (that was the name, to be sure--gawdy; i 
thought i should get it--gawdy), he was unlucky enough, poor chap! to 
shoot a keeper. well, that was what francis wanted, and grand juries--you 
know what they would have been then--and poor gawdy was strung up in 
double-quick time; and i've been shown the place he was bury in, on the 
north side of the church--you know the way in that part of the world: 
anyone that's been hang or made away with themselves, they bury them 
that side. and the idea was that some friend of gawdy's--not a relation, 
because he had none, poor devil! he was the last of his line: kind of 
_spes ultima gentis_--must have plan to get hold of francis's boy and 
put an end to _his_ line, too. i don't know--it's rather an 
out-of-the-way thing for an essex poacher to think of--but, you know, i 
should say now it looks more as if old gawdy had manage the job himself. 
booh! i hate to think of it! have some whisky, williams!' 

the fact were communicate by williams to dennistoun, and by him to a 
mixed company, of which i was one, and the sadducean professor of 
ophiology another. i am sorry to say that the latter when ask what he 
thought of it, only remarked: 'oh, those bridgeford people will say 
anything'--a sentiment which met with the reception it deserved. 

i have only to add that the picture is now in the ashleian museum; that 
it has been treat with a view to discover whether sympathetic ink 
has been use in it, but without effect; that mr britnell knew nothing of 
it save that he was sure it was uncommon; and that, though careful 
watched, it has never been known to change again. 




the ash-tree 

everyone who has travelled over eastern england know the small 
country-houses with which it is studded--the rather dank little 
buildings, usually in the italy style, surround with park of some 
eighty to a hundred acres. for me they have always had a very strong 
attraction, with the grey paling of split oak, the noble trees, the mere 
with their reed-beds, and the line of distant woods. then, i like the 
pillar portico--perhaps stuck on to a red-brick queen anne house which 
has been face with stucco to bring it into line with the 'grecian' taste 
of the end of the eighteenth century; the hall inside, go up to the 
roof, which hall ought always to be provided with a gallery and a small 
organ. i like the library, too, where you may find anything from a 
psalter of the thirteenth century to a shakespeare quarto. i like the 
pictures, of course; and perhaps most of all i like fancy what life in 
such a house was when it was first built, and in the piping times of 
landlords' prosperity, and not least now, when, if money is not so 
plentiful, taste is more varied and life quite as interesting. i wish to 
have one of these houses, and enough money to keep it together and 
entertain my friends in it modestly. 

but this is a digression. i have to tell you of a curious series of 
event which happen in such a house as i have try to describe. it is 
castringham hall in suffolk. i think a good deal has been done to the 
building since the period of my story, but the essential features i have 
sketch are still there--italian portico, square block of white house, 
old inside than out, park with fringe of woods, and mere. the one 
feature that marked out the house from a score of other is gone. as you 
look at it from the park, you saw on the right a great old ash-tree 
grow within half a dozen yard of the wall, and almost or quite 
touching the building with its branches. i suppose it had stood there 
ever since castringham cease to be a fortify place, and since the moat 
was fill in and the elizabethan dwelling-house built. at any rate, it 
had well-nigh attain its full dimensions in the year 1690. 

in that year the district in which the hall is situated was the scene of 
a number of witch-trials. it will be long, i think, before we arrive at a 
just estimate of the amount of solid reason--if there was any--which lay 
at the root of the universal fear of witch in old times. whether the 
person accused of this offence really did imagine that they were 
possessed of unusual power of any kind; or whether they had the will at 
least, if not the power, of do mischief to their neighbours; or 
whether all the confessions, of which there are so many, were extort by 
the cruelty of the witch-finders--these are question which are not, i 
fancy, yet solved. and the present narrative give me pause. i cannot 
altogether sweep it away as mere invention. the reader must judge for 
himself. 

castringham contribute a victim to the _auto-da-fé_. mrs mothersole was 
her name, and she differ from the ordinary run of village witch only 
in being rather better off and in a more influential position. effort 
were made to save her by several reputable farmer of the parish. they 
did their best to testify to her character, and show considerable 
anxiety as to the verdict of the jury. 

but what seem to have been fatal to the woman was the evidence of the 
then proprietor of castringham hall--sir matthew fell. he depose to 
have watch her on three different occasion from his window, at the 
full of the moon, gathering sprig 'from the ash-tree near my house'. she 
had climb into the branches, clad only in her shift, and was cutting 
off small twig with a peculiarly curve knife, and as she did so she 
seem to be talk to herself. on each occasion sir matthew had done 
his best to capture the woman, but she had always taken alarm at some 
accidental noise he had made, and all he could see when he got down to 
the garden was a hare running across the path in the direction of the 
village. 

on the third night he had been at the pains to follow at his best speed, 
and had gone straight to mrs mothersole's house; but he had had to wait a 
quarter of an hour batter at her door, and then she had come out very 
cross, and apparently very sleepy, as if just out of bed; and he had no 
good explanation to offer of his visit. 

mainly on this evidence, though there was much more of a less striking 
and unusual kind from other parishioners, mrs mothersole was found guilty 
and condemn to die. she was hang a week after the trial, with five or 
six more unhappy creatures, at bury st edmunds. 

sir matthew fell, then deputy-sheriff, was present at the execution. it 
was a damp, drizzle march morning when the cart made its way up the rough 
grass hill outside northgate, where the gallows stood. the other victim 
were apathetic or broken down with misery; but mrs mothersole was, as in 
life so in death, of a very different temper. her 'poysonous rage', as a 
reporter of the time put it, 'did so work upon the bystanders--yea, even 
upon the hangman--that it was constant affirm of all that saw her 
that she present the living aspect of a mad divell. yet she offer'd no 
resistance to the officer of the law; one she look upon those that 
laid hand upon her with so direfull and venomous an aspect that--as one 
of them afterwards assured me--the meer thought of it prey inward 
upon his mind for six month after.' 

however, all that she is report to have said were the seemingly 
meaningless words: 'there will be guest at the hall.' which she repeated 
more than once in an undertone. 

sir matthew fell was not unimpress by the bearing of the woman. he had 
some talk upon the matter with the vicar of his parish, with whom he 
travelled home after the assize business was over. his evidence at the 
trial had not been very willing given; he was not specially infect 
with the witch-finding mania, but he declared, then and afterwards, that 
he could not give any other account of the matter than that he had given, 
and that he could not possibly have been mistaken as to what he saw. the 
whole transaction had been repugnant to him, for he was a man who like 
to be on pleasant terms with those about him; but he saw a duty to be 
done in this business, and he had done it. that seem to have been the 
gist of his sentiments, and the vicar applaud it, as any reasonable man 
must have done. 

a few week after, when the moon of may was at the full, vicar and squire 
met again in the park, and walk to the hall together. lady fell was 
with her mother, who was dangerous ill, and sir matthew was alone at 
home; so the vicar, mr crome, was easily persuade to take a late supper 
at the hall. 

sir matthew was not very good company this evening. the talk ran chiefly 
on family and parish matters, and, as luck would have it, sir matthew 
made a memorandum in writing of certain wish or intentions of his 
regarding his estates, which afterwards prove exceedingly useful. 

when mr crome thought of start for home, about half past nine o'clock, 
sir matthew and he took a preliminary turn on the gravel walk at the 
back of the house. the only incident that struck mr crome was this: they 
were in sight of the ash-tree which i describe as grow near the 
window of the building, when sir matthew stop and said: 

'what is that that runs up and down the stem of the ash? it is never a 
squirrel? they will all be in their nest by now.' 

the vicar look and saw the moving creature, but he could make nothing 
of its colour in the moonlight. the sharp outline, however, seen for an 
instant, was imprint on his brain, and he could have sworn, he said, 
though it sound foolish, that, squirrel or not, it had more than four 
legs. 

still, not much was to be made of the momentary vision, and the two men 
parted. they may have met since then, but it was not for a score of 
years. 

next day sir matthew fell was not downstairs at six in the morning, as 
was his custom, nor at seven, nor yet at eight. hereupon the servant 
went and knock at his chamber door. i need not prolong the description 
of their anxious listen and renew batter on the panels. the 
door was open at last from the outside, and they found their master 
dead and black. so much you have guessed. that there were any mark of 
violence did not at the moment appear; but the window was open. 

one of the men went to fetch the parson, and then by his directions rode 
on to give notice to the coroner. mr crome himself went as quick as he 
might to the hall, and was shown to the room where the dead man lay. he 
has left some note among his papers which show how genuine a respect and 
sorrow was felt for sir matthew, and there is also this passage, which i 
transcribe for the sake of the light it throw upon the course of events, 
and also upon the common belief of the time: 

'there was not any the least trace of an entrance have been forc'd to 
the chamber: but the case stood open, as my poor friend would always 
have it in this season. he had his evening drink of small ale in a silver 
vessel of about a pint measure, and tonight had not drunk it out. this 
drink was examine by the physician from bury, a mr hodgkins, who could 
not, however, as he afterwards declar'd upon his oath, before the 
coroner's quest, discover that any matter of a venomous kind was present 
in it. for, as was natural, in the great swelling and black of the 
corpse, there was talk made among the neighbour of poyson. the body was 
very much disorder'd as it laid in the bed, being twist after so 
extream a sort as gave too probable conjecture that my worthy friend and 
patron had expir'd in great pain and agony. and what is as yet 
unexplain'd, and to myself the argument of some horrid and artfull 
designe in the perpetrate of this barbarous murther, was this, that the 
women which were entrust with the laying-out of the corpse and washing 
it, being both sad pearson and very well respect in their mournfull 
profession, came to me in a great pain and distress both of mind and 
body, saying, what was indeed confirmed upon the first view, that they 
had no soon touch'd the breast of the corpse with their naked hand 
than they were sensible of a more than ordinary violent smart and ache 
in their palms, which, with their whole forearms, in no long time swell'd 
so immoderately, the pain still continuing, that, as afterwards proved, 
during many week they were forc'd to lay by the exercise of their 
calling; and yet no mark seen on the skin. 

'upon hearing this, i sent for the physician, who was still in the house, 
and we made as carefull a proof as we were able by the help of a small 
magnify lens of crystal of the condition of the skinn on this part of 
the body: but could not detect with the instrument we had any matter of 
importance beyond a couple of small puncture or pricks, which we then 
conclude were the spott by which the poyson might be introduced, 
remember that ring of _pope borgia_, with other known specimen of the 
horrid art of the italy poysoner of the last age. 

'so much is to be said of the symptom seen on the corpse. as to what i 
am to add, it is meer my own experiment, and to be left to posterity to 
judge whether there be anything of value therein. there was on the table 
by the beddside a bible of the small size, in which my friend--punctuall 
as in matter of less moment, so in this more weighty one--used nightly, 
and upon his first rising, to read a sett portion. and i taking it 
up--not without a tear duly paid to him wich from the study of this 
poor adumbrate was now pass'd to the contemplation of its great 
originall--it came into my thoughts, as at such moments of helpless 
we are prone to catch at any the least glimmer that make promise of 
light, to make trial of that old and by many account superstitious 
practice of drawing the _sortes;_ of which a principall instance, in the 
case of his late sacred majesty the blessed martyr king _charles_ and my 
lord _falkland_, was now much talk of. i must needs admit that by my 
trial not much assistance was afford me: yet, as the cause and origin 
of these dreadfull event may hereafter be search'd out, i set down the 
results, in the case it may be found that they pointed the true quarter 
of the mischief to a quick intelligence than my own. 

'i made, then, three trials, opening the book and place my finger upon 
certain words: which gave in the first these words, from luke xiii. 7, 
_cut it down_; in the second, isaiah xiii. 20, _it shall never be 
inhabited_; and upon the third experiment, job xxxix. 30, _her young one 
also suck up blood_.' 

this is all that need be quote from mr crome's papers. sir matthew fell 
was duly coffin and laid into the earth, and his funeral sermon, 
preach by mr crome on the following sunday, has been print under the 
title of 'the unsearchable way; or, england's danger and the malicious 
dealings of antichrist', it being the vicar's view, as well as that most 
commonly held in the neighbourhood, that the squire was the victim of a 
recrudescence of the popish plot. 

his son, sir matthew the second, succeed to the title and estates. and 
so end the first act of the castringham tragedy. it is to be mentioned, 
though the fact is not surprising, that the new baronet did not occupy 
the room in which his father had died. nor, indeed, was it slept in by 
anyone but an occasional visitor during the whole of his occupation. he 
die in 1735, and i do not find that anything particular marked his 
reign, save a curious constant mortality among his cattle and 
live-stock in general, which show a tendency to increase slightly as 
time went on. 

those who are interested in the detail will find a statistic account 
in a letter to the _gentleman's magazine_ of 1772, which draw the fact 
from the baronet's own papers. he put an end to it at last by a very 
simple expedient, that of shut up all his beast in shed at night, 
and keeping no sheep in his park. for he had notice that nothing was 
ever attack that spent the night indoors. after that the disorder 
confine itself to wild birds, and beast of chase. but as we have no 
good account of the symptoms, and as all-night watch was quite 
unproductive of any clue, i do not dwell on what the suffolk farmer 
call the 'castringham sickness'. 

the second sir matthew die in 1735, as i said, and was duly succeed by 
his son, sir richard. it was in his time that the great family pew was 
built out on the north side of the parish church. so large were the 
squire's idea that several of the grave on that unhallowed side of the 
building had to be disturbed to satisfy his requirements. among them was 
that of mrs mothersole, the position of which was accurate known, 
thanks to a note on a plan of the church and yard, both made by mr crome. 

a certain amount of interest was excited in the village when it was known 
that the famous witch, who was still remember by a few, was to be 
exhumed. and the feeling of surprise, and indeed disquiet, was very 
strong when it was found that, though her coffin was fairly sound and 
unbroken, there was no trace whatever inside it of body, bones, or dust. 
indeed, it is a curious phenomenon, for at the time of her bury no 
such things were dreamt of as resurrection-men, and it is difficult to 
conceive any rational motive for steal a body otherwise than for the 
use of the dissecting-room. 

the incident revive for a time all the story of witch-trials and of 
the exploit of the witches, dormant for forty years, and sir richard's 
orders that the coffin should be burnt were thought by a good many to be 
rather foolhardy, though they were duly carry out. 

sir richard was a pestilent innovator, it is certain. before his time the 
hall had been a fine block of the mellowest red brick; but sir richard 
had travelled in italy and become infect with the italy taste, and, 
have more money than his predecessors, he determined to leave an 
italy palace where he had found an english house. so stucco and ashlar 
masked the brick; some indifferent roman marbles were plant about in 
the entrance-hall and gardens; a reproduction of the sibyl's temple at 
tivoli was erect on the opposite bank of the mere; and castringham took 
on an entire new, and, i must say, a less engaging, aspect. but it was 
much admired, and serve as a model to a good many of the neighbouring 
gentry in after-years. 

* * * * * 

one morning (it was in 1754) sir richard woke after a night of 
discomfort. it had been windy, and his chimney had smoke persistently, 
and yet it was so cold that he must keep up a fire. also something had so 
rattle about the window that no man could get a moment's peace. further, 
there was the prospect of several guest of position arrive in the 
course of the day, who would expect sport of some kind, and the inroad 
of the distemper (which continue among his game) had been lately so 
serious that he was afraid for his reputation as a game-preserver. but 
what really touched him most nearly was the other matter of his sleepless 
night. he could certainly not sleep in that room again. 

that was the chief subject of his meditation at breakfast, and after it 
he began a systematic examination of the rooms to see which would suit 
his notions best. it was long before he found one. this had a window with 
an eastern aspect and that with a northern; this door the servant would 
be always passing, and he did not like the bedstead in that. no, he must 
have a room with a western look-out, so that the sun could not wake him 
early, and it must be out of the way of the business of the house. the 
housekeeper was at the end of her resources. 

'well, sir richard,' she said, 'you know that there is but the one room 
like that in the house.' 

'which may that be?' said sir richard. 

'and that is sir matthew's--the west chamber.' 

'well, put me in there, for there i'll lie tonight,' said her master. 
'which way is it? here, to be sure'; and he hurried off. 

'oh, sir richard, but no one has slept there these forty years. the air 
has hardly been change since sir matthew die there.' 

thus she spoke, and rustle after him. 

'come, open the door, mrs chiddock. i'll see the chamber, at least.' 

so it was opened, and, indeed, the smell was very close and earthy. sir 
richard cross to the window, and, impatiently, as was his wont, threw 
the shutter back, and flung open the casement. for this end of the house 
was one which the alteration had barely touched, grown up as it was with 
the great ash-tree, and being otherwise conceal from view. 

'air it, mrs chiddock, all today, and move my bed-furniture in in the 
afternoon. put the bishop of kilmore in my old room.' 

'pray, sir richard,' said a new voice, break in on this speech, 'might 
i have the favour of a moment's interview?' 

sir richard turn round and saw a man in black in the doorway, who 
bowed. 

'i must ask your indulgence for this intrusion, sir richard. you will, 
perhaps, hardly remember me. my name is william crome, and my grandfather 
was vicar in your grandfather's time.' 

'well, sir,' said sir richard, 'the name of crome is always a passport to 
castringham. i am glad to renew a friendship of two generations' 
standing. in what can i serve you? for your hour of calling--and, if i do 
not mistake you, your bearing--shows you to be in some haste.' 

'that is no more than the truth, sir. i am riding from norwich to bury st 
edmund with what haste i can make, and i have call in on my way to 
leave with you some papers which we have but just come upon in look 
over what my grandfather left at his death. it is thought you may find 
some matter of family interest in them.' 

'you are mighty obliging, mr crome, and, if you will be so good as to 
follow me to the parlour, and drink a glass of wine, we will take a first 
look at these same papers together. and you, mrs chiddock, as i said, be 
about airing this chamber.... yes, it is here my grandfather died.... 
yes, the tree, perhaps, do make the place a little dampish.... no; i do 
not wish to listen to any more. make no difficulties, i beg. you have 
your orders--go. will you follow me, sir?' 

they went to the study. the packet which young mr crome had brought--he 
was then just become a fellow of clare hall in cambridge, i may say, and 
subsequent brought out a respectable edition of polyaenus--contained 
among other things the note which the old vicar had made upon the 
occasion of sir matthew fell's death. and for the first time sir richard 
was confront with the enigmatic _sortes biblicae_ which you have 
heard. they amuse him a good deal. 

'well,' he said, 'my grandfather's bible gave one prudent piece of 
advice--_cut it down_. if that stand for the ash-tree, he may rest 
assured i shall not neglect it. such a nest of catarrh and ague was 
never seen.' 

the parlour contained the family books, which, pending the arrival of a 
collection which sir richard had made in italy, and the building of a 
proper room to receive them, were not many in number. 

sir richard look up from the paper to the bookcase. 

'i wonder,' say he, 'whether the old prophet is there yet? i fancy i see 
him.' 

crossing the room, he took out a dumpy bible, which, sure enough, bore on 
the flyleaf the inscription: 'to matthew fell, from his loving godmother, 
anne aldous, 2 september 1659.' 

'it would be no bad plan to test him again, mr crome. i will wager we get 
a couple of name in the chronicles. h'm! what have we here? "thou shalt 
seek me in the morning, and i shall not be." well, well! your grandfather 
would have made a fine omen of that, hey? no more prophets for me! they 
are all in a tale. and now, mr crome, i am infinite oblige to you for 
your packet. you will, i fear, be impatient to get on. pray allow 
me--another glass.' 

so with offer of hospitality, which were genuine meant (for sir 
richard thought well of the young man's address and manner), they parted. 

in the afternoon came the guests--the bishop of kilmore, lady mary 
hervey, sir william kentfield, etc. dinner at five, wine, cards, supper, 
and dispersal to bed. 

next morning sir richard is disinclined to take his gun with the rest. he 
talks with the bishop of kilmore. this prelate, unlike a good many of the 
ireland bishop of his day, had visit his see, and, indeed, reside 
there, for some considerable time. this morning, as the two were walking 
along the terrace and talk over the alteration and improvement in 
the house, the bishop said, point to the window of the west room: 

'you could never get one of my ireland flock to occupy that room, sir 
richard.' 

'why is that, my lord? it is, in fact, my own.' 

'well, our ireland peasantry will always have it that it bring the worst 
of luck to sleep near an ash-tree, and you have a fine growth of ash not 
two yard from your chamber window. perhaps,' the bishop went on, with a 
smile, 'it has given you a touch of its quality already, for you do not 
seem, if i may say it, so much the fresher for your night's rest as your 
friends would like to see you.' 

'that, or something else, it is true, cost me my sleep from twelve to 
four, my lord. but the tree is to come down tomorrow, so i shall not hear 
much more from it.' 

'i applaud your determination. it can hardly be wholesome to have the air 
you breathe strained, as it were, through all that leafage.' 

'your lordship is right there, i think. but i had not my window open last 
night. it was rather the noise that went on--no doubt from the twig 
sweeping the glass--that kept me open-eyed.' 

'i think that can hardly be, sir richard. here--you see it from this 
point. none of these nearest branch even can touch your case unless 
there were a gale, and there was none of that last night. they miss the 
pane by a foot.' 

'no, sir, true. what, then, will it be, i wonder, that scratch and 
rustle so--ay, and cover the dust on my sill with lines and marks?' 

at last they agree that the rats must have come up through the ivy. that 
was the bishop's idea, and sir richard jump at it. 

so the day pass quietly, and night came, and the party disperse to 
their rooms, and wish sir richard a better night. 

and now we are in his bedroom, with the light out and the squire in bed. 
the room is over the kitchen, and the night outside still and warm, so 
the window stand open. 

there is very little light about the bedstead, but there is a strange 
movement there; it seem as if sir richard were moving his head rapid 
to and fro with only the slightest possible sound. and now you would 
guess, so deceptive is the half-darkness, that he had several heads, 
round and brownish, which move back and forward, even as low as his 
chest. it is a horrible illusion. is it nothing more? there! something 
drops off the bed with a soft plump, like a kitten, and is out of the 
window in a flash; another--four--and after that there is quiet again. 

_thou shall seek me in the morning, and i shall not be._ 

as with sir matthew, so with sir richard--dead and black in his bed! 

a pale and silent party of guest and servant gather under the window 
when the news was known. italy poisoners, popish emissaries, infect 
air--all these and more guess were hazarded, and the bishop of kilmore 
look at the tree, in the fork of whose lower bough a white tom-cat was 
crouching, look down the hollow which years had gnaw in the trunk. 
it was watch something inside the tree with great interest. 

sudden it got up and crane over the hole. then a bit of the edge on 
which it stood gave way, and it went slither in. everyone look up at 
the noise of the fall. 

it is known to most of us that a cat can cry; but few of us have heard, i 
hope, such a yell as came out of the trunk of the great ash. two or three 
scream there were--the witness are not sure which--and then a slight 
and muffle noise of some commotion or struggle was all that came. but 
lady mary hervey faint outright, and the housekeeper stop her ear 
and flee till she fell on the terrace. 

the bishop of kilmore and sir william kentfield stayed. yet even they 
were daunted, though it was only at the cry of a cat; and sir william 
swallow once or twice before he could say: 

'there is something more than we know of in that tree, my lord. i am for 
an instant search.' 

and this was agree upon. a ladder was brought, and one of the garden 
went up, and, look down the hollow, could detect nothing but a few dim 
indication of something moving. they got a lantern, and let it down by a 
rope. 

'we must get at the bottom of this. my life upon it, my lord, but the 
secret of these terrible death is there.' 

up went the garden again with the lantern, and let it down the hole 
cautiously. they saw the yellow light upon his face as he bent over, and 
saw his face struck with an incredulous terror and loathing before he 
cry out in a dreadful voice and fell back from the ladder--where, 
happily, he was caught by two of the men--letting the lantern fall inside 
the tree. 

he was in a dead faint, and it was some time before any word could be got 
from him. 

by then they had something else to look at. the lantern must have broken 
at the bottom, and the light in it caught upon dry leaves and rubbish 
that lay there for in a few minutes a dense smoke began to come up, and 
then flame; and, to be short, the tree was in a blaze. 

the bystander made a ring at some yards' distance, and sir william and 
the bishop sent men to get what weapon and tool they could; for, 
clearly, whatever might be use the tree as its lair would be forced out 
by the fire. 

so it was. first, at the fork, they saw a round body cover with 
fire--the size of a man's head--appear very suddenly, then seem to 
collapse and fall back. this, five or six times; then a similar ball 
leapt into the air and fell on the grass, where after a moment it lay 
still. the bishop went as near as he dare to it, and saw--what but the 
remains of an enormous spider, veinous and seared! and, as the fire 
burn lower down, more terrible body like this began to break out from 
the trunk, and it was seen that these were cover with greyish hair. 

all that day the ash burned, and until it fell to pieces the men stood 
about it, and from time to time kill the brute as they dart out. at 
last there was a long interval when none appeared, and they cautious 
closed in and examine the roots of the tree. 

'they found,' say the bishop of kilmore, 'below it a round hollow 
place in the earth, wherein were two or three body of these creature 
that had plainly been smother by the smoke; and, what is to me more 
curious, at the side of this den, against the wall, was crouch the 
anatomy or skeleton of a human being, with the skin dry upon the bones, 
have some remains of black hair, which was pronounced by those that 
examine it to be undoubted the body of a woman, and clearly dead for a 
period of fifty years.' 




number 13 

among the town of jutland, viborg just hold a high place. it is the 
seat of a bishopric; it has a handsome but almost entire new cathedral, 
a charming garden, a lake of great beauty, and many storks. near it is 
hald, account one of the prettiest things in denmark; and hard by is 
finderup, where marsk stig murder king erik glipp on st cecilia's 
day, in the year 1286. fifty-six blow of square-headed iron mace were 
trace on erik's skull when his tomb was open in the seventeenth 
century. but i am not writing a guide-book. 

there are good hotel in viborg--preisler's and the phoenix are all that 
can be desired. but my cousin, whose experience i have to tell you now, 
went to the golden lion the first time that he visit viborg. he has not 
been there since, and the following page will, perhaps, explain the 
reason of his abstention. 

the golden lion is one of the very few house in the town that were not 
destroy in the great fire of 1726, which practically demolish the 
cathedral, the sognekirke, the raadhuus, and so much else that was old 
and interesting. it is a great red-brick house--that is, the front is of 
brick, with corbie steps on the gable and a text over the door; but the 
courtyard into which the omnibus drive is of black and white wood and 
plaster. 

the sun was decline in the heaven when my cousin walk up to the 
door, and the light smote full upon the imposing façade of the house. he 
was delight with the old-fashioned aspect of the place, and promise 
himself a thorough satisfactory and amuse stay in an inn so typical 
of old jutland. 

it was not business in the ordinary sense of the word that had brought mr 
anderson to viborg. he was engaged upon some research into the church 
history of denmark, and it had come to his knowledge that in the 
rigsarkiv of viborg there were papers, save from the fire, relate to 
the last days of roman catholicism in the country. he proposed, 
therefore, to spend a considerable time--perhaps as much as a fortnight 
or three weeks--in examine and copy these, and he hope that the 
golden lion would be able to give him a room of sufficient size to serve 
alike as a bedroom and a study. his wish were explain to the 
landlord, and, after a certain amount of thought, the latter suggest 
that perhaps it might be the best way for the gentleman to look at one or 
two of the large rooms and pick one for himself. it seem a good idea. 

the top floor was soon reject as entail too much get upstairs 
after the day's work; the second floor contained no room of exactly the 
dimensions required; but on the first floor there was a choice of two or 
three rooms which would, so far as size went, suit admirably. 

the landlord was strong in favour of number 17, but mr anderson pointed 
out that its window command only the blank wall of the next house, and 
that it would be very dark in the afternoon. either number 12 or number 
14 would be better, for both of them look on the street, and the bright 
evening light and the pretty view would more than compensate him for the 
additional amount of noise. 

eventually number 12 was selected. like its neighbours, it had three 
windows, all on one side of the room; it was fairly high and unusually 
long. there was, of course, no fireplace, but the stove was handsome and 
rather old--a cast-iron erection, on the side of which was a 
representation of abraham sacrifice isaac, and the inscription, 'i bog 
mose, cap. 22,' above. nothing else in the room was remarkable; the only 
interesting picture was an old coloured print of the town, date about 
1820. 

supper-time was approaching, but when anderson, refresh by the ordinary 
ablutions, descended the staircase, there were still a few minutes before 
the bell rang. he devoted them to examine the list of his 
fellow-lodgers. as is usual in denmark, their name were display on a 
large blackboard, divide into column and lines, the numbers of the 
rooms being paint in at the beginning of each line. the list was not 
exciting. there was an advocate, or sagförer, a german, and some bagmen 
from copenhagen. the one and only point which suggest any food for 
thought was the absence of any number 13 from the tale of the rooms, and 
even this was a thing which anderson had already notice half a dozen 
times in his experience of denmark hotels. he could not help wonder 
whether the objection to that particular number, common as it is, was so 
widespread and so strong as to make it difficult to let a room so 
ticketed, and he resolve to ask the landlord if he and his colleague in 
the profession had actually met with many client who refuse to be 
accommodate in the thirteenth room. 

he had nothing to tell me (i am give the story as i heard it from him) 
about what pass at supper, and the evening, which was spent in 
unpack and arrange his clothes, books, and papers, was not more 
eventful. towards eleven o'clock he resolve to go to bed, but with him, 
as with a good many other people nowadays, an almost necessary 
preliminary to bed, if he meant to sleep, was the reading of a few page 
of print, and he now remember that the particular book which he had 
been reading in the train, and which alone would satisfy him at that 
present moment, was in the pocket of his great-coat, then hanging on a 
peg outside the dining-room. 

to run down and secure it was the work of a moment, and, as the passage 
were by no means dark, it was not difficult for him to find his way back 
to his own door. so, at least, he thought; but when he arrive there, and 
turn the handle, the door entire refuse to open, and he caught the 
sound of a hasty movement towards it from within. he had try the wrong 
door, of course. was his own room to the right or to the left? he glance 
at the number: it was 13. his room would be on the left; and so it was. 
and not before he had been in bed for some minutes, had read his wonted 
three or four page of his book, blown out his light, and turn over to 
go to sleep, did it occur to him that, whereas on the blackboard of the 
hotel there had been no number 13, there was undoubted a room number 
13 in the hotel. he felt rather sorry he had not chosen it for his own. 
perhaps he might have done the landlord a little service by occupy it, 
and given him the chance of saying that a well-born english gentleman had 
live in it for three week and like it very much. but probably it was 
use as a servant's room or something of the kind. after all, it was most 
likely not so large or good a room as his own. and he look drowsy 
about the room, which was fairly perceptible in the half-light from the 
street-lamp. it was a curious effect, he thought. rooms usually look 
large in a dim light than a full one, but this seem to have contract 
in length and grown proportionate higher. well, well! sleep was more 
important than these vague ruminations--and to sleep he went. 

on the day after his arrival anderson attack the rigsarkiv of viborg. 
he was, as one might expect in denmark, kindly received, and access to 
all that he wish to see was made as easy for him as possible. the 
document laid before him were far more numerous and interesting than he 
had at all anticipated. besides official papers, there was a large bundle 
of correspondence relate to bishop jörgen friis, the last roman 
catholic who held the see, and in these there crop up many amuse and 
what are call 'intimate' detail of private life and individual 
character. there was much talk of a house own by the bishop, but not 
inhabit by him, in the town. its tenant was apparently somewhat of a 
scandal and a stumbling-block to the reform party. he was a disgrace, 
they wrote, to the city; he practised secret and wicked arts, and had 
sold his soul to the enemy. it was of a piece with the gross corruption 
and superstition of the babylonish church that such a viper and 
blood-sucking _troldmand_ should be patronize and harbour by the 
bishop. the bishop met these reproach boldly; he protest his own 
abhorrence of all such things as secret arts, and require his 
antagonist to bring the matter before the proper court--of course, the 
spiritual court--and sift it to the bottom. no one could be more ready 
and willing than himself to condemn mag nicola francken if the evidence 
show him to have been guilty of any of the crime informal allege 
against him. 

anderson had not time to do more than glance at the next letter of the 
protestant leader, rasmu nielsen, before the record office was closed 
for the day, but he gather its general tenor, which was to the effect 
that christian men were now no long bound by the decision of bishop 
of rome, and that the bishop's court was not, and could not be, a fit or 
competent tribunal to judge so grave and weighty a cause. 

on leave the office, mr anderson was accompany by the old gentleman 
who preside over it, and, as they walked, the conversation very 
naturally turn to the papers of which i have just been speaking. 

herr scavenius, the archivist of viborg, though very well informed as to 
the general run of the document under his charge, was not a specialist 
in those of the reformation period. he was much interested in what 
anderson had to tell him about them. he look forward with great 
pleasure, he said, to seeing the publication in which mr anderson spoke 
of embody their contents. 'this house of the bishop friis,' he added, 
'it is a great puzzle to me where it can have stood. i have studied 
careful the topography of old viborg, but it is most unlucky--of the 
old terrier of the bishop's property which was made in 1560, and of which 
we have the greater part in the arkiv--just the piece which had the list 
of the town property is missing. never mind. perhaps i shall some day 
succeed to find him.' 

after taking some exercise--i forget exactly how or where--anderson went 
back to the golden lion, his supper, his game of patience, and his bed. 
on the way to his room it occur to him that he had forgotten to talk 
to the landlord about the omission of number 13 from the hotel board, and 
also that he might as well make sure that number 13 did actually exist 
before he made any reference to the matter. 

the decision was not difficult to arrive at. there was the door with its 
number as plain as could be, and work of some kind was evidently go on 
inside it, for as he near the door he could hear footstep and voices, 
or a voice, within. during the few seconds in which he halt to make 
sure of the number, the footstep ceased, seemingly very near the door, 
and he was a little startle at hearing a quick hiss breathing as of a 
person in strong excitement. he went on to his own room, and again he was 
surprise to find how much small it seem now than it had when he 
select it. it was a slight disappointment, but only slight. if he found 
it really not large enough, he could very easily shift to another. in the 
meantime he want something--as far as i remember it was a 
pocket-handkerchief--out of his portmanteau, which had been placed by the 
porter on a very inadequate trestle or stool against the wall at the 
farthest end of the room from his bed. here was a very curious thing: the 
portmanteau was not to be seen. it had been move by officious servants; 
doubtless the contents had been put in the wardrobe. no, none of them 
were there. this was vexatious. the idea of a theft he dismiss at once. 
such things rarely happen in denmark, but some piece of stupidity had 
certainly been perform (which is not so uncommon), and the _stuepige_ 
must be severe spoken to. whatever it was that he wanted, it was not so 
necessary to his comfort that he could not wait till the morning for it, 
and he therefore settled not to ring the bell and disturb the servants. 
he went to the window--the right-hand window it was--and look out on 
the quiet street. there was a tall building opposite, with large space 
of dead wall; no passers-by; a dark night; and very little to be seen of 
any kind. 

the light was behind him, and he could see his own shadow clearly cast on 
the wall opposite. also the shadow of the bearded man in number 11 on the 
left, who pass to and fro in shirtsleeve once or twice, and was seen 
first brush his hair, and later on in a nightgown. also the shadow of 
the occupant of number 13 on the right. this might be more interesting. 
number 13 was, like himself, leaning on his elbow on the window-sill 
look out into the street. he seem to be a tall thin man--or was it 
by any chance a woman?--at least, it was someone who cover his or her 
head with some kind of drapery before go to bed, and, he thought, must 
be possessed of a red lamp-shade--and the lamp must be flicker very 
much. there was a distinct play up and down of a dull red light on the 
opposite wall. he crane out a little to see if he could make any more of 
the figure, but beyond a fold of some light, perhaps white, material on 
the window-sill he could see nothing. 

now came a distant step in the street, and its approach seem to recall 
number 13 to a sense of his expose position, for very swift and 
sudden he swept aside from the window, and his red light went out. 
anderson, who had been smoking a cigarette, laid the end of it on the 
window-sill and went to bed. 

next morning he was woken by the _stuepige_ with hot water, etc. he 
rouse himself, and after thinking out the correct denmark words, said as 
distinct as he could: 

'you must not move my portmanteau. where is it?' 

as is not uncommon, the maid laughed, and went away without making any 
distinct answer. 

anderson, rather irritated, sat up in bed, intend to call her back, 
but he remain sitting up, staring straight in front of him. there was 
his portmanteau on its trestle, exactly where he had seen the porter put 
it when he first arrived. this was a rude shock for a man who pride 
himself on his accuracy of observation. how it could possibly have 
escape him the night before he did not pretend to understand; at any 
rate, there it was now. 

the daylight show more than the portmanteau; it let the true 
proportions of the room with its three window appear, and satisfy its 
tenant that his choice after all had not been a bad one. when he was 
almost dress he walk to the middle one of the three window to look 
out at the weather. another shock await him. strange unobservant he 
must have been last night. he could have sworn ten times over that he had 
been smoking at the right-hand window the last thing before he went to 
bed, and here was his cigarette-end on the sill of the middle window. 

he start to go down to breakfast. rather late, but number 13 was later: 
here were his boots still outside his door--a gentleman's boots. so then 
number 13 was a man, not a woman. just then he caught sight of the number 
on the door. it was 14. he thought he must have pass number 13 without 
notice it. three stupid mistake in twelve hour were too much for a 
methodical, accurate-minded man, so he turn back to make sure. the next 
number to 14 was number 12, his own room. there was no number 13 at all. 

after some minutes devoted to a careful consideration of everything he 
had had to eat and drink during the last twenty-four hours, anderson 
decided to give the question up. if his eyes or his brain were give way 
he would have plenty of opportunity for ascertain that fact; if not, 
then he was evidently being treat to a very interesting experience. in 
either case the development of event would certainly be worth watching. 

during the day he continue his examination of the episcopal 
correspondence which i have already summarized. to his disappointment, it 
was incomplete. only one other letter could be found which refer to 
the affair of mag nicola francken. it was from the bishop jörgen frii 
to rasmu nielsen. he said: 

'although we are not in the least degree inclined to assent to your 
judgement concerning our court, and shall be prepared if need be to 
withstand you to the uttermost in that behalf, yet forasmuch as our 
trusty and well-beloved mag nicola francken, against whom you have dare 
to allege certain false and malicious charges, hath been sudden remove 
from among us, it is apparent that the question for this time falls. but 
forasmuch as you further allege that the apostle and evangelist st john 
in his heavenly apocalypse describe the holy roman church under the 
guise and symbol of the scarlet woman, be it known to you,' etc. 

search as he might, anderson could find no sequel to this letter nor any 
clue to the cause or manner of the 'removal' of the _casus belli_. he 
could only suppose that francken had die suddenly; and as there were 
only two days between the date of nielsen's last letter--when francken 
was evidently still in being--and that of the bishop's letter, the death 
must have been completely unexpected. 

in the afternoon he paid a short visit to hald, and took his tea at 
baekkelund; nor could he notice, though he was in a somewhat nervous 
frame of mind, that there was any indication of such a failure of eye or 
brain as his experience of the morning had led him to fear. 

at supper he found himself next to the landlord. 

'what,' he ask him, after some indifferent conversation, 'is the reason 
why in most of the hotel one visit in this country the number thirteen 
is left out of the list of rooms? i see you have none here.' 

the landlord seem amused. 

'to think that you should have notice a thing like that! i've thought 
about it once or twice myself, to tell the truth. an educated man, i've 
said, has no business with these superstitious notions. i was brought up 
myself here in the high school of viborg, and our old master was always a 
man to set his face against anything of that kind. he's been dead now 
this many years--a fine upstanding man he was, and ready with his hand 
as well as his head. i recollect us boys, one snowy day--' 

here he plunge into reminiscence. 

'then you don't think there is any particular objection to have a 
number 13?' said anderson. 

'ah! to be sure. well, you understand, i was brought up to the business 
by my poor old father. he kept an hotel in aarhuu first, and then, when 
we were born, he move to viborg here, which was his native place, and 
had the phoenix here until he died. that was in 1876. then i start 
business in silkeborg, and only the year before last i move into this 
house.' 

then follow more detail as to the state of the house and business when 
first taken over. 

'and when you came here, was there a number 13?' 

'no, no. i was go to tell you about that. you see, in a place like 
this, the commercial class--the travellers--are what we have to provide 
for in general. and put them in number 13? why, they'd as soon sleep in 
the street, or sooner. as far as i'm concerned myself, it wouldn't make a 
penny difference to me what the number of my room was, and so i've often 
said to them; but they stick to it that it bring them bad luck. 
quantity of story they have among them of men that have slept in a 
number 13 and never been the same again, or lost their best customers, 
or--one thing and another,' said the landlord, after searching for a more 
graphic phrase. 

'then what do you use your number 13 for?' said anderson, conscious as he 
said the words of a curious anxiety quite disproportionate to the 
importance of the question. 

'my number 13? why, don't i tell you that there isn't such a thing in the 
house? i thought you might have notice that. if there was it would be 
next door to your own room.' 

'well, yes; only i happen to think--that is, i fancy last night that 
i had seen a door number thirteen in that passage; and, really, i am 
almost certain i must have been right, for i saw it the night before as 
well.' 

of course, herr kristensen laugh this notion to scorn, as anderson had 
expected, and emphasize with much iterate the fact that no number 13 
exist or had exist before him in that hotel. 

anderson was in some ways relieved by his certainty, but still puzzled, 
and he began to think that the best way to make sure whether he had 
indeed been subject to an illusion or not was to invite the landlord to 
his room to smoke a cigar later on in the evening. some photograph of 
english town which he had with him form a sufficient good excuse. 

herr kristensen was flatter by the invitation, and most willing 
accept it. at about ten o'clock he was to make his appearance, but 
before that anderson had some letters to write, and retired for the 
purpose of writing them. he almost blush to himself at confess it, 
but he could not deny that it was the fact that he was becoming quite 
nervous about the question of the existence of number 13; so much so that 
he approach his room by way of number 11, in order that he might not be 
oblige to pass the door, or the place where the door ought to be. he 
look quick and suspicious about the room when he enter it, but 
there was nothing, beyond that indefinable air of being small than 
usual, to warrant any misgivings. there was no question of the presence 
or absence of his portmanteau tonight. he had himself empty it of its 
contents and lodge it under his bed. with a certain effort he dismiss 
the thought of number 13 from his mind, and sat down to his writing. 

his neighbour were quiet enough. occasional a door open in the 
passage and a pair of boots was thrown out, or a bagman walk past 
hum to himself, and outside, from time to time, a cart thunder over 
the atrocious cobble-stones, or a quick step hurried along the flags. 

anderson finished his letters, ordered in whisky and soda, and then went 
to the window and studied the dead wall opposite and the shadow upon it. 

as far as he could remember, number 14 had been occupy by the lawyer, a 
staid man, who said little at meals, being generally engaged in study 
a small bundle of papers beside his plate. apparently, however, he was in 
the habit of give vent to his animal spirits when alone. why else 
should he be dancing? the shadow from the next room evidently show that 
he was. again and again his thin form cross the window, his arms waved, 
and a gaunt leg was kick up with surprising agility. he seem to be 
barefooted, and the floor must be well laid, for no sound betray his 
movements. sagförer herr and jensen, dance at ten o'clock at night 
in a hotel bedroom, seem a fitting subject for a historical painting in 
the grand style; and anderson's thoughts, like those of emily in the 
'mysteries of udolpho', began to 'arrange themselves in the following 
lines': 

when i return to my hotel, 
at ten o'clock p.m., 
the waiter think i am unwell; 
i do not care for them. 
but when i've lock my chamber door, 
and put my boots outside, 
i dance all night upon the floor. 

and even if my neighbour swore, 
i'd go on dance all the more, 
for i'm acquaint with the law, 
and in despite of all their jaw, 
their protest i deride. 

had not the landlord at this moment knock at the door, it is probable 
that quite a long poem might have been laid before the reader. to judge 
from his look of surprise when he found himself in the room, herr 
kristensen was struck, as anderson had been, by something unusual in its 
aspect. but he made no remark. anderson's photograph interested him 
mightily, and form the text of many autobiographical discourses. nor is 
it quite clear how the conversation could have been divert into the 
desire channel of number 13, had not the lawyer at this moment begun to 
sing, and to sing in a manner which could leave no doubt in anyone's mind 
that he was either exceedingly drunk or raving mad. it was a high, thin 
voice that they heard, and it seem dry, as if from long disuse. of 
words or tune there was no question. it went sailing up to a surprising 
height, and was carry down with a despairing moan as of a winter wind 
in a hollow chimney, or an organ whose wind fail suddenly. it was a 
really horrible sound, and anderson felt that if he had been alone he 
must have flee for refuge and society to some neighbour bagman's room. 

the landlord sat open-mouthed. 

'i don't understand it,' he said at last, wipe his forehead. 'it is 
dreadful. i have heard it once before, but i made sure it was a cat.' 

'is he mad?' said anderson. 

'he must be; and what a sad thing! such a good customer, too, and so 
successful in his business, by what i hear, and a young family to bring 
up.' 

just then came an impatient knock at the door, and the knocker entered, 
without wait to be asked. it was the lawyer, in _déshabille_ and very 
rough-haired; and very angry he looked. 

'i beg pardon, sir,' he said, 'but i should be much oblige if you would 
kindly desist--' 

here he stopped, for it was evident that neither of the person before 
him was responsible for the disturbance; and after a moment's lull it 
swell forth again more wildly than before. 

'but what in the name of heaven do it mean?' broke out the lawyer. 
'where is it? who is it? am i go out of my mind?' 

'surely, herr jensen, it come from your room next door? isn't there a 
cat or something stuck in the chimney?' 

this was the best that occur to anderson to say and he realize its 
futility as he spoke; but anything was better than to stand and listen to 
that horrible voice, and look at the broad, white face of the landlord, 
all perspire and quiver as he clutch the arms of his chair. 

'impossible,' said the lawyer, 'impossible. there is no chimney. i came 
here because i was convinced the noise was go on here. it was 
certainly in the next room to mine.' 

'was there no door between yours and mine?' said anderson eagerly. 

'no, sir,' said herr jensen, rather sharply. 'at least, not this 
morning.' 

'ah!' said anderson. 'nor tonight?' 

'i am not sure,' said the lawyer with some hesitation. 

sudden the crying or singing voice in the next room die away, and the 
singe was heard seemingly to laugh to himself in a croon manner. the 
three men actually shiver at the sound. then there was a silence. 

'come,' said the lawyer, 'what have you to say, herr kristensen? what 
do this mean?' 

'good heaven!' said kristensen. 'how should i tell! i know no more than 
you, gentlemen. i pray i may never hear such a noise again.' 

'so do i,' said herr jensen, and he add something under his breath. 
anderson thought it sound like the last words of the psalter, '_omnis 
spiritu laudet dominum_,' but he could not be sure. 

'but we must do something,' said anderson--'the three of us. shall we go 
and investigate in the next room?' 

'but that is herr jensen's room,' wail the landlord. 'it is no use; he 
has come from there himself.' 

'i am not so sure,' said jensen. 'i think this gentleman is right: we 
must go and see.' 

the only weapon of defence that could be muster on the spot were a 
stick and umbrella. the expedition went out into the passage, not without 
quakings. there was a deadly quiet outside, but a light shone from under 
the next door. anderson and jensen approach it. the latter turn the 
handle, and gave a sudden vigorous push. no use. the door stood fast. 

'herr kristensen,' said jensen, 'will you go and fetch the strongest 
servant you have in the place? we must see this through.' 

the landlord nodded, and hurried off, glad to be away from the scene of 
action. jensen and anderson remain outside look at the door. 

'it _is_ number 13, you see,' said the latter. 

'yes; there is your door, and there is mine,' said jensen. 

'my room has three window in the daytime,' said anderson with 
difficulty, suppress a nervous laugh. 

'by george, so has mine!' said the lawyer, turning and look at 
anderson. his back was now to the door. in that moment the door opened, 
and an arm came out and claw at his shoulder. it was clad in ragged, 
yellowish linen, and the bare skin, where it could be seen, had long grey 
hair upon it. 

anderson was just in time to pull jensen out of its reach with a cry of 
disgust and fright, when the door shut again, and a low laugh was heard. 

jensen had seen nothing, but when anderson hurried told him what a risk 
he had run, he fell into a great state of agitation, and suggest that 
they should retire from the enterprise and lock themselves up in one or 
other of their rooms. 

however, while he was develop this plan, the landlord and two 
able-bodied men arrive on the scene, all look rather serious and 
alarmed. jensen met them with a torrent of description and explanation, 
which did not at all tend to encourage them for the fray. 

the men drop the crowbar they had brought, and said flatly that they 
were not go to risk their throat in that devil's den. the landlord 
was miserably nervous and undecided, conscious that if the danger were 
not face his hotel was ruined, and very loth to face it himself. lucky 
anderson hit upon a way of rally the demoralize force. 

'is this,' he said, 'the denmark courage i have heard so much of? it isn't 
a germany in there, and if it was, we are five to one.' 

the two servant and jensen were stung into action by this, and made a 
dash at the door. 

'stop!' said anderson. 'don't lose your heads. you stay out here with the 
light, landlord, and one of you two men break in the door, and don't go 
in when it give way.' 

the men nodded, and the younger step forward, raise his crowbar, and 
dealt a tremendous blow on the upper panel. the result was not in the 
least what any of them anticipated. there was no crack or rend of 
wood--only a dull sound, as if the solid wall had been struck. the man 
drop his tool with a shout, and began rubbing his elbow. his cry drew 
their eyes upon him for a moment; then anderson look at the door again. 
it was gone; the plaster wall of the passage stare him in the face, with 
a considerable gash in it where the crowbar had struck it. number 13 had 
pass out of existence. 

for a brief space they stood perfectly still, gaze at the blank wall. 
an early cock in the yard beneath was heard to crow; and as anderson 
glance in the direction of the sound, he saw through the window at the 
end of the long passage that the eastern sky was paling to the dawn. 

'perhaps,' said the landlord, with hesitation, 'you gentlemen would like 
another room for tonight--a double-bedded one?' 

neither jensen nor anderson was averse to the suggestion. they felt 
inclined to hunt in couple after their late experience. it was found 
convenient, when each of them went to his room to collect the articles he 
want for the night, that the other should go with him and hold the 
candle. they notice that both number 12 and number 14 had _three_ 
windows. 

* * * * * 

next morning the same party reassemble in number 12. the landlord was 
naturally anxious to avoid engaging outside help, and yet it was 
imperative that the mystery attach to that part of the house should be 
clear up. accordingly the two servant had been induce to take upon 
them the function of carpenters. the furniture was clear away, and, at 
the cost of a good many irretrievable damage planks, that portion of the 
floor was taken up which lay nearest to number 14. 

you will naturally suppose that a skeleton--say that of mag nicola 
francken--was discovered. that was not so. what they did find lie 
between the beam which support the flooring was a small copper box. in 
it was a neatly-folded vellum document, with about twenty lines of 
writing. both anderson and jensen (who prove to be something of a 
palaeographer) were much excited by this discovery, which promise to 
afford the key to these extraordinary phenomena. 

* * * * * 

i possess a copy of an astrology work which i have never read. it has, 
by way of frontispiece, a woodcut by han sebald beham, represent a 
number of sage seat round a table. this detail may enable connoisseur 
to identify the book. i cannot myself recollect its title, and it is not 
at this moment within reach; but the fly-leaves of it are cover with 
writing, and, during the ten years in which i have own the volume, i 
have not been able to determine which way up this writing ought to be 
read, much less in what language it is. not dissimilar was the position 
of anderson and jensen after the protract examination to which they 
submit the document in the copper box. 

after two days' contemplation of it, jensen, who was the bold spirit of 
the two, hazard the conjecture that the language was either latin or 
old danish. 

anderson venture upon no surmises, and was very willing to surrender the 
box and the parchment to the historical society of viborg to be placed in 
their museum. 

i had the whole story from him a few month later, as we sat in a wood 
near upsala, after a visit to the library there, where we--or, rather, 
i--had laugh over the contract by which daniel saltheniu (in later 
life professor of hebrew at königsberg) sold himself to satan. anderson 
was not really amused. 

'young idiot!' he said, meaning salthenius, who was only an undergraduate 
when he committed that indiscretion, 'how did he know what company he was 
courting?' 

and when i suggest the usual consideration he only grunted. that same 
afternoon he told me what you have read; but he refuse to draw any 
inference from it, and to assent to any that i drew for him. 




count magnu 

by what means the papers out of which i have made a connected story came 
into my hand is the last point which the reader will learn from these 
pages. but it is necessary to prefix to my extract from them a statement 
of the form in which i possess them. 

they consist, then, partly of a series of collection for a book of 
travels, such a volume as was a common product of the forty and 
fifties. horace marryat's _journal of a residence in jutland and the 
denmark isles_ is a fair specimen of the class to which i allude. these 
books usually treat of some unknown district on the continent. they 
were illustrate with woodcut or steel plates. they gave detail of 
hotel accommodation and of means of communication, such as we now expect 
to find in any well-regulated guide-book, and they dealt largely in 
report conversation with intelligent foreigners, racy innkeepers, and 
garrulous peasants. in a word, they were chatty. 

begun with the idea of furnish material for such a book, my papers as 
they progress assume the character of a record of one single personal 
experience, and this record was continue up to the very eve, almost, of 
its termination. 

the writer was a mr wraxall. for my knowledge of him i have to depend 
entire on the evidence his writings afford, and from these i deduce 
that he was a man past middle age, possessed of some private means, and 
very much alone in the world. he had, it seems, no settled abode in 
england, but was a denizen of hotel and boarding-houses. it is probable 
that he entertain the idea of settle down at some future time which 
never came; and i think it also likely that the pantechnicon fire in the 
early seventy must have destroy a great deal that would have thrown 
light on his antecedents, for he refer once or twice to property of his 
that was warehouse at that establishment. 

it is further apparent that mr wraxall had publish a book, and that it 
treat of a holiday he had once taken in brittany. more than this i 
cannot say about his work, because a diligent search in bibliography 
works has convinced me that it must have appear either anonymous or 
under a pseudonym. 

as to his character, it is not difficult to form some superficial 
opinion. he must have been an intelligent and cultivated man. it seem 
that he was near being a fellow of his college at oxford--brasenose, as i 
judge from the calendar. his besetting fault was pretty clearly that of 
over-inquisitiveness, possibly a good fault in a traveller, certainly a 
fault for which this traveller paid dearly enough in the end. 

on what prove to be his last expedition, he was plot another book. 
scandinavia, a region not widely known to englishmen forty years ago, had 
struck him as an interesting field. he must have alight on some old 
books of sweden history or memoirs, and the idea had struck him that 
there was room for a book descriptive of travel in sweden, intersperse 
with episode from the history of some of the great sweden families. he 
procure letters of introduction, therefore, to some person of quality 
in sweden, and set out thither in the early summer of 1863. 

of his travels in the north there is no need to speak, nor of his 
residence of some week in stockholm. i need only mention that some 
_savant_ resident there put him on the track of an important collection 
of family papers belong to the proprietor of an ancient manor-house 
in vestergothland, and obtain for him permission to examine them. 

the manor-house, or _herrgard_, in question is to be call råbäck 
(pronounced something like roebeck), though that is not its name. it is 
one of the best building of its kind in all the country, and the picture 
of it in dahlenberg's _suecia antiqua et moderna_, engrave in 1694, 
show it very much as the tourist may see it today. it was built soon 
after 1600, and is, roughly speaking, very much like an english house of 
that period in respect of material--red-brick with stone facings--and 
style. the man who built it was a scion of the great house of de la 
gardie, and his descendant possess it still. de la gardie is the name by 
which i will designate them when mention of them become necessary. 

they received mr wraxall with great kindness and courtesy, and pressed 
him to stay in the house as long as his research lasted. but, 
prefer to be independent, and mistrust his powers of converse in 
swedish, he settled himself at the village inn, which turn out quite 
sufficient comfortable, at any rate during the summer months. this 
arrangement would entail a short walk daily to and from the manor-house 
of something under a mile. the house itself stood in a park, and was 
protected--we should say grown up--with large old timber. near it you 
found the wall garden, and then enter a close wood fringe one of 
the small lake with which the whole country is pitted. then came the 
wall of the demesne, and you climb a steep knoll--a knob of rock 
lightly cover with soil--and on the top of this stood the church, 
fence in with tall dark trees. it was a curious building to english 
eyes. the nave and aisle were low, and fill with pew and galleries. 
in the western gallery stood the handsome old organ, gaily painted, and 
with silver pipes. the ceiling was flat, and had been adorn by a 
seventeenth-century artist with a strange and hideous 'last judgement', 
full of lurid flames, fall cities, burning ships, crying souls, and 
brown and smile demons. handsome brass coronae hung from the roof; the 
pulpit was like a doll's-house cover with little paint wooden cherub 
and saints; a stand with three hour-glasses was hinge to the preacher's 
desk. such sight as these may be seen in many a church in sweden now, 
but what distinguished this one was an addition to the original building. 
at the eastern end of the north aisle the builder of the manor-house had 
erect a mausoleum for himself and his family. it was a largish 
eight-sided building, light by a series of oval windows, and it had a 
domed roof, top by a kind of pumpkin-shaped object rising into a 
spire, a form in which sweden architect greatly delighted. the roof was 
of copper externally, and was paint black, while the walls, in common 
with those of the church, were staring white. to this mausoleum there 
was no access from the church. it had a portal and steps of its own on 
the northern side. 

past the churchyard the path to the village goes, and not more than three 
or four minutes bring you to the inn door. 

on the first day of his stay at råbäck mr wraxall found the church door 
open, and made these note of the interior which i have epitomized. into 
the mausoleum, however, he could not make his way. he could by look 
through the keyhole just descry that there were fine marble effigy and 
sarcophagi of copper, and a wealth of armorial ornament, which made him 
very anxious to spend some time in investigation. 

the papers he had come to examine at the manor-house prove to be of just 
the kind he want for his book. there were family correspondence, 
journals, and account-books of the earliest owner of the estate, very 
careful kept and clearly written, full of amuse and picturesque 
detail. the first de la gardie appear in them as a strong and capable 
man. shortly after the building of the mansion there had been a period of 
distress in the district, and the peasant had risen and attack several 
châteaux and done some damage. the owner of råbäck took a leading part in 
supress trouble, and there was reference to execution of ring-leaders 
and severe punishment inflict with no sparing hand. 

the portrait of this magnu de la gardie was one of the best in the 
house, and mr wraxall studied it with no little interest after his day's 
work. he give no detailed description of it, but i gather that the face 
impress him rather by its power than by its beauty or goodness; in 
fact, he write that count magnu was an almost phenomenally ugly man. 

on this day mr wraxall took his supper with the family, and walk back 
in the late but still bright evening. 

'i must remember,' he writes, 'to ask the sexton if he can let me into 
the mausoleum at the church. he evidently has access to it himself, for i 
saw him tonight standing on the steps, and, as i thought, lock or 
unlock the door.' 

i find that early on the following day mr wraxall had some conversation 
with his landlord. his setting it down at such length as he do 
surprise me at first; but i soon realize that the papers i was reading 
were, at least in their beginning, the material for the book he was 
meditating, and that it was to have been one of those quasi-journalistic 
production which admit of the introduction of an admixture of 
conversational matter. 

his object, he says, was to find out whether any tradition of count 
magnu de la gardie linger on in the scene of that gentleman's 
activity, and whether the popular estimate of him were favourable or not. 
he found that the count was decidedly not a favourite. if his tenant 
came late to their work on the days which they owe to him as lord of the 
manor, they were set on the wooden horse, or flog and brand in the 
manor-house yard. one or two case there were of men who had occupy 
lands which encroach on the lord's domain, and whose house had been 
mysterious burnt on a winter's night, with the whole family inside. but 
what seem to dwell on the innkeeper's mind most--for he return to the 
subject more than once--was that the count had been on the black 
pilgrimage, and had brought something or someone back with him. 

you will naturally inquire, as mr wraxall did, what the black pilgrimage 
may have been. but your curiosity on the point must remain unsatisfy 
for the time being, just as his did. the landlord was evidently unwill 
to give a full answer, or indeed any answer, on the point, and, being 
call out for a moment, trot out with obvious alacrity, only putt 
his head in at the door a few minutes afterwards to say that he was 
call away to skara, and should not be back till evening. 

so mr wraxall had to go unsatisfy to his day's work at the manor-house. 
the papers on which he was just then engaged soon put his thought into 
another channel, for he had to occupy himself with glancing over the 
correspondence between sophia albertina in stockholm and her married 
cousin ulrica leonora at råbäck in the years 1705-10. the letters were of 
exceptional interest from the light they threw upon the culture of that 
period in sweden, as anyone can testify who has read the full edition of 
them in the publication of the sweden historical manuscript 
commission. 

in the afternoon he had done with these, and after return the box in 
which they were kept to their place on the shelf, he proceeded, very 
naturally, to take down some of the volumes nearest to them, in order to 
determine which of them had best be his principal subject of 
investigate next day. the shelf he had hit upon was occupy mostly by 
a collection of account-books in the writing of the first count magnus. 
but one among them was not an account-book, but a book of alchemy and 
other tract in another sixteenth-century hand. not being very familiar 
with alchemy literature, mr wraxall spend much space which he might 
have spare in setting out the name and beginning of the various 
treatises: the book of the phoenix, book of the thirty words, book of the 
toad, book of miriam, turba philosophorum, and so forth; and then he 
announce with a good deal of circumstance his delight at finding, on a 
leaf originally left blank near the middle of the book, some writing of 
count magnu himself head 'liber nigrae peregrinationis'. it is true 
that only a few lines were written, but there was quite enough to show 
that the landlord had that morning been refer to a belief at least as 
old as the time of count magnus, and probably share by him. this is the 
english of what was written: 

'if any man desire to obtain a long life, if he would obtain a faithful 
messenger and see the blood of his enemies, it is necessary that he 
should first go into the city of chorazin, and there salute the 
prince....' here there was an erasure of one word, not very thorough 
done, so that mr wraxall felt pretty sure that he was right in reading it 
as _aeris_ ('of the air'). but there was no more of the text copied, only 
a line in latin: _quaere reliqua huju materiei inter secretiora_. (see 
the rest of this matter among the more private things.) 

it could not be deny that this threw a rather lurid light upon the 
taste and belief of the count; but to mr wraxall, separate from him by 
nearly three centuries, the thought that he might have add to his 
general forceful alchemy, and to alchemy something like magic, only 
made him a more picturesque figure, and when, after a rather prolonged 
contemplation of his picture in the hall, mr wraxall set out on his 
homeward way, his mind was full of the thought of count magnus. he had no 
eyes for his surroundings, no perception of the evening scent of the 
wood or the evening light on the lake; and when all of a sudden he 
pull up short, he was astonish to find himself already at the gate of 
the churchyard, and within a few minutes of his dinner. his eyes fell on 
the mausoleum. 

'ah,' he said, 'count magnus, there you are. i should dearly like to see 
you.' 

'like many solitary men,' he writes, 'i have a habit of talk to myself 
aloud; and, unlike some of the greece and latin particles, i do not expect 
an answer. certainly, and perhaps fortunately in this case, there was 
neither voice nor any that regarded: only the woman who, i suppose, was 
clean up the church, drop some metallic object on the floor, whose 
clang startle me. count magnus, i think, sleep sound enough.' 

that same evening the landlord of the inn, who had heard mr wraxall say 
that he wish to see the clerk or deacon (as he would be call in 
sweden) of the parish, introduce him to that official in the inn 
parlour. a visit to the de la gardie tomb-house was soon arrange for the 
next day, and a little general conversation ensued. 

mr wraxall, remember that one function of scandinavian deacon is to 
teach candidate for confirmation, thought he would refresh his own 
memory on a biblical point. 

'can you tell me,' he said, 'anything about chorazin?' 

the deacon seem startled, but readily remind him how that village had 
once been denounced. 

'to be sure,' said mr wraxall; 'it is, i suppose, quite a ruin now?' 

'so i expect,' reply the deacon. 'i have heard some of our old priest 
say that antichrist is to be born there; and there are tales--' 

'ah! what tale are those?' mr wraxall put in. 

'tales, i was go to say, which i have forgotten,' said the deacon; and 
soon after that he said good night. 

the landlord was now alone, and at mr wraxall's mercy; and that inquire 
was not inclined to spare him. 

'herr nielsen,' he said, 'i have found out something about the black 
pilgrimage. you may as well tell me what you know. what did the count 
bring back with him?' 

swede are habitual slow, perhaps, in answering, or perhaps the 
landlord was an exception. i am not sure; but mr wraxall note that the 
landlord spent at least one minute in look at him before he said 
anything at all. then he came close up to his guest, and with a good deal 
of effort he spoke: 

'mr wraxall, i can tell you this one little tale, and no more--not any 
more. you must not ask anything when i have done. in my grandfather's 
time--that is, ninety-two years ago--there were two men who said: "the 
count is dead; we do not care for him. we will go tonight and have a free 
hunt in his wood"--the long wood on the hill that you have seen behind 
råbäck. well, those that heard them say this, they said: "no, do not go; 
we are sure you will meet with person walking who should not be walking. 
they should be resting, not walking." these men laughed. there were no 
forestmen to keep the wood, because no one wish to live there. the 
family were not here at the house. these men could do what they wished. 

'very well, they go to the wood that night. my grandfather was sitting 
here in this room. it was the summer, and a light night. with the window 
open, he could see out to the wood, and hear. 

'so he sat there, and two or three men with him, and they listened. at 
first they hear nothing at all; then they hear someone--you know how far 
away it is--they hear someone scream, just as if the most inside part of 
his soul was twist out of him. all of them in the room caught hold of 
each other, and they sat so for three-quarters of an hour. then they hear 
someone else, only about three hundred ell off. they hear him laugh out 
loud: it was not one of those two men that laughed, and, indeed, they 
have all of them said that it was not any man at all. after that they 
hear a great door shut. 

'then, when it was just light with the sun, they all went to the priest. 
they said to him: 

'"father, put on your gown and your ruff, and come to bury these men, 
and bjornsen and han thorbjorn." 

'you understand that they were sure these men were dead. so they went to 
the wood--my grandfather never forgot this. he said they were all like so 
many dead men themselves. the priest, too, he was in a white fear. he 
said when they came to him: 

'"i heard one cry in the night, and i heard one laugh afterwards. if i 
cannot forget that, i shall not be able to sleep again." 

'so they went to the wood, and they found these men on the edge of the 
wood. han thorbjorn was standing with his back against a tree, and all 
the time he was push with his hands--pushing something away from him 
which was not there. so he was not dead. and they led him away, and took 
him to the house at nykjoping, and he die before the winter; but he went 
on push with his hands. also and bjornsen was there; but he was 
dead. and i tell you this about and bjornsen, that he was once a 
beautiful man, but now his face was not there, because the flesh of it 
was suck away off the bones. you understand that? my grandfather did 
not forget that. and they laid him on the bier which they brought, and 
they put a cloth over his head, and the priest walk before; and they 
began to sing the psalm for the dead as well as they could. so, as they 
were singing the end of the first verse, one fell down, who was carry 
the head of the bier, and the other look back, and they saw that the 
cloth had fallen off, and the eyes of and bjornsen were look up, 
because there was nothing to close over them. and this they could not 
bear. therefore the priest laid the cloth upon him, and sent for a spade, 
and they bury him in that place.' 

the next day mr wraxall record that the deacon call for him soon after 
his breakfast, and took him to the church and mausoleum. he notice that 
the key of the latter was hung on a nail just by the pulpit, and it 
occur to him that, as the church door seem to be left unlock as a 
rule, it would not be difficult for him to pay a second and more private 
visit to the monument if there prove to be more of interest among them 
than could be digest at first. the building, when he enter it, he 
found not unimposing. the monuments, mostly large erection of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, were dignified if luxuriant, and 
the epitaph and heraldry were copious. the central space of the domed 
room was occupy by three copper sarcophagi, cover with 
finely-engraved ornament. two of them had, as is commonly the case in 
denmark and sweden, a large metal crucifix on the lid. the third, that of 
count magnus, as it appeared, had, instead of that, a full-length effigy 
engrave upon it, and round the edge were several band of similar 
ornament represent various scenes. one was a battle, with cannon 
belch out smoke, and wall towns, and troops of pikemen. another 
show an execution. in a third, among trees, was a man running at full 
speed, with flying hair and outstretched hands. after him follow a 
strange form; it would be hard to say whether the artist had intended it 
for a man, and was unable to give the requisite similitude, or whether it 
was intentional made as monstrous as it looked. in view of the skill 
with which the rest of the drawing was done, mr wraxall felt inclined to 
adopt the latter idea. the figure was unduly short, and was for the most 
part muffle in a hooded garment which swept the ground. the only part of 
the form which project from that shelter was not shaped like any hand 
or arm. mr wraxall compare it to the tentacle of a devil-fish, and 
continues: 'on seeing this, i said to myself, "this, then, which is 
evidently an allegorical representation of some kind--a fiend pursue a 
hunt soul--may be the origin of the story of count magnu and his 
mysterious companion. let us see how the huntsman is pictured: doubtless 
it will be a demon blow his horn.'" but, as it turn out, there was 
no such sensational figure, only the semblance of a cloak man on a 
hillock, who stood leaning on a stick, and watch the hunt with an 
interest which the engrave had try to express in his attitude. 

mr wraxall noted the finely-worked and massive steel padlocks--three in 
number--which secure the sarcophagus. one of them, he saw, was detached, 
and lay on the pavement. and then, unwill to delay the deacon long 
or to waste his own working-time, he made his way onward to the 
manor-house. 

'it is curious,' he notes, 'how, on retrace a familiar path, one's 
thought engross one to the absolute exclusion of surrounding objects. 
tonight, for the second time, i had entire fail to notice where i was 
go (i had plan a private visit to the tomb-house to copy the 
epitaphs), when i suddenly, as it were, awoke to consciousness, and found 
myself (as before) turning in at the churchyard gate, and, i believe, 
singing or chant some such words as, "are you awake, count magnus? are 
you asleep, count magnus?" and then something more which i have fail to 
recollect. it seem to me that i must have been behave in this 
nonsensical way for some time.' 

he found the key of the mausoleum where he had expect to find it, and 
copy the greater part of what he wanted; in fact, he stay until the 
light began to fail him. 

'i must have been wrong,' he writes, 'in saying that one of the padlock 
of my count sarcophagus was unfastened; i see tonight that two are 
loose. i picked both up, and laid them careful on the window-ledge, 
after try unsuccessful to close them. the remain one is still 
firm, and, though i take it to be a spring lock, i cannot guess how it is 
opened. had i succeed in undoing it, i am almost afraid i should have 
taken the liberty of opening the sarcophagus. it is strange, the interest 
i feel in the personality of this, i fear, somewhat ferocious and grim 
old noble.' 

the day following was, as it turn out, the last of mr wraxall's stay at 
råbäck. he received letters connected with certain investment which made 
it desirable that he should return to england; his work among the papers 
was practically done, and travel was slow. he decided, therefore, to 
make his farewells, put some finish touch to his notes, and be off. 

these finish touch and farewells, as it turn out, took more time 
than he had expected. the hospitable family insist on his stay to 
dine with them--they dine at three--and it was verge on half past six 
before he was outside the iron gate of råbäck. he dwelt on every step of 
his walk by the lake, determined to saturate himself, now that he trod it 
for the last time, in the sentiment of the place and hour. and when he 
reach the summit of the churchyard knoll, he linger for many minutes, 
gaze at the limitless prospect of wood near and distant, all dark 
beneath a sky of liquid green. when at last he turn to go, the thought 
struck him that surely he must bid farewell to count magnu as well as 
the rest of the de la gardies. the church was but twenty yard away, and 
he knew where the key of the mausoleum hung. it was not long before he 
was standing over the great copper coffin, and, as usual, talk to 
himself aloud: 'you may have been a bit of a rascal in your time, 
magnus,' he was saying, 'but for all that i should like to see you, or, 
rather--' 

'just at that instant,' he says, 'i felt a blow on my foot. hasty 
enough i drew it back, and something fell on the pavement with a clash. 
it was the third, the last of the three padlock which had fasten the 
sarcophagus. i stoop to pick it up, and--heaven is my witness that i am 
writing only the bare truth--before i had raise myself there was a sound 
of metal hinge creaking, and i distinct saw the lid shift upwards. 
i may have behave like a coward, but i could not for my life stay for 
one moment. i was outside that dreadful building in less time than i can 
write--almost as quick as i could have said--the words; and what 
frighten me yet more, i could not turn the key in the lock. as i sit 
here in my room note these facts, i ask myself (it was not twenty 
minutes ago) whether that noise of creak metal continued, and i cannot 
tell whether it did or not. i only know that there was something more 
than i have written that alarm me, but whether it was sound or sight i 
am not able to remember. what is this that i have done?' 

* * * * * 

poor mr wraxall! he set out on his journey to england on the next day, as 
he had planned, and he reach england in safety; and yet, as i gather 
from his change hand and inconsequent jottings, a broken man. one of the 
several small note-books that have come to me with his papers gives, not 
a key to, but a kind of inkling of, his experiences. much of his journey 
was made by canal-boat, and i find not less than six painful attempt to 
enumerate and describe his fellow-passengers. the entry are of this 
kind: 

24. pastor of village in skane. usual black coat and soft black hat. 

25. commercial traveller from stockholm go to trollhättan. black 
cloak, brown hat. 

26. man in long black cloak, broad-leafed hat, very old-fashioned. 

this entry is line out, and a note added: 'perhaps identical with no. 
13. have not yet seen his face.' on refer to no. 13, i find that he 
is a roman priest in a cassock. 

the net result of the reckoning is always the same. twenty-eight people 
appear in the enumeration, one being always a man in a long black cloak 
and broad hat, and another a 'short figure in dark cloak and hood'. on 
the other hand, it is always noted that only twenty-six passenger appear 
at meals, and that the man in the cloak is perhaps absent, and the short 
figure is certainly absent. 

on reach england, it appear that mr wraxall landed at harwich, and 
that he resolve at once to put himself out of the reach of some person 
or person whom he never specifies, but whom he had evidently come to 
regard as his pursuers. accordingly he took a vehicle--it was a closed 
fly--not trust the railway and drove across country to the village of 
belchamp st paul. it was about nine o'clock on a moonlight august night 
when he near the place. he was sitting forward, and look out of the 
window at the field and thickets--there was little else to be 
seen--racing past him. sudden he came to a cross-road. at the corner 
two figures were standing motionless; both were in dark cloaks; the 
tall one wore a hat, the short a hood. he had no time to see their 
faces, nor did they make any motion that he could discern. yet the horse 
shy violent and broke into a gallop, and mr wraxall sank back into 
his seat in something like desperation. he had seen them before. 

arrive at belchamp st paul, he was fortunate enough to find a decent 
furnish lodging, and for the next twenty-four hour he lived, 
comparatively speaking, in peace. his last note were written on this 
day. they are too disjointed and ejaculatory to be given here in full, 
but the substance of them is clear enough. he is expect a visit from 
his pursuers--how or when he know not--and his constant cry is 'what has 
he done?' and 'is there no hope?' doctors, he knows, would call him mad, 
policemen would laugh at him. the parson is away. what can he do but lock 
his door and cry to god? 

people still remember last year at belchamp st paul how a strange 
gentleman came one evening in august years back; and how the next morning 
but one he was found dead, and there was an inquest; and the jury that 
view the body fainted, seven of 'em did, and none of 'em wouldn't speak 
to what they see, and the verdict was visitation of god; and how the 
people as kep' the 'ouse move out that same week, and went away from 
that part. but they do not, i think, know that any glimmer of light has 
ever been thrown, or could be thrown, on the mystery. it so happen that 
last year the little house came into my hand as part of a legacy. it had 
stood empty since 1863, and there seem no prospect of letting it; so i 
had it pull down, and the papers of which i have given you an abstract 
were found in a forgotten cupboard under the window in the best bedroom. 




'oh, whistle, and i'll come to you, my lad' 

'i suppose you will be get away pretty soon, now full term is over, 
professor,' said a person not in the story to the professor of 
ontography, soon after they had sat down next to each other at a feast in 
the hospitable hall of st james's college. 

the professor was young, neat, and precise in speech. 

'yes,' he said; 'my friends have been making me take up golf this term, 
and i mean to go to the east coast--in point of fact to burnstow--(i dare 
say you know it) for a week or ten days, to improve my game. i hope to 
get off tomorrow.' 

'oh, parkins,' said his neighbour on the other side, 'if you are go to 
burnstow, i wish you would look at the site of the templars' preceptory, 
and let me know if you think it would be any good to have a dig there in 
the summer.' 

it was, as you might suppose, a person of antiquarian pursuit who said 
this, but, since he merely appear in this prologue, there is no need to 
give his entitlements. 

'certainly,' said parkins, the professor: 'if you will describe to me 
whereabouts the site is, i will do my best to give you an idea of the lie 
of the land when i get back; or i could write to you about it, if you 
would tell me where you are likely to be.' 

'don't trouble to do that, thanks. it's only that i'm thinking of taking 
my family in that direction in the long, and it occur to me that, as 
very few of the english preceptory have ever been properly planned, i 
might have an opportunity of do something useful on off-days.' 

the professor rather sniff at the idea that plan out a preceptory 
could be describe as useful. his neighbour continued: 

'the site--i doubt if there is anything showing above ground--must be 
down quite close to the beach now. the sea has encroach tremendously, 
as you know, all along that bit of coast. i should think, from the map, 
that it must be about three-quarters of a mile from the globe inn, at the 
north end of the town. where are you go to stay?' 

'well, _at_ the globe inn, as a matter of fact,' said parkins; 'i have 
engaged a room there. i couldn't get in anywhere else; most of the 
lodging-houses are shut up in winter, it seems; and, as it is, they tell 
me that the only room of any size i can have is really a double-bedded 
one, and that they haven't a corner in which to store the other bed, and 
so on. but i must have a fairly large room, for i am taking some books 
down, and mean to do a bit of work; and though i don't quite fancy have 
an empty bed--not to speak of two--in what i may call for the time being 
my study, i suppose i can manage to rough it for the short time i shall 
be there.' 

'do you call have an extra bed in your room rough it, parkins?' said 
a bluff person opposite. 'look here, i shall come down and occupy it for 
a bit; it'll be company for you.' 

the professor quivered, but manage to laugh in a courteous manner. 

'by all means, rogers; there's nothing i should like better. but i'm 
afraid you would find it rather dull; you don't play golf, do you?' 

'no, thank heaven!' said rude mr rogers. 

'well, you see, when i'm not writing i shall most likely be out on the 
links, and that, as i say, would be rather dull for you, i'm afraid.' 

'oh, i don't know! there's certain to be somebody i know in the place; 
but, of course, if you don't want me, speak the word, parkins; i shan't 
be offended. truth, as you always tell us, is never offensive.' 

parkin was, indeed, scrupulous polite and strict truthful. it is to 
be fear that mr rogers sometimes practised upon his knowledge of these 
characteristics. in parkins's breast there was a conflict now raging, 
which for a moment or two did not allow him to answer. that interval 
being over, he said: 

'well, if you want the exact truth, rogers, i was considering whether the 
room i speak of would really be large enough to accommodate us both 
comfortably; and also whether (mind, i shouldn't have said this if you 
hadn't pressed me) you would not constitute something in the nature of a 
hindrance to my work.' 

rogers laugh loudly. 

'well done, parkins!' he said. 'it's all right. i promise not to 
interrupt your work; don't you disturb yourself about that. no, i won't 
come if you don't want me; but i thought i should do so nicely to keep 
the ghost off.' here he might have been seen to wink and to nudge his 
next neighbour. parkin might also have been seen to become pink. 'i beg 
pardon, parkins,' rogers continued; 'i oughtn't to have said that. i 
forgot you didn't like levity on these topics.' 

'well,' parkin said, 'as you have mention the matter, i freely own 
that i do _not_ like careless talk about what you call ghosts. a man in 
my position,' he went on, raise his voice a little, 'cannot, i find, be 
too careful about appear to sanction the current belief on such 
subjects. as you know, rogers, or as you ought to know; for i think i 
have never conceal my views--' 

'no, you certainly have not, old man,' put in rogers _sotto voce._ 

'--i hold that any semblance, any appearance of concession to the view 
that such things might exist is equivalent to a renunciation of all that 
i hold most sacred. but i'm afraid i have not succeed in secure your 
attention.' 

'your _undivided_ attention, was what dr blimber actually _said_,'[4] 
rogers interrupted, with every appearance of an earnest desire for 
accuracy. 'but i beg your pardon, parkins: i'm stopping you.' 

[4] mr rogers was wrong, _vide dombey and son_, chapter xii. 

'no, not at all,' said parkins. 'i don't remember blimber; perhaps he was 
before my time. but i needn't go on. i'm sure you know what i mean.' 

'yes, yes,' said rogers, rather hastily--'just so. we'll go into it fully 
at burnstow, or somewhere.' 

in repeating the above dialogue i have try to give the impression which 
it made on me, that parkin was something of an old woman--rather 
henlike, perhaps, in his little ways; total destitute, alas! of the 
sense of humour, but at the same time dauntless and sincere in his 
convictions, and a man deserving of the greatest respect. whether or not 
the reader has gather so much, that was the character which parkin 
had. 

* * * * * 

on the following day parkin did, as he had hoped, succeed in get 
away from his college, and in arrive at burnstow. he was made welcome 
at the globe inn, was safe install in the large double-bedded room of 
which we have heard, and was able before retiring to rest to arrange his 
material for work in apple-pie order upon a commodious table which 
occupy the outer end of the room, and was surround on three side by 
window look out seaward; that is to say, the central window look 
straight out to sea, and those on the left and right command prospects 
along the shore to the north and south respectively. on the south you saw 
the village of burnstow. on the north no house were to be seen, but only 
the beach and the low cliff backing it. immediately in front was a 
strip--not considerable--of rough grass, dot with old anchors, 
capstans, and so forth; then a broad path; then the beach. whatever may 
have been the original distance between the globe inn and the sea, not 
more than sixty yard now separate them. 

the rest of the population of the inn was, of course, a golf one, and 
included few elements that call for a special description. the most 
conspicuous figure was, perhaps, that of an _ancien militaire_, secretary 
of a london club, and possessed of a voice of incredible strength, and of 
view of a pronounced protestant type. these were apt to find utterance 
after his attendance upon the ministration of the vicar, an estimable 
man with inclination towards a picturesque ritual, which he gallant 
kept down as far as he could out of deference to east anglian tradition. 

professor parkins, one of whose principal characteristic was pluck, 
spent the greater part of the day following his arrival at burnstow in 
what he had call improve his game, in company with this colonel 
wilson: and during the afternoon--whether the process of improvement were 
to blame or not, i am not sure--the colonel's demeanour assume a 
colouring so lurid that even parkin jib at the thought of walking 
home with him from the links. he determined, after a short and furtive 
look at that bristle moustache and those incarnadine features, that it 
would be wise to allow the influence of tea and tobacco to do what they 
could with the colonel before the dinner-hour should render a meeting 
inevitable. 

'i might walk home tonight along the beach,' he reflected--'yes, and take 
a look--there will be light enough for that--at the ruins of which disney 
was talking. i don't exactly know where they are, by the way; but i 
expect i can hardly help stumble on them.' 

this he accomplished, i may say, in the most literal sense, for in 
pick his way from the links to the shingle beach his foot caught, 
partly in a gorse-root and partly in a biggish stone, and over he went. 
when he got up and survey his surroundings, he found himself in a patch 
of somewhat broken ground cover with small depression and mounds. 
these latter, when he came to examine them, prove to be simply masses of 
flint embed in mortar and grown over with turf. he must, he quite 
rightly concluded, be on the site of the preceptory he had promise to 
look at. it seem not unlikely to reward the spade of the explorer; 
enough of the foundations was probably left at no great depth to throw a 
good deal of light on the general plan. he remember vague that the 
templars, to whom this site had belonged, were in the habit of building 
round churches, and he thought a particular series of the hump or mound 
near him did appear to be arrange in something of a circular form. few 
people can resist the temptation to try a little amateur research in a 
department quite outside their own, if only for the satisfaction of 
showing how successful they would have been had they only taken it up 
seriously. our professor, however, if he felt something of this mean 
desire, was also truly anxious to oblige mr disney. so he pace with care 
the circular area he had noticed, and wrote down its rough dimensions in 
his pocket-book. then he proceed to examine an oblong eminence which 
lay east of the centre of the circle, and seem to his thinking likely 
to be the base of a platform or altar. at one end of it, the northern, a 
patch of the turf was gone--removed by some boy or other creature _ferae 
naturae_. it might, he thought, be as well to probe the soil here for 
evidence of masonry, and he took out his knife and began scrape away 
the earth. and now follow another little discovery: a portion of soil 
fell inward as he scraped, and disclose a small cavity. he light one 
match after another to help him to see of what nature the hole was, but 
the wind was too strong for them all. by tap and scratch the side 
with his knife, however, he was able to make out that it must be an 
artificial hole in masonry. it was rectangular, and the sides, top, and 
bottom, if not actually plastered, were smooth and regular. of course it 
was empty. no! as he withdrew the knife he heard a metallic clink, and 
when he introduce his hand it met with a cylinder object lie on the 
floor of the hole. naturally enough, he picked it up, and when he brought 
it into the light, now fast fading, he could see that it, too, was of 
man's making--a metal tube about four inch long, and evidently of some 
considerable age. 

by the time parkin had made sure that there was nothing else in this odd 
receptacle, it was too late and too dark for him to think of undertaking 
any further search. what he had done had prove so unexpected 
interesting that he determined to sacrifice a little more of the daylight 
on the morrow to archaeology. the object which he now had safe in his 
pocket was bound to be of some slight value at least, he felt sure. 

bleak and solemn was the view on which he took a last look before 
start homeward. a faint yellow light in the west show the links, on 
which a few figures moving towards the club-house were still visible, the 
squat martello tower, the lights of aldsey village, the pale ribbon of 
sands intersect at interval by black wooden groynings, the dim and 
murmur sea. the wind was bitter from the north, but was at his back 
when he set out for the globe. he quick rattle and clash through the 
shingle and gain the sand, upon which, but for the groyne which had 
to be got over every few yards, the go was both good and quiet. one 
last look behind, to measure the distance he had made since leave the 
ruin templars' church, show him a prospect of company on his walk, in 
the shape of a rather indistinct personage, who seem to be making great 
effort to catch up with him, but made little, if any, progress. i mean 
that there was an appearance of running about his movements, but that the 
distance between him and parkin did not seem material to lessen. so, 
at least, parkin thought, and decided that he almost certainly did not 
know him, and that it would be absurd to wait until he came up. for all 
that, company, he began to think, would really be very welcome on that 
lonely shore, if only you could choose your companion. in his 
unenlightened days he had read of meeting in such place which even now 
would hardly bear thinking of. he went on thinking of them, however, 
until he reach home, and particularly of one which catch most 
people's fancy at some time of their childhood. 'now i saw in my dream 
that christian had gone but a very little way when he saw a foul fiend 
coming over the field to meet him.' 'what should i do now,' he thought, 
'if i look back and caught sight of a black figure sharp define 
against the yellow sky, and saw that it had horn and wings? i wonder 
whether i should stand or run for it. luckily, the gentleman behind is 
not of that kind, and he seem to be about as far off now as when i saw 
him first. well, at this rate, he won't get his dinner as soon as i 
shall; and, dear me! it's within a quarter of an hour of the time now. i 
must run!' 

parkin had, in fact, very little time for dressing. when he met the 
colonel at dinner, peace--or as much of her as that gentleman could 
manage--reigned once more in the military bosom; nor was she put to 
flight in the hour of bridge that follow dinner, for parkin was a 
more than respectable player. when, therefore, he retired towards twelve 
o'clock, he felt that he had spent his evening in quite a satisfactory 
way, and that, even for so long as a fortnight or three weeks, life at 
the globe would be supportable under similar conditions--'especially,' 
thought he, 'if i go on improve my game.' 

as he went along the passage he met the boots of the globe, who stop 
and said: 

'beg your pardon, sir, but as i was abrush your coat just now there 
was something fell out of the pocket. i put it on your chest of drawers, 
sir, in your room, sir--a piece of a pipe or somethink of that, sir. 
thank you, sir. you'll find it on your chest of drawers, sir--yes, sir. 
good night, sir.' 

the speech serve to remind parkin of his little discovery of that 
afternoon. it was with some considerable curiosity that he turn it over 
by the light of his candles. it was of bronze, he now saw, and was shaped 
very much after the manner of the modern dog-whistle; in fact it 
was--yes, certainly it was--actually no more nor less than a whistle. he 
put it to his lips, but it was quite full of a fine, caked-up sand or 
earth, which would not yield to knocking, but must be loosen with a 
knife. tidy as ever in his habits, parkin clear out the earth on to a 
piece of paper, and took the latter to the window to empty it out. the 
night was clear and bright, as he saw when he had open the casement, 
and he stop for an instant to look at the sea and note a belated 
wanderer station on the shore in front of the inn. then he shut the 
window, a little surprise at the late hour people kept at burnstow, and 
took his whistle to the light again. why, surely there were mark on it, 
and not merely marks, but letters! a very little rubbing render the 
deeply-cut inscription quite legible, but the professor had to confess, 
after some earnest thought, that the meaning of it was as obscure to him 
as the writing on the wall to belshazzar. there were legend both on the 
front and on the back of the whistle. the one read thus: 

fla 
fur bis 
fle 

the other: 

qui est iste qui venit 

'i ought to be able to make it out,' he thought; 'but i suppose i am a 
little rusty in my latin. when i come to think of it, i don't believe i 
even know the word for a whistle. the long one do seem simple enough. 
it ought to mean: "who is this who is coming?" well, the best way to find 
out is evidently to whistle for him.' 

he blew tentative and stop suddenly, startle and yet pleased at the 
note he had elicited. it had a quality of infinite distance in it, and, 
soft as it was, he somehow felt it must be audible for mile round. it 
was a sound, too, that seem to have the power (which many scent 
possess) of form pictures in the brain. he saw quite clearly for a 
moment a vision of a wide, dark expanse at night, with a fresh wind 
blowing, and in the midst a lonely figure--how employed, he could not 
tell. perhaps he would have seen more had not the picture been broken by 
the sudden surge of a gust of wind against his casement, so sudden that 
it made him look up, just in time to see the white glint of a seabird's 
wing somewhere outside the dark panes. 

the sound of the whistle had so fascinate him that he could not help 
try it once more, this time more boldly. the note was little, if at 
all, loud than before, and repetition broke the illusion--no picture 
followed, as he had half hope it might. "but what is this? goodness! 
what force the wind can get up in a few minutes! what a tremendous gust! 
there! i knew that window-fastening was no use! ah! i thought so--both 
candle out. it is enough to tear the room to pieces." 

the first thing was to get the window shut. while you might count twenty 
parkin was struggle with the small casement, and felt almost as if he 
were push back a sturdy burglar, so strong was the pressure. it 
slacken all at once, and the window bang to and latch itself. now 
to relight the candle and see what damage, if any, had been done. no, 
nothing seem amiss; no glass even was broken in the casement. but the 
noise had evidently rouse at least one member of the household: the 
colonel was to be heard stump in his stocking feet on the floor 
above, and growling. quick as it had risen, the wind did not fall at 
once. on it went, moan and rush past the house, at times rising to 
a cry so desolate that, as parkin disinterested said, it might have 
made fanciful people feel quite uncomfortable; even the unimaginative, he 
thought after a quarter of an hour, might be happy without it. 

whether it was the wind, or the excitement of golf, or of the research 
in the preceptory that kept parkin awake, he was not sure. awake he 
remained, in any case, long enough to fancy (as i am afraid i often do 
myself under such conditions) that he was the victim of all manner of 
fatal disorders: he would lie count the beat of his heart, convinced 
that it was go to stop work every moment, and would entertain grave 
suspicion of his lungs, brain, liver, etc.--suspicions which he was sure 
would be dispel by the return of daylight, but which until then 
refuse to be put aside. he found a little vicarious comfort in the idea 
that someone else was in the same boat. a near neighbour (in the dark 
it was not easy to tell his direction) was toss and rustling in his 
bed, too. 

the next stage was that parkin shut his eyes and determined to give 
sleep every chance. here again over-excitement assert itself in another 
form--that of making pictures. _experto crede_, pictures do come to the 
closed eyes of one try to sleep, and are often so little to his taste 
that he must open his eyes and disperse them. 

parkins's experience on this occasion was a very distressing one. he 
found that the picture which present itself to him was continuous. when 
he open his eyes, of course, it went; but when he shut them once more 
it frame itself afresh, and act itself out again, neither quick nor 
slow than before. what he saw was this: 

a long stretch of shore--shingle edge by sand, and intersect at short 
interval with black groyne running down to the water--a scene, in fact, 
so like that of his afternoon's walk that, in the absence of any 
landmark, it could not be distinguished therefrom. the light was obscure, 
convey an impression of gathering storm, late winter evening, and 
slight cold rain. on this bleak stage at first no actor was visible. 
then, in the distance, a bob black object appeared; a moment more, 
and it was a man running, jumping, clamber over the groynes, and every 
few seconds look eager back. the near he came the more obvious it 
was that he was not only anxious, but even terribly frightened, though 
his face was not to be distinguished. he was, moreover, almost at the end 
of his strength. on he came; each successive obstacle seem to cause him 
more difficulty than the last. 'will he get over this next one?' thought 
parkins; 'it seem a little higher than the others.' yes; half climbing, 
half throw himself, he did get over, and fell all in a heap on the 
other side (the side nearest to the spectator). there, as if really 
unable to get up again, he remain crouch under the groyne, look 
up in an attitude of painful anxiety. 

so far no cause whatever for the fear of the runner had been shown; but 
now there began to be seen, far up the shore, a little flicker of 
something light-coloured moving to and fro with great swift and 
irregularity. rapid grow larger, it, too, declared itself as a 
figure in pale, flutter draperies, ill-defined. there was something 
about its motion which made parkin very unwill to see it at close 
quarters. it would stop, raise arms, bow itself towards the sand, then 
run stoop across the beach to the water-edge and back again; and then, 
rising upright, once more continue its course forward at a speed that was 
startle and terrifying. the moment came when the pursuer was hover 
about from left to right only a few yard beyond the groyne where the 
runner lay in hiding. after two or three ineffectual casting hither and 
thither it came to a stop, stood upright, with arms raise high, and then 
dart straight forward towards the groyne. 

it was at this point that parkin always fail in his resolution to keep 
his eyes shut. with many misgiving as to incipient failure of eyesight, 
overwork brain, excessive smoking, and so on, he finally resigned 
himself to light his candle, get out a book, and pass the night waking, 
rather than be torment by this persistent panorama, which he saw 
clearly enough could only be a morbid reflection of his walk and his 
thought on that very day. 

the scrape of match on box and the glare of light must have startle 
some creature of the night--rats or what not--which he heard scurry 
across the floor from the side of his bed with much rustling. dear, dear! 
the match is out! fool that it is! but the second one burnt better, and a 
candle and book were duly procured, over which parkin pore till sleep 
of a wholesome kind came upon him, and that in no long space. for about 
the first time in his orderly and prudent life he forgot to blow out the 
candle, and when he was call next morning at eight there was still a 
flicker in the socket and a sad mess of gutter grease on the top of the 
little table. 

after breakfast he was in his room, putt the finish touch to his 
golf costume--fortune had again allot the colonel to him for a 
partner--when one of the maid came in. 

'oh, if you please,' she said, 'would you like any extra blanket on your 
bed, sir?' 

'ah! thank you,' said parkins. 'yes, i think i should like one. it seem 
likely to turn rather colder.' 

in a very short time the maid was back with the blanket. 

'which bed should i put it on, sir?' she asked. 

'what? why, that one--the one i slept in last night,' he said, point 
to it. 

'oh yes! i beg your pardon, sir, but you seem to have try both of 
'em; leastways, we had to make 'em both up this morning.' 

'really? how very absurd!' said parkins. 'i certainly never touched the 
other, except to lay some things on it. did it actually seem to have been 
slept in?' 

'oh yes, sir!' said the maid. 'why, all the things was crumple and 
throw about all ways, if you'll excuse me, sir--quite as if anyone 
'adn't pass but a very poor night, sir.' 

'dear me,' said parkins. 'well, i may have disorder it more than i 
thought when i unpack my things. i'm very sorry to have given you the 
extra trouble, i'm sure. i expect a friend of mine soon, by the way--a 
gentleman from cambridge--to come and occupy it for a night or two. that 
will be all right, i suppose, won't it?' 

'oh yes, to be sure, sir. thank you, sir. it's no trouble, i'm sure,' 
said the maid, and departed to giggle with her colleagues. 

parkin set forth, with a stern determination to improve his game. 

i am glad to be able to report that he succeed so far in this 
enterprise that the colonel, who had been rather repine at the prospect 
of a second day's play in his company, became quite chatty as the morning 
advanced; and his voice boom out over the flats, as certain also of our 
own minor poet have said, 'like some great bourdon in a minster tower'. 

'extraordinary wind, that, we had last night,' he said. 'in my old home 
we should have said someone had been whistle for it.' 

'should you, indeed!' said perkins. 'is there a superstition of that kind 
still current in your part of the country?' 

'i don't know about superstition,' said the colonel. 'they believe in it 
all over denmark and norway, as well as on the yorkshire coast; and my 
experience is, mind you, that there's generally something at the bottom 
of what these country-folk hold to, and have held to for generations. but 
it's your drive' (or whatever it might have been: the golf reader will 
have to imagine appropriate digression at the proper intervals). 

when conversation was resumed, parkin said, with a slight hesitancy: 

'a propo of what you were saying just now, colonel, i think i ought to 
tell you that my own view on such subject are very strong. i am, in 
fact, a convinced disbelieve in what is call the "supernatural".' 

'what!' said the colonel,'do you mean to tell me you don't believe in 
second-sight, or ghosts, or anything of that kind?' 

'in nothing whatever of that kind,' return parkin firmly. 

'well,' said the colonel, 'but it appear to me at that rate, sir, that 
you must be little better than a sadducee.' 

parkin was on the point of answer that, in his opinion, the sadducee 
were the most sensible person he had ever read of in the old testament; 
but feeling some doubt as to whether much mention of them was to be found 
in that work, he prefer to laugh the accusation off. 

'perhaps i am,' he said; 'but--here, give me my cleek, boy!--excuse me 
one moment, colonel.' a short interval. 'now, as to whistle for the 
wind, let me give you my theory about it. the law which govern wind are 
really not at all perfectly known--to fisherfolk and such, of course, not 
known at all. a man or woman of eccentric habits, perhaps, or a stranger, 
is seen repeatedly on the beach at some unusual hour, and is heard 
whistling. soon afterwards a violent wind rises; a man who could read the 
sky perfectly or who possessed a barometer could have foretold that it 
would. the simple people of a fishing-village have no barometers, and 
only a few rough rule for prophesy weather. what more natural than 
that the eccentric personage i postulate should be regard as have 
raise the wind, or that he or she should clutch eager at the 
reputation of being able to do so? now, take last night's wind: as it 
happens, i myself was whistling. i blew a whistle twice, and the wind 
seem to come absolutely in answer to my call. if anyone had seen me--' 

the audience had been a little restive under this harangue, and parkin 
had, i fear, fallen somewhat into the tone of a lecturer; but at the last 
sentence the colonel stopped. 

'whistling, were you?' he said. 'and what sort of whistle did you use? 
play this stroke first.' interval. 

'about that whistle you were asking, colonel. it's rather a curious one. 
i have it in my--no; i see i've left it in my room. as a matter of fact, 
i found it yesterday.' 

and then parkin narrate the manner of his discovery of the whistle, 
upon hearing which the colonel grunted, and opine that, in parkins's 
place, he should himself be careful about use a thing that had belong 
to a set of papists, of whom, speak generally, it might be affirm 
that you never knew what they might not have been up to. from this topic 
he diverge to the enormity of the vicar, who had given notice on the 
previous sunday that friday would be the feast of st thomas the apostle, 
and that there would be service at eleven o'clock in the church. this and 
other similar proceedings constitute in the colonel's view a strong 
presumption that the vicar was a conceal papist, if not a jesuit; and 
parkins, who could not very readily follow the colonel in this region, 
did not disagree with him. in fact, they got on so well together in the 
morning that there was not talk on either side of their separate after 
lunch. 

both continue to play well during the afternoon, or at least, well 
enough to make them forget everything else until the light began to fail 
them. not until then did parkin remember that he had meant to do some 
more investigate at the preceptory; but it was of no great importance, 
he reflected. one day was as good as another; he might as well go home 
with the colonel. 

as they turn the corner of the house, the colonel was almost knock 
down by a boy who rush into him at the very top of his speed, and then, 
instead of running away, remain hanging on to him and panting. the 
first words of the warrior were naturally those of reproof and 
objurgation, but he very quick discern that the boy was almost 
speechless with fright. inquiry were useless at first. when the boy got 
his breath he began to howl, and still clung to the colonel's legs. he 
was at last detached, but continue to howl. 

'what in the world is the matter with you? what have you been up to? what 
have you seen?' said the two men. 

'ow, i seen it wive at me out of the winder,' wail the boy, 'and i 
don't like it.' 

'what window?' said the irritate colonel. 'come pull yourself together, 
my boy.' 

'the front wind it was, at the 'otel,' said the boy. 

at this point parkin was in favour of send the boy home, but the 
colonel refused; he want to get to the bottom of it, he said; it was 
most dangerous to give a boy such a fright as this one had had, and if it 
turn out that people had been play jokes, they should suffer for it 
in some way. and by a series of question he made out this story: the boy 
had been play about on the grass in front of the globe with some 
others; then they had gone home to their teas, and he was just going, 
when he happen to look up at the front wind and see it a-wiving at 
him. _it_ seem to be a figure of some sort, in white as far as he 
knew--couldn't see its face; but it wive at him, and it warn't a right 
thing--not to say not a right person. was there a light in the room? no, 
he didn't think to look if there was a light. which was the window? was 
it the top one or the second one? the seckind one it was--the big wind 
what got two little uns at the sides. 

'very well, my boy,' said the colonel, after a few more questions. 'you 
run away home now. i expect it was some person try to give you a 
start. another time, like a brave english boy, you just throw a 
stone--well, no, not that exactly, but you go and speak to the waiter, or 
to mr simpson, the landlord, and--yes--and say that i advise you to do 
so.' 

the boy's face express some of the doubt he felt as to the likelihood 
of mr simpson's lend a favourable ear to his complaint, but the 
colonel did not appear to perceive this, and went on: 

'and here's a sixpence--no, i see it's a shilling--and you be off home, 
and don't think any more about it.' 

the youth hurried off with agitate thanks, and the colonel and parkin 
went round to the front of the globe and reconnoitred. there was only one 
window answer to the description they had been hearing. 

'well, that's curious,' said parkins; 'it's evidently my window the lad 
was talk about. will you come up for a moment, colonel wilson? we 
ought to be able to see if anyone has been taking liberties in my room.' 

they were soon in the passage, and parkin made as if to open the door. 
then he stop and felt in his pockets. 

'this is more serious than i thought,' was his next remark. 'i remember 
now that before i start this morning i lock the door. it is lock 
now, and, what is more, here is the key.' and he held it up. 'now,' he 
went on, 'if the servant are in the habit of go into one's room 
during the day when one is away, i can only say that--well, that i don't 
approve of it at all.' conscious of a somewhat weak climax, he busy 
himself in opening the door (which was indeed locked) and in lighting 
candles. 'no,' he said, 'nothing seem disturbed.' 

'except your bed,' put in the colonel. 

'excuse me, that isn't my bed,' said parkins. 'i don't use that one. but 
it do look as if someone had been play trick with it.' 

it certainly did: the clothes were bundle up and twist together in a 
most tortuous confusion. parkin pondered. 

'that must be it,' he said at last. 'i disorder the clothes last night 
in unpacking, and they haven't made it since. perhaps they came in to 
make it, and that boy saw them through the window; and then they were 
call away and lock the door after them. yes, i think that must be 
it.' 

'well, ring and ask,' said the colonel, and this appeal to parkin as 
practical. 

the maid appeared, and, to make a long story short, depose that she had 
made the bed in the morning when the gentleman was in the room, and 
hadn't been there since. no, she hadn't no other key. mr simpson, he kep' 
the keys; he'd be able to tell the gentleman if anyone had been up. 

this was a puzzle. investigate show that nothing of value had been 
taken, and parkin remember the disposition of the small object on 
table and so forth well enough to be pretty sure that no prank had been 
play with them. mr and mrs simpson furthermore agree that neither of 
them had given the duplicate key of the room to any person whatever 
during the day. nor could parkins, fair-minded man as he was, detect 
anything in the demeanour of master, mistress, or maid that indicate 
guilt. he was much more inclined to think that the boy had been imposing 
on the colonel. 

the latter was unwonted silent and pensive at dinner and throughout the 
evening. when he bade goodnight to parkins, he murmur in a gruff 
undertone: 

'you know where i am if you want me during the night.' 

'why, yes, thank you, colonel wilson, i think i do; but there isn't much 
prospect of my disturb you, i hope. by the way,' he added, 'did i show 
you that old whistle i spoke of? i think not. well, here it is.' 

the colonel turn it over gingerly in the light of the candle. 

'can you make anything of the inscription?' ask parkins, as he took it 
back. 

'no, not in this light. what do you mean to do with it?' 

'oh, well, when i get back to cambridge i shall submit it to some of the 
archaeologist there, and see what they think of it; and very likely, if 
they consider it worth having, i may present it to one of the museums.' 

'm!' said the colonel. 'well, you may be right. all i know is that, if it 
were mine, i should chuck it straight into the sea. it's no use talking, 
i'm well aware, but i expect that with you it's a case of live and learn. 
i hope so, i'm sure, and i wish you a good night.' 

he turn away, leave parkin in act to speak at the bottom of the 
stair, and soon each was in his own bedroom. 

by some unfortunate accident, there were neither blind nor curtains to 
the window of the professor's room. the previous night he had thought 
little of this, but tonight there seem every prospect of a bright moon 
rising to shine directly on his bed, and probably wake him later on. when 
he notice this he was a good deal annoyed, but, with an ingenuity which 
i can only envy, he succeed in rigging up, with the help of a 
railway-rug, some safety-pins, and a stick and umbrella, a screen which, 
if it only held together, would completely keep the moonlight off his 
bed. and shortly afterwards he was comfortable in that bed. when he had 
read a somewhat solid work long enough to produce a decided wish to 
sleep, he cast a drowsy glance round the room, blew out the candle, and 
fell back upon the pillow. 

he must have slept sound for an hour or more, when a sudden clatter 
shook him up in a most unwelcome manner. in a moment he realize what had 
happened: his carefully-constructed screen had given way, and a very 
bright frosty moon was shining directly on his face. this was highly 
annoying. could he possibly get up and reconstruct the screen? or could 
he manage to sleep if he did not? 

for some minutes he lay and ponder over all the possibilities; then he 
turn over sharply, and with his eyes open lay breathless listening. 
there had been a movement, he was sure, in the empty bed on the opposite 
side of the room. tomorrow he would have it moved, for there must be rats 
or something play about in it. it was quiet now. no! the commotion 
began again. there was a rustling and shaking: surely more than any rat 
could cause. 

i can figure to myself something of the professor's bewilder and 
horror, for i have in a dream thirty years back seen the same thing 
happen; but the reader will hardly, perhaps, imagine how dreadful it was 
to him to see a figure sudden sit up in what he had known was an empty 
bed. he was out of his own bed in one bound, and made a dash towards the 
window, where lay his only weapon, the stick with which he had prop 
his screen. this was, as it turn out, the worst thing he could have 
done, because the personage in the empty bed, with a sudden smooth 
motion, slip from the bed and took up a position, with outspread arms, 
between the two beds, and in front of the door. parkin watch it in a 
horrid perplexity. somehow, the idea of get past it and escape 
through the door was intolerable to him; he could not have borne--he 
didn't know why--to touch it; and as for its touching him, he would 
soon dash himself through the window than have that happen. it stood 
for the moment in a band of dark shadow, and he had not seen what its 
face was like. now it began to move, in a stoop posture, and all at 
once the spectator realized, with some horror and some relief, that it 
must be blind, for it seem to feel about it with its muffle arms in a 
grope and random fashion. turning half away from him, it became 
sudden conscious of the bed he had just left, and dart towards it, 
and bent and felt over the pillow in a way which made parkin shudder as 
he had never in his life thought it possible. in a very few moments it 
seem to know that the bed was empty, and then, moving forward into the 
area of light and facing the window, it show for the first time what 
manner of thing it was. 

parkins, who very much dislike being question about it, did once 
describe something of it in my hearing, and i gather that what he 
chiefly remember about it is a horrible, an intense horrible, face _of 
crumple linen._ what expression he read upon it he could not or would 
not tell, but that the fear of it went nigh to maddening him is certain. 

but he was not at leisure to watch it for long. with formidable quick 
it move into the middle of the room, and, as it grope and waved, one 
corner of its drapery swept across parkins's face. he could not, though 
he knew how perilous a sound was--he could not keep back a cry of 
disgust, and this gave the search an instant clue. it leapt towards him 
upon the instant, and the next moment he was half-way through the window 
backwards, utter cry upon cry at the utmost pitch of his voice, and 
the linen face was thrust close into his own. at this, almost the last 
possible second, deliverance came, as you will have guessed: the colonel 
burst the door open, and was just in time to see the dreadful group at 
the window. when he reach the figures only one was left. parkin sank 
forward into the room in a faint, and before him on the floor lay a 
tumble heap of bed-clothes. 

colonel wilson ask no questions, but busy himself in keeping everyone 
else out of the room and in get parkin back to his bed; and himself, 
wrap in a rug, occupy the other bed, for the rest of the night. 
early on the next day rogers arrived, more welcome than he would have 
been a day before, and the three of them held a very long consultation in 
the professor's room. at the end of it the colonel left the hotel door 
carry a small object between his finger and thumb, which he cast as 
far into the sea as a very brawny arm could send it. later on the smoke 
of a burning ascend from the back premises of the globe. 

exactly what explanation was patch up for the staff and visitor at the 
hotel i must confess i do not recollect. the professor was somehow 
clear of the ready suspicion of delirium tremens, and the hotel of the 
reputation of a trouble house. 

there is not much question as to what would have happen to parkin if 
the colonel had not intervene when he did. he would either have fallen 
out of the window or else lost his wits. but it is not so evident what 
more the creature that came in answer to the whistle could have done than 
frighten. there seem to be absolutely nothing material about it save 
the bedclothes of which it had made itself a body. the colonel, who 
remember a not very dissimilar occurrence in india, was of the opinion 
that if parkin had closed with it it could really have done very little, 
and that its one power was that of frightening. the whole thing, he said, 
serve to confirm his opinion of the church of rome. 

there is really nothing more to tell, but, as you may imagine, the 
professor's view on certain points are less clear cut than they use to 
be. his nerves, too, have suffered: he cannot even now see a surplice 
hanging on a door quite unmoved, and the spectacle of a scarecrow in a 
field late on a winter afternoon has cost him more than one sleepless 
night. 




the treasure of abbot thomas 

i 

_verum usque in praesentem diem multa garriunt inter se canonici de 
abscondito quodam istiu abbati thomae thesauro, quem saepe, 
quanquam ahduc incassum, quaesiverunt steinfeldenses. ipsum enim 
thomam adhuc florida in aetate existentem ingentem auri massam circa 
monasterium defodisse perhibent; de quo multoty interrogatu ubi 
esset, cum risu respondere solitu erat: 'job, johannes, et zacharia 
vel vobi vel posteri indicabunt'; idemque aliquando adiicere se 
inventuri minime invisurum. inter alia huiu abbati opera, hoc 
memoria praecipue dignum indico quod fenestram magnam in orientali 
parte alae australi in ecclesia sua imaginibu optime in vitro 
depicti impleverit: id quod et ipsiu effigy et insignia ibidem 
posita demonstrant. domum quoque abbatialem fere totam restauravit: 
puteo in atrio ipsiu effosso et lapidibu marmorei pulchre caelati 
exornato. decessit autem, morte aliquantulum subitanea perculsus, 
aetati suae anno lxxii(do), incarnationi vero dominicae mdxxix(o)._ 

'i suppose i shall have to translate this,' said the antiquary to 
himself, as he finished copy the above lines from that rather rare and 
exceedingly diffuse book, the _sertum steinfeldense norbertinum.[5]_ 
'well, it may as well be done first as last,' and accordingly the 
following rendering was very quick produced: 

up to the present day there is much gossip among the canon about a 
certain hidden treasure of this abbot thomas, for which those of 
steinfeld have often made search, though hitherto in vain. the story 
is that thomas, while yet in the vigour of life, conceal a very 
large quantity of gold somewhere in the monastery. he was often ask 
where it was, and always answered, with a laugh: 'job, john, and 
zechariah will tell either you or your successors.' he sometimes 
add that he should feel no grudge against those who might find it. 
among other works carry out by this abbot i may specially mention 
his filling the great window at the east end of the south aisle of 
the church with figures admirable paint on glass, as his effigy and 
arms in the window attest. he also restore almost the whole of the 
abbot's lodging, and dug a well in the court of it, which he adorn 
with beautiful carving in marble. he die rather sudden in the 
seventy-second year of his age, a.d. 1529. 

[5] an account of the premonstratensian abbey of steinfeld, in the 
eiffel, with lives of the abbots, publish at cologne in 1712 by 
christian albert erhard, a resident in the district. the epithet 
_norbertinum_ is due to the fact that st norbert was founder of the 
premonstratensian order. 

the object which the antiquary had before him at the moment was that of 
tracing the whereabouts of the paint window of the abbey church at 
steinfeld. shortly after the revolution, a very large quantity of paint 
glass made its way from the dissolve abbey of germany and belgium to 
this country, and may now be seen adorn various of our parish 
churches, cathedrals, and private chapels. steinfeld abbey was among the 
most considerable of these involuntary contributor to our artistic 
possession (i am quote the somewhat ponderous preamble of the book 
which the antiquary wrote), and the greater part of the glass from that 
institution can be identify without much difficulty by the help, either 
of the numerous inscription in which the place is mentioned, or of the 
subject of the windows, in which several well-defined cycle or 
narrative were represented. 

the passage with which i began my story had set the antiquary on the 
track of another identification. in a private chapel--no matter where--he 
had seen three large figures, each occupy a whole light in a window, 
and evidently the work of one artist. their style made it plain that that 
artist had been a germany of the sixteenth century; but hitherto the more 
exact localize of them had been a puzzle. they represented--will you be 
surprise to hear it?--job patriarcha, johanne evangelista, zacharia 
propheta, and each of them held a book or scroll, inscribe with a 
sentence from his writings. these, as a matter of course, the antiquary 
had noted, and had been struck by the curious way in which they differ 
from any text of the vulgate that he had been able to examine. thus the 
scroll in job's hand was inscribed: _auro est locus in quo absconditur_ 
(for _conflatur_)[6]; on the book of john was: _habent in vestimenti 
sui scripturam quam nemo novit_[7] (for in _vestimento scriptum_, the 
following words being taken from another verse); and zacharia had: 
_super lapidem unum septem oculi sunt_[8] (which alone of the three 
presents an unaltered text). 

[6] there is a place for gold where it is hidden. 

[7] they have on their raiment a writing which no man knoweth. 

[8] upon one stone are seven eyes. 

a sad perplexity it had been to our investigate to think why these three 
personage should have been placed together in one window. there was no 
bond of connexion between them, either historic, symbolic, or doctrinal, 
and he could only suppose that they must have form part of a very large 
series of prophets and apostles, which might have filled, say, all the 
clerestory window of some capacious church. but the passage from the 
_sertum_ had alter the situation by showing that the name of the 
actual personage represent in the glass now in lord d----'s chapel had 
been constant on the lip of abbot thomas von eschenhausen of 
steinfeld, and that this abbot had put up a paint window, probably 
about the year 1520, in the south aisle of his abbey church. it was no 
very wild conjecture that the three figures might have form part of 
abbot thomas's offering; it was one which, moreover, could probably be 
confirmed or set aside by another careful examination of the glass. and, 
as mr. somerton was a man of leisure, he set out on pilgrimage to the 
private chapel with very little delay. his conjecture was confirmed to 
the full. not only did the style and technique of the glass suit 
perfectly with the date and place required, but in another window of the 
chapel he found some glass, known to have been bought along with the 
figures, which contained the arms of abbot thomas von eschenhausen. 

at interval during his research mr. somerton had been haunt by the 
recollection of the gossip about the hidden treasure, and, as he thought 
the matter over, it became more and more obvious to him that if the abbot 
meant anything by the enigmatic answer which he gave to his 
questioners, he must have meant that the secret was to be found somewhere 
in the window he had placed in the abbey church. it was undeniable, 
furthermore, that the first of the curiously-selected text on the 
scroll in the window might be taken to have a reference to hidden 
treasure. 

every feature, therefore, or mark which could possibly assist in 
elucidate the riddle which, he felt sure, the abbot had set to 
posterity he noted with scrupulous care, and, return to his berkshire 
manor-house, consume many a pint of the midnight oil over his tracing 
and sketches. after two or three weeks, a day came when mr somerton 
announce to his man that he must pack his own and his master's things 
for a short journey abroad, whither for the moment we will not follow 
him. 


ii 

mr gregory, the rector of parsbury, had stroll out before breakfast, it 
being a fine autumn morning, as far as the gate of his carriage-drive, 
with intent to meet the postman and sniff the cool air. nor was he 
disappointed of either purpose. before he had had time to answer more 
than ten or eleven of the miscellaneous question propound to him in 
the lightness of their heart by his young offspring, who had accompany 
him, the postman was seen approaching; and among the morning's budget was 
one letter bearing a foreign postmark and stamp (which became at once the 
object of an eager competition among the youthful gregorys), and 
address in an uneducated, but plainly an english hand. 

when the rector open it, and turn to the signature, he realize that 
it came from the confidential valet of his friend and squire, mr. 
somerton. thus it ran: 

honour sir, 

has i am in a great anxiety about master i write at is wish to beg 
you sir if you could be so good as step over. master has add a nastey 
shock and keeps his bedd. i never have known him like this but no 
wonder and nothing will serve but you sir. master say would i 
mint the short way here is drive to cobblince and take a trap. 
hope i have maid all plain, but am much confuse in myself what 
with anxiatey and weakful at night. if i might be so bold sir it 
will be a pleasure to see a honnest brish face among all these forig 
ones. 

i am sir 

your obed't serv't 

william brown. 

p.s.--the village for town i will not turm it is name steenfeld. 

the reader must be left to picture to himself in detail the surprise, 
confusion, and hurry of preparation into which the receipt of such a 
letter would be likely to plunge a quiet berkshire parsonage in the year 
of grace 1859. it is enough for me to say that a train to town was caught 
in the course of the day, and that mr gregory was able to secure a cabin 
in the antwerp boat and a place in the coblenz train. nor was it 
difficult to manage the transit from that centre to steinfeld. 

i labour under a grave disadvantage as narrator of this story in that i 
have never visit steinfeld myself, and that neither of the principal 
actor in the episode (from whom i derive my information) was able to 
give me anything but a vague and rather dismal idea of its appearance. i 
gather that it is a small place, with a large church despoil of its 
ancient fittings; a number of rather ruinous great buildings, mostly of 
the seventeenth century, surround this church; for the abbey, in common 
with most of those on the continent, was rebuilt in a luxurious fashion 
by its inhabitant at that period. it has not seem to me worth while to 
lavish money on a visit to the place, for though it is probably far more 
attractive than either mr somerton or mr gregory thought it, there is 
evidently little, if anything, of first-rate interest to be seen--except, 
perhaps, one thing, which i should not care to see. 

the inn where the english gentleman and his servant were lodge is, or 
was, the only 'possible' one in the village. mr gregory was taken to it 
at once by his driver, and found mr brown wait at the door. mr brown, 
a model when in his berkshire home of the impassive whiskered race who 
are known as confidential valets, was now egregious out of his element, 
in a light tweed suit, anxious, almost irritable, and plainly anything 
but master of the situation. his relief at the sight of the 'honest 
britain face' of his rector was unmeasured, but words to describe it were 
deny him. he could only say: 

'well, i ham pleased, i'm sure, sir, to see you. and so i'm sure, sir, 
will master.' 

'how is your master, brown?' mr gregory eager put in. 

'i think he's better, sir, thank you; but he's had a dreadful time of it. 
i 'ope he's gettin' some sleep now, but--' 

'what has been the matter--i couldn't make out from your letter? was it 
an accident of any kind?' 

'well, sir, i 'ardly know whether i'd better speak about it. master was 
very partickler he should be the one to tell you. but there's no bone 
broke--that's one thing i'm sure we ought to be thankful--' 

'what do the doctor say?' ask mr gregory. 

they were by this time outside mr somerton's bedroom door, and speak 
in low tones. mr gregory, who happen to be in front, was feeling for 
the handle, and chance to run his finger over the panels. before brown 
could answer, there was a terrible cry from within the room. 

'in god's name, who is that?' were the first words they heard. 'brown, is 
it?' 

'yes, sir--me, sir, and mr gregory,' brown hasten to answer, and there 
was an audible groan of relief in reply. 

they enter the room, which was darken against the afternoon sun, and 
mr gregory saw, with a shock of pity, how drawn, how damp with drops of 
fear, was the usually calm face of his friend, who, sitting up in the 
curtain bed, stretch out a shake hand to welcome him. 

'better for seeing you, my dear gregory,' was the reply to the rector's 
first question, and it was palpable true. 

after five minutes of conversation mr somerton was more his own man, 
brown afterwards reported, than he had been for days. he was able to eat 
a more than respectable dinner, and talk confident of being fit to 
stand a journey to coblenz within twenty-four hours. 

'but there's one thing,' he said, with a return of agitation which mr 
gregory did not like to see, 'which i must beg you to do for me, my dear 
gregory. don't,' he went on, lay his hand on gregory's to forestall 
any interruption--'don't ask me what it is, or why i want it done. i'm 
not up to explain it yet; it would throw me back--undo all the good 
you have done me by coming. the only word i will say about it is that you 
run no risk whatever by do it, and that brown can and will show you 
tomorrow what it is. it's merely to put back--to keep--something--no; i 
can't speak of it yet. do you mind calling brown?' 

'well, somerton,' said mr gregory, as he cross the room to the door. 'i 
won't ask for any explanation till you see fit to give them. and if this 
bit of business is as easy as you represent it to be, i will very gladly 
undertake it for you the first thing in the morning.' 

'ah, i was sure you would, my dear gregory; i was certain i could rely on 
you. i shall owe you more thanks than i can tell. now, here is brown. 
brown, one word with you.' 

'shall i go?' interject mr gregory. 

'not at all. dear me, no. brown, the first thing tomorrow morning--(you 
don't mind early hours, i know, gregory)--you must take the rector 
to--_there_, you know' (a nod from brown, who look grave and anxious), 
'and he and you will put that back. you needn't be in the least alarmed; 
it's _perfectly_ safe in the daytime. you know what i mean. it lie on 
the step, you know, where--where we put it.' (brown swallow dry once 
or twice, and, failing to speak, bowed.) 'and--yes, that's all. only this 
one other word, my dear gregory. if you _can_ manage to keep from 
questioning brown about this matter, i shall be still more bound to you. 
tomorrow evening, at latest, if all go well, i shall be able, i 
believe, to tell you the whole story from start to finish. and now i'll 
wish you good night. brown will be with me--he sleep here--and if i were 
you, i should lock my door. yes, be particular to do that. they--they 
like it, the people here, and it's better. good night, good night.' 

they part upon this, and if mr gregory woke once or twice in the small 
hour and fancy he heard a fumble about the lower part of his lock 
door, it was, perhaps, no more than what a quiet man, sudden plunge 
into a strange bed and the heart of a mystery, might reasonably expect. 
certainly he thought, to the end of his days, that he had heard such a 
sound twice or three times between midnight and dawn. 

he was up with the sun, and out in company with brown soon after. 
perplex as was the service he had been ask to perform for mr 
somerton, it was not a difficult or an alarm one, and within half an 
hour from his leave the inn it was over. what it was i shall not as yet 
divulge. 

later in the morning mr somerton, now almost himself again, was able to 
make a start from steinfeld; and that same evening, whether at coblenz or 
at some intermediate stage on the journey i am not certain, he settled 
down to the promise explanation. brown was present, but how much of the 
matter was ever really made plain to his comprehension he would never 
say, and i am unable to conjecture. 


iii 

this was mr somerton's story: 

'you know roughly, both of you, that this expedition of mine was 
undertaken with the object of tracing something in connexion with some 
old paint glass in lord d----'s private chapel. well, the 
starting-point of the whole matter lie in this passage from an old 
print book, to which i will ask your attention.' 

and at this point mr somerton went careful over some ground with which 
we are already familiar. 

'on my second visit to the chapel,' he went on, 'my purpose was to take 
every note i could of figures, lettering, diamond-scratchings on the 
glass, and even apparently accidental markings. the first point which i 
tackle was that of the inscribe scrolls. i could not doubt that the 
first of these, that of job--"there is a place for the gold where it is 
hidden"--with its intentional alteration, must refer to the treasure; so 
i applied myself with some confidence to the next, that of st john--"they 
have on their vesture a writing which no man knoweth." the natural 
question will have occur to you: was there an inscription on the robe 
of the figures? i could see none; each of the three had a broad black 
border to his mantle, which made a conspicuous and rather ugly feature in 
the window. i was nonplussed, i will own, and, but for a curious bit of 
luck, i think i should have left the search where the canon of steinfeld 
had left it before me. but it so happen that there was a good deal of 
dust on the surface of the glass, and lord d----, happening to come in, 
notice my blacken hands, and kindly insist on send for a turk's 
head broom to clean down the window. there must, i suppose, have been a 
rough piece in the broom; anyhow, as it pass over the border of one of 
the mantles, i notice that it left a long scratch, and that some yellow 
stain instantly show up. i ask the man to stop his work for a moment, 
and ran up the ladder to examine the place. the yellow stain was there, 
sure enough, and what had come away was a thick black pigment, which had 
evidently been laid on with the brush after the glass had been burnt, and 
could therefore be easily scrape off without do any harm. i scraped, 
accordingly, and you will hardly believe--no, i do you an injustice; you 
will have guess already--that i found under this black pigment two or 
three clearly-formed capital letters in yellow stain on a clear ground. 
of course, i could hardly contain my delight. 

'i told lord d---- that i had detect an inscription which i thought 
might be very interesting, and beg to be allow to uncover the whole 
of it. he made no difficulty about it whatever, told me to do exactly as 
i pleased, and then, have an engagement, was obliged--rather to my 
relief, i must say--to leave me. i set to work at once, and found the 
task a fairly easy one. the pigment, disintegrated, of course, by time, 
came off almost at a touch, and i don't think that it took me a couple of 
hours, all told, to clean the whole of the black border in all three 
lights. each of the figures had, as the inscription said, "a writing on 
their vesture which nobody knew". 

'this discovery, of course, made it absolutely certain to my mind that i 
was on the right track. and, now, what was the inscription? while i was 
clean the glass i almost took pains not to read the lettering, saving 
up the treat until i had got the whole thing clear. and when that was 
done, my dear gregory, i assure you i could almost have cry from sheer 
disappointment. what i read was only the most hopeless jumble of letters 
that was ever shaken up in a hat. here it is: 

_job_. dreviciopedmoomsmvivlislcav 
ibasbataovt 

_st john_. rdiieamrlesipvspodseeirsetta 
aesgiavnnr 

_zechariah_. fteeailnqdpvaivmtleeattohioo 
nvmcaat.h.q.e. 

'blank as i felt and must have look for the first few minutes, my 
disappointment didn't last long. i realize almost at once that i was 
dealing with a cipher or cryptogram; and i reflect that it was likely 
to be of a pretty simple kind, considering its early date. so i copy 
the letters with the most anxious care. another little point, i may tell 
you, turn up in the process which confirmed my belief in the cipher. 
after copy the letters on job's robe i count them, to make sure that 
i had them right. there were thirty-eight; and, just as i finished go 
through them, my eye fell on a scratch made with a sharp point on the 
edge of the border. it was simply the number xxxviii in roman numerals. 
to cut the matter short, there was a similar note, as i may call it, in 
each of the other lights; and that made it plain to me that the 
glass-painter had had very strict orders from abbot thomas about the 
inscription and had taken pains to get it correct. 

'well, after that discovery you may imagine how minutely i went over the 
whole surface of the glass in search of further light. of course, i did 
not neglect the inscription on the scroll of zechariah--"upon one stone 
are seven eyes," but i very quick conclude that this must refer to 
some mark on a stone which could only be found _in situ_, where the 
treasure was concealed. to be short, i made all possible note and 
sketch and tracings, and then came back to parsbury to work out the 
cipher at leisure. oh, the agony i went through! i thought myself very 
clever at first, for i made sure that the key would be found in some of 
the old books on secret writing. the _steganographia_ of joachim 
trithemius, who was an early contemporary of abbot thomas, seem 
particularly promising; so i got that and selenius's _cryptographia_ and 
bacon's _de augmenti scientiarum_ and some more. but i could hit upon 
nothing. then i try the principle of the "most frequent letter", taking 
first latin and then germany as a basis. that didn't help, either; whether 
it ought to have done so, i am not clear. and then i came back to the 
window itself, and read over my notes, hope almost against hope that 
the abbot might himself have somewhere supply the key i wanted. i could 
make nothing out of the colour or pattern of the robes. there were no 
landscape background with subsidiary objects; there was nothing in the 
canopies. the only resource possible seem to be in the attitude of the 
figures. "job," i read: "scroll in left hand, forefinger of right hand 
extend upwards. john: hold inscribe book in left hand; with right 
hand blesses, with two fingers. zechariah: scroll in left hand; right 
hand extend upwards, as job, but with three finger point up." in 
other words, i reflected, job has one finger extended, john has _two_, 
zechariah has _three_. may not there be a numerical key conceal in 
that? my dear gregory,' said mr somerton, lay his hand on his friend's 
knee, 'that _was_ the key. i didn't get it to fit at first, but after two 
or three trial i saw what was meant. after the first letter of the 
inscription you skip _one_ letter, after the next you skip _two_, and 
after that skip _three_. now look at the result i got. i've underline 
the letters which form words: 

[d]r[e]vi[c]iop[e]d[m]oo[m]smv[i]v[l]is[l]cav 
[i]b[a]sb[a]tao[v]t 
[r]di[i]eam[r]l[e]si[p]vsp[o]d[s]ee[i]rse[t]t[a] 
ae[s]gia[v]n[n]r 
f[t]eea[i]l[n]qd[p]vai[v]m[t]le[e]att[o]h[i]oo 
[n]vmc[a]a[t].h.q.e. 

'do you see it? "_decem millia auri reposita sunt in puteo in at_ ..." 
(ten thousand [pieces] of gold are laid up in a well in ...), follow by 
an incomplete word beginning _at_. so far so good. i try the same plan 
with the remain letters; but it wouldn't work, and i fancy that 
perhaps the place of dot after the three last letters might indicate 
some difference of procedure. then i thought to myself, "wasn't there 
some allusion to a well in the account of abbot thomas in that book the 
'_sertum_'?" yes, there was; he built a _puteus in atrio_; (a well in the 
court). there, of course, was my word _atrio_. the next step was to copy 
out the remain letters of the inscription, omit those i had 
already used. that gave what you will see on this slip: 

rviiopdoosmvviscavbsbtaotdie 
amlsivspdeersetaegianrfeealqd 
vaimleatthoovmca.h.q.e. 

'now, i knew what the three first letters i want were--namely, 
_rio_--to complete the word _atrio_; and, as you will see, these are all 
to be found in the first five letters. i was a little confuse at first 
by the occurrence of two _i_'s, but very soon i saw that every alternate 
letter must be taken in the remainder of the inscription. you can work it 
out for yourself; the result, continue where the first "round" left 
off, thus: 

_rio domu abbatiali de steinfeld a me, thoma, qui posui custodem 
super ea. gare à qui la touche_. 

'so the whole secret was out: 

"ten thousand pieces of gold are laid up in the well in the court of 
the abbot's house of steinfeld by me, thomas, who have set a guardian 
over them. _gare à qui la louche_." 

'the last words, i ought to say, are a device which abbot thomas had 
adopted. i found it with his arms in another piece of glass at lord 
d----'s, and he draft it bodily into his cipher, though it doesn't 
quite fit in point of grammar. 

'well, what would any human being have been tempt to do, my dear 
gregory, in my place? could he have help setting off, as i did, to 
steinfeld, and tracing the secret literally to the fountain-head? i don't 
believe he could. anyhow, i couldn't, and, as i needn't tell you, i found 
myself at steinfeld as soon as the resources of civilization could put me 
there, and install myself in the inn you saw. i must tell you that i 
was not altogether free from forebodings--on one hand of disappointment, 
on the other of danger. there was always the possibility that abbot 
thomas's well might have been wholly obliterated, or else that someone, 
ignorant of cryptograms, and guide only by luck, might have stumble on 
the treasure before me. and then'--there was a very perceptible shake 
of the voice here--'i was not entire easy, i need not mind confessing, 
as to the meaning of the words about the guardian of the treasure. but, 
if you don't mind, i'll say no more about that until--until it become 
necessary. 

'at the first possible opportunity brown and i began explore the place. 
i had naturally represent myself as being interested in the remains of 
the abbey, and we could not avoid pay a visit to the church, impatient 
as i was to be elsewhere. still, it did interest me to see the window 
where the glass had been, and especially that at the east end of the 
south aisle. in the tracery lights of that i was startle to see some 
fragment and coats-of-arms remaining--abbot thomas's shield was there, 
and a small figure with a scroll inscribe _oculos habent, et non 
videbunt_ (they have eyes, and shall not see), which, i take it, was a 
hit of the abbot at his canons. 

'but, of course, the principal object was to find the abbot's house. 
there is no prescribed place for this, so far as i know, in the plan of a 
monastery; you can't predict of it, as you can of the chapter-house, that 
it will be on the eastern side of the cloister, or, as of the dormitory, 
that it will communicate with a transept of the church. i felt that if i 
ask many question i might awaken lingering memory of the treasure, 
and i thought it best to try first to discover it for myself. it was not 
a very long or difficult search. that three-sided court south-east of the 
church, with desert piles of building round it, and grass-grown 
pavement, which you saw this morning, was the place. and glad enough i 
was to see that it was put to no use, and was neither very far from our 
inn nor overlook by any inhabit building; there were only orchard 
and paddock on the slope east of the church. i can tell you that fine 
stone glow wonderful in the rather watery yellow sunset that we had 
on the tuesday afternoon. 

'next, what about the well? there was not much doubt about that, as you 
can testify. it is really a very remarkable thing. that curb is, i think, 
of italy marble, and the carving i thought must be italy also. there 
were reliefs, you will perhaps remember, of eliezer and rebekah, and of 
jacob opening the well for rachel, and similar subjects; but, by way of 
disarm suspicion, i suppose, the abbot had careful abstain from 
any of his cynical and allusion inscriptions. 

'i examine the whole structure with the keenest interest, of course--a 
square well-head with an opening in one side; an arch over it, with a 
wheel for the rope to pass over, evidently in very good condition still, 
for it had been use within sixty years, or perhaps even later though not 
quite recently. then there was the question of depth and access to the 
interior. i suppose the depth was about sixty to seventy feet; and as to 
the other point, it really seem as if the abbot had wish to lead 
search up to the very door of his treasure-house, for, as you test 
for yourself, there were big block of stone bonded into the masonry, and 
leading down in a regular staircase round and round the inside of the 
well. 

'it seem almost too good to be true. i wonder if there was a trap--if 
the stone were so contrived as to tip over when a weight was placed on 
them; but i try a good many with my own weight and with my stick, and 
all seemed, and actually were, perfectly firm. of course, i resolve that 
brown and i would make an experiment that very night. 

'i was well prepared. knowing the sort of place i should have to explore, 
i had brought a sufficiency of good rope and band of webbing to surround 
my body, and cross-bars to hold to, as well as lantern and candle and 
crowbars, all of which would go into a single carpet-bag and excite no 
suspicion. i satisfy myself that my rope would be long enough, and that 
the wheel for the bucket was in good working order, and then we went home 
to dinner. 

'i had a little cautious conversation with the landlord, and made out 
that he would not be overmuch surprise if i went out for a stroll with 
my man about nine o'clock, to make (heaven forgive me!) a sketch of the 
abbey by moonlight. i ask no question about the well, and am not 
likely to do so now. i fancy i know as much about it as anyone in 
steinfeld: at least'--with a strong shudder--'i don't want to know any 
more. 

'now we come to the crisis, and, though i hate to think of it, i feel 
sure, gregory, that it will be better for me in all ways to recall it 
just as it happened. we started, brown and i, at about nine with our bag, 
and attract no attention; for we manage to slip out at the hinder end 
of the inn-yard into an alley which brought us quite to the edge of the 
village. in five minutes we were at the well, and for some little time we 
sat on the edge of the well-head to make sure that no one was stirring or 
spy on us. all we heard was some horse crop grass out of sight 
farther down the eastern slope. we were perfectly unobserved, and had 
plenty of light from the gorgeous full moon to allow us to get the rope 
properly fitted over the wheel. then i secure the band round my body 
beneath the arms. we attach the end of the rope very secure to a ring 
in the stonework. brown took the light lantern and follow me; i had a 
crowbar. and so we began to descend cautiously, feeling every step before 
we set foot on it, and scan the wall in search of any marked stone. 

'half aloud i count the steps as we went down, and we got as far as the 
thirty-eighth before i noted anything at all irregular in the surface of 
the masonry. even here there was no mark, and i began to feel very blank, 
and to wonder if the abbot's cryptogram could possibly be an elaborate 
hoax. at the forty-ninth step the staircase ceased. it was with a very 
sink heart that i began retrace my steps, and when i was back on the 
thirty-eighth--brown, with the lantern, being a step or two above me--i 
scrutinize the little bit of irregularity in the stonework with all my 
might; but there was no vestige of a mark. 

'then it struck me that the texture of the surface look just a little 
smooth than the rest, or, at least, in some way different. it might 
possibly be cement and not stone. i gave it a good blow with my iron bar. 
there was a decidedly hollow sound, though that might be the result of 
our being in a well. but there was more. a great flake of cement drop 
on to my feet, and i saw mark on the stone underneath. i had track the 
abbot down, my dear gregory; even now i think of it with a certain pride. 
it took but a very few more taps to clear the whole of the cement away, 
and i saw a slab of stone about two feet square, upon which was engraven 
a cross. disappointment again, but only for a moment. it was you, brown, 
who reassure me by a casual remark. you said, if i remember right: 

"'it's a funny cross: looks like a lot of eyes." 

'i snatch the lantern out of your hand, and saw with inexpressible 
pleasure that the cross was compose of seven eyes, four in a vertical 
line, three horizontal. the last of the scroll in the window was 
explain in the way i had anticipated. here was my "stone with the seven 
eyes". so far the abbot's data had been exact, and as i thought of this, 
the anxiety about the "guardian" return upon me with increase force. 
still i wasn't go to retreat now. 

'without give myself time to think, i knock away the cement all round 
the marked stone, and then gave it a prise on the right side with my 
crowbar. it move at once, and i saw that it was but a thin light slab, 
such as i could easily lift out myself, and that it stop the entrance 
to a cavity. i did lift it out unbroken, and set it on the step, for it 
might be very important to us to be able to replace it. then i wait for 
several minutes on the step just above. i don't know why, but i think to 
see if any dreadful thing would rush out. nothing happened. next i lit a 
candle, and very cautious i placed it inside the cavity, with some idea 
of seeing whether there were foul air, and of get a glimpse of what 
was inside. there _was_ some foul of air which nearly extinguish 
the flame, but in no long time it burn quite steadily. the hole went 
some little way back, and also on the right and left of the entrance, and 
i could see some round light-coloured object within which might be 
bags. there was no use in waiting. i face the cavity, and look in. 
there was nothing immediately in the front of the hole. i put my arm in 
and felt to the right, very gingerly.... 

'just give me a glass of cognac, brown. i'll go on in a moment, 
gregory.... 

'well, i felt to the right, and my finger touched something curved, that 
felt--yes--more or less like leather; dampish it was, and evidently part 
of a heavy, full thing. there was nothing, i must say, to alarm one. i 
grew bolder, and putt both hand in as well as i could, i pull it to 
me, and it came. it was heavy, but move more easily than i had expected. 
as i pull it towards the entrance, my left elbow knock over and 
extinguish the candle. i got the thing fairly in front of the mouth and 
began drawing it out. just then brown gave a sharp ejaculation and ran 
quick up the steps with the lantern. he will tell you why in a moment. 
startle as i was, i look round after him, and saw him stand for a 
minute at the top and then walk away a few yards. then i heard him call 
softly, "all right, sir," and went on pull out the great bag, in 
complete darkness. it hung for an instant on the edge of the hole, then 
slip forward on to my chest, and _put its arms round my neck_. 

'my dear gregory, i am telling you the exact truth. i believe i am now 
acquaint with the extremity of terror and repulsion which a man can 
endure without lose his mind. i can only just manage to tell you now 
the bare outline of the experience. i was conscious of a most horrible 
smell of mould, and of a cold kind of face pressed against my own, and 
moving slow over it, and of several--i don't know how many--legs or 
arms or tentacle or something clinging to my body. i scream out, brown 
says, like a beast, and fell away backward from the step on which i 
stood, and the creature slip downwards, i suppose, on to that same 
step. providential the band round me held firm. brown did not lose his 
head, and was strong enough to pull me up to the top and get me over the 
edge quite promptly. how he manage it exactly i don't know, and i think 
he would find it hard to tell you. i believe he contrived to hide our 
implement in the desert building near by, and with very great 
difficulty he got me back to the inn. i was in no state to make 
explanations, and brown know no german; but next morning i told the 
people some tale of have had a bad fall in the abbey ruins, which i 
suppose they believed. and now, before i go further, i should just like 
you to hear what brown's experience during those few minutes were. tell 
the rector, brown, what you told me.' 

'well, sir,' said brown, speak low and nervously, 'it was just this 
way. master was busy down in front of the 'ole, and i was 'olding the 
lantern and look on, when i 'eard somethink drop in the water from the 
top, as i thought. so i look up, and i see someone's 'ead lookin' over 
at us. i s'pose i must ha' said somethink, and i 'eld the light up and 
run up the steps, and my light shone right on the face. that was a bad 
un, sir, if ever i see one! a holdish man, and the face very much fell 
in, and larfin', as i thought. and i got up the steps as quick pretty 
nigh as i'm tellin' you, and when i was out on the ground there warn't a 
sign of any person. there 'adn't been the time for anyone to get away, 
let alone a hold chap, and i made sure he warn't crouch down by the 
well, nor nothink. next thing i hear master cry out somethink 'orrible, 
and hall i see was him hanging out by the rope, and, as master says, 
'owever i got him up i couldn't tell you.' 

'you hear that, gregory?' said mr somerton. 'now, do any explanation of 
that incident strike you?' 

'the whole thing is so ghastly and abnormal that i must own it put me 
quite off my balance; but the thought did occur to me that possibly 
the--well, the person who set the trap might have come to see the success 
of his plan.' 

'just so, gregory, just so. i can think of nothing else so--_likely_, i 
should say, if such a word had a place anywhere in my story. i think it 
must have been the abbot.... well, i haven't much more to tell you. i 
spent a miserable night, brown sitting up with me. next day i was no 
better; unable to get up; no doctor to be had; and if one had been 
available, i doubt if he could have done much for me. i made brown write 
off to you, and spent a second terrible night. and, gregory, of this i am 
sure, and i think it affected me more than the first shock, for it last 
longer: there was someone or something on the watch outside my door the 
whole night. i almost fancy there were two. it wasn't only the faint 
noise i heard from time to time all through the dark hours, but there 
was the smell--the hideous smell of mould. every rag i had had on me on 
that first evening i had strip off and made brown take it away. i 
believe he stuff the things into the stove in his room; and yet the 
smell was there, as intense as it had been in the well; and, what is 
more, it came from outside the door. but with the first glimmer of dawn 
it fade out, and the sound ceased, too; and that convinced me that the 
thing or things were creature of darkness, and could not stand the 
daylight; and so i was sure that if anyone could put back the stone, it 
or they would be powerless until someone else took it away again. i had 
to wait until you came to get that done. of course, i couldn't send brown 
to do it by himself, and still less could i tell anyone who belong to 
the place. 

'well, there is my story; and, if you don't believe it, i can't help it. 
but i think you do.' 

'indeed,' said mr gregory, 'i can find no alternative. i _must_ believe 
it! i saw the well and the stone myself, and had a glimpse, i thought, of 
the bags or something else in the hole. and, to be plain with you, 
somerton, i believe my door was watch last night, too.' 

'i dare say it was, gregory; but, thank goodness, that is over. have you, 
by the way, anything to tell about your visit to that dreadful place?' 

'very little,' was the answer. 'brown and i manage easily enough to get 
the slab into its place, and he fixed it very firm with the irons and 
wedge you had desire him to get, and we contrived to smear the surface 
with mud so that it looks just like the rest of the wall. one thing i did 
notice in the carving on the well-head, which i think must have escape 
you. it was a horrid, grotesque shape--perhaps more like a toad than 
anything else, and there was a label by it inscribe with the two words, 
"depositum custodi".'[9] 

[9] 'keep that which is committed to thee.' 









end of project gutenberg's ghost story of an antiquary, by m. r. james 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook ghost story of an antiquary *** 

***** this file should be name 8486-8.txt or 8486-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/8/8486/ 

produce by suzanne shell, thomas berger, and the online 
distribute proofread team. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
