the project gutenberg ebook of the monk; a romance, by m. g. lewis 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the monk; a romance 

author: m. g. lewis 

posting date: october 10, 2008 [ebook #601] 
release date: july, 1996 
last updated: march 19, 2015 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the monk; a romance *** 




produce by charles keller. html version by al haines. 









the monk 

a romance 


by 

matthew lewis 




somnia, terror magicos, miracula, sagas, 
nocturno lemures, portentaque. 
horat. 

dreams, magic terrors, spell of mighty power, 
witches, and ghost who rove at midnight hour. 




preface 

imitation of horace ep. 20.--b. 1. 

methinks, oh! vain ill-judging book, 
i see thee cast a wishful look, 
where reputation won and lost are 
in famous row call paternoster. 
incense to find your precious olio 
bury in unexplored port-folio, 
you scorn the prudent lock and key, 
and pant well bound and gilt to see 
your volume in the window set 
of stockdale, hookham, or debrett. 

go then, and pass that dangerous bourn 
whence never book can back return: 
and when you find, condemned, despised, 
neglected, blamed, and criticised, 
abuse from all who read you fall, 
(if haply you be read at all 
sorely will you your folly sigh at, 
and wish for me, and home, and quiet. 

assume now a conjuror's office, i 
thus on your future fortune prophesy:-- 
soon as your novelty is o'er, 
and you are young and new no more, 
in some dark dirty corner thrown, 
mouldy with damps, with cobweb strown, 
your leaves shall be the book-worm's prey; 
or sent to chandler-shop away, 
and doom to suffer public scandal, 
shall line the trunk, or wrap the candle! 

but should you meet with approbation, 
and some one find an inclination 
to ask, by natural transition 
respecting me and my condition; 
that i am one, the enquire teach, 
nor very poor, nor very rich; 
of passion strong, of hasty nature, 
of graceless form and dwarfish stature; 
by few approved, and few approving; 
extreme in hate and in loving; 

abhor all whom i dislike, 
adore who my fancy strike; 
in form judgement never long, 
and for the most part judge wrong; 
in friendship firm, but still believe 
other are treacherous and deceiving, 
and thinking in the present aera 
that friendship is a pure chimaera: 
more passionate no creature living, 
proud, obstinate, and unforgiving, 
but yet for those who kindness show, 
ready through fire and smoke to go. 

again, should it be ask your page, 
'pray, what may be the author's age?' 
your faults, no doubt, will make it clear, 
i scarce have seen my twentieth year, 
which passed, kind reader, on my word, 
while england's throne held george the third. 

now then your venturous course pursue: 
go, my delight! dear book, adieu! 

hague, 
oct. 28, 1794. m. g. l. 




advertisement 

the first idea of this romance was suggest by the story of the santon 
barsisa, related in the guardian.--the bleeding nun is a tradition 
still credit in many parts of germany; and i have been told that the 
ruins of the castle of lauenstein, which she is supposed to haunt, may 
yet be seen upon the border of thuringia.--the water-king, from the 
third to the twelfth stanza, is the fragment of an original denmark 
ballad--and belerma and durandarte is translate from some stanza to 
be found in a collection of old spain poetry, which contain also the 
popular song of gayfero and melesindra, mention in don quixote.--i 
have now made a full avowal of all the plagiarism of which i am aware 
myself; but i doubt not, many more may be found, of which i am at 
present total unconscious. 




volume i 

chapter i 

----lord angelo is precise; 
stand at a guard with envy; scarce confess 
that his blood flows, or that his appetite 
is more to bread than stone. 
measure for measure. 


scarcely had the abbey bell toll for five minutes, and already was 
the church of the capuchin throng with auditors. do not encourage 
the idea that the crowd was assemble either from motive of piety or 
thirst of information. but very few were influence by those reasons; 
and in a city where superstition reign with such despotic sway as in 
madrid, to seek for true devotion would be a fruitless attempt. the 
audience now assemble in the capuchin church was collected by various 
causes, but all of them were foreign to the ostensible motive. the 
women came to show themselves, the men to see the women: some were 
attract by curiosity to hear an orator so celebrated; some came 
because they had no better means of employ their time till the play 
began; some, from being assured that it would be impossible to find 
place in the church; and one half of madrid was brought thither by 
expect to meet the other half. the only person truly anxious to 
hear the preach were a few antiquated devotees, and half a dozen 
rival orators, determined to find fault with and ridicule the 
discourse. as to the remainder of the audience, the sermon might have 
been omit altogether, certainly without their being disappointed, 
and very probably without their perceive the omission. 

whatever was the occasion, it is at least certain that the capuchin 
church had never witness a more numerous assembly. every corner was 
filled, every seat was occupied. the very statue which ornament the 
long aisle were pressed into the service. boys suspend themselves 
upon the wings of cherubims; st. francis and st. mark bore each a 
spectator on his shoulders; and st. agatha found herself under the 
necessity of carry double. the consequence was, that in spite of 
all their hurry and expedition, our two newcomers, on enter the 
church, look round in vain for places. 

however, the old woman continue to move forwards. in vain were 
exclamation of displeasure vent against her from all sides: in vain 
was she address with--'i assure you, segnora, there are no place 
here.'--'i beg, segnora, that you will not crowd me so 
intolerably!'--'segnora, you cannot pass this way. bless me! how can 
people be so troublesome!'--the old woman was obstinate, and on she 
went. by dint of perseverance and two brawny arms she made a passage 
through the crowd, and manage to bustle herself into the very body of 
the church, at no great distance from the pulpit. her companion had 
follow her with timid and in silence, profit by the exertion 
of her conductress. 

'holy virgin!' exclaim the old woman in a tone of disappointment, 
while she threw a glance of enquiry round her; 'holy virgin! what 
heat! what a crowd! i wonder what can be the meaning of all this. i 
believe we must return: there is no such thing as a seat to be had, 
and nobody seem kind enough to accommodate us with theirs.' 

this broad hint attract the notice of two cavaliers, who occupy 
stool on the right hand, and were leaning their back against the 
seventh column from the pulpit. both were young, and richly habited. 
hearing this appeal to their polite pronounced in a female voice, 
they interrupt their conversation to look at the speaker. she had 
thrown up her veil in order to take a clear look round the cathedral. 
her hair was red, and she squinted. the cavalier turn round, and 
renew their conversation. 

'by all means,' reply the old woman's companion; 'by all means, 
leonella, let us return home immediately; the heat is excessive, and i 
am terrify at such a crowd.' 

these words were pronounced in a tone of unexampled sweetness. the 
cavalier again broke off their discourse, but for this time they were 
not contented with look up: both start involuntary from their 
seats, and turn themselves towards the speaker. 

the voice came from a female, the delicacy and elegance of whose figure 
inspired the youth with the most lively curiosity to view the face to 
which it belonged. this satisfaction was deny them. her features 
were hidden by a thick veil; but struggle through the crowd had 
derange it sufficient to discover a neck which for symmetry and 
beauty might have vie with the medicean venus. it was of the most 
dazzle whiteness, and received additional charm from being shade by 
the tresses of her long fair hair, which descended in ringlet to her 
waist. her figure was rather below than above the middle size: it was 
light and airy as that of an hamadryad. her bosom was careful 
veiled. her dress was white; it was fasten by a blue sash, and just 
permit to peep out from under it a little foot of the most delicate 
proportions. a chaplet of large grain hung upon her arm, and her face 
was cover with a veil of thick black gauze. such was the female, to 
whom the youngest of the cavalier now offer his seat, while the 
other thought it necessary to pay the same attention to her companion. 

the old lady with many expression of gratitude, but without much 
difficulty, accept the offer, and seat herself: the young one 
follow her example, but made no other compliment than a simple and 
graceful reverence. don lorenzo (such was the cavalier's name, whose 
seat she had accepted) placed himself near her; but first he whisper 
a few words in his friend's ear, who immediately took the hint, and 
endeavour to draw off the old woman's attention from her lovely 
charge. 

'you are doubtless lately arrive at madrid,' said lorenzo to his fair 
neighbour; 'it is impossible that such charm should have long remain 
unobserved; and had not this been your first public appearance, the 
envy of the women and adoration of the men would have render you 
already sufficient remarkable.' 

he paused, in expectation of an answer. as his speech did not 
absolutely require one, the lady did not open her lips: after a few 
moments he resume his discourse: 

'am i wrong in supposing you to be a stranger to madrid?' 

the lady hesitated; and at last, in so low a voice as to be scarcely 
intelligible, she made shift to answer,--'no, segnor.' 

'do you intend making a stay of any length?' 

'yes, segnor.' 

'i should esteem myself fortunate, were it in my power to contribute to 
making your abode agreeable. i am well known at madrid, and my family 
has some interest at court. if i can be of any service, you cannot 
honour or oblige me more than by permit me to be of use to 
you.'--'surely,' said he to himself, 'she cannot answer that by a 
monosyllable; now she must say something to me.' 

lorenzo was deceived, for the lady answer only by a bow. 

by this time he had discover that his neighbour was not very 
conversible; but whether her silence proceed from pride, discretion, 
timidity, or idiotism, he was still unable to decide. 

after a pause of some minutes--'it is certainly from your being a 
stranger,' said he, 'and as yet unacquainted with our customs, that you 
continue to wear your veil. permit me to remove it.' 

at the same time he advanced his hand towards the gauze: the lady 
raise hers to prevent him. 

'i never unveil in public, segnor.' 

'and where is the harm, i pray you?' interrupt her companion somewhat 
sharply; 'do not you see that the other ladies have all laid their 
veil aside, to do honour no doubt to the holy place in which we are? 
i have taken off mine already; and surely if i expose my features to 
general observation, you have no cause to put yourself in such a 
wonderful alarm! blessed maria! here is a fuss and a bustle about a 
chit's face! come, come, child! uncover it; i warrant you that nobody 
will run away with it from you--' 

'dear aunt, it is not the custom in murcia.' 

'murcia, indeed! holy st. barbara, what do that signify? you are 
always putt me in mind of that villainous province. if it is the 
custom in madrid, that is all that we ought to mind, and therefore i 
desire you to take off your veil immediately. obey me this moment 
antonia, for you know that i cannot bear contradiction--' 

her niece was silent, but made no further opposition to don lorenzo's 
efforts, who, armed with the aunt's sanction hasten to remove the 
gauze. what a seraph's head present itself to his admiration! yet 
it was rather bewitch than beautiful; it was not so lovely from 
regularity of features as from sweet and sensibility of 
countenance. the several parts of her face considered separately, many 
of them were far from handsome; but when examine together, the whole 
was adorable. her skin though fair was not entire without freckles; 
her eyes were not very large, nor their lash particularly long. but 
then her lip were of the most rosy freshness; her fair and undulate 
hair, confine by a simple ribband, pour itself below her waist in a 
profusion of ringlets; her throat was full and beautiful in the 
extreme; her hand and arm were form with the most perfect symmetry; 
her mild blue eyes seem an heaven of sweetness, and the crystal in 
which they move sparkle with all the brilliance of diamonds: she 
appear to be scarcely fifteen; an arch smile, play round her 
mouth, declared her to be possessed of liveliness, which excess of 
timid at present represt; she look round her with a bashful 
glance; and whenever her eyes accidental met lorenzo's, she dropt 
them hasty upon her rosary; her cheek was immediately suffuse with 
blushes, and she began to tell her beads; though her manner evidently 
show that she knew not what she was about. 

lorenzo gaze upon her with mingle surprise and admiration; but the 
aunt thought it necessary to apologize for antonia's mauvaise honte. 

''tis a young creature,' said she, 'who is total ignorant of the 
world. she has been brought up in an old castle in murcia; with no 
other society than her mother's, who, god help her! has no more sense, 
good soul, than is necessary to carry her soup to her mouth. yet she is 
my own sister, both by father and mother.' 

'and has so little sense?' said don christoval with feign 
astonishment; 'how very extraordinary!' 

'very true, segnor; is it not strange? however, such is the fact; and 
yet only to see the luck of some people! a young nobleman, of the very 
first quality, took it into his head that elvira had some pretension 
to beauty--as to pretensions, in truth, she had always enough of them; 
but as to beauty....! if i had only taken half the pains to set 
myself off which she did....! but this is neither here nor there. 
as i was saying, segnor, a young nobleman fell in love with her, and 
married her unknown to his father. their union remain a secret near 
three years, but at last it came to the ear of the old marquis, who, 
as you may well suppose, was not much pleased with the intelligence. 
away he post in all haste to cordova, determined to seize elvira, and 
send her away to some place or other, where she would never be heard of 
more. holy st. paul! how he storm on finding that she had escape 
him, had join her husband, and that they had embark together for 
the indies. he swore at us all, as if the evil spirit had possessed 
him; he threw my father into prison, as honest a painstaking shoe-maker 
as any in cordova; and when he went away, he had the cruelty to take 
from us my sister's little boy, then scarcely two years old, and whom 
in the abrupt of her flight, she had been oblige to leave behind 
her. i suppose, that the poor little wretch met with bitter bad 
treatment from him, for in a few month after, we received intelligence 
of his death.' 

'why, this was a most terrible old fellow, segnora!' 

'oh! shocking! and a man so total devoid of taste! why, would you 
believe it, segnor? when i attempt to pacify him, he cursed me for a 
witch, and wish that to punish the count, my sister might become as 
ugly as myself! ugly indeed! i like him for that.' 

'ridiculous', cry don christoval; 'doubtless the count would have 
thought himself fortunate, had he been permit to exchange the one 
sister for the other.' 

'oh! christ! segnor, you are really too polite. however, i am 
heartily glad that the conde was of a different way of thinking. a 
mighty pretty piece of business, to be sure, elvira has made of it! 
after broil and stew in the indy for thirteen long years, her 
husband dies, and she returns to spain, without an house to hide her 
head, or money to procure her one! this antonia was then but an 
infant, and her only remain child. she found that her father-in-law 
had married again, that he was irreconcileable to the conde, and that 
his second wife had produce him a son, who is report to be a very 
fine young man. the old marquis refuse to see my sister or her child; 
but sent her word that on condition of never hearing any more of her, 
he would assign her a small pension, and she might live in an old 
castle which he possessed in murcia; this had been the favourite 
habitation of his eldest son; but since his flight from spain, the old 
marquis could not bear the place, but let it fall to ruin and 
confusion--my sister accept the proposal; she retired to murcia, and 
has remain there till within the last month.' 

'and what bring her now to madrid?' enquire don lorenzo, whom 
admiration of the young antonia compel to take a lively interest in 
the talkative old woman's narration. 

'alas! segnor, her father-in-law being lately dead, the steward of his 
murcian estate has refuse to pay her pension any longer. 

with the design of supplicate his son to renew it, she is now come to 
madrid; but i doubt, that she might have save herself the trouble! you 
young noblemen have always enough to do with your money, and are not 
very often disposed to throw it away upon old women. i advise my 
sister to send antonia with her petition; but she would not hear of 
such a thing. she is so obstinate! well! she will find herself the 
worse for not following my counsels: the girl has a good pretty face, 
and possibly might have done much.' 

'ah! segnora,' interrupt don christoval, counterfeit a passionate 
air; 'if a pretty face will do the business, why has not your sister 
recourse to you?' 

'oh! jesus! my lord, i swear you quite overpower me with your 
gallantry! but i promise you that i am too well aware of the danger of 
such expedition to trust myself in a young nobleman's power! no, no; 
i have as yet preserve my reputation without blemish or reproach, and 
i always knew how to keep the men at a proper distance.' 

'of that, segnora, i have not the least doubt. but permit me to ask 
you; have you then any aversion to matrimony?' 

'that is an home question. i cannot but confess, that if an amiable 
cavalier was to present himself....' 

here she intended to throw a tender and significant look upon don 
christoval; but, as she unlucki happen to squint most abominably, 
the glance fell directly upon his companion: lorenzo took the 
compliment to himself, and answer it by a profound bow. 

'may i enquire,' said he, 'the name of the marquis?' 

'the marquis de las cisternas.' 

'i know him intimate well. he is not at present in madrid, but is 
expect here daily. he is one of the best of men; and if the lovely 
antonia will permit me to be her advocate with him, i doubt not my 
being able to make a favourable report of her cause.' 

antonia raise her blue eyes, and silent thank him for the offer by 
a smile of inexpressible sweetness. leonella's satisfaction was much 
more loud and audible: indeed, as her niece was generally silent in her 
company, she thought it incumbent upon her to talk enough for both: 
this she manage without difficulty, for she very seldom found herself 
deficient in words. 

'oh! segnor!' she cried; 'you will lay our whole family under the most 
signal obligations! i accept your offer with all possible gratitude, 
and return you a thousand thanks for the generous of your proposal. 
antonia, why do not you speak, child? while the cavalier say all 
sort of civil things to you, you sit like a statue, and never utter a 
syllable of thanks, either bad, good, or indifferent!' 

'my dear aunt, i am very sensible that....' 

'fye, niece! how often have i told you, that you never should 
interrupt a person who is speaking!? when did you ever know me do such 
a thing? are these your murcian manners? mercy on me! i shall never 
be able to make this girl any thing like a person of good breeding. 
but pray, segnor,' she continued, address herself to don christoval, 
'inform me, why such a crowd is assemble today in this cathedral?' 

'can you possibly be ignorant, that ambrosio, abbot of this monastery, 
pronounce a sermon in this church every thursday? all madrid ring 
with his praises. as yet he has preach but thrice; but all who have 
heard him are so delight with his eloquence, that it is as difficult 
to obtain a place at church, as at the first representation of a new 
comedy. his fame certainly must have reach your ears--' 

'alas! segnor, till yesterday i never had the good fortune to see 
madrid; and at cordova we are so little informed of what is passing in 
the rest of the world, that the name of ambrosio has never been 
mention in its precincts.' 

'you will find it in every one's mouth at madrid. he seem to have 
fascinate the inhabitants; and not have attend his sermon myself, 
i am astonish at the enthusiasm which he has excited. the adoration 
paid him both by young and old, by man and woman is unexampled. the 
grandee load him with presents; their wives refuse to have any other 
confessor, and he is known through all the city by the name of the 
"man of holiness".' 

'undoubtedly, segnor, he is of noble origin--' 

'that point still remains undecided. the late superior of the 
capuchin found him while yet an infant at the abbey door. all 
attempt to discover who had left him there were vain, and the child 
himself could give no account of his parents. he was educated in the 
monastery, where he has remain ever since. he early show a strong 
inclination for study and retirement, and as soon as he was of a proper 
age, he pronounced his vows. no one has ever appear to claim him, or 
clear up the mystery which conceal his birth; and the monks, who find 
their account in the favour which is shewn to their establishment from 
respect to him, have not hesitate to publish that he is a present to 
them from the virgin. in truth the singular austerity of his life 
give some countenance to the report. he is now thirty years old, 
every hour of which period has been pass in study, total seclusion 
from the world, and mortification of the flesh. till these last three 
weeks, when he was chosen superior of the society to which he belongs, 
he had never been on the outside of the abbey walls: even now he never 
quits them except on thursdays, when he deliver a discourse in this 
cathedral which all madrid assemble to hear. his knowledge is said to 
be the most profound, his eloquence the most persuasive. in the whole 
course of his life he has never been known to transgress a single rule 
of his order; the smallest stain is not to be discover upon his 
character; and he is report to be so strict an observer of chastity, 
that he know not in what consist the difference of man and woman. 
the common people therefore esteem him to be a saint.' 

'does that make a saint?' enquire antonia; 'bless me! then am i one?' 

'holy st. barbara!' exclaim leonella; 'what a question! fye, child, 
fye! these are not fit subject for young women to handle. you should 
not seem to remember that there is such a thing as a man in the world, 
and you ought to imagine every body to be of the same sex with 
yourself. i should like to see you give people to understand, that you 
know that a man has no breasts, and no hips, and no ...'. 

lucky for antonia's ignorance which her aunt's lecture would soon 
have dispelled, an universal murmur through the church announce the 
preacher's arrival. donna leonella rose from her seat to take a better 
view of him, and antonia follow her example. 

he was a man of noble port and commanding presence. his stature was 
lofty, and his features uncommonly handsome. his nose was aquiline, 
his eyes large black and sparkling, and his dark brow almost join 
together. his complexion was of a deep but clear brown; study and 
watch had entire deprived his cheek of colour. tranquill 
reign upon his smooth unwrinkled forehead; and content, express 
upon every feature, seem to announce the man equally unacquainted 
with care and crimes. he bowed himself with humility to the audience: 
still there was a certain severity in his look and manner that inspired 
universal awe, and few could sustain the glance of his eye at once 
fiery and penetrating. such was ambrosio, abbot of the capuchins, and 
surnamed, 'the man of holiness'. 

antonia, while she gaze upon him eagerly, felt a pleasure flutter 
in her bosom which till then had been unknown to her, and for which she 
in vain endeavour to account. she wait with impatience till the 
sermon should begin; and when at length the friar spoke, the sound of 
his voice seem to penetrate into her very soul. though no other of 
the spectator felt such violent sensation as did the young antonia, 
yet every one listen with interest and emotion. they who were 
insensible to religion's merits, were still enchant with ambrosio's 
oratory. all found their attention irresistible attract while he 
spoke, and the most profound silence reign through the crowded aisles. 

even lorenzo could not resist the charm: he forgot that antonia was 
seat near him, and listen to the preach with undivided attention. 

in language nervous, clear, and simple, the monk expatiate on the 
beauty of religion. he explain some abstruse parts of the sacred 
writings in a style that carry with it universal conviction. his 
voice at once distinct and deep was fraught with all the terror of the 
tempest, while he inveigh against the vice of humanity, and 
describe the punishment reserved for them in a future state. every 
hearer look back upon his past offences, and trembled: the thunder 
seem to roll, whose bolt was destined to crush him, and the abyss of 
eternal destruction to open before his feet. but when ambrosio, 
change his theme, spoke of the excellence of an unsullied conscience, 
of the glorious prospect which eternity present to the soul untainted 
with reproach, and of the recompense which await it in the regions of 
everlasting glory, his auditor felt their scattered spirits insensible 
return. they threw themselves with confidence upon the mercy of their 
judge; they hung with delight upon the console words of the preacher; 
and while his full voice swell into melody, they were transport to 
those happy regions which he paint to their imagination in colours 
so brilliant and glowing. 

the discourse was of considerable length; yet when it concluded, the 
audience grieve that it had not last longer. though the monk had 
cease to speak, enthusiast silence still prevail through the 
church: at length the charm gradual dissolving, the general 
admiration was express in audible terms. as ambrosio descended from 
the pulpit, his auditor crowded round him, loaded him with blessings, 
threw themselves at his feet, and kiss the hem of his garment. he 
pass on slow with his hand cross devoutly upon his bosom, to the 
door opening into the abbey chapel, at which his monk wait to 
receive him. he ascend the steps, and then turning towards his 
followers, address to them a few words of gratitude, and exhortation. 
while he spoke, his rosary, compose of large grain of amber, fell 
from his hand, and drop among the surrounding multitude. it was 
seize eagerly, and immediately divide amidst the spectators. whoever 
became possessor of a bead, preserve it as a sacred relique; and had 
it been the chaplet of thrice-blessed st. francis himself, it could not 
have been dispute with greater vivacity. the abbot, smile at their 
eagerness, pronounced his benediction, and quit the church, while 
humility dwelt upon every feature. dwelt she also in his heart? 

antonia's eyes follow him with anxiety. as the door closed after 
him, it seem to her as had she lost some one essential to her 
happiness. a tear stole in silence down her cheek. 

'he is separate from the world!' said she to herself; 'perhaps, i 
shall never see him more!' 

as she wipe away the tear, lorenzo observe her action. 

'are you satisfy with our orator?' said he; 'or do you think that 
madrid overrate his talents?' 

antonia's heart was so fill with admiration for the monk, that she 
eager seize the opportunity of speak of him: besides, as she now 
no long considered lorenzo as an absolute stranger, she was less 
embarrass by her excessive timidity. 

'oh! he far exceed all my expectations,' answer she; 'till this 
moment i had no idea of the powers of eloquence. but when he spoke, 
his voice inspired me with such interest, such esteem, i might almost 
say such affection for him, that i am myself astonish at the 
acute of my feelings.' 

lorenzo smile at the strength of her expressions. 

'you are young and just enter into life,' said he; 'your heart, new 
to the world and full of warmth and sensibility, receive its first 
impression with eagerness. artless yourself, you suspect not other 
of deceit; and view the world through the medium of your own truth 
and innocence, you fancy all who surround you to deserve your 
confidence and esteem. what pity, that these gay vision must soon be 
dissipated! what pity, that you must soon discover the base of 
mankind, and guard against your fellow-creatures as against your foes!' 

'alas! segnor,' reply antonia; 'the misfortune of my parent have 
already placed before me but too many sad example of the perfidy of 
the world! yet surely in the present instance the warmth of sympathy 
cannot have deceive me.' 

'in the present instance, i allow that it has not. ambrosio's 
character is perfectly without reproach; and a man who has pass the 
whole of his life within the wall of a convent cannot have found the 
opportunity to be guilty, even were he possessed of the inclination. 
but now, when, oblige by the duty of his situation, he must enter 
occasional into the world, and be thrown into the way of temptation, 
it is now that it behove him to show the brilliance of his virtue. 
the trial is dangerous; he is just at that period of life when the 
passion are most vigorous, unbridled, and despotic; his establish 
reputation will mark him out to seduction as an illustrious victim; 
novelty will give additional charm to the allurement of pleasure; and 
even the talent with which nature has endow him will contribute to 
his ruin, by facilitate the means of obtain his object. very few 
would return victorious from a contest so severe.' 

'ah! surely ambrosio will be one of those few.' 

'of that i have myself no doubt: by all account he is an exception to 
mankind in general, and envy would seek in vain for a blot upon his 
character.' 

'segnor, you delight me by this assurance! it encourage me to indulge 
my prepossession in his favour; and you know not with what pain i 
should have repressed the sentiment! ah! dearest aunt, entreat my 
mother to choose him for our confessor.' 

'i entreat her?' reply leonella; 'i promise you that i shall do no 
such thing. i do not like this same ambrosio in the least; he has a 
look of severity about him that made me tremble from head to foot: 
were he my confessor, i should never have the courage to avow one half 
of my peccadilloes, and then i should be in a rare condition! i never 
saw such a stern-looking mortal, and hope that i never shall see such 
another. his description of the devil, god bless us! almost terrify 
me out of my wits, and when he spoke about sinner he seem as if he 
was ready to eat them.' 

'you are right, segnora,' answer don christoval; 'too great severity 
is said to be ambrosio's only fault. exempt himself from human 
failings, he is not sufficient indulgent to those of others; and 
though strict just and disinterested in his decisions, his government 
of the monk has already shown some proof of his inflexibility. but 
the crowd is nearly dissipated: will you permit us to attend you home?' 

'oh! christ! segnor,' exclaim leonella affecting to blush; 'i would 
not suffer such a thing for the universe! if i came home attend by 
so gallant a cavalier, my sister is so scrupulous that she would read 
me an hour's lecture, and i should never hear the last of it. besides, 
i rather wish you not to make your proposal just at present.' 

'my proposals? i assure you, segnora....' 

'oh! segnor, i believe that your assurance of impatience are all very 
true; but really i must desire a little respite. it would not be quite 
so delicate in me to accept your hand at first sight.' 

'accept my hand? as i hope to live and breathe....' 

'oh! dear segnor, press me no further, if you love me! i shall consider 
your obedience as a proof of your affection; you shall hear from me 
tomorrow, and so farewell. but pray, cavaliers, may i not enquire your 
names?' 

'my friend's,' reply lorenzo, 'is the conde d'ossorio, and mine 
lorenzo de medina.' 

''tis sufficient. well, don lorenzo, i shall acquaint my sister with 
your obliging offer, and let you know the result with all expedition. 
where may i send to you?' 

'i am always to be found at the medina palace.' 

'you may depend upon hearing from me. farewell, cavaliers. segnor 
conde, let me entreat you to moderate the excessive ardour of your 
passion: however, to prove to you that i am not displease with you, 
and prevent your abandon yourself to despair, receive this mark of 
my affection, and sometimes bestow a thought upon the absent leonella.' 

as she said this, she extend a lean and wrinkle hand; which her 
supposed admirer kiss with such sorry grace and constraint so 
evident, that lorenzo with difficulty repressed his inclination to 
laugh. leonella then hasten to quit the church; the lovely antonia 
follow her in silence; but when she reach the porch, she turn 
involuntarily, and cast back her eyes towards lorenzo. he bowed to 
her, as bidding her farewell; she return the compliment, and hasty 
withdrew. 

'so, lorenzo!' said don christoval as soon as they were alone, 'you 
have procure me an agreeable intrigue! to favour your designs upon 
antonia, i obliging make a few civil speech which mean nothing to 
the aunt, and at the end of an hour i find myself upon the brink of 
matrimony! how will you reward me for have suffer so grievous 
for your sake? what can repay me for have kiss the leathern paw of 
that confounded old witch? diavolo! she has left such a scent upon my 
lip that i shall smell of garlick for this month to come! as i pass 
along the prado, i shall be taken for a walking omelet, or some large 
onion running to seed!' 

'i confess, my poor count,' reply lorenzo, 'that your service has 
been attend with danger; yet am i so far from supposing it be past 
all endurance that i shall probably solicit you to carry on your amour 
still further.' 

'from that petition i conclude that the little antonia has made some 
impression upon you.' 

'i cannot express to you how much i am charm with her. since my 
father's death, my uncle the duke de medina, has signify to me his 
wish to see me married; i have till now elude his hints, and refuse 
to understand them; but what i have seen this evening....' 

'well? what have you seen this evening? why surely, don lorenzo, you 
cannot be mad enough to think of making a wife out of this 
grand-daughter of "as honest a painstaking shoe-maker as any in 
cordova"?' 

'you forget, that she is also the grand-daughter of the late marquis de 
las cisternas; but without dispute about birth and titles, i must 
assure you, that i never beheld a woman so interesting as antonia.' 

'very possibly; but you cannot mean to marry her?' 

'why not, my dear conde? i shall have wealth enough for both of us, 
and you know that my uncle think liberally upon the subject. 

from what i have seen of raymond de las cisternas, i am certain that he 
will readily acknowledge antonia for his niece. her birth therefore 
will be no objection to my offering her my hand. i should be a villain 
could i think of her on any other terms than marriage; and in truth she 
seem possessed of every quality requisite to make me happy in a wife. 
young, lovely, gentle, sensible....' 

'sensible? why, she said nothing but "yes," and "no".' 

'she did not say much more, i must confess--but then she always said 
"yes," or "no," in the right place.' 

'did she so? oh! your most obedient! that is use a right lover's 
argument, and i dare dispute no long with so profound a casuist. 
suppose we adjourn to the comedy?' 

'it is out of my power. i only arrive last night at madrid, and have 
not yet had an opportunity of seeing my sister; you know that her 
convent is in this street, and i was go thither when the crowd which 
i saw throng into this church excited my curiosity to know what was 
the matter. i shall now pursue my first intention, and probably pass 
the evening with my sister at the parlour grate.' 

'your sister in a convent, say you? oh! very true, i had forgotten. 
and how do donna agnes? i am amazed, don lorenzo, how you could 
possibly think of immure so charming a girl within the wall of a 
cloister!' 

'i think of it, don christoval? how can you suspect me of such 
barbarity? you are conscious that she took the veil by her own desire, 
and that particular circumstances made her wish for a seclusion from 
the world. i use every means in my power to induce her to change her 
resolution; the endeavour was fruitless, and i lost a sister!' 

'the lucky fellow you; i think, lorenzo, you were a considerable 
gain by that loss: if i remember right, donna agnes had a portion of 
ten thousand pistoles, half of which revert to your lordship. by st. 
jago! i wish that i had fifty sister in the same predicament. i should 
consent to lose them every soul without much heart-burning--' 

'how, conde?' said lorenzo in an angry voice; 'do you suppose me base 
enough to have influence my sister's retirement? do you suppose that 
the despicable wish to make myself master of her fortune could....' 

'admirable! courage, don lorenzo! now the man is all in a blaze. god 
grant that antonia may soften that fiery temper, or we shall certainly 
cut each other's throat before the month is over! however, to prevent 
such a tragic catastrophe for the present, i shall make a retreat, 
and leave you master of the field. farewell, my knight of mount aetna! 
moderate that inflammable disposition, and remember that whenever it is 
necessary to make love to yonder harridan, you may reckon upon my 
services.' 

he said, and dart out of the cathedral. 

'how wild-brained!' said lorenzo; 'with so excellent an heart, what 
pity that he possess so little solidity of judgment!' 

the night was now fast advancing. the lamp were not yet lighted. the 
faint beam of the rising moon scarcely could pierce through the gothic 
obscurity of the church. lorenzo found himself unable to quit the 
spot. the void left in his bosom by antonia's absence, and his 
sister's sacrifice which don christoval had just recall to his 
imagination, create that melancholy of mind which accord but too 
well with the religious gloom surrounding him. he was still leaning 
against the seventh column from the pulpit. a soft and cool air 
breathe along the solitary aisles: the moonbeam dart into the 
church through paint window tinge the fret roof and massy 
pillar with a thousand various tint of light and colours: 

universal silence prevail around, only interrupt by the occasional 
close of door in the adjoin abbey. 

the calm of the hour and solitude of the place contribute to nourish 
lorenzo's disposition to melancholy. he threw himself upon a seat which 
stood near him, and abandoned himself to the delusion of his fancy. 
he thought of his union with antonia; he thought of the obstacle which 
might oppose his wishes; and a thousand change vision float before 
his fancy, sad 'tis true, but not unpleasing. sleep insensible stole 
over him, and the tranquil solemnity of his mind when awake for a while 
continue to influence his slumbers. 

he still fancy himself to be in the church of the capuchins; but it 
was no long dark and solitary. multitude of silver lamp shed 
splendour from the vaulted roof; accompany by the captivate chaunt 
of distant choristers, the organ's melody swell through the church; 
the altar seem decorate as for some distinguished feast; it was 
surround by a brilliant company; and near it stood antonia array in 
bridal white, and blush with all the charm of virgin modesty. 

half hoping, half fearing, lorenzo gaze upon the scene before him. 
sudden the door leading to the abbey unclosed, and he saw, attend by 
a long train of monks, the preach advance to whom he had just 
listen with so much admiration. he drew near antonia. 

'and where is the bridegroom?' said the imaginary friar. 

antonia seem to look round the church with anxiety. involuntary the 
youth advanced a few steps from his concealment. she saw him; the 
blush of pleasure glow upon her cheek; with a graceful motion of her 
hand she beckon to him to advance. he disobey not the command; he 
flew towards her, and threw himself at her feet. 

she retreat for a moment; then gaze upon him with unutterable 
delight;--'yes!' she exclaimed, 'my bridegroom! my destined 
bridegroom!' she said, and hasten to throw herself into his arms; but 
before he had time to receive her, an unknown rush between them. his 
form was gigantic; his complexion was swarthy, his eyes fierce and 
terrible; his mouth breathe out volumes of fire; and on his forehead 
was written in legible characters--'pride! lust! inhumanity!' 

antonia shrieked. the monster clasp her in his arms, and spring 
with her upon the altar, torture her with his odious caresses. she 
endeavour in vain to escape from his embrace. lorenzo flew to her 
succour, but ere he had time to reach her, a loud burst of thunder was 
heard. instantly the cathedral seem crumble into pieces; the monk 
betook themselves to flight, shriek fearfully; the lamp were 
extinguished, the altar sank down, and in its place appear an abyss 
vomit forth cloud of flame. utter a loud and terrible cry the 
monster plunge into the gulph, and in his fall attempt to drag 
antonia with him. he strove in vain. animate by supernatural powers 
she disengaged herself from his embrace; but her white robe was left in 
his possession. instantly a wing of brilliant splendour spread itself 
from either of antonia's arms. she dart upwards, and while ascend 
cry to lorenzo, 

'friend! we shall meet above!' 

at the same moment the roof of the cathedral opened; harmonious voice 
peal along the vaults; and the glory into which antonia was received 
was compose of ray of such dazzle brightness, that lorenzo was 
unable to sustain the gaze. his sight failed, and he sank upon the 
ground. 

when he woke, he found himself extend upon the pavement of the 
church: it was illuminated, and the chaunt of hymn sound from a 
distance. for a while lorenzo could not persuade himself that what he 
had just witness had been a dream, so strong an impression had it 
made upon his fancy. a little recollection convinced him of its 
fallacy: the lamp had been light during his sleep, and the music 
which he heard was occasion by the monks, who were celebrate their 
vespers in the abbey chapel. 

lorenzo rose, and prepared to bend his steps towards his sister's 
convent. his mind fully occupy by the singular of his dream, he 
already drew near the porch, when his attention was attract by 
perceive a shadow moving upon the opposite wall. he look curious 
round, and soon descry a man wrap up in his cloak, who seem 
careful examine whether his action were observed. very few people 
are exempt from the influence of curiosity. the unknown seem anxious 
to conceal his business in the cathedral, and it was this very 
circumstance, which made lorenzo wish to discover what he was about. 

our hero was conscious that he had no right to pry into the secret of 
this unknown cavalier. 

'i will go,' said lorenzo. and lorenzo stayed, where he was. 

the shadow thrown by the column, effectually conceal him from the 
stranger, who continue to advance with caution. at length he drew a 
letter from beneath his cloak, and hasty placed it beneath a colossal 
statue of st. francis. then retiring with precipitation, he conceal 
himself in a part of the church at a considerable distance from that in 
which the image stood. 

'so!' said lorenzo to himself; 'this is only some foolish love affair. 
i believe, i may as well be gone, for i can do no good in it.' 

in truth till that moment it never came into his head that he could do 
any good in it; but he thought it necessary to make some little excuse 
to himself for have indulge his curiosity. he now made a second 
attempt to retire from the church: for this time he gain the porch 
without meeting with any impediment; but it was destined that he should 
pay it another visit that night. as he descended the steps leading into 
the street, a cavalier rush against him with such violence, that both 
were nearly overturn by the concussion. lorenzo put his hand to his 
sword. 

'how now, segnor?' said he; 'what mean you by this rudeness?' 

'ha! is it you, medina?' reply the newcomer, whom lorenzo by his 
voice now recognize for don christoval; 'you are the luckiest fellow 
in the universe, not to have left the church before my return. in, in! 
my dear lad! they will be here immediately!' 

'who will be here?' 

'the old hen and all her pretty little chickens! in, i say, and then 
you shall know the whole history.' 

lorenzo follow him into the cathedral, and they conceal themselves 
behind the statue of st. francis. 

'and now,' said our hero, 'may i take the liberty of asking, what is 
the meaning of all this haste and rapture?' 

'oh! lorenzo, we shall see such a glorious sight! the prioress of st. 
clare and her whole train of nun are coming hither. you are to know, 
that the pious father ambrosio (the lord reward him for it!) will upon 
no account move out of his own precincts: it being absolutely 
necessary for every fashionable convent to have him for its confessor, 
the nun are in consequence oblige to visit him at the abbey; since 
when the mountain will not come to mahomet, mahomet must needs go to 
the mountain. now the prioress of st. clare, the better to escape the 
gaze of such impure eyes as belong to yourself and your humble servant, 
think proper to bring her holy flock to confession in the dusk: she is 
to be admitted into the abbey chapel by yon private door. the 
porteress of st. clare, who is a worthy old soul and a particular 
friend of mine, has just assured me of their being here in a few 
moments. there is news for you, you rogue! we shall see some of the 
prettiest face in madrid!' 

'in truth, christoval, we shall do no such thing. the nun are always 
veiled.' 

'no! no! i know better. on enter a place of worship, they ever 
take off their veil from respect to the saint to whom 'tis dedicated. 
but hark! they are coming! silence, silence! observe, and be 
convinced.' 

'good!' said lorenzo to himself; 'i may possibly discover to whom the 
vow are address of this mysterious stranger.' 

scarcely had don christoval cease to speak, when the domina of st. 
clare appeared, follow by a long procession of nuns. each upon 
enter the church took off her veil. the prioress cross her hand 
upon her bosom, and made a profound reverence as she pass the statue 
of st. francis, the patron of this cathedral. the nun follow her 
example, and several move onwards without have satisfy lorenzo's 
curiosity. he almost began to despair of seeing the mystery clear 
up, when in pay her respects to st. francis, one of the nun 
happen to drop her rosary. as she stoop to pick it up, the light 
flash full upon her face. at the same moment she dexterous remove 
the letter from beneath the image, placed it in her bosom, and hasten 
to resume her rank in the procession. 

'ha!' said christoval in a low voice; 'here we have some little 
intrigue, no doubt.' 

'agnes, by heaven!' cry lorenzo. 

'what, your sister? diavolo! then somebody, i suppose, will have to 
pay for our peeping.' 

'and shall pay for it without delay,' reply the incense brother. 

the pious procession had now enter the abbey; the door was already 
closed upon it. the unknown immediately quit his concealment and 
hasten to leave the church: ere he could effect his intention, he 
descry medina station in his passage. the stranger hasty 
retreated, and drew his hat over his eyes. 

'attempt not to fly me!' exclaim lorenzo; 'i will know who you are, 
and what were the contents of that letter.' 

'of that letter?' repeated the unknown. 'and by what title do you ask 
the question?' 

'by a title of which i am now ashamed; but it become not you to 
question me. either reply circumstantial to my demands, or answer me 
with your sword.' 

'the latter method will be the shortest,' rejoin the other, drawing 
his rapier; 'come on, segnor bravo! i am ready!' 

burning with rage, lorenzo hasten to the attack: the antagonist had 
already exchange several pass before christoval, who at that moment 
had more sense than either of them, could throw himself between their 
weapons. 

'hold! hold! medina!' he exclaimed; 'remember the consequence of 
shed blood on consecrate ground!' 

the stranger immediately drop his sword. 

'medina?' he cried; 'great god, is it possible! lorenzo, have you quite 
forgotten raymond de las cisternas?' 

lorenzo's astonishment increase with every succeed moment. raymond 
advanced towards him, but with a look of suspicion he drew back his 
hand, which the other was prepare to take. 

'you here, marquis? what is the meaning of all this? you engaged in a 
clandestine correspondence with my sister, whose affections....' 

'have ever been, and still are mine. but this is no fit place for an 
explanation. accompany me to my hotel, and you shall know every thing. 
who is that with you?' 

'one whom i believe you to have seen before,' reply don christoval, 
'though probably not at church.' 

'the conde d'ossorio?' 

'exactly so, marquis.' 

'i have no objection to entrust you with my secret, for i am sure 
that i may depend upon your silence.' 

'then your opinion of me is better than my own, and therefore i must 
beg leave to decline your confidence. do you go your own way, and i 
shall go mine. marquis, where are you to be found?' 

'as usual, at the hotel de las cisternas; but remember, that i am 
incognito, and that if you wish to see me, you must ask for alphonso 
d'alvarada.' 

'good! good! farewell, cavaliers!' said don christoval, and instantly 
departed. 

'you, marquis,' said lorenzo in the accent of surprise; 'you, alphonso 
d'alvarada?' 

'even so, lorenzo: but unless you have already heard my story from 
your sister, i have much to relate that will astonish you. follow me, 
therefore, to my hotel without delay.' 

at this moment the porter of the capuchin enter the cathedral to 
lock up the door for the night. the two noblemen instantly withdrew, 
and hasten with all speed to the palace de las cisternas. 

'well, antonia!' said the aunt, as soon as she had quit the church; 
'what think you of our gallants? don lorenzo really seem a very 
obliging good sort of young man: he paid you some attention, and 
nobody know what may come of it. but as to don christoval, i protest 
to you, he is the very phoenix of politeness. so gallant! so 
well-bred! so sensible, and so pathetic! well! if ever man can 
prevail upon me to break my vow never to marry, it will be that don 
christoval. you see, niece, that every thing turn out exactly as i 
told you: the very moment that i produce myself in madrid, i knew 
that i should be surround by admirers. when i took off my veil, did 
you see, antonia, what an effect the action had upon the conde? and 
when i present him my hand, did you observe the air of passion with 
which he kiss it? if ever i witness real love, i then saw it 
impress upon don christoval's countenance!' 

now antonia had observe the air, with which don christoval had kiss 
this same hand; but as she drew conclusion from it somewhat different 
from her aunt's, she was wise enough to hold her tongue. as this is 
the only instance known of a woman's ever have done so, it was judge 
worthy to be record here. 

the old lady continue her discourse to antonia in the same strain, 
till they gain the street in which was their lodging. here a crowd 
collected before their door permit them not to approach it; and 
place themselves on the opposite side of the street, they endeavour 
to make out what had drawn all these people together. after some 
minutes the crowd form itself into a circle; and now antonia 
perceive in the midst of it a woman of extraordinary height, who 
whirl herself repeatedly round and round, use all sort of 
extravagant gestures. her dress was compose of shred of 
various-coloured silk and linen fantastic arranged, yet not 
entire without taste. her head was cover with a kind of turban, 
ornament with vine leaves and wild flowers. she seem much 
sun-burnt, and her complexion was of a deep olive: her eyes look 
fiery and strange; and in her hand she bore a long black rod, with 
which she at interval trace a variety of singular figures upon the 
ground, round about which she dance in all the eccentric attitude of 
folly and delirium. sudden she broke off her dance, whirl herself 
round thrice with rapidity, and after a moment's pause she sang the 
following ballad. 

the gypsy's song 

come, cross my hand! my art surpass 
all that did ever mortal know; 
come, maidens, come! my magic glasses 
your future husband's form can show: 

for 'tis to me the power is given 
unclosed the book of fate to see; 
to read the fixed resolve of heaven, 
and dive into futurity. 

i guide the pale moon's silver waggon; 
the wind in magic bonds i hold; 
i charm to sleep the crimson dragon, 
who love to watch o'er bury gold: 

fence round with spells, unhurt i venture 
their sabbath strange where witch keep; 
fearless the sorcerer's circle enter, 
and woundless tread on snake asleep. 

lo! here are charm of mighty power! 
this make secure an husband's truth 
and this compose at midnight hour 
will force to love the coldest youth: 

if any maid too much has granted, 
her loss this philtre will repair; 
this bloom a cheek where red is wanted, 
and this will make a brown girl fair! 

then silent hear, while i discover 
what i in fortune's mirror view; 
and each, when many a year is over, 
shall own the gypsy's saying true. 


'dear aunt!' said antonia when the stranger had finished, 'is she not 
mad?' 

'mad? not she, child; she is only wicked. she is a gypsy, a sort of 
vagabond, whose sole occupation is to run about the country telling 
lyes, and pilfer from those who come by their money honestly. out 
upon such vermin! if i were king of spain, every one of them should be 
burnt alive who was found in my dominion after the next three weeks.' 

these words were pronounced so audible that they reach the gypsy's 
ears. she immediately pierce through the crowd and made towards the 
ladies. she salute them thrice in the eastern fashion, and then 
address herself to antonia. 

the gypsy 

'lady! gentle lady! know, 
i your future fate can show; 
give your hand, and do not fear; 
lady! gentle lady! hear!' 

'dearest aunt!' said antonia, 'indulge me this once! let me have my 
fortune told me!' 

'nonsense, child! she will tell you nothing but falsehoods.' 

'no matter; let me at least hear what she has to say. do, my dear aunt! 
oblige me, i beseech you!' 

'well, well! antonia, since you are so bent upon the thing, ... here, 
good woman, you shall see the hand of both of us. there is money for 
you, and now let me hear my fortune.' 

as she said this, she drew off her glove, and present her hand; the 
gypsy look at it for a moment, and then made this reply. 


the gypsy 

'your fortune? you are now so old, 
good dame, that 'tis already told: 
yet for your money, in a trice 
i will repay you in advice. 
astonish at your childish vanity, 
your friends all tax you with insanity, 
and grieve to see you use your art 
to catch some youthful lover's heart. 
believe me, dame, when all is done, 
your age will still be fifty one; 
and men will rarely take an hint 
of love, from two grey eyes that squint. 
take then my counsels; lay aside 
your paint and patches, lust and pride, 
and on the poor those sum bestow, 
which now are spent on useless show. 
think on your maker, not a suitor; 
think on your past faults, not on future; 
and think time's scythe will quick mow 
the few red hairs, which deck your brow. 

the audience rang with laughter during the gypsy's address; and--'fifty 
one,'--'squinting eyes,' 'red hair,'--'paint and patches,' &c. were 
bandy from mouth to mouth. leonella was almost choake with passion, 
and loaded her malicious adviser with the bitterest reproaches. the 
swarthy prophetess for some time listen to her with a contemptuous 
smile: at length she made her a short answer, and then turn to 
antonia. 

the gypsy 

'peace, lady! what i said was true; 
and now, my lovely maid, to you; 
give me your hand, and let me see 
your future doom, and heaven's decree.' 

in imitation of leonella, antonia drew off her glove, and present her 
white hand to the gypsy, who have gaze upon it for some time with a 
mingle expression of pity and astonishment, pronounced her oracle in 
the following words. 

the gypsy 

'jesus! what a palm is there! 
chaste, and gentle, young and fair, 
perfect mind and form possessing, 
you would be some good man's blessing: 
but alas! this line discovers, 
that destruction o'er you hovers; 
lustful man and crafty devil 
will combine to work your evil; 
and from earth by sorrow driven, 
soon your soul must speed to heaven. 
yet your suffering to delay, 
well remember what i say. 
when you one more virtuous see 
than belong to man to be, 
one, whose self no crime assailing, 
pity not his neighbour's failing, 
call the gypsy's words to mind: 
though he seem so good and kind, 
fair exterior oft will hide 
hearts, that swell with lust and pride! 
lovely maid, with tear i leave you! 
let not my prediction grieve you; 
rather with submission bend 
calm wait distress impending, 
and expect eternal bliss 
in a better world than this. 

have said this, the gypsy again whirl herself round thrice, and 
then hasten out of the street with frantic gesture. the crowd 
follow her; and elvira's door being now unembarrass leonella 
enter the house out of honour with the gypsy, with her niece, and 
with the people; in short with every body, but herself and her charming 
cavalier. the gypsy's prediction had also considerably affected 
antonia; but the impression soon wore off, and in a few hour she had 
forgotten the adventure as total as had it never taken place. 



chapter ii 

forse se tu gustassi una sol volta 
la millesima parte delle gioje, 
che gusta un cor amato riamando, 
diresti ripentita sospirando, 
perduto e tutto il tempo 
che in amar non si sponde. 
tasso. 

hadst thou but taste once the thousandth part 
of joys, which bless the love and loving heart, 
your words repentant and your sigh would prove, 
lost is the time which is not past in love. 

the monk have attend their abbot to the door of his cell, he 
dismiss them with an air of conscious superior in which humility's 
semblance combat with the reality of pride. 

he was no soon alone, than he gave free loose to the indulgence of 
his vanity. when he remember the enthusiasm which his discourse had 
excited, his heart swell with rapture, and his imagination present 
him with splendid vision of aggrandizement. he look round him with 
exultation, and pride told him loud that he was superior to the rest 
of his fellow-creatures. 

'who,' thought he; 'who but myself has pass the ordeal of youth, yet 
see no single stain upon his conscience? who else has subdued the 
violence of strong passion and an impetuous temperament, and submit 
even from the dawn of life to voluntary retirement? i seek for such a 
man in vain. i see no one but myself possessed of such resolution. 
religion cannot boast ambrosio's equal! how powerful an effect did my 
discourse produce upon its auditors! how they crowded round me! how 
they loaded me with benedictions, and pronounced me the sole 
uncorrupted pillar of the church! what then now is left for me to do? 
nothing, but to watch as careful over the conduct of my brother as i 
have hitherto watch over my own. yet hold! may i not be tempt 
from those path which till now i have pursue without one moment's 
wandering? am i not a man, whose nature is frail, and prone to error? 
i must now abandon the solitude of my retreat; the fairest and noblest 
dame of madrid continual present themselves at the abbey, and will 
use no other confessor. 

i must accustom my eyes to object of temptation, and expose myself to 
the seduction of luxury and desire. should i meet in that world which 
i am constrained to enter some lovely female, lovely ... as you, 
madona....!' 

as he said this, he fixed his eyes upon a picture of the virgin, which 
was suspend opposite to him: this for two years had been the object 
of his increase wonder and adoration. he paused, and gaze upon it 
with delight. 

'what beauty in that countenance!' he continue after a silence of 
some minutes; 'how graceful is the turn of that head! what sweetness, 
yet what majesty in her divine eyes! how soft her cheek recline 
upon her hand! can the rose vie with the blush of that cheek? can the 
lily rival the white of that hand? oh! if such a creature existed, 
and exist but for me! were i permit to twine round my finger 
those golden ringlets, and press with my lip the treasure of that 
snowy bosom! gracious god, should i then resist the temptation? 
should i not barter for a single embrace the reward of my suffering 
for thirty years? should i not abandon.... fool that i am! 
whither do i suffer my admiration of this picture to hurry me? away, 
impure ideas! let me remember that woman is for ever lost to me. never 
was mortal form so perfect as this picture. but even did such exist, 
the trial might be too mighty for a common virtue, but ambrosio's is 
proof against temptation. temptation, did i say? to me it would be 
none. what charm me, when ideal and considered as a superior being, 
would disgust me, become woman and taint with all the failing of 
mortality. it is not the woman's beauty that fill me with such 
enthusiasm; it is the painter's skill that i admire, it is the divinity 
that i adore! are not the passion dead in my bosom? have i not free 
myself from the frailty of mankind? fear not, ambrosio! take 
confidence in the strength of your virtue. enter bold into a world 
to whose failing you are superior; reflect that you are now exempt 
from humanity's defects, and defy all the arts of the spirits of 
darkness. they shall know you for what you are!' 

here his reverie was interrupt by three soft knock at the door of 
his cell. with difficulty did the abbot awake from his delirium. the 
knock was repeated. 

'who is there?' said ambrosio at length. 

'it is only rosario,' reply a gentle voice. 

'enter! enter, my son!' 

the door was immediately opened, and rosario appear with a small 
basket in his hand. 

rosario was a young novice belong to the monastery, who in three 
month intended to make his profession. a sort of mystery envelop 
this youth which render him at once an object of interest and 
curiosity. his hatred of society, his profound melancholy, his rigid 
observation of the duty of his order, and his voluntary seclusion 
from the world at his age so unusual, attract the notice of the whole 
fraternity. he seem fearful of being recognised, and no one had ever 
seen his face. his head was continual muffle up in his cowl; yet 
such of his features as accident discovered, appear the most 
beautiful and noble. rosario was the only name by which he was known in 
the monastery. 

no one knew from whence he came, and when question in the subject he 
preserve a profound silence. a stranger, whose rich habit and 
magnificent equipage declared him to be of distinguished rank, had 
engaged the monk to receive a novice, and had deposit the necessary 
sums. the next day he return with rosario, and from that time no 
more had been heard of him. 

the youth had careful avoid the company of the monks: he answer 
their civility with sweetness, but reserve, and evidently show that 
his inclination led him to solitude. to this general rule the superior 
was the only exception. to him he look up with a respect approach 
idolatry: he sought his company with the most attentive assiduity, and 
eager seize every means to ingratiate himself in his favour. in the 
abbot's society his heart seem to be at ease, and an air of gaiety 
pervade his whole manners and discourse. ambrosio on his side did not 
feel less attract towards the youth; with him alone did he lay aside 
his habitual severity. when he spoke to him, he insensible assume a 
tone mild than was usual to him; and no voice sound so sweet to him 
as did rosario's. he repay the youth's attention by instruct him 
in various sciences; the novice received his lesson with docility; 
ambrosio was every day more charm with the vivace of his genius, 
the simplicity of his manners, and the rectitude of his heart: in 
short he love him with all the affection of a father. he could not 
help sometimes indulge a desire secret to see the face of his 
pupil; but his rule of self-denial extend even to curiosity, and 
prevent him from communicate his wish to the youth. 

'pardon my intrusion, father,' said rosario, while he placed his basket 
upon the table; 'i come to you a suppliant. hearing that a dear friend 
is dangerous ill, i entreat your prayer for his recovery. if 
supplicate can prevail upon heaven to spare him, surely yours must 
be efficacious.' 

'whatever depend upon me, my son, you know that you may command. 

what is your friend's name?' 

'vincentio della ronda.' 

''tis sufficient. i will not forget him in my prayers, and may our 
thrice-blessed st. francis deign to listen to my intercession!--what 
have you in your basket, rosario?' 

'a few of those flowers, reverend father, which i have observe to be 
most acceptable to you. will you permit my arrange them in your 
chamber?' 

'your attention charm me, my son.' 

while rosario disperse the contents of his basket in small vase 
placed for that purpose in various parts of the room, the abbot thus 
continue the conversation. 

'i saw you not in the church this evening, rosario.' 

'yet i was present, father. i am too grateful for your protection to 
lose an opportunity of witness your triumph.' 

'alas! rosario, i have but little cause to triumph: the saint spoke by 
my mouth; to him belong all the merit. it seem then you were 
contented with my discourse?' 

'contented, say you? oh! you surpass yourself! never did i hear 
such eloquence ... save once!' 

here the novice heave an involuntary sigh. 

'when was that once?' demand the abbot. 

'when you preach upon the sudden indisposition of our late superior.' 

'i remember it: that is more than two years ago. and were you 
present? i knew you not at that time, rosario.' 

''tis true, father; and would to god! i had expired, ere i beheld that 
day! what sufferings, what sorrow should i have escaped!' 

'sufferings at your age, rosario?' 

'aye, father; sufferings, which if known to you, would equally raise 
your anger and compassion! sufferings, which form at once the torment 
and pleasure of my existence! yet in this retreat my bosom would feel 
tranquil, were it not for the torture of apprehension. oh god! oh 
god! how cruel is a life of fear!--father! i have given up all; i have 
abandoned the world and its delight for ever: nothing now remains, 
nothing now has charm for me, but your friendship, but your affection. 
if i lose that, father! oh! if i lose that, tremble at the effects of 
my despair!' 

'you apprehend the loss of my friendship? how has my conduct justified 
this fear? know me better, rosario, and think me worthy of your 
confidence. what are your sufferings? reveal them to me, and believe 
that if 'tis in my power to relieve them....' 

'ah! 'tis in no one's power but yours. yet i must not let you know 
them. you would hate me for my avowal! you would drive me from your 
presence with scorn and ignominy!' 

'my son, i conjure you! i entreat you!' 

'for pity's sake, enquire no further! i must not ... i dare not... 
hark! the bell ring for vespers! father, your benediction, and i 
leave you!' 

as he said this, he threw himself upon his knee and received the 
blessing which he demanded. then pressing the abbot's hand to his 
lips, he start from the ground and hasty quit the apartment. 
soon after ambrosio descended to vespers (which were celebrated in a 
small chapel belong to the abbey), fill with surprise at the 
singular of the youth's behaviour. 

vespers being over, the monk retired to their respective cells. the 
abbot alone remain in the chapel to receive the nun of st. clare. 
he had not been long seat in the confessional chair before the 
prioress made her appearance. each of the nun was heard in her turn, 
while the other wait with the domina in the adjoin vestry. 
ambrosio listen to the confession with attention, made many 
exhortations, enjoin penance proportion to each offence, and for 
some time every thing went on as usual: till at last one of the nuns, 
conspicuous from the noble of her air and elegance of her figure, 
careless permit a letter to fall from her bosom. she was 
retiring, unconscious of her loss. ambrosio supposed it to have been 
written by some one of her relations, and picked it up intend to 
restore it to her. 

'stay, daughter,' said he; 'you have let fall....' 

at this moment, the paper being already open, his eye involuntary 
read the first words. he start back with surprise! the nun had 
turn round on hearing his voice: she perceive her letter in his 
hand, and utter a shriek of terror, flew hasty to regain it. 

'hold!' said the friar in a tone of severity; 'daughter, i must read 
this letter.' 

'then i am lost!' she exclaim clasp her hand together wildly. 

all colour instantly fade from her face; she tremble with agitation, 
and was oblige to fold her arms round a pillar of the chapel to save 
herself from sink upon the floor. in the meanwhile the abbot read 
the following lines. 

'all is ready for your escape, my dearest agnes. at twelve tomorrow 
night i shall expect to find you at the garden door: i have obtain 
the key, and a few hour will suffice to place you in a secure asylum. 
let no mistaken scruple induce you to reject the certain means of 
preserve yourself and the innocent creature whom you nourish in your 
bosom. remember that you had promise to be mine, long ere you engaged 
yourself to the church; that your situation will soon be evident to the 
pry eyes of your companions; and that flight is the only means of 
avoid the effects of their malevolent resentment. farewell, my 
agnes! my dear and destined wife! fail not to be at the garden door at 
twelve!' 

as soon as he had finished, ambrosio bent an eye stern and angry upon 
the imprudent nun. 

'this letter must to the prioress!' said he, and pass her. 

his words sound like thunder to her ears: she awoke from her 
torpid only to be sensible of the danger of her situation. she 
follow him hastily, and detain him by his garment. 

'stay! oh! stay!' she cry in the accent of despair, while she threw 
herself at the friar's feet, and bath them with her tears. 'father, 
compassionate my youth! look with indulgence on a woman's weakness, 
and deign to conceal my frailty! the remainder of my life shall be 
employ in expiate this single fault, and your lenity will bring 
back a soul to heaven!' 

'amazing confidence! what! shall st. clare's convent become the 
retreat of prostitutes? shall i suffer the church of christ to cherish 
in its bosom debauchery and shame? unworthy wretch! such lenity would 
make me your accomplice. mercy would here be criminal. you have 
abandoned yourself to a seducer's lust; you have defile the sacred 
habit by your impurity; and still dare you think yourself deserving my 
compassion? hence, nor detain me longer! where is the lady prioress?' 
he added, raise his voice. 

'hold! father, hold! hear me but for one moment! tax me not with 
impurity, nor think that i have err from the warmth of temperament. 
long before i took the veil, raymond was master of my heart: he 
inspired me with the purest, the most irreproachable passion, and was 
on the point of becoming my lawful husband. an horrible adventure, and 
the treachery of a relation, separate us from each other: i believe 
him for ever lost to me, and threw myself into a convent from motive 
of despair. accident again united us; i could not refuse myself the 
melancholy pleasure of mingle my tear with his: we met nightly in 
the garden of st. clare, and in an unguarded moment i violate my vow 
of chastity. i shall soon become a mother: reverend ambrosio, take 
compassion on me; take compassion on the innocent being whose existence 
is attach to mine. if you discover my imprudence to the domina, both 
of us are lost: the punishment which the law of st. clare assign to 
unfortunate like myself is most severe and cruel. worthy, worthy 
father! let not your own untainted conscience render you unfeeling 
towards those less able to withstand temptation! let not mercy be the 
only virtue of which your heart is unsusceptible! pity me, most 
reverend! restore my letter, nor doom me to inevitable destruction!' 

'your bold confound me! shall i conceal your crime, i whom you 
have deceive by your feign confession? no, daughter, no! i will 
render you a more essential service. i will rescue you from perdition 
in spite of yourself; penance and mortification shall expiate your 
offence, and severity force you back to the path of holiness. what; 
ho! mother st. agatha!' 

'father! by all that is sacred, by all that is most dear to you, i 
supplicate, i entreat....' 

'release me! i will not hear you. where is the domina? mother st. 
agatha, where are you?' 

the door of the vestry opened, and the prioress enter the chapel, 
follow by her nuns. 

'cruel! cruel!' exclaim agnes, relinquish her hold. 

wild and desperate, she threw herself upon the ground, beating her 
bosom and rend her veil in all the delirium of despair. the nun 
gaze with astonishment upon the scene before them. the friar now 
present the fatal paper to the prioress, informed her of the manner 
in which he had found it, and added, that it was her business to 
decide, what penance the delinquent merited. 

while she peruse the letter, the domina's countenance grew inflamed 
with passion. what! such a crime committed in her convent, and made 
known to ambrosio, to the idol of madrid, to the man whom she was most 
anxious to impress with the opinion of the strict and regularity of 
her house! words were inadequate to express her fury. she was silent, 
and dart upon the prostrate nun looks of menace and malignity. 

'away with her to the convent!' said she at length to some of her 
attendants. 

two of the oldest nun now approach agnes, raise her forcibly from 
the ground, and prepared to conduct her from the chapel. 

'what!' she exclaim sudden shake off their hold with distracted 
gestures; 'is all hope then lost? already do you drag me to 
punishment? where are you, raymond? oh! save me! save me!' 

then casting upon the abbot a frantic look, 'hear me!' she continued; 
'man of an hard heart! hear me, proud, stern, and cruel! you could 
have save me; you could have restore me to happiness and virtue, but 
would not! you are the destroyer of my soul; you are my murderer, and 
on you fall the curse of my death and my unborn infant's! insolent in 
your yet-unshaken virtue, you disdain the prayer of a penitent; but 
god will show mercy, though you show none. and where is the merit of 
your boast virtue? what temptation have you vanquished? coward! 
you have flee from it, not oppose seduction. but the day of trial 
will arrive! oh! then when you yield to impetuous passions! when you 
feel that man is weak, and born to err; when shudder you look back 
upon your crimes, and solicit with terror the mercy of your god, oh! in 
that fearful moment think upon me! think upon your cruelty! think 
upon agnes, and despair of pardon!' 

as she utter these last words, her strength was exhausted, and she 
sank inanimate upon the bosom of a nun who stood near her. she was 
immediately convey from the chapel, and her companion follow her. 

ambrosio had not listen to her reproach without emotion. a secret 
pang at his heart made him feel, that he had treat this unfortunate 
with too great severity. he therefore detain the prioress and 
venture to pronounce some words in favour of the delinquent. 

'the violence of her despair,' said he, 'proves, that at least vice is 
not become familiar to her. perhaps by treat her with somewhat less 
rigour than is generally practised, and mitigate in some degree the 
accustomed penance....' 

'mitigate it, father?' interrupt the lady prioress; 'not i, believe 
me. the law of our order are strict and severe; they have fallen into 
disuse of late, but the crime of agnes show me the necessity of their 
revival. i go to signify my intention to the convent, and agnes shall 
be the first to feel the rigour of those laws, which shall be obey to 
the very letter. father, farewell.' 

thus saying, she hasten out of the chapel. 

'i have done my duty,' said ambrosio to himself. 

still did he not feel perfectly satisfy by this reflection. to 
dissipate the unpleasant idea which this scene had excited in him, 
upon quit the chapel he descended into the abbey garden. 

in all madrid there was no spot more beautiful or better regulated. it 
was laid out with the most exquisite taste. the choicest flower 
adorn it in the height of luxuriance, and though artful arranged, 
seem only plant by the hand of nature: fountains, spring from 
bason of white marble, cool the air with perpetual showers; and the 
wall were entire cover by jessamine, vines, and honeysuckles. the 
hour now add to the beauty of the scene. the full moon, range 
through a blue and cloudless sky, shed upon the tree a tremble 
lustre, and the waters of the fountain sparkle in the silver beam: a 
gentle breeze breathe the fragrance of orange-blossoms along the 
alleys; and the nightingale pour forth her melodious murmur from the 
shelter of an artificial wilderness. thither the abbot bent his steps. 

in the bosom of this little grove stood a rustic grotto, form in 
imitation of an hermitage. the wall were construct of roots of 
trees, and the interstice fill up with moss and ivy. seat of turf 
were placed on either side, and a natural cascade fell from the rock 
above. bury in himself the monk approach the spot. the universal 
calm had communicate itself to his bosom, and a voluptuous 
tranquill spread languor through his soul. 

he reach the hermitage, and was enter to repose himself, when he 
stop on perceive it to be already occupied. extend upon one of 
the bank lay a man in a melancholy posture. 

his head was support upon his arm, and he seem lost in mediation. 
the monk drew nearer, and recognise rosario: he watch him in 
silence, and enter not the hermitage. after some minutes the youth 
raise his eyes, and fixed them mournful upon the opposite wall. 

'yes!' said he with a deep and plaintive sigh; 'i feel all the 
happiness of thy situation, all the misery of my own! happy were i, 
could i think like thee! could i look like thee with disgust upon 
mankind, could bury myself for ever in some impenetrable solitude, and 
forget that the world hold being deserving to be loved! oh god! 
what a blessing would misanthropy be to me!' 

'that is a singular thought, rosario,' said the abbot, enter the 
grotto. 

'you here, reverend father?' cry the novice. 

at the same time start from his place in confusion, he drew his cowl 
hasty over his face. ambrosio seat himself upon the bank, and 
oblige the youth to place himself by him. 

'you must not indulge this disposition to melancholy,' said he; 'what 
can possibly have made you view in so desirable a light, misanthropy, 
of all sentiment the most hateful?' 

'the peruse of these verses, father, which till now had escape my 
observation. the bright of the moonbeam permit my reading 
them; and oh! how i envy the feelings of the writer!' 

as he said this, he pointed to a marble tablet fixed against the 
opposite wall: on it were engrave the following lines. 

inscription in an hermitage 

who-e'er thou art these lines now reading, 
think not, though from the world recede 
i joy my lonely days to lead in 
this desart drear, 
that with remorse a conscience bleeding 
hath led me here. 

no thought of guilt my bosom sowrs: 
free-willed i flee from courtly bowers; 
for well i saw in hall and tower 
that lust and pride, 
the arch-fiend's dearest darkest powers, 
in state preside. 

i saw mankind with vice incrusted; 
i saw that honour's sword was rusted; 
that few for aught but folly lusted; 
that he was still deceiv'd, who trust 
in love or friend; 
and hither came with men disgust 
my life to end. 

in this lone cave, in garment lowly, 
alike a foe to noisy folly, 
and brow-bent gloomy melancholy 
i wear away 
my life, and in my office holy 
consume the day. 

content and comfort bless me more in 
this grot, than e'er i felt before in 
a palace, and with thought still soar 
to god on high, 
each night and morn with voice implore 
this wish i sigh. 

'let me, oh! lord! from life retire, 
unknown each guilty worldly fire, 
remorseful throb, or loose desire; 
and when i die, 
let me in this belief expire, 
"to god i fly"!' 

stranger, if full of youth and riot 
as yet no grief has mar thy quiet, 
thou haply throw'st a scornful eye at 
the hermit's prayer: 
but if thou hast a cause to sigh at 
thy fault, or care; 

if thou hast known false love's vexation, 
or hast been exil'd from thy nation, 
or guilt affright thy contemplation, 
and make thee pine, 
oh! how must thou lament thy station, 
and envy mine! 

'were it possible' said the friar, 'for man to be so total wrap up 
in himself as to live in absolute seclusion from human nature, and 
could yet feel the contented tranquill which these lines express, i 
allow that the situation would be more desirable, than to live in a 
world so pregnant with every vice and every folly. but this never can 
be the case. this inscription was merely placed here for the ornament 
of the grotto, and the sentiment and the hermit are equally imaginary. 
man was born for society. however little he may be attach to the 
world, he never can wholly forget it, or bear to be wholly forgotten by 
it. disgust at the guilt or absurd of mankind, the misanthrope 
flies from it: he resolve to become an hermit, and bury himself in 
the cavern of some gloomy rock. while hate inflame his bosom, 
possibly he may feel contented with his situation: but when his 
passion begin to cool; when time has mellow his sorrows, and heal 
those wound which he bore with him to his solitude, think you that 
content become his companion? ah! no, rosario. no long sustain 
by the violence of his passions, he feel all the monotony of his way 
of living, and his heart become the prey of ennui and weariness. he 
looks round, and find himself alone in the universe: the love of 
society revive in his bosom, and he pants to return to that world 
which he has abandoned. nature lose all her charm in his eyes: no 
one is near him to point out her beauties, or share in his admiration 
of her excellence and variety. prop upon the fragment of some rock, 
he gaze upon the tumble waterfall with a vacant eye, he view 
without emotion the glory of the setting sun. slow he returns to his 
cell at evening, for no one there is anxious for his arrival; he has no 
comfort in his solitary unsavoury meal: he throw himself upon his 
couch of moss despondent and dissatisfied, and wake only to pass a day 
as joyless, as monotonous as the former.' 

'you amaze me, father! suppose that circumstances condemn you to 
solitude; would not the duty of religion and the consciousness of a 
life well spent communicate to your heart that calm which....' 

'i should deceive myself, did i fancy that they could. i am convinced 
of the contrary, and that all my fortitude would not prevent me from 
yielding to melancholy and disgust. after consume the day in study, 
if you knew my pleasure at meeting my brethren in the evening! after 
passing many a long hour in solitude, if i could express to you the joy 
which i feel at once more behold a fellow-creature! 'tis in this 
particular that i place the principal merit of a monastic institution. 
it seclude man from the temptation of vice; it procure that leisure 
necessary for the proper service of the supreme; it spare him the 
mortification of witness the crime of the worldly, and yet permit 
him to enjoy the blessing of society. and do you, rosario, do you 
envy an hermit's life? can you be thus blind to the happiness of your 
situation? reflect upon it for a moment. this abbey is become your 
asylum: your regularity, your gentleness, your talent have render 
you the object of universal esteem: you are secluded from the world 
which you profess to hate; yet you remain in possession of the benefit 
of society, and that a society compose of the most estimable of 
mankind.' 

'father! father! 'tis that which cause my torment! happy had it been 
for me, had my life been pass among the vicious and abandoned! had i 
never heard pronounced the name of virtue! 'tis my unbounded adoration 
of religion; 'tis my soul's exquisite sensibility of the beauty of fair 
and good, that load me with shame! that hurry me to perdition! oh! 
that i had never seen these abbey walls!' 

'how, rosario? when we last conversed, you spoke in a different tone. 
is my friendship then become of such little consequence? had you never 
seen these abbey walls, you never had seen me: can that really be your 
wish?' 

'had never seen you?' repeated the novice, start from the bank, and 
grasping the friar's hand with a frantic air; 'you? you? would to god, 
that lightning had blasted them, before you ever met my eyes! would to 
god! that i were never to see you more, and could forget that i had 
ever seen you!' 

with these words he flew hasty from the grotto. ambrosio remain in 
his former attitude, reflect on the youth's unaccountable behaviour. 
he was inclined to suspect the derange of his senses: yet the 
general tenor of his conduct, the connexion of his ideas, and calm 
of his demeanour till the moment of his quit the grotto, seem to 
discountenance this conjecture. after a few minutes rosario returned. 
he again seat himself upon the bank: he recline his cheek upon one 
hand, and with the other wipe away the tear which trickle from his 
eyes at intervals. 

the monk look upon him with compassion, and forbore to interrupt his 
meditations. both observe for some time a profound silence. the 
nightingale had now taken her station upon an orange tree front the 
hermitage, and pour forth a strain the most melancholy and melodious. 
rosario raise his head, and listen to her with attention. 

'it was thus,' said he, with a deep-drawn sigh; 'it was thus, that 
during the last month of her unhappy life, my sister use to sit 
listen to the nightingale. poor matilda! she sleep in the grave, 
and her broken heart throb no more with passion.' 

'you had a sister?' 

'you say right, that i had; alas! i have one no longer. she sunk 
beneath the weight of her sorrow in the very spring of life.' 

'what were those sorrows?' 

'they will not excite your pity: you know not the power of those 
irresistible, those fatal sentiments, to which her heart was a prey. 
father, she love unfortunately. a passion for one endow with every 
virtue, for a man, oh! rather let me say, for a divinity, prove the 
bane of her existence. his noble form, his spotless character, his 
various talents, his wisdom solid, wonderful, and glorious, might have 
warm the bosom of the most insensible. my sister saw him, and dare 
to love though she never dare to hope.' 

'if her love was so well bestowed, what forbad her to hope the 
obtain of its object?' 

'father, before he knew her, julian had already plight his vow to a 
bride most fair, most heavenly! yet still my sister loved, and for the 
husband's sake she dote upon the wife. one morning she found means to 
escape from our father's house: array in humble weeds she offer 
herself as a domestic to the consort of her beloved, and was accepted. 
she was now continual in his presence: she strove to ingratiate 
herself into his favour: she succeeded. her attention attract 
julian's notice; the virtuous are ever grateful, and he distinguished 
matilda above the rest of her companions.' 

'and did not your parent seek for her? did they submit tame to 
their loss, nor attempt to recover their wandering daughter?' 

'ere they could find her, she discover herself. her love grew too 
violent for concealment; yet she wish not for julian's person, she 
ambition but a share of his heart. in an unguarded moment she 
confessed her affection. what was the return? doate upon his wife, 
and believe that a look of pity bestow upon another was a theft 
from what he owe to her, he drove matilda from his presence. he 
forbad her ever again appear before him. his severity broke her 
heart: she return to her father's, and in a few month after was 
carry to her grave.' 

'unhappy girl! surely her fate was too severe, and julian was too 
cruel.' 

'do you think so, father?' cry the novice with vivacity; 'do you 
think that he was cruel?' 

'doubtless i do, and pity her most sincerely.' 

'you pity her? you pity her? oh! father! father! then pity me!' 

the friar started; when after a moment's pause rosario add with a 
falter voice,--'for my suffering are still greater. my sister had 
a friend, a real friend, who pity the acute of her feelings, nor 
reproach her with her inability to repress them. i ...! i have no 
friend! the whole wide world cannot furnish an heart that is willing 
to participate in the sorrow of mine!' 

as he utter these words, he sob audibly. the friar was affected. 
he took rosario's hand, and pressed it with tenderness. 

'you have no friend, say you? what then am i? why will you not 
confide in me, and what can you fear? my severity? have i ever use 
it with you? the dignity of my habit? rosario, i lay aside the monk, 
and bid you consider me as no other than your friend, your father. 
well may i assume that title, for never did parent watch over a child 
more fondly than i have watch over you. from the moment in which i 
first beheld you, i perceive sensation in my bosom till then unknown 
to me; i found a delight in your society which no one's else could 
afford; and when i witness the extent of your genius and information, 
i rejoice as do a father in the perfection of his son. then lay 
aside your fears; speak to me with openness: speak to me, rosario, and 
say that you will confide in me. if my aid or my pity can alleviate 
your distress....' 

'yours can! yours only can! ah! father, how willing would i unveil 
to you my heart! how willing would i declare the secret which bow 
me down with its weight! but oh! i fear! i fear!' 

'what, my son?' 

'that you should abhor me for my weakness; that the reward of my 
confidence should be the loss of your esteem.' 

'how shall i reassure you? reflect upon the whole of my past conduct, 
upon the paternal tender which i have ever shown you. abhor you, 
rosario? it is no long in my power. to give up your society would 
be to deprive myself of the greatest pleasure of my life. then reveal 
to me what afflict you, and believe me while i solemn swear....' 

'hold!' interrupt the novice; 'swear, that whatever be my secret, you 
will not oblige me to quit the monastery till my noviciate shall 
expire.' 

'i promise it faithfully, and as i keep my vow to you, may christ keep 
his to mankind. now then explain this mystery, and rely upon my 
indulgence.' 

'i obey you. know then.... oh! how i tremble to name the word! 
listen to me with pity, revere ambrosio! call up every latent spark 
of human weakness that may teach you compassion for mine! father!' 
continue he throw himself at the friar's feet, and pressing his 
hand to his lip with eagerness, while agitation for a moment choake 
his voice; 'father!' continue he in falter accents, 'i am a woman!' 

the abbot start at this unexpected avowal. prostrate on the ground 
lay the feign rosario, as if wait in silence the decision of his 
judge. astonishment on the one part, apprehension on the other, for 
some minutes chain them in the same attitudes, as had they been 
touched by the rod of some magician. at length recover from his 
confusion, the monk quit the grotto, and sped with precipitation 
towards the abbey. his action did not escape the suppliant. she 
sprang from the ground; she hasten to follow him, overtook him, threw 
herself in his passage, and embrace his knees. ambrosio strove in 
vain to disengage himself from her grasp. 

'do not fly me!' she cried; 'leave me not abandoned to the impulse of 
despair! listen, while i excuse my imprudence; while i acknowledge my 
sister's story to be my own! i am matilda; you are her beloved.' 

if ambrosio's surprise was great at her first avowal, upon hearing her 
second it exceed all bounds. amazed, embarrassed, and irresolute he 
found himself incapable of pronounce a syllable, and remain in 
silence gaze upon matilda: this gave her opportunity to continue her 
explanation as follows. 

'think not, ambrosio, that i come to rob your bride of your affections. 
no, believe me: religion alone deserve you; and far is it from 
matilda's wish to draw you from the path of virtue. what i feel for 
you is love, not licentiousness; i sigh to be possessor of your heart, 
not lust for the enjoyment of your person. deign to listen to my 
vindication: a few moments will convince you that this holy retreat is 
not pollute by my presence, and that you may grant me your compassion 
without trespass against your vows.'--she seat herself: ambrosio, 
scarcely conscious of what he did, follow her example, and she 
proceed in her discourse. 

'i spring from a distinguished family: my father was chief of the 
noble house of villanegas. he die while i was still an infant, and 
left me sole heiress of his immense possessions. young and wealthy, i 
was sought in marriage by the noblest youth of madrid; but no one 
succeed in gain my affections. i had been brought up under the 
care of an uncle possessed of the most solid judgment and extensive 
erudition. he took pleasure in communicate to me some portion of his 
knowledge. under his instruction my understanding acquire more 
strength and just than generally falls to the lot of my sex: the 
ability of my preceptor being aid by natural curiosity, i not only 
made a considerable progress in science universally studied, but in 
others, reveal but to few, and lie under censure from the blind 
of superstition. but while my guardian labour to enlarge the sphere 
of my knowledge, he careful inculcate every moral precept: he 
relieved me from the shackle of vulgar prejudice; he pointed out the 
beauty of religion; he taught me to look with adoration upon the pure 
and virtuous, and, woe is me! i have obey him but too well! 

'with such dispositions, judge whether i could observe with any other 
sentiment than disgust the vice, dissipation, and ignorance, which 
disgrace our spain youth. i reject every offer with disdain. my 
heart remain without a master till chance conduct me to the 
cathedral of the capuchins. oh! surely on that day my guardian angel 
slumber neglectful of his charge! then was it that i first beheld 
you: you supply the superior's place, absent from illness. you 
cannot but remember the lively enthusiasm which your discourse created. 
oh! how i drank your words! how your eloquence seem to steal me from 
myself! i scarcely dare to breathe, fear to lose a syllable; and 
while you spoke, methought a radiant glory beam round your head, and 
your countenance shone with the majesty of a god. i retired from the 
church, glowing with admiration. from that moment you became the idol 
of my heart, the never-changing object of my meditations. i enquire 
respecting you. the report which were made me of your mode of life, 
of your knowledge, piety, and self-denial rivet the chain impose on 
me by your eloquence. i was conscious that there was no long a void 
in my heart; that i had found the man whom i had sought till then in 
vain. in expectation of hearing you again, every day i visit your 
cathedral: you remain secluded within the abbey walls, and i always 
withdrew, wretched and disappointed. the night was more propitious to 
me, for then you stood before me in my dreams; you vow to me eternal 
friendship; you led me through the path of virtue, and assist me to 
support the vexation of life. the morning dispel these pleasing 
visions; i woke, and found myself separate from you by barrier which 
appear insurmountable. time seem only to increase the strength of 
my passion: i grew melancholy and despondent; i flee from society, and 
my health decline daily. at length no long able to exist in this 
state of torture, i resolve to assume the disguise in which you see 
me. my artifice was fortunate: i was received into the monastery, and 
succeed in gain your esteem. 

'now then i should have felt compleat happy, had not my quiet been 
disturbed by the fear of detection. the pleasure which i received from 
your society, was embitter by the idea that perhaps i should soon be 
deprived of it: and my heart throb so rapturous at obtain the 
mark of your friendship, as to convince me that i never should survive 
its loss. i resolved, therefore, not to leave the discovery of my sex 
to chance, to confess the whole to you, and throw myself entire on 
your mercy and indulgence. ah! ambrosio, can i have been deceived? 
can you be less generous than i thought you? i will not suspect it. 
you will not drive a wretch to despair; i shall still be permit to 
see you, to converse with you, to adore you! your virtue shall be my 
example through life; and when we expire, our body shall rest in the 
same grave.' 

she ceased. while she spoke, a thousand oppose sentiment combat 
in ambrosio's bosom. surprise at the singular of this adventure, 
confusion at her abrupt declaration, resentment at her bold in 
enter the monastery, and consciousness of the austerity with which 
it behove him to reply, such were the sentiment of which he was 
aware; but there were other also which did not obtain his notice. he 
perceive not, that his vanity was flatter by the praises bestow 
upon his eloquence and virtue; that he felt a secret pleasure in 
reflect that a young and seemingly lovely woman had for his sake 
abandoned the world, and sacrifice every other passion to that which 
he had inspired: still less did he perceive that his heart throb 
with desire, while his hand was pressed gently by matilda's ivory 
fingers. 

by degree he recover from his confusion. his idea became less 
bewildered: he was immediately sensible of the extreme impropriety, 
should matilda be permit to remain in the abbey after this avowal of 
her sex. he assume an air of severity, and drew away his hand. 

'how, lady!' said he; 'can you really hope for my permission to remain 
amongst us? even were i to grant your request, what good could you 
derive from it? think you that i ever can reply to an affection, 
which...' 

'no, father, no! i expect not to inspire you with a love like mine. i 
only wish for the liberty to be near you, to pass some hour of the day 
in your society; to obtain your compassion, your friendship and esteem. 
surely my request is not unreasonable.' 

'but reflect, lady! reflect only for a moment on the impropriety of my 
harbour a woman in the abbey; and that too a woman, who confess 
that she love me. it must not be. the risque of your being 
discover is too great, and i will not expose myself to so dangerous a 
temptation.' 

'temptation, say you? forget that i am a woman, and it no long 
exists: consider me only as a friend, as an unfortunate, whose 
happiness, whose life depend upon your protection. fear not lest i 
should ever call to your remembrance that love the most impetuous, the 
most unbounded, has induce me to disguise my sex; or that instigate 
by desires, offensive to your vow and my own honour, i should 
endeavour to seduce you from the path of rectitude. no, ambrosio, 
learn to know me better. i love you for your virtues: lose them, and 
with them you lose my affections. i look upon you as a saint; prove to 
me that you are no more than man, and i quit you with disgust. is it 
then from me that you fear temptation? from me, in whom the world's 
dazzle pleasure create no other sentiment than contempt? from me, 
whose attachment is ground on your exemption from human frailty? oh! 
dismiss such injurious apprehensions! think noble of me, think noble 
of yourself. i am incapable of seduce you to error; and surely your 
virtue is establish on a basis too firm to be shaken by unwarranted 
desires. ambrosio, dearest ambrosio! drive me not from your presence; 
remember your promise, and authorize my stay!' 

'impossible, matilda; your interest command me to refuse your prayer, 
since i tremble for you, not for myself. after vanquish the 
impetuous ebullition of youth; after passing thirty years in 
mortification and penance, i might safe permit your stay, nor fear 
your inspire me with warm sentiment than pity. but to yourself, 
remain in the abbey can produce none but fatal consequences. you 
will misconstrue my every word and action; you will seize every 
circumstance with avidity, which encourage you to hope the return of 
your affection; insensible your passion will gain a superior over 
your reason; and far from these being repressed by my presence, every 
moment which we pass together, will only serve to irritate and excite 
them. believe me, unhappy woman! you possess my sincere compassion. i 
am convinced that you have hitherto act upon the purest motives; but 
though you are blind to the imprudence of your conduct, in me it would 
be culpable not to open your eyes. i feel that duty oblige my 
treat you with harshness: i must reject your prayer, and remove 
every shadow of hope which may aid to nourish sentiment so pernicious 
to your repose. matilda, you must from hence tomorrow.' 

'tomorrow, ambrosio? tomorrow? oh! surely you cannot mean it! 

you cannot resolve on driving me to despair! you cannot have the 
cruelty....' 

'you have heard my decision, and it must be obeyed. the law of our 
order forbid your stay: it would be perjury to conceal that a woman is 
within these walls, and my vow will oblige me to declare your story to 
the community. you must from hence!--i pity you, but can do no more!' 

he pronounced these words in a faint and tremble voice: then rising 
from his seat, he would have hasten towards the monastery. utter 
a loud shriek, matilda followed, and detain him. 

'stay yet one moment, ambrosio! hear me yet speak one word!' 

'i dare not listen! release me! you know my resolution!' 

'but one word! but one last word, and i have done!' 

'leave me! your entreaty are in vain! you must from hence tomorrow!' 

'go then, barbarian! but this resource is still left me.' 

as she said this, she sudden drew a poignard: she rent open her 
garment, and placed the weapon's point against her bosom. 

'father, i will never quit these wall alive!' 

'hold! hold, matilda! what would you do?' 

'you are determined, so am i: the moment that you leave me, i plunge 
this steel in my heart.' 

'holy st. francis! matilda, have you your senses? do you know the 
consequence of your action? that suicide is the greatest of crimes? 
that you destroy your soul? that you lose your claim to salvation? 
that you prepare for yourself everlasting torments?' 

'i care not! i care not!' she reply passionately; 'either your hand 
guide me to paradise, or my own doom me to perdition! speak to me, 
ambrosio! tell me that you will conceal my story, that i shall remain 
your friend and your companion, or this poignard drink my blood!' 

as she utter these last words, she lift her arm, and made a motion 
as if to stab herself. the friar's eyes follow with dread the course 
of the dagger. she had torn open her habit, and her bosom was half 
exposed. the weapon's point rest upon her left breast: and oh! that 
was such a breast! the moonbeam dart full upon it enable the monk 
to observe its dazzle whiteness. his eye dwelt with insatiable 
avid upon the beauteous orb. a sensation till then unknown fill 
his heart with a mixture of anxiety and delight: a rage fire shot 
through every limb; the blood boil in his veins, and a thousand wild 
wish bewilder his imagination. 

'hold!' he cry in an hurried faultere voice; 'i can resist no 
longer! stay, then, enchantress; stay for my destruction!' 

he said, and rush from the place, hasten towards the monastery: 
he regain his cell and threw himself upon his couch, distracted 
irresolute and confused. 

he found it impossible for some time to arrange his ideas. the scene 
in which he had been engaged had excited such a variety of sentiment 
in his bosom, that he was incapable of decide which was predominant. 
he was irresolute what conduct he ought to hold with the disturb of 
his repose. he was conscious that prudence, religion, and propriety 
necessitate his obliging her to quit the abbey: but on the other hand 
such powerful reason authorize her stay that he was but too much 
inclined to consent to her remaining. he could not avoid being 
flatter by matilda's declaration, and at reflect that he had 
unconscious vanquish an heart which had resist the attack of 
spain's noblest cavaliers: the manner in which he had gain her 
affection was also the most satisfactory to his vanity: he remember 
the many happy hour which he had pass in rosario's society, and 
dread that void in his heart which parting with him would occasion. 
besides all this, he considered, that as matilda was wealthy, her 
favour might be of essential benefit to the abbey. 

'and what do i risque,' said he to himself, 'by authorize her stay? 
may i not safe credit her assertions? will it not be easy for me to 
forget her sex, and still consider her as my friend and my disciple? 
surely her love is as pure as she describes. had it been the offspring 
of mere licentiousness, would she so long have conceal it in her own 
bosom? would she not have employ some means to procure its 
gratification? she has done quite the contrary: she strove to keep me 
in ignorance of her sex; and nothing but the fear of detection, and my 
instances, would have compel her to reveal the secret. she has 
observe the duty of religion not less strict than myself. she has 
made no attempt to rouze my slumber passions, nor has she ever 
converse with me till this night on the subject of love. had she been 
desirous to gain my affections, not my esteem, she would not have 
conceal from me her charm so carefully: at this very moment i have 
never seen her face: yet certainly that face must be lovely, and her 
person beautiful, to judge by her ... by what i have seen.' 

as this last idea pass through his imagination, a blush spread itself 
over his cheek. alarm at the sentiment which he was indulging, he 
betook himself to prayer; he start from his couch, knelt before the 
beautiful madona, and entreat her assistance in stifle such 
culpable emotions. he then return to his bed, and resigned himself 
to slumber. 

he awoke, heated and unrefreshed. during his sleep his inflamed 
imagination had present him with none but the most voluptuous 
objects. matilda stood before him in his dreams, and his eyes again 
dwelt upon her naked breast. she repeated her protestation of eternal 
love, threw her arms round his neck, and loaded him with kisses: he 
return them; he clasp her passionately to his bosom, and ... the 
vision was dissolved. sometimes his dream present the image of his 
favourite madona, and he fancy that he was kneel before her: as 
he offer up his vow to her, the eyes of the figure seem to beam on 
him with inexpressible sweetness. he pressed his lip to hers, and 
found them warm: the animate form start from the canvas, embrace 
him affectionately, and his senses were unable to support delight so 
exquisite. such were the scenes, on which his thought were employ 
while sleeping: his unsatisfy desire placed before him the most 
lustful and provoking images, and he riot in joy till then unknown 
to him. 

he start from his couch, fill with confusion at the remembrance of 
his dreams. scarcely was he less ashamed, when he reflect on his 
reason of the former night which induce him to authorize matilda's 
stay. the cloud was now dissipated which had obscure his judgment: he 
shudder when he beheld his argument blazon in their proper 
colours, and found that he had been a slave to flattery, to avarice, 
and self-love. if in one hour's conversation matilda had produce a 
change so remarkable in his sentiments, what had he not to dread from 
her remain in the abbey? become sensible of his danger, awaken 
from his dream of confidence, he resolve to insist on her depart 
without delay. he began to feel that he was not proof against 
temptation; and that however matilda might restrain herself within the 
bounds of modesty, he was unable to contend with those passions, from 
which he false thought himself exempted. 

'agnes! agnes!' he exclaimed, while reflect on his embarrassments, 
'i already feel thy curse!' 

he quit his cell, determined upon dismiss the feign rosario. 
he appear at matins; but his thought were absent, and he paid them 
but little attention. his heart and brain were both of them fill 
with worldly objects, and he pray without devotion. the service over, 
he descended into the garden. he bent his steps towards the same spot 
where, on the preceding night, he had made this embarrass discovery. 
he doubt not but that matilda would seek him there: he was not 
deceived. she soon enter the hermitage, and approach the monk with 
a timid air. after a few minutes during which both were silent, she 
appear as if on the point of speaking; but the abbot, who during this 
time had been summon up all his resolution, hasty interrupt her. 
though still unconscious how extensive was its influence, he dread 
the melodious seduction of her voice. 

'seat yourself by my side, matilda,' said he, assume a look of 
firmness, though careful avoid the least mixture of severity; 
'listen to me patiently, and believe, that in what i shall say, i am 
not more influence by my own interest than by yours: believe, that i 
feel for you the warmest friendship, the truest compassion, and that 
you cannot feel more grieve than i do, when i declare to you that we 
must never meet again.' 

'ambrosio!' she cried, in a voice at once expressive of surprise and 
sorrow. 

'be calm, my friend! my rosario! still let me call you by that name 
so dear to me! our separation is unavoidable; i blush to own, how 
sensible it affect me.-- but yet it must be so. i feel myself 
incapable of treat you with indifference, and that very conviction 
oblige me to insist upon your departure. matilda, you must stay here 
no longer.' 

'oh! where shall i now seek for probity? disgust with a perfidious 
world, in what happy region do truth conceal herself? father, i 
hope that she reside here; i thought that your bosom had been her 
favourite shrine. and you too prove false? oh god! and you too can 
betray me?' 

'matilda!' 

'yes, father, yes! 'tis with justice that i reproach you. oh! where 
are your promises? my noviciate is not expired, and yet will you 
compell me to quit the monastery? can you have the heart to drive me 
from you? and have i not received your solemn oath to the contrary?' 

'i will not compell you to quit the monastery: you have received my 
solemn oath to the contrary. but yet when i throw myself upon your 
generosity, when i declare to you the embarrassment in which your 
presence involve me, will you not release me from that oath? reflect 
upon the danger of a discovery, upon the opprobrium in which such an 
event would plunge me: reflect that my honour and reputation are at 
stake, and that my peace of mind depend on your compliance. as yet my 
heart is free; i shall separate from you with regret, but not with 
despair. stay here, and a few week will sacrifice my happiness on the 
altar of your charms. you are but too interesting, too amiable! i 
should love you, i should doat on you! my bosom would become the prey 
of desire which honour and my profession forbid me to gratify. if i 
resist them, the impetuos of my wish unsatisfy would drive me 
to madness: if i yield to the temptation, i should sacrifice to one 
moment of guilty pleasure my reputation in this world, my salvation in 
the next. to you then i fly for defence against myself. preserve me 
from lose the reward of thirty years of sufferings! preserve me from 
becoming the victim of remorse! your heart has already felt the 
anguish of hopeless love; oh! then if you really value me, spare mine 
that anguish! give me back my promise; fly from these walls. go, and 
you bear with you my warmest prayer for your happiness, my friendship, 
my esteem and admiration: stay, and you become to me the source of 
danger, of sufferings, of despair! answer me, matilda; what is your 
resolve?'--she was silent--'will you not speak, matilda? will you not 
name your choice?' 

'cruel! cruel!' she exclaimed, wring her hand in agony; 'you know 
too well that you offer me no choice! you know too well that i can have 
no will but yours!' 

'i was not then deceived! matilda's generous equal my expectations.' 

'yes; i will prove the truth of my affection by submit to a decree 
which cut me to the very heart. take back your promise. i will quit 
the monastery this very day. i have a relation, abbess of a covent in 
estramadura: to her will i bend my steps, and shut myself from the 
world for ever. yet tell me, father, shall i bear your good wish 
with me to my solitude? will you sometimes abstract your attention 
from heavenly object to bestow a thought upon me?' 

'ah! matilda, i fear that i shall think on you but too often for my 
repose!' 

'then i have nothing more to wish for, save that we may meet in heaven. 
farewell, my friend! my ambrosio!-- and yet methinks, i would fain bear 
with me some token of your regard!' 

'what shall i give you?' 

'something.--any thing.--one of those flower will be sufficient.' 
(here she pointed to a bush of roses, plant at the door of the 
grotto.) 'i will hide it in my bosom, and when i am dead, the nun 
shall find it wither upon my heart.' 

the friar was unable to reply: with slow steps, and a soul heavy with 
affliction, he quit the hermitage. he approach the bush, and 
stoop to pluck one of the roses. sudden he utter a piercing cry, 
start back hastily, and let the flower, which he already held, fall 
from his hand. matilda heard the shriek, and flew anxious towards 
him. 

'what is the matter?' she cried; 'answer me, for god's sake! what has 
happened?' 

'i have received my death!' he reply in a faint voice; 'concealed 
among the rose ... a serpent....' 

here the pain of his wound became so exquisite, that nature was unable 
to bear it: his senses abandoned him, and he sank inanimate into 
matilda's arms. 

her distress was beyond the power of description. she rent her hair, 
beat her bosom, and not daring to quit ambrosio, endeavour by loud 
cries to summon the monk to her assistance. she at length succeeded. 
alarm by her shrieks, several of the brother hasten to the spot, 
and the superior was convey back to the abbey. he was immediately 
put to bed, and the monk who officiate as surgeon to the fraternity 
prepared to examine the wound. by this time ambrosio's hand had 
swell to an extraordinary size; the remedy which had been 
administer to him, 'tis true, restore him to life, but not to his 
senses; he rave in all the horrors of delirium, foam at the mouth, 
and four of the strongest monk were scarcely able to hold him in his 
bed. 

father pablos, such was the surgeon's name, hasten to examine the 
wound hand. the monk surround the bed, anxious wait for the 
decision: among these the feign rosario appear not the most 
insensible to the friar's calamity. he gaze upon the sufferer with 
inexpressible anguish; and the groan which every moment escape from 
his bosom sufficient betray the violence of his affliction. 

father pablo probe the wound. as he drew out his lancet, its point 
was tinge with a greenish hue. he shook his head mournfully, and 
quit the bedside. 

''tis as i feared!' said he; 'there is no hope.' 

'no hope?' exclaim the monk with one voice; 'say you, no hope?' 

'from the sudden effects, i suspect that the abbot was stung by a 
cientipedoro: the venom which you see upon my lancet confirm my idea: 
he cannot live three days.' 

'and can no possible remedy be found?' enquire rosario. 

'without extract the poison, he cannot recover; and how to extract 
it is to me still a secret. all that i can do is to apply such herb 
to the wound as will relieve the anguish: the patient will be restore 
to his senses; but the venom will corrupt the whole mass of his blood, 
and in three days he will exist no longer.' 

excessive was the universal grief at hearing this decision. pablos, as 
he had promised, dress the wound, and then retired, follow by his 
companions: rosario alone remain in the cell, the abbot at his 
urgent entreaty have been committed to his care. ambrosio's strength 
worn out by the violence of his exertions, he had by this time fallen 
into a profound sleep. so total was he overcome by weariness, that 
he scarcely gave any sign of life; he was still in this situation, 
when the monk return to enquire whether any change had taken place. 
pablo loosen the bandage which conceal the wound, more from a 
principle of curiosity than from indulge the hope of discover any 
favourable symptoms. what was his astonishment at finding, that the 
inflammation had total subsided! he probe the hand; his lancet came 
out pure and unsullied; no trace of the venom were perceptible; and 
had not the orifice still been visible, pablo might have doubt that 
there had ever been a wound. 

he communicate this intelligence to his brethren; their delight was 
only equal by their surprize. from the latter sentiment, however, 
they were soon release by explain the circumstance according to 
their own ideas: they were perfectly convinced that their superior was 
a saint, and thought, that nothing could be more natural than for st. 
francis to have operate a miracle in his favour. this opinion was 
adopt unanimously: they declared it so loudly, and vociferated,--'a 
miracle! a miracle!'--with such fervour, that they soon interrupt 
ambrosio's slumbers. 

the monk immediately crowded round his bed, and express their 
satisfaction at his wonderful recovery. he was perfectly in his 
senses, and free from every complaint except feeling weak and languid. 
pablo gave him a strengthen medicine, and advise his keeping his 
bed for the two succeed days: he then retired, have desire his 
patient not to exhaust himself by conversation, but rather to endeavour 
at taking some repose. the other monk follow his example, and the 
abbot and rosario were left without observers. 

for some minutes ambrosio regard his attendant with a look of mingle 
pleasure and apprehension. she was seat upon the side of the bed, 
her head bend down, and as usual envelop in the cowl of her habit. 

'and you are still here, matilda?' said the friar at length. 'are you 
not satisfy with have so nearly effect my destruction, that 
nothing but a miracle could have save me from the grave? ah! surely 
heaven sent that serpent to punish....' 

matilda interrupt him by putt her hand before his lip with an air 
of gaiety. 

'hush! father, hush! you must not talk!' 

'he who impose that order, knew not how interesting are the subject 
on which i wish to speak.' 

'but i know it, and yet issue the same positive command. i am 
appoint your nurse, and you must not disobey my orders.' 

'you are in spirits, matilda!' 

'well may i be so: i have just received a pleasure unexampled through 
my whole life.' 

'what was that pleasure?' 

'what i must conceal from all, but most from you.' 

'but most from me? nay then, i entreat you, matilda....' 

'hush, father! hush! you must not talk. but as you do not seem 
inclined to sleep, shall i endeavour to amuse you with my harp?' 

'how? i knew not that you understood music.' 

'oh! i am a sorry performer! yet as silence is prescribed you for 
eight and forty hours, i may possibly entertain you, when weary of 
your own reflections. i go to fetch my harp.' 

she soon return with it. 

'now, father; what shall i sing? will you hear the ballad which treat 
of the gallant durandarte, who die in the famous battle of 
roncevalles?' 

'what you please, matilda.' 

'oh! call me not matilda! call me rosario, call me your friend! those 
are the names, which i love to hear from your lips. now listen!' 

she then tune her harp, and afterwards prelude for some moments with 
such exquisite taste as to prove her a perfect mistress of the 
instrument. the air which she play was soft and plaintive: 

ambrosio, while he listened, felt his uneasy subside, and a 
pleasing melancholy spread itself into his bosom. sudden matilda 
change the strain: with an hand bold and rapid she struck a few loud 
martial chords, and then chaunte the following ballad to an air at 
once simple and melodious. 

durandarte and belerma 

sad and fearful is the story 
of the roncevalle fight; 
on those fatal plain of glory 
perish many a gallant knight. 

there fell durandarte; never 
verse a noble chieftain named: 
he, before his lip for ever 
closed in silence thus exclaimed. 

'oh! belerma! oh! my dear-one! 
for my pain and pleasure born! 
seven long years i serve thee, fair-one, 
seven long years my fee was scorn: 

'and when now thy heart reply 
to my wishes, burn like mine, 
cruel fate my bliss deny 
bid me every hope resign. 

'ah! though young i fall, believe me, 
death would never claim a sigh; 
'tis to lose thee, 'tis to leave thee, 
make me think it hard to die! 

'oh! my cousin montesinos, 
by that friendship firm and dear 
which from youth has live between us, 
now my last petition hear! 

'when my soul these limb forsake 
eager seek a pure air, 
from my breast the cold heart taking, 
give it to belerma's care. 

say, i of my lands possessor 
name her with my die breath: 
say, my lip i op'd to bless her, 
ere they closed for aye in death: 

'twice a week too how sincerely 
i adore her, cousin, say; 
twice a week for one who dearly 
love her, cousin, bid her pray. 

'montesinos, now the hour 
marked by fate is near at hand: 
lo! my arm has lost its power! 
lo! i drop my trusty brand! 

'eyes, which forth beheld me going, 
homewards ne'er shall see me hie! 
cousin, stop those tear o'er-flowing, 
let me on thy bosom die! 

'thy kind hand my eyelid closing, 
yet one favour i implore: 
pray thou for my soul's reposing, 
when my heart shall throb no more; 

'so shall jesus, still attend 
gracious to a christian's vow, 
pleased accept my ghost ascending, 
and a seat in heaven allow.' 

thus spoke gallant durandarte; 
soon his brave heart broke in twain. 
greatly joy the moorish party, 
that the gallant knight was slain. 

bitter weeping montesino 
took from him his helm and glaive; 
bitter weeping montesino 
dug his gallant cousin's grave. 

to perform his promise made, he 
cut the heart from out the breast, 
that belerma, wretched lady! 
might receive the last bequest. 

sad was montesinos' heart, he 
felt distress his bosom rend. 
'oh! my cousin durandarte, 
woe is me to view thy end! 

'sweet in manners, fair in favour, 
mild in temper, fierce in fight, 
warrior, nobler, gentler, braver, 
never shall behold the light! 

'cousin, lo! my tear bedew thee! 
how shall i thy loss survive! 
durandarte, he who slew thee, 
wherefore left he me alive!' 


while she sung, ambrosio listen with delight: never had he heard a 
voice more harmonious; and he wonder how such heavenly sound could 
be produce by any but angels. but though he indulge the sense of 
hearing, a single look convinced him that he must not trust to that of 
sight. the songstress sat at a little distance from his bed. the 
attitude in which she bent over her harp, was easy and graceful: her 
cowl had fallen backward than usual: two coral lip were visible, 
ripe, fresh, and melting, and a chin in whose dimple seem to lurk a 
thousand cupids. her habit's long sleeve would have swept along the 
chord of the instrument: to prevent this inconvenience she had drawn 
it above her elbow, and by this means an arm was discover form in 
the most perfect symmetry, the delicacy of whose skin might have 
contend with snow in whiteness. ambrosio dare to look on her but 
once: that glance suffice to convince him, how dangerous was the 
presence of this seduce object. he closed his eyes, but strove in 
vain to banish her from his thoughts. there she still move before him, 
adorn with all those charm which his heated imagination could 
supply: every beauty which he had seen, appear embellished, and 
those still conceal fancy represent to him in glowing colours. 
still, however, his vow and the necessity of keeping to them were 
present to his memory. he struggle with desire, and shudder when he 
beheld how deep was the precipice before him. 

matilda cease to sing. dread the influence of her charms, ambrosio 
remain with his eyes closed, and offer up his prayer to st. 
francis to assist him in this dangerous trial! matilda believe that he 
was sleeping. she rose from her seat, approach the bed softly, and 
for some minutes gaze upon him attentively. 

'he sleeps!' said she at length in a low voice, but whose accent the 
abbot distinguished perfectly; 'now then i may gaze upon him without 
offence! i may mix my breath with his; i may doat upon his features, 
and he cannot suspect me of impurity and deceit!--he fear my seduce 
him to the violate of his vows! oh! the unjust! were it my wish to 
excite desire, should i conceal my features from him so carefully? 
those features, of which i daily hear him....' 

she stopped, and was lost in her reflections. 

'it was but yesterday!' she continued; 'but a few short hour have 
past, since i was dear to him! he esteem me, and my heart was 
satisfied! now!... oh! now how cruel is my situation changed! he 
looks on me with suspicion! he bid me leave him, leave him for ever! 
oh! you, my saint! my idol! you, holding the next place to god in my 
breast! yet two days, and my heart will be unveil to you.--could you 
know my feelings, when i beheld your agony! could you know, how much 
your suffering have endear you to me! but the time will come, when 
you will be convinced that my passion is pure and disinterested. then 
you will pity me, and feel the whole weight of these sorrows!' 

as she said this, her voice was choake by weeping. while she bent over 
ambrosio, a tear fell upon his cheek. 

'ah! i have disturbed him!' cry matilda, and retreat hastily. 

her alarm was ungrounded. none sleep so profoundly, as those who are 
determined not to wake. the friar was in this predicament: he still 
seem bury in a repose, which every succeed minute render him 
less capable of enjoying. the burning tear had communicate its warmth 
to his heart. 

'what affection! what purity!' said he internally; 'ah! since my 
bosom is thus sensible of pity, what would it be if agitate by love?' 

matilda again quit her seat, and retired to some distance from the 
bed. ambrosio venture to open his eyes, and to cast them upon her 
fearfully. her face was turn from him. she rest her head in a 
melancholy posture upon her harp, and gaze on the picture which hung 
opposite to the bed. 

'happy, happy image!' thus did she address the beautiful madona; ''tis 
to you that he offer his prayers! 'tis on you that he gaze with 
admiration! i thought you would have lighten my sorrows; you have 
only serve to increase their weight: you have made me feel that had i 
known him ere his vow were pronounced, ambrosio and happiness might 
have been mine. with what pleasure he view this picture! with what 
fervour he address his prayer to the insensible image! ah! may not 
his sentiment be inspired by some kind and secret genius, friend to my 
affection? may it not be man's natural instinct which inform him... 
be silent, idle hopes! let me not encourage an idea which take from 
the brilliance of ambrosio's virtue. 'tis religion, not beauty which 
attract his admiration; 'tis not to the woman, but the divinity that 
he kneels. would he but address to me the least tender expression 
which he pour forth to this madona! would he but say that were he not 
already affiance to the church, he would not have despise matilda! 
oh! let me nourish that fond idea! perhaps he may yet acknowledge 
that he feel for me more than pity, and that affection like mine might 
well have deserve a return; perhaps, he may own thus much when i lye 
on my deathbed! he then need not fear to infringe his vows, and the 
confession of his regard will soften the pang of dying. would i were 
sure of this! oh! how earnest should i sigh for the moment of 
dissolution!' 

of this discourse the abbot lost not a syllable; and the tone in which 
she pronounced these last words pierce to his heart. involuntary he 
raise himself from his pillow. 

'matilda!' he said in a trouble voice; 'oh! my matilda!' 

she start at the sound, and turn towards him hastily. the 
sudden of her movement made her cowl fall back from her head; her 
features became visible to the monk's enquiring eye. what was his 
amaze at behold the exact resemblance of his admire madona? 
the same exquisite proportion of features, the same profusion of golden 
hair, the same rosy lips, heavenly eyes, and majesty of countenance 
adorn matilda! utter an exclamation of surprize, ambrosio sank 
back upon his pillow, and doubt whether the object before him was 
mortal or divine. 

matilda seem penetrate with confusion. she remain motionless in 
her place, and support herself upon her instrument. her eyes were 
bent upon the earth, and her fair cheek overspread with blushes. on 
recover herself, her first action was to conceal her features. she 
then in an unsteady and trouble voice venture to address these words 
to the friar. 

'accident has made you master of a secret, which i never would have 
reveal but on the bed of death. yes, ambrosio; in matilda de 
villanega you see the original of your beloved madona. soon after i 
conceive my unfortunate passion, i form the project of convey to 
you my picture: crowd of admirer had persuade me that i possessed 
some beauty, and i was anxious to know what effect it would produce 
upon you. i cause my portrait to be drawn by martin galuppi, a 
celebrated venetian at that time resident in madrid. the resemblance 
was striking: i sent it to the capuchin abbey as if for sale, and the 
jew from whom you bought it was one of my emissaries. you purchase 
it. judge of my rapture, when informed that you had gaze upon it with 
delight, or rather with adoration; that you had suspend it in your 
cell, and that you address your supplicate to no other saint. 
will this discovery make me still more regard as an object of 
suspicion? rather should it convince you how pure is my affection, and 
engage you to suffer me in your society and esteem. i heard you daily 
extol the praises of my portrait: i was an eyewitness of the 
transports, which its beauty excited in you: yet i forbore to use 
against your virtue those arms, with which yourself had furnish me. 
i conceal those features from your sight, which you love 
unconsciously. i strove not to excite desire by display my charms, 
or to make myself mistress of your heart through the medium of your 
senses. to attract your notice by studious attend to religious 
duties, to endear myself to you by convincing you that my mind was 
virtuous and my attachment sincere, such was my only aim. i succeeded; 
i became your companion and your friend. i conceal my sex from your 
knowledge; and had you not pressed me to reveal my secret, had i not 
been torment by the fear of a discovery, never had you known me for 
any other than rosario. and still are you resolve to drive me from 
you? the few hour of life which yet remain for me, may i not pass 
them in your presence? oh! speak, ambrosio, and tell me that i may 
stay!' 

this speech gave the abbot an opportunity of recollect himself. he 
was conscious that in the present disposition of his mind, avoid her 
society was his only refuge from the power of this enchanting woman. 

'you declaration has so much astonish me,' said he, 'that i am at 
present incapable of answer you. do not insist upon a reply, 
matilda; leave me to myself; i have need to be alone.' 

'i obey you--but before i go, promise not to insist upon my quit 
the abbey immediately.' 

'matilda, reflect upon your situation; reflect upon the consequence of 
your stay. our separation is indispensable, and we must part.' 

'but not to-day, father! oh! in pity not today!' 

'you press me too hard, but i cannot resist that tone of supplication. 
since you insist upon it, i yield to your prayer: i consent to your 
remain here a sufficient time to prepare in some measure the 
brethren for your departure. stay yet two days; but on the third,' ... 
(he sigh involuntarily)--'remember, that on the third we must part 
for ever!' 

she caught his hand eagerly, and pressed it to her lips. 

'on the third?' she exclaim with an air of wild solemnity; 'you are 
right, father! you are right! on the third we must part for ever!' 

there was a dreadful expression in her eye as she utter these words, 
which penetrate the friar's soul with horror: again she kiss his 
hand, and then flee with rapid from the chamber. 

anxious to authorise the presence of his dangerous guest, yet conscious 
that her stay was infringe the law of his order, ambrosio's bosom 
became the theatre of a thousand contend passions. at length his 
attachment to the feign rosario, aid by the natural warmth of his 
temperament, seem likely to obtain the victory: the success was 
assured, when that presumption which form the groundwork of his 
character came to matilda's assistance. the monk reflect that to 
vanquish temptation was an infinite greater merit than to avoid it: 
he thought that he ought rather to rejoice in the opportunity given him 
of prove the firm of his virtue. st. anthony had withstood all 
seduction to lust; then why should not he? besides, st. anthony was 
tempt by the devil, who put every art into practice to excite his 
passions: whereas, ambrosio's danger proceed from a mere mortal 
woman, fearful and modest, whose apprehension of his yielding were not 
less violent than his own. 

'yes,' said he; 'the unfortunate shall stay; i have nothing to fear 
from her presence. even should my own prove too weak to resist the 
temptation, i am secure from danger by the innocence of matilda.' 

ambrosio was yet to learn, that to an heart unacquainted with her, vice 
is ever most dangerous when lurk behind the mask of virtue. 

he found himself so perfectly recovered, that when father pablo 
visit him again at night, he entreat permission to quit his chamber 
on the day following. his request was granted. matilda appear no 
more that evening, except in company with the monk when they came in a 
body to enquire after the abbot's health. she seem fearful of 
converse with him in private, and stay but a few minutes in his 
room. the friar slept well; but the dream of the former night were 
repeated, and his sensation of voluptuous were yet more keen and 
exquisite. the same lust-exciting vision float before his eyes: 
matilda, in all the pomp of beauty, warm, tender, and luxurious, 
clasp him to her bosom, and lavish upon him the most ardent 
caresses. he return them as eagerly, and already was on the point of 
satisfying his desires, when the faithless form disappeared, and left 
him to all the horrors of shame and disappointment. 

the morning dawned. fatigued, harassed, and exhaust by his provoking 
dreams, he was not disposed to quit his bed. he excuse himself from 
appear at matins: it was the first morning in his life that he had 
ever miss them. he rose late. during the whole of the day he had no 
opportunity of speak to matilda without witnesses. his cell was 
throng by the monks, anxious to express their concern at his illness; 
and he was still occupy in receiving their compliments on his 
recovery, when the bell summon them to the refectory. 

after dinner the monk separated, and disperse themselves in various 
parts of the garden, where the shade of tree or retirement of some 
grotto present the most agreeable means of enjoy the siesta. the 
abbot bent his steps towards the hermitage: a glance of his eye 
invite matilda to accompany him. 

she obeyed, and follow him thither in silence. they enter the 
grotto, and seat themselves. both seem unwill to begin the 
conversation, and to labour under the influence of mutual 
embarrassment. at length the abbot spoke: he converse only on 
indifferent topics, and matilda answer him in the same tone. she 
seem anxious to make him forget that the person who sat by him was 
any other than rosario. neither of them dared, or indeed wish to 
make an allusion, to the subject which was most at the heart of both. 

matilda's effort to appear gay were evidently forced: her spirits were 
oppress by the weight of anxiety, and when she spoke her voice was 
low and feeble. she seem desirous of finish a conversation which 
embarrass her; and complain that she was unwell, she request 
ambrosio's permission to return to the abbey. he accompany her to 
the door of her cell; and when arrive there, he stop her to declare 
his consent to her continue the partner of his solitude so long as 
should be agreeable to herself. 

she discover no mark of pleasure at receiving this intelligence, 
though on the preceding day she had been so anxious to obtain the 
permission. 

'alas! father,' she said, wave her head mournfully; 'your kindness 
come too late! my doom is fixed. we must separate for ever. yet 
believe, that i am grateful for your generosity, for your compassion of 
an unfortunate who is but too little deserving of it!' 

she put her handkerchief to her eyes. her cowl was only half drawn 
over her face. ambrosio observe that she was pale, and her eyes sunk 
and heavy. 

'good god!' he cried; 'you are very ill, matilda! i shall send father 
pablo to you instantly.' 

'no; do not. i am ill, 'tis true; but he cannot cure my malady. 
farewell, father! remember me in your prayer tomorrow, while i shall 
remember you in heaven!' 

she enter her cell, and closed the door. 

the abbot dispatch to her the physician without lose a moment, and 
wait his report impatiently. but father pablo soon returned, and 
declared that his errand had been fruitless. rosario refuse to admit 
him, and had positively reject his offer of assistance. the 
uneasy which this account gave ambrosio was not trifling: yet he 
determined that matilda should have her own way for that night: but 
that if her situation did not mend by the morning, he would insist upon 
her taking the advice of father pablos. 

he did not find himself inclined to sleep. he open his casement, and 
gaze upon the moonbeam as they play upon the small stream whose 
waters bath the wall of the monastery. the cool of the night 
breeze and tranquill of the hour inspired the friar's mind with 
sadness. he thought upon matilda's beauty and affection; upon the 
pleasure which he might have share with her, had he not been 
restrained by monastic fetters. he reflected, that unsustained by hope 
her love for him could not long exist; that doubtless she would succeed 
in extinguish her passion, and seek for happiness in the arms of one 
more fortunate. he shudder at the void which her absence would leave 
in his bosom. he look with disgust on the monotony of a convent, and 
breathe a sigh towards that world from which he was for ever 
separated. such were the reflection which a loud knock at his door 
interrupted. the bell of the church had already struck two. the abbot 
hasten to enquire the cause of this disturbance. he open the door 
of his cell, and a lay-brother entered, whose looks declared his hurry 
and confusion. 

'hasten, reverend father!' said he; 'hasten to the young rosario. 

he earnest request to see you; he lie at the point of death.' 

'gracious god! where is father pablos? why is he not with him? oh! i 
fear! i fear!' 

'father pablo has seen him, but his art can do nothing. he say that 
he suspect the youth to be poisoned.' 

'poisoned? oh! the unfortunate! it is then as i suspected! but let 
me not lose a moment; perhaps it may yet be time to save her!' 

he said, and flew towards the cell of the novice. several monk were 
already in the chamber. father pablo was one of them, and held a 
medicine in his hand which he was endeavour to persuade rosario to 
swallow. the other were employ in admire the patient's divine 
countenance, which they now saw for the first time. she look 
lovely than ever. she was no long pale or languid; a bright glow 
had spread itself over her cheeks; her eyes sparkle with a serene 
delight, and her countenance was expressive of confidence and 
resignation. 

'oh! torment me no more!' was she saying to pablos, when the terrify 
abbot rush hasty into the cell; 'my disease is far beyond the reach 
of your skill, and i wish not to be cure of it'--then perceive 
ambrosio,-- 'ah! 'tis he!' she cried; 'i see him once again, before we 
part for ever! leave me, my brethren; much have i to tell this holy 
man in private.' 

the monk retired immediately, and matilda and the abbot remain 
together. 

'what have you done, imprudent woman!' exclaim the latter, as soon as 
they were left alone; 'tell me; are my suspicion just? am i indeed to 
lose you? has your own hand been the instrument of your destruction?' 

she smiled, and grasp his hand. 

'in what have i been imprudent, father? i have sacrifice a pebble, 
and save a diamond: my death preserve a life valuable to the world, 
and more dear to me than my own. yes, father; i am poisoned; but know 
that the poison once circulate in your veins.' 

'matilda!' 

'what i tell you i resolve never to discover to you but on the bed of 
death: that moment is now arrived. you cannot have forgotten the day 
already, when your life was endanger by the bite of a cientipedoro. 
the physician gave you over, declare himself ignorant how to extract 
the venom: i knew but of one means, and hesitate not a moment to 
employ it. i was left alone with you: you slept; i loosen the 
bandage from your hand; i kiss the wound, and drew out the poison 
with my lips. the effect has been more sudden than i expected. i feel 
death at my heart; yet an hour, and i shall be in a better world.' 

'almighty god!' exclaim the abbot, and sank almost lifeless upon the 
bed. 

after a few minutes he again raise himself up suddenly, and gaze upon 
matilda with all the wild of despair. 

'and you have sacrifice yourself for me! you die, and die to preserve 
ambrosio! and is there indeed no remedy, matilda? and is there indeed 
no hope? speak to me, oh! speak to me! tell me, that you have still 
the means of life!' 

'be comforted, my only friend! yes, i have still the means of life in 
my power: but 'tis a means which i dare not employ. it is dangerous! 
it is dreadful! life would be purchase at too dear a rate, ... 
unless it were permit me to live for you.' 

'then live for me, matilda, for me and gratitude!'-- (he caught her 
hand, and pressed it rapturous to his lips.)--'remember our late 
conversations; i now consent to every thing: remember in what lively 
colours you describe the union of souls; be it ours to realize those 
ideas. let us forget the distinction of sex, despise the world's 
prejudices, and only consider each other as brother and friend. live 
then, matilda! oh! live for me!' 

'ambrosio, it must not be. when i thought thus, i deceive both you 
and myself. either i must die at present, or expire by the lingering 
torment of unsatisfy desire. oh! since we last converse together, 
a dreadful veil has been rent from before my eyes. i love you no 
long with the devotion which is paid to a saint: i prize you no more 
for the virtue of your soul; i lust for the enjoyment of your person. 
the woman reign in my bosom, and i am become a prey to the wildest of 
passions. away with friendship! 'tis a cold unfeeling word. my bosom 
burn with love, with unutterable love, and love must be its return. 
tremble then, ambrosio, tremble to succeed in your prayers. if i live, 
your truth, your reputation, your reward of a life past in sufferings, 
all that you value is irretrievable lost. i shall no long be able to 
combat my passions, shall seize every opportunity to excite your 
desires, and labour to effect your dishonour and my own. no, no, 
ambrosio; i must not live! i am convinced with every moment, that i 
have but one alternative; i feel with every heart-throb, that i must 
enjoy you, or die.' 

'amazement!--matilda! can it be you who speak to me?' 

he made a movement as if to quit his seat. she utter a loud shriek, 
and raise herself half out of the bed, threw her arms round the friar 
to detain him. 

'oh! do not leave me! listen to my error with compassion! in a few 
hour i shall be no more; yet a little, and i am free from this 
disgraceful passion.' 

'wretched woman, what can i say to you! i cannot ... i must not ... 
but live, matilda! oh! live!' 

'you do not reflect on what you ask. what? live to plunge myself in 
infamy? to become the agent of hell? to work the destruction both of 
you and of myself? feel this heart, father!' 

she took his hand: confused, embarrassed, and fascinated, he withdrew 
it not, and felt her heart throb under it. 

'feel this heart, father! it is yet the seat of honour, truth, and 
chastity: if it beat tomorrow, it must fall a prey to the blackest 
crimes. oh! let me then die today! let me die, while i yet deserve 
the tear of the virtuous! thus will expire!'--(she recline her head 
upon his shoulder; her golden hair pour itself over his chest.)-- 
'folded in your arms, i shall sink to sleep; your hand shall close my 
eyes for ever, and your lip receive my die breath. and will you not 
sometimes think of me? will you not sometimes shed a tear upon my 
tomb? oh! yes! yes! yes! that kiss is my assurance!' 

the hour was night. all was silence around. the faint beam of a 
solitary lamp dart upon matilda's figure, and shed through the 
chamber a dim mysterious light. no pry eye, or curious ear was near 
the lovers: nothing was heard but matilda's melodious accents. 
ambrosio was in the full vigour of manhood. he saw before him a young 
and beautiful woman, the preserver of his life, the adore of his 
person, and whom affection for him had reduce to the brink of the 
grave. he sat upon her bed; his hand rest upon her bosom; her head 
recline voluptuous upon his breast. who then can wonder, if he 
yield to the temptation? drunk with desire, he pressed his lip to 
those which sought them: his kiss vie with matilda's in warmth and 
passion. he clasp her rapturous in his arms; he forgot his vows, 
his sanctity, and his fame: he remember nothing but the pleasure and 
opportunity. 

'ambrosio! oh! my ambrosio!' sigh matilda. 

'thine, ever thine!' murmur the friar, and sank upon her bosom. 



chapter iii 

----these are the villain 
whom all the traveller do fear so much. 
--------some of them are gentlemen 
such as the fury of ungoverned youth 
thrust from the company of awful men. 
two gentlemen of verona. 

the marquis and lorenzo proceed to the hotel in silence. the former 
employ himself in calling every circumstance to his mind, which 
related might give lorenzo's the most favourable idea of his connexion 
with agnes. the latter, just alarm for the honour of his family, 
felt embarrass by the presence of the marquis: the adventure which he 
had just witness forbad his treat him as a friend; and antonia's 
interests being entrust to his mediation, he saw the impolicy of 
treat him as a foe. he conclude from these reflections, that 
profound silence would be the wisest plan, and wait with impatience 
for don raymond's explanation. 

they arrive at the hotel de las cisternas. the marquis immediately 
conduct him to his apartment, and began to express his satisfaction 
at finding him at madrid. lorenzo interrupt him. 

'excuse me, my lord,' said he with a distant air, 'if i reply somewhat 
cold to your expression of regard. a sister's honour is involved in 
this affair: till that is established, and the purport of your 
correspondence with agnes clear up, i cannot consider you as my 
friend. i am anxious to hear the meaning of your conduct, and hope 
that you will not delay the promise explanation.' 

'first give me your word, that you will listen with patience and 
indulgence.' 

'i love my sister too well to judge her harshly; and till this moment i 
possessed no friend so dear to me as yourself. i will also confess, 
that your have it in your power to oblige me in a business which i 
have much at heart, make me very anxious to find you still deserving 
my esteem.' 

'lorenzo, you transport me! no greater pleasure can be given me, than 
an opportunity of serving the brother of agnes.' 

'convince me that i can accept your favours without dishonour, and 
there is no man in the world to whom i am more willing to be obliged.' 

'probably, you have already heard your sister mention the name of 
alphonso d'alvarada?' 

'never. though i feel for agnes an affection truly fraternal, 
circumstances have prevent us from being much together. while yet a 
child she was consign to the care of her aunt, who had married a 
germany nobleman. at his castle she remain till two years since, when 
she return to spain, determined upon seclude herself from the 
world.' 

'good god! lorenzo, you knew of her intention, and yet strove not to 
make her change it?' 

'marquis, you wrong me. the intelligence, which i received at naples, 
shock me extremely, and i hasten my return to madrid for the 
express purpose of prevent the sacrifice. the moment that i 
arrived, i flew to the convent of st. clare, in which agnes had chosen 
to perform her noviciate. i request to see my sister. conceive my 
surprise when she sent me a refusal; she declared positively, that 
apprehend my influence over her mind, she would not trust herself in 
my society till the day before that on which she was to receive the 
veil. i supplicate the nuns; i insist upon seeing agnes, and 
hesitate not to avow my suspicion that her being kept from me was 
against her own inclinations. to free herself from the imputation of 
violence, the prioress brought me a few lines written in my sister's 
well-known hand, repeating the message already delivered. all future 
attempt to obtain a moment's conversation with her were as fruitless 
as the first. she was inflexible, and i was not permit to see her 
till the day preceding that on which she enter the cloister never to 
quit it more. this interview took place in the presence of our 
principal relations. it was for the first time since her childhood 
that i saw her, and the scene was most affecting. she threw herself 
upon my bosom, kiss me, and wept bitterly. by every possible 
argument, by tears, by prayers, by kneeling, i strove to make her 
abandon her intention. i represent to her all the hardship of a 
religious life; i paint to her imagination all the pleasure which 
she was go to quit, and besought her to disclose to me, what 
occasion her disgust to the world. at this last question she turn 
pale, and her tear flow yet faster. she entreat me not to press 
her on that subject; that it suffice me to know that her resolution 
was taken, and that a convent was the only place where she could now 
hope for tranquillity. she persevere in her design, and made her 
profession. i visit her frequent at the grate, and every moment 
that i pass with her, made me feel more affliction at her loss. i 
was shortly after oblige to quit madrid; i return but yesterday 
evening, and since then have not had time to call at st. clare's 
convent.' 

'then till i mention it, you never heard the name of alphonso 
d'alvarada?' 

'pardon me: my aunt wrote me word that an adventurer so call had 
found means to get introduce into the castle of lindenberg; that he 
had insinuate himself into my sister's good graces, and that she had 
even consent to elope with him. however, before the plan could be 
executed, the cavalier discover that the estate which he believe 
agnes to possess in hispaniola, in reality belong to me. this 
intelligence made him change his intention; he disappear on the day 
that the elope was to have taken place, and agnes, in despair at 
his perfidy and meanness, had resolve upon seclusion in a convent. 
she added, that as this adventurer had given himself out to be a friend 
of mine, she wish to know whether i had any knowledge of him. i 
reply in the negative. i had then very little idea, that alphonso 
d'alvarada and the marquis de las cisterna were one and the same 
person: the description given me of the first by no means tally with 
what i knew of the latter.' 

'in this i easily recognize donna rodolpha's perfidious character. 
every word of this account is stamp with mark of her malice, of her 
falsehood, of her talent for misrepresent those whom she wish to 
injure. forgive me, medina, for speak so freely of your relation. 
the mischief which she has done me authorise my resentment, and when 
you have heard my story, you will be convinced that my expression have 
not been too severe.' 

he then began his narrative in the following manner. 

history of don raymond, marquis de las cisterna 

long experience, my dear lorenzo, has convinced me how generous is your 
nature: i wait not for your declaration of ignorance respecting your 
sister's adventure to suppose that they had been purposely conceal 
from you. had they reach your knowledge, from what misfortune 
should both agnes and myself have escaped! fate had ordain it 
otherwise! you were on your travels when i first became acquaint 
with your sister; and as our enemy took care to conceal from her your 
direction, it was impossible for her to implore by letter your 
protection and advice. 

on leave salamanca, at which university as i have since heard, you 
remain a year after i quit it, i immediately set out upon my 
travels. my father supply me liberally with money; but he insist 
upon my conceal my rank, and present myself as no more than a 
private gentleman. this command was issue by the counsel of his 
friend, the duke of villa hermosa, a nobleman for whose abilities and 
knowledge of the world i have ever entertain the most profound 
veneration. 

'believe me,' said he, 'my dear raymond, you will hereafter feel the 
benefit of this temporary degradation. 'tis true, that as the conde 
de las cisterna you would have been received with open arms; and your 
youthful vanity might have felt gratify by the attention shower 
upon you from all sides. at present, much will depend upon yourself: 
you have excellent recommendations, but it must be your own business to 
make them of use to you. you must lay yourself out to please; you must 
labour to gain the approbation of those, to whom you are presented: 
they who would have court the friendship of the conde de las 
cisterna will have no interest in finding out the merits, or bearing 
patient with the faults, of alphonso d'alvarada. consequently, when 
you find yourself really liked, you may safe ascribe it to your good 
qualities, not your rank, and the distinction shown you will be 
infinite more flattering. besides, your exalted birth would not 
permit your mix with the lower class of society, which will now be 
in your power, and from which, in my opinion, you will derive 
considerable benefit. do not confine yourself to the illustrious of 
those country through which you pass. examine the manners and 
customs of the multitude: enter into the cottages; and by observing how 
the vassal of foreigner are treated, learn to diminish the burthen 
and augment the comfort of your own. according to my ideas, of those 
advantage which a youth destined to the possession of power and wealth 
may reap from travel, he should not consider as the least essential, 
the opportunity of mix with the class below him, and becoming an 
eyewitness of the suffering of the people.' 

forgive me, lorenzo, if i seem tedious in my narration. the close 
connexion which now exist between us, make me anxious that you should 
know every particular respecting me; and in my fear of omit the 
least circumstance which may induce you to think favourable of your 
sister and myself, i may possibly relate many which you may think 
uninteresting. 

i follow the duke's advice; i was soon convinced of its wisdom. 

i quit spain, calling myself by the assume title of don alphonso 
d'alvarada, and attend by a single domestic of approve fidelity. 
paris was my first station. for some time i was enchant with it, as 
indeed must be every man who is young, rich, and fond of pleasure. yet 
among all its gaieties, i felt that something was wanting to my heart. 
i grew sick of dissipation: i discovered, that the people among whom i 
lived, and whose exterior was so polish and seducing, were at bottom 
frivolous, unfeeling and insincere. i turn from the inhabitant of 
paris with disgust, and quit that theatre of luxury without heave 
one sigh of regret. 

i now bent my course towards germany, intend to visit most of the 
principal courts: prior to this expedition, i meant to make some 
little stay at strasbourg. on quit my chaise at luneville to take 
some refreshment, i observe a splendid equipage, attend by four 
domestic in rich liveries, wait at the door of the silver lion. 
soon after as i look out of the window, i saw a lady of noble 
presence, follow by two female attendants, step into the carriage, 
which drove off immediately. 

i enquire of the host, who the lady was, that had just departed. 

'a germany baroness, monsieur, of great rank and fortune. she has been 
upon a visit to the duchess of longueville, as her servant informed 
me; she is go to strasbourg, where she will find her husband, and 
then both return to their castle in germany.' 

i resume my journey, intend to reach strasbourg that night. my 
hopes, however were frustrate by the break down of my chaise. the 
accident happen in the middle of a thick forest, and i was not a 
little embarrass as to the means of proceeding. 

it was the depth of winter: the night was already close round us; 
and strasbourg, which was the nearest town, was still distant from us 
several leagues. it seem to me that my only alternative to passing 
the night in the forest, was to take my servant's horse and ride on to 
strasbourg, an undertaking at that season very far from agreeable. 
however, seeing no other resource, i was oblige to make up my mind to 
it. accordingly i communicate my design to the postillion, telling 
him that i would send people to assist him as soon as i reach 
strasbourg. i had not much confidence in his honesty; but stephano 
being well-armed, and the driver to all appearance considerably 
advanced in years, i believe i ran no danger of lose my baggage. 

luckily, as i then thought, an opportunity present itself of passing 
the night more agreeably than i expected. on mention my design of 
proceeding by myself to strasbourg, the postillion shook his head in 
disapprobation. 

'it is a long way,' said he; 'you will find it a difficult matter to 
arrive there without a guide. besides, monsieur seem unaccustomed to 
the season's severity, and 'tis possible that unable to sustain the 
excessive cold....' 

'what use is there to present me with all these objections?' said i, 
impatient interrupt him; 'i have no other resource: i run still 
greater risque of perishing with cold by passing the night in the 
forest.' 

'passing the night in the forest?' he replied; 'oh! by st. denis! we 
are not in quite so bad a plight as that come to yet. if i am not 
mistaken, we are scarcely five minutes walk from the cottage of my old 
friend, baptiste. he is a wood-cutter, and a very honest fellow. i 
doubt not but he will shelter you for the night with pleasure. in the 
meantime i can take the saddle-horse, ride to strasbourg, and be back 
with proper people to mend your carriage by break of day.' 

'and in the name of god,' said i, 'how could you leave me so long in 
suspense? why did you not tell me of this cottage sooner? what 
excessive stupidity!' 

'i thought that perhaps monsieur would not deign to accept....' 

'absurd! come, come! say no more, but conduct us without delay to the 
wood-man's cottage.' 

he obeyed, and we move onwards: the horse contrived with some 
difficulty to drag the shatter vehicle after us. my servant was 
become almost speechless, and i began to feel the effects of the cold 
myself, before we reach the wished-for cottage. it was a small but 
neat building: as we drew near it, i rejoice at observing through the 
window the blaze of a comfortable fire. our conductor knock at the 
door: it was some time before any one answered; the people within 
seem in doubt whether we should be admitted. 

'come! come, friend baptiste!' cry the driver with impatience; 'what 
are you about? are you asleep? or will you refuse a night's lodging 
to a gentleman, whose chaise has just broken down in the forest?' 

'ah! is it you, honest claude?' reply a man's voice from within; 
'wait a moment, and the door shall be opened.' 

soon after the bolt were drawn back. the door was unclosed, and a man 
present himself to us with a lamp in his hand. he gave the guide an 
hearty reception, and then address himself to me. 

'walk in, monsieur; walk in, and welcome! excuse me for not admit 
you at first: but there are so many rogue about this place, that 
saving your presence, i suspect you to be one.' 

thus saying, he usher me into the room, where i had observe the 
fire: i was immediately placed in an easy chair, which stood close to 
the hearth. a female, whom i supposed to be the wife of my host, rose 
from her seat upon my entrance, and received me with a slight and 
distant reverence. she made no answer to my compliment, but 
immediately re-seating herself, continue the work on which she had 
been employed. her husband's manners were as friendly as hers were 
harsh and repulsive. 

'i wish, i could lodge you more conveniently, monsieur,' said he; 'but 
we cannot boast of much spare room in this hovel. however, a chamber 
for yourself, and another for your servant, i think, we can make shift 
to supply. you must content yourself with sorry fare; but to what we 
have, believe me, you are heartily welcome.' ----then turning to his 
wife--'why, how you sit there, marguerite, with as much tranquill as 
if you had nothing better to do! stir about, dame! stir about! get 
some supper; look out some sheets; here, here; throw some log upon the 
fire, for the gentleman seem perish with cold.' 

the wife threw her work hasty upon the table, and proceed to 
execute his command with every mark of unwillingness. her countenance 
had displease me on the first moment of my examine it. yet upon the 
whole her features were handsome unquestionably; but her skin was 
sallow, and her person thin and meagre; a lour gloom over-spread her 
countenance; and it bore such visible mark of rancour and ill-will, as 
could not escape being notice by the most inattentive observer. her 
every look and action express discontent and impatience, and the 
answer which she gave baptiste, when he reproach her good-humouredly 
for her dissatisfy air, were tart, short, and cutting. in tine, i 
conceive at first sight equal disgust for her, and prepossession in 
favour of her husband, whose appearance was calculate to inspire 
esteem and confidence. his countenance was open, sincere, and 
friendly; his manners had all the peasant's honesty unaccompanied by 
his rudeness; his cheek were broad, full, and ruddy; and in the 
solidity of his person he seem to offer an ample apology for the 
lean of his wife's. from the wrinkle on his brow i judge him to 
be turn of sixty; but he bore his years well, and seem still hearty 
and strong: the wife could not be more than thirty, but in spirits and 
vivace she was infinite old than the husband. 

however, in spite of her unwillingness, marguerite began to prepare the 
supper, while the wood-man converse gaily on different subjects. the 
postillion, who had been furnish with a bottle of spirits, was now 
ready to set out for strasbourg, and enquired, whether i had any 
further commands. 

'for strasbourg?' interrupt baptiste; 'you are not go thither 
tonight?' 

'i beg your pardon: if i do not fetch workmen to mend the chaise, how 
is monsieur to proceed tomorrow?' 

'that is true, as you say; i had forgotten the chaise. well, but 
claude; you may at least eat your supper here? that can make you lose 
very little time, and monsieur looks too kind-hearted to send you out 
with an empty stomach on such a bitter cold night as this is.' 

to this i readily assented, telling the postillion that my reach 
strasbourg the next day an hour or two later would be perfectly 
immaterial. he thank me, and then leave the cottage with stephano, 
put up his horse in the wood-man's stable. baptiste follow them to 
the door, and look out with anxiety. 

''tis a sharp biting wind!' said he; 'i wonder, what detain my boys so 
long! monsieur, i shall show you two of the finest lads, that ever 
stept in shoe of leather. the eldest is three and twenty, the second a 
year younger: their equal for sense, courage, and activity, are not 
to be found within fifty mile of strasbourg. would they were back 
again! i begin to feel uneasy about them.' 

marguerite was at this time employ in lay the cloth. 

'and are you equally anxious for the return of your sons?' said i to 
her. 

'not i!' she reply peevishly; 'they are no children of mine.' 

'come! come, marguerite!' said the husband; 'do not be out of humour 
with the gentleman for ask a simple question. had you not look so 
cross, he would never have thought you old enough to have a son of 
three and twenty: but you see how many years ill-temper add to 
you!--excuse my wife's rudeness, monsieur. a little thing put her 
out, and she is somewhat displease at your not thinking her to be 
under thirty. that is the truth, is it not, marguerite? you know, 
monsieur, that age is always a ticklish subject with a woman. come! 
come! marguerite, clear up a little. if you have not son as old, you 
will some twenty years hence, and i hope, that we shall live to see 
them just such lad as jacque and robert.' 

marguerite clasp her hand together passionately. 

'god forbid!' said she; 'god forbid! if i thought it, i would strangle 
them with my own hands!' 

she quit the room hastily, and went up stairs. 

i could not help express to the wood-man how much i pity him for 
being chain for life to a partner of such ill-humour. 

'ah! lord! monsieur, every one has his share of grievances, and 
marguerite has fallen to mine. besides, after all she is only cross, 
and not malicious. the worst is, that her affection for two children 
by a former husband make her play the step-mother with my two sons. 
she cannot bear the sight of them, and by her good-will they would 
never set a foot within my door. but on this point i always stand 
firm, and never will consent to abandon the poor lad to the world's 
mercy, as she has often solicit me to do. in every thing else i let 
her have her own way; and truly she manage a family rarely, that i 
must say for her.' 

we were converse in this manner, when our discourse was interrupt 
by a loud halloo, which rang through the forest. 

'my sons, i hope!' exclaim the wood-man, and ran to open the door. 

the halloo was repeated: we now distinguished the trample of horses, 
and soon after a carriage, attend by several cavalier stop at the 
cottage door. one of the horsemen enquire how far they were still 
from strasbourg. as he address himself to me, i answer in the 
number of mile which claude had told me; upon which a volley of curse 
was vent against the driver for have lost their way. the person 
in the coach were now informed of the distance of strasbourg, and also 
that the horse were so fatigue as to be incapable of proceeding 
further. a lady, who appear to be the principal, express much 
chagrin at this intelligence; but as there was no remedy, one of the 
attendant ask the wood-man, whether he could furnish them with 
lodging for the night. 

he seem much embarrassed, and reply in the negative; add that a 
spain gentleman and his servant were already in possession of the 
only spare apartments in his house. on hearing this, the gallantry of 
my nation would not permit me to retain those accommodations, of which 
a female was in want. i instantly signify to the wood-man, that i 
transfer my right to the lady; he made some objections; but i 
overrule them, and hasten to the carriage, open the door, and 
assist the lady to descend. i immediately recognize her for the 
same person whom i had seen at the inn at luneville. i took an 
opportunity of ask one of her attendants, what was her name? 

'the baroness lindenberg,' was the answer. 

i could not but remark how different a reception our host had given 
these newcomer and myself. his reluctance to admit them was visibly 
express on his countenance, and he prevail on himself with 
difficulty to tell the lady that she was welcome. i conduct her into 
the house, and placed her in the armed-chair, which i had just quitted. 
she thank me very graciously; and made a thousand apology for 
putt me to an inconvenience. sudden the wood-man's countenance 
clear up. 

'at last i have arrange it!' said he, interrupt her excuses; 'i can 
lodge you and your suite, madam, and you will not be under the 
necessity of making this gentleman suffer for his politeness. 

we have two spare chambers, one for the lady, the other, monsieur, for 
you: my wife shall give up hers to the two waiting-women; as for the 
men-servants, they must content themselves with passing the night in a 
large barn, which stand at a few yard distance from the house. there 
they shall have a blazing fire, and as good a supper as we can make 
shift to give them.' 

after several expression of gratitude on the lady's part, and 
opposition on mine to marguerite's give up her bed, this arrangement 
was agree to. as the room was small, the baroness immediately 
dismiss her male domestics: baptiste was on the point of conduct 
them to the barn which he had mention when two young men appear at 
the door of the cottage. 

'hell and furies!' exclaim the first start back; 'robert, the 
house is fill with strangers!' 

'ha! there are my sons!' cry our host. 'why, jacques! robert! 
whither are you running, boys? there is room enough still for you.' 

upon this assurance the youth returned. the father present them to 
the baroness and myself: after which he withdrew with our domestics, 
while at the request of the two waiting-women, marguerite conduct 
them to the room design for their mistress. 

the two new-comers were tall, stout, well-made young men, 
hard-featured, and very much sun-burnt. they paid their compliments to 
us in few words, and acknowledge claude, who now enter the room, as 
an old acquaintance. they then threw aside their cloak in which they 
were wrap up, took off a leathern belt to which a large cutlass was 
suspended, and each drawing a brace of pistol from his girdle laid 
them upon a shelf. 

'you travel well-armed,' said i. 

'true, monsieur;' reply robert. 'we left strasbourg late this 
evening, and 'tis necessary to take precaution at passing through this 
forest after dark. it do not bear a good repute, i promise you.' 

'how?' said the baroness; 'are there robber hereabout?' 

'so it is said, madame; for my own part, i have travelled through the 
wood at all hours, and never met with one of them.' 

here marguerite returned. her stepson drew her to the other end of 
the room, and whisper her for some minutes. by the looks which they 
cast towards us at intervals, i conjecture them to be enquiring our 
business in the cottage. 

in the meanwhile the baroness express her apprehensions, that her 
husband would be suffering much anxiety upon her account. she had 
intended to send on one of her servant to inform the baron of her 
delay; but the account which the young men gave of the forest render 
this plan impracticable. claude relieved her from her embarrassment. 
he informed her that he was under the necessity of reach strasbourg 
that night, and that would she trust him with a letter, she might 
depend upon its being safe delivered. 

'and how come it,' said i, 'that you are under no apprehension of 
meeting these robbers?' 

'alas! monsieur, a poor man with a large family must not lose certain 
profit because 'tis attend with a little danger, and perhaps my lord 
the baron may give me a trifle for my pains. besides, i have nothing to 
lose except my life, and that will not be worth the robber taking.' 

i thought his argument bad, and advise his wait till the morning; 
but as the baroness did not second me, i was oblige to give up the 
point. the baroness lindenberg, as i found afterwards, had long been 
accustomed to sacrifice the interests of other to her own, and her 
wish to send claude to strasbourg blind her to the danger of the 
undertaking. accordingly, it was resolve that he should set out 
without delay. the baroness wrote her letter to her husband, and i 
sent a few lines to my banker, apprise him that i should not be at 
strasbourg till the next day. claude took our letters, and left the 
cottage. 

the lady declared herself much fatigue by her journey: besides have 
come from some distance, the driver had contrived to lose their way in 
the forest. she now address herself to marguerite, desire to be 
shown to her chamber, and permit to take half an hour's repose. one 
of the waiting-women was immediately summoned; she appear with a 
light, and the baroness follow her up stairs. the cloth was 
spread in the chamber where i was, and marguerite soon gave me to 
understand that i was in her way. her hint were too broad to be 
easily mistaken; i therefore desire one of the young men to conduct me 
to the chamber where i was to sleep, and where i could remain till 
supper was ready. 

'which chamber is it, mother?' said robert. 

'the one with green hangings,' she replied; 'i have just been at the 
trouble of get it ready, and have put fresh sheet upon the bed; if 
the gentleman choose to lollop and lounge upon it, he may make it 
again himself for me.' 

'you are out of humour, mother, but that is no novelty. have the 
goodness to follow me, monsieur.' 

he open the door, and advanced towards a narrow staircase. 

'you have got no light!' said marguerite; 'is it your own neck or the 
gentleman's that you have a mind to break?' 

she cross by me, and put a candle into robert's hand, have received 
which, he began to ascend the staircase. jacque was employ in 
lay the cloth, and his back was turn towards me. 

marguerite seize the moment, when we were unobserved. she caught my 
hand, and pressed it strongly. 

'look at the sheets!' said she as she pass me, and immediately 
resume her former occupation. 

startle by the abrupt of her action, i remain as if petrified. 
robert's voice, desire me to follow him, recall me to myself. i 
ascend the staircase. my conductor usher me into a chamber, where 
an excellent wood-fire was blazing upon the hearth. he placed the 
light upon the table, enquire whether i had any further commands, and 
on my reply in the negative, he left me to myself. you may be 
certain that the moment when i found myself alone was that on which i 
comply with marguerite's injunction. i took the candle, hasty 
approach the bed, and turn down the coverture. what was my 
astonishment, my horror, at finding the sheet crimson with blood! 

at that moment a thousand confuse idea pass before my imagination. 
the robber who infest the wood, marguerite's exclamation respecting 
her children, the arms and appearance of the two young men, and the 
various anecdote which i had heard related, respecting the secret 
correspondence which frequent exist between banditti and 
postillions, all these circumstances flash upon my mind, and inspired 
me with doubt and apprehension. i ruminate on the most probable means 
of ascertain the truth of my conjectures. sudden i was aware of 
someone below pace hasty backwards and forwards. every thing now 
appear to me an object of suspicion. with precaution i drew near the 
window, which, as the room had been long shut up, was left open in 
spite of the cold. i venture to look out. the beam of the moon 
permit me to distinguish a man, whom i had no difficulty to 
recognize for my host. i watch his movements. 

he walk swiftly, then stopped, and seem to listen: he stamp upon 
the ground, and beat his stomach with his arms as if to guard himself 
from the inclement of the season. at the least noise, if a voice was 
heard in the lower part of the house, if a bat flit past him, or the 
wind rattle amidst the leafless boughs, he started, and look round 
with anxiety. 

'plague take him!' said he at length with impatience; 'what can he be 
about!' 

he spoke in a low voice; but as he was just below my window, i had no 
difficulty to distinguish his words. 

i now heard the steps of one approaching. baptiste went towards the 
sound; he join a man, whom his low stature and the horn suspend 
from his neck, declared to be no other than my faithful claude, whom i 
had supposed to be already on his way to strasbourg. expect their 
discourse to throw some light upon my situation, i hasten to put 
myself in a condition to hear it with safety. for this purpose i 
extinguish the candle, which stood upon a table near the bed: the 
flame of the fire was not strong enough to betray me, and i immediately 
resume my place at the window. 

the object of my curiosity had station themselves directly under it. 
i suppose that during my momentary absence the wood-man had been 
blame claude for tardiness, since when i return to the window, the 
latter was endeavour to excuse his fault. 

'however,' add he, 'my diligence at present shall make up for my past 
delay.' 

'on that condition,' answer baptiste, 'i shall readily forgive you. 
but in truth as you share equally with us in our prizes, your own 
interest will make you use all possible diligence. 'twould be a shame 
to let such a noble booty escape us! you say, that this spaniard is 
rich?' 

'his servant boast at the inn, that the effects in his chaise were 
worth above two thousand pistoles.' 

oh! how i cursed stephano's imprudent vanity! 

'and i have been told,' continue the postillion, 'that this baroness 
carry about her a casket of jewel of immense value.' 

'may be so, but i had rather she had stay away. the spaniard was a 
secure prey. the boys and myself could easily have master him and 
his servant, and then the two thousand pistol would have been share 
between us four. now we must let in the band for a share, and perhaps 
the whole covey may escape us. should our friends have betaken 
themselves to their different post before you reach the cavern, all 
will be lost. the lady's attendant are too numerous for us to 
overpower them: unless our associate arrive in time, we must needs 
let these traveller set out tomorrow without damage or hurt.' 

''tis plaguy unlucky that my comrade who drove the coach should be 
those unacquainted with our confederacy! but never fear, friend 
baptiste. an hour will bring me to the cavern; it is now but ten 
o'clock, and by twelve you may expect the arrival of the band. by the 
bye, take care of your wife: you know how strong is her repugnance to 
our mode of life, and she may find means to give information to the 
lady's servant of our design.' 

'oh! i am secure of her silence; she is too much afraid of me, and fond 
of her children, to dare to betray my secret. besides, jacque and 
robert keep a strict eye over her, and she is not permit to set a 
foot out of the cottage. the servant are safe lodge in the barn; i 
shall endeavour to keep all quiet till the arrival of our friends. 
were i assured of your finding them, the stranger should be dispatch 
this instant; but as it is possible for you to miss the banditti, i am 
fearful of being summon to produce them by their domestic in the 
morning.' 

'and suppose either of the traveller should discover your design?' 

'then we must poignard those in our power, and take our chance about 
master the rest. however, to avoid running such a risque, hasten to 
the cavern: the banditti never leave it before eleven, and if you use 
diligence, you may reach it in time to stop them.' 

'tell robert that i have taken his horse: my own has broken his 
bridle, and escape into the wood. what is the watch-word?' 

'the reward of courage.' 

''tis sufficient. i hasten to the cavern.' 

'and i to rejoin my guests, lest my absence should create suspicion. 
farewell, and be diligent.' 

these worthy associate now separated: the one bent his course towards 
the stable, while the other return to the house. 

you may judge, what must have been my feelings during this 
conversation, of which i lost not a single syllable. i dare not trust 
myself to my reflections, nor did any means present itself to escape 
the danger which threaten me. resistance, i knew to be vain; i was 
unarmed, and a single man against three: however, i resolve at least 
to sell my life as dearly as i could. dread lest baptiste should 
perceive my absence, and suspect me to have overheard the message with 
which claude was dispatched, i hasty relighte my candle and quit 
the chamber. on descending, i found the table spread for six persons. 
the baroness sat by the fireside: marguerite was employ in dressing a 
sallad, and her step-sons were whisper together at the further end 
of the room. baptiste have the round of the garden to make, ere he 
could reach the cottage door, was not yet arrived. i seat myself 
quiet opposite to the baroness. 

a glance upon marguerite told her that her hint had not been thrown 
away upon me. how different did she now appear to me! what before 
seem gloom and sullenness, i now found to be disgust at her 
associates, and compassion for my danger. i look up to her as to my 
only resource; yet knowing her to be watch by her husband with a 
suspicious eye, i could place but little reliance on the exertion of 
her good-will. 

in spite of all my endeavour to conceal it, my agitation was but too 
visibly express upon my countenance. i was pale, and both my words 
and action were disorder and embarrassed. the young men observe 
this, and enquire the cause. i attribute it to excess of fatigue, 
and the violent effect produce on me by the severity of the season. 
whether they believe me or not, i will not pretend to say: they at 
least cease to embarrass me with their questions. i strove to divert 
my attention from the peril which surround me, by converse on 
different subject with the baroness. i talk of germany, declare 
my intention of visiting it immediately: god knows, that i little 
thought at that moment of ever seeing it! she reply to me with great 
ease and politeness, professed that the pleasure of making my 
acquaintance ample compensate for the delay in her journey, and gave 
me a pressing invitation to make some stay at the castle of lindenberg. 
as she spoke thus, the youth exchange a malicious smile, which 
declared that she would be fortunate if she ever reach that castle 
herself. this action did not escape me; but i conceal the emotion 
which it excited in my breast. i continue to converse with the lady; 
but my discourse was so frequent incoherent, that as she has since 
informed me, she began to doubt whether i was in my right senses. the 
fact was, that while my conversation turn upon one subject, my 
thought were entire occupy by another. i meditate upon the means 
of quit the cottage, finding my way to the barn, and give the 
domestic information of our host's designs. i was soon convinced, how 
impracticable was the attempt. jacque and robert watch my every 
movement with an attentive eye, and i was oblige to abandon the idea. 
all my hope now rest upon claude's not finding the banditti: in 
that case, according to what i had overheard, we should be permit to 
depart unhurt. 

i shudder involuntary as baptiste enter the room. he made many 
apology for his long absence, but 'he had been detain by affair 
impossible to be delayed.' he then entreat permission for his family 
to sup at the same table with us, without which, respect would not 
authorize his taking such a liberty. oh! how in my heart i cursed the 
hypocrite! how i loathe his presence, who was on the point of 
deprive me of an existence, at that time infinite dear! i had 
every reason to be satisfy with life; i had youth, wealth, rank, and 
education; and the fairest prospects present themselves before me. i 
saw those prospects on the point of close in the most horrible 
manner: yet was i oblige to dissimulate, and to receive with a 
semblance of gratitude the false civility of him who held the dagger 
to my bosom. 

the permission which our host demanded, was easily obtained. we seat 
ourselves at the table. the baroness and myself occupy one side: 
the son were opposite to us with their back to the door. baptiste 
took his seat by the baroness at the upper end, and the place next to 
him was left for his wife. she soon enter the room, and placed 
before us a plain but comfortable peasant's repast. our host thought 
it necessary to apologize for the poorness of the supper: 'he had not 
been apprize of our coming; he could only offer us such fare as had 
been intended for his own family:' 

'but,' add he, 'should any accident detain my noble guest long 
than they at present intend, i hope to give them a better treatment.' 

the villain! i well knew the accident to which he alluded; i shudder 
at the treatment which he taught us to expect! 

my companion in danger seem entire to have got rid of her chagrin 
at being delayed. she laughed, and converse with the family with 
infinite gaiety. i strove but in vain to follow her example. my 
spirits were evidently forced, and the constraint which i put upon 
myself escape not baptiste's observation. 

'come, come, monsieur, cheer up!' said he; 'you seem not quite 
recover from your fatigue. to raise your spirits, what say you to a 
glass of excellent old wine which was left me by my father? god rest 
his soul, he is in a better world! i seldom produce this wine; but as 
i am not honour with such guest every day, this is an occasion which 
deserve a bottle.' 

he then gave his wife a key, and instruct her where to find the wine 
of which he spoke. she seem by no means pleased with the commission; 
she took the key with an embarrass air, and hesitate to quit the 
table. 

'did you hear me?' said baptiste in an angry tone. 

marguerite dart upon him a look of mingle anger and fear, and left 
the chamber. his eyes follow her suspiciously, till she had closed 
the door. 

she soon return with a bottle seal with yellow wax. she placed it 
upon the table, and gave the key back to her husband. i suspect that 
this liquor was not present to us without design, and i watch 
marguerite's movements with inquietude. she was employ in rinse 
some small horn goblets. as she placed them before baptiste, she saw 
that my eye was fixed upon her; and at the moment when she thought 
herself unobserved by the banditti, she motion to me with her head 
not to taste the liquor, she then resume her place. 

in the mean while our host had drawn the cork, and filling two of the 
goblets, offer them to the lady and myself. she at first made some 
objections, but the instance of baptiste were so urgent, that she was 
oblige to comply. fear to excite suspicion, i hesitate not to 
take the goblet present to me. by its smell and colour i guess it 
to be champagne; but some grain of powder floating upon the top 
convinced me that it was not unadulterated. however, i dare not to 
express my repugnance to drink it; i lift it to my lips, and 
seem to be swallow it: sudden start from my chair, i made 
the best of my way towards a vase of water at some distance, in which 
marguerite had been rinse the goblets. i pretended to spit out the 
wine with disgust, and took an opportunity unperceived of empty the 
liquor into the vase. 

the banditti seem alarm at my action. jacque half rose from his 
chair, put his hand into his bosom, and i discover the haft of a 
dagger. i return to my seat with tranquillity, and affected not to 
have observe their confusion. 

'you have not suit my taste, honest friend,' said i, address 
myself to baptiste. 'i never can drink champagne without its produce 
a violent illness. i swallow a few mouthful ere i was aware of its 
quality, and fear that i shall suffer for my imprudence.' 

baptiste and jacque exchange looks of distrust. 

'perhaps,' said robert, 'the smell may be disagreeable to you.' 

he quit his chair, and remove the goblet. i observed, that he 
examined, whether it was nearly empty. 

'he must have drank sufficient,' said he to his brother in a low voice, 
while he reseat himself. 

marguerite look apprehensive, that i had taste the liquor: a glance 
from my eye reassure her. 

i wait with anxiety for the effects which the beverage would produce 
upon the lady. i doubt not but the grain which i had observe were 
poisonous, and lament that it had been impossible for me to warn her 
of the danger. but a few minutes had elapse before i perceive her 
eyes grow heavy; her head sank upon her shoulder, and she fell into a 
deep sleep. i affected not to attend to this circumstance, and 
continue my conversation with baptiste, with all the outward gaiety in 
my power to assume. but he no long answer me without constraint. 
he eye me with distrust and astonishment, and i saw that the banditti 
were frequent whisper among themselves. my situation became every 
moment more painful; i sustain the character of confidence with a 
worse grace than ever. equally afraid of the arrival of their 
accomplice and of their suspect my knowledge of their designs, i 
knew not how to dissipate the distrust which the banditti evidently 
entertain for me. in this new dilemma the friendly marguerite again 
assist me. she pass behind the chair of her stepsons, stop for 
a moment opposite to me, closed her eyes, and recline her head upon 
her shoulder. this hint immediately dispel my incertitude. it told 
me, that i ought to imitate the baroness, and pretend that the liquor 
had taken its full effect upon me. i did so, and in a few minutes 
seem perfectly overcome with slumber. 

'so!' cry baptiste, as i fell back in my chair; 'at last he sleeps! 
i began to think that he had scent our design, and that we should 
have been forced to dispatch him at all events.' 

'and why not dispatch him at all events?' enquire the ferocious 
jacques. 'why leave him the possibility of betray our secret? 
marguerite, give me one of my pistols: a single touch of the trigger 
will finish him at once.' 

'and supposing,' rejoin the father, 'supposing that our friends 
should not arrive tonight, a pretty figure we should make when the 
servant enquire for him in the morning! no, no, jacques; we must wait 
for our associates. if they join us, we are strong enough to dispatch 
the domestic as well as their masters, and the booty is our own; if 
claude do not find the troop, we must take patience, and suffer the 
prey to slip through our fingers. ah! boys, boys, had you arrive but 
five minutes sooner, the spaniard would have been done for, and two 
thousand pistol our own. but you are always out of the way when you 
are most wanted. 

you are the most unlucky rogues!' 

'well, well, father!' answer jacques; 'had you been of my mind, all 
would have been over by this time. you, robert, claude, and myself, why 
the stranger were but double the number, and i warrant you we might 
have master them. however, claude is gone; 'tis too late to think of 
it now. we must wait patient for the arrival of the gang; and if the 
traveller escape us tonight, we must take care to waylay them 
tomorrow.' 

'true! true!' said baptiste; 'marguerite, have you given the 
sleeping-draught to the waiting-women?' 

she reply in the affirmative. 

'all then is safe. come, come, boys; whatever falls out, we have no 
reason to complain of this adventure. we run no danger, may gain much, 
and can lose nothing.' 

at this moment i heard a trample of horses. oh! how dreadful was the 
sound to my ears. a cold sweat flow down my forehead, and i felt all 
the terror of impending death. i was by no means reassure by hearing 
the compassionate marguerite exclaim in the accent of despair, 

'almighty god! they are lost!' 

lucky the wood-man and his son were too much occupy by the arrival 
of their associate to attend to me, or the violence of my agitation 
would have convinced them that my sleep was feigned. 

'open! open!' exclaim several voice on the outside of the cottage. 

'yes! yes!' cry baptiste joyfully; 'they are our friends sure 
enough! now then our booty is certain. away! lads, away! lead them 
to the barn; you know what is to be done there.' 

robert hasten to open the door of the cottage. 

'but first,' said jacques, taking up his arms; 'first let me dispatch 
these sleepers.' 

'no, no, no!' reply his father; 'go you to the barn, where your 
presence is wanted. leave me to take care of these and the women 
above.' 

jacque obeyed, and follow his brother. they seem to converse with 
the new-comers for a few minutes: after which i heard the robber 
dismount, and as i conjectured, bend their course towards the barn. 

'so! that is wise done!' mutter baptiste; 'they have quit their 
horses, that they may fall upon the stranger by surprise. good! good! 
and now to business.' 

i heard him approach a small cupboard which was fixed up in a distant 
part of the room, and unlock it. at this moment i felt myself shaken 
gently. 

'now! now!' whisper marguerite. 

i open my eyes. baptiste stood with his back towards me. no one 
else was in the room save marguerite and the sleep lady. the villain 
had taken a dagger from the cupboard and seem examine whether it 
was sufficient sharp. i had neglect to furnish myself with arms; 
but i perceive this to be my only chance of escaping, and resolve not 
to lose the opportunity. i sprang from my seat, dart sudden upon 
baptiste, and clasp my hand round his throat, pressed it so 
forcibly as to prevent his utter a single cry. you may remember 
that i was remarkable at salamanca for the power of my arm: it now 
render me an essential service. surprised, terrified, and 
breathless, the villain was by no means an equal antagonist. i threw 
him upon the ground; i grasp him still tighter; and while i fixed him 
without motion upon the floor, marguerite, wrest the dagger from his 
hand, plunge it repeatedly in his heart till he expired. 

no soon was this horrible but necessary act perpetrate than 
marguerite call on me to follow her. 

'flight is our only refuge!' said she; 'quick! quick! away!' 

i hesitate not to obey her: but unwill to leave the baroness a 
victim to the vengeance of the robbers, i raise her in my arms still 
sleeping, and hasten after marguerite. the horse of the banditti 
were fasten near the door: my conductress sprang upon one of them. 
i follow her example, placed the baroness before me, and spur on 
my horse. our only hope was to reach strasbourg, which was much near 
than the perfidious claude had assured me. marguerite was well 
acquaint with the road, and gallop on before me. we were oblige 
to pass by the barn, where the robber were slaughter our domestics. 
the door was open: we distinguished the shriek of the die and 
imprecation of the murderers! what i felt at that moment language is 
unable to describe! 

jacque heard the trample of our horse as we rush by the barn. he 
flew to the door with a burning torch in his hand, and easily 
recognise the fugitives. 

'betrayed! betrayed!' he shout to his companions. 

instantly they left their bloody work, and hasten to regain their 
horses. we heard no more. i bury my spur in the side of my 
courser, and marguerite goad on hers with the poignard, which had 
already render us such good service. we flew like lightning, and 
gain the open plains. already was strasbourg's steeple in sight, 
when we heard the robber pursue us. marguerite look back, and 
distinguished our follower descend a small hill at no great 
distance. it was in vain that we urge on our horses; the noise 
approach near with every moment. 

'we are lost!' she exclaimed; 'the villain gain upon us!' 

'on! on!' reply i; 'i hear the trample of horse coming from the 
town.' 

we redouble our exertions, and were soon aware of a numerous band of 
cavaliers, who came towards us at full speed. they were on the point 
of passing us. 

'stay! stay!' shriek marguerite; 'save us! for god's sake, save us!' 

the foremost, who seem to act as guide, immediately rein in his 
steed. 

''tis she! 'tis she!' exclaim he, spring upon the ground; 'stop, 
my lord, stop! they are safe! 'tis my mother!' 

at the same moment marguerite threw herself from her horse, clasp him 
in her arms, and cover him with kisses. the other cavalier stop 
at the exclamation. 

'the baroness lindenberg?' cry another of the stranger eagerly; 
'where is she? is she not with you?' 

he stop on behold her lie senseless in my arms. hasty he 
caught her from me. the profound sleep in which she was plunge made 
him at first tremble for her life; but the beating of her heart soon 
reassure him. 

'god be thanked!' said he; 'she has escape unhurt.' 

i interrupt his joy by point out the brigands, who continue to 
approach. no soon had i mention them than the greatest part of the 
company, which appear to be chiefly compose of soldiers, hasten 
forward to meet them. the villain stay not to receive their attack: 
perceive their danger they turn the head of their horses, and flee 
into the wood, whither they were follow by our preservers. in the 
mean while the stranger, whom i guess to be the baron lindenberg, 
after thank me for my care of his lady, propose our return with 
all speed to the town. the baroness, on whom the effects of the opiate 
had not cease to operate, was placed before him; marguerite and her 
son remount their horses; the baron's domestic followed, and we soon 
arrive at the inn, where he had taken his apartments. 

this was at the austria eagle, where my banker, whom before my 
quit paris i had apprise of my intention to visit strasbourg, had 
prepared lodgings for me. i rejoice at this circumstance. it gave me 
an opportunity of cultivate the baron's acquaintance, which i foresaw 
would be of use to me in germany. immediately upon our arrival the 
lady was convey to bed; a physician was sent for, who prescribed a 
medicine likely to counteract the effects of the sleepy potion, and 
after it had been pour down her throat, she was committed to the care 
of the hostess. the baron then address himself to me, and entreat 
me to recount the particulars of this adventure. i comply with his 
request instantaneously; for in pain respecting stephano's fate, whom i 
had been compel to abandon to the cruelty of the banditti, i found 
it impossible for me to repose, till i had some news of him. i 
received but too soon the intelligence, that my trusty servant had 
perished. the soldier who had pursue the brigand return while i 
was employ in relate my adventure to the baron. by their account i 
found that the robber had been overtaken: guilt and true courage are 
incompatible; they had thrown themselves at the feet of their pursuers, 
had surrender themselves without striking a blow, had discover 
their secret retreat, made known their signal by which the rest of the 
gang might be seized, and in short had betray ever mark of cowardice 
and baseness. by this means the whole of the band, consist of near 
sixty persons, had been made prisoners, bound, and conduct to 
strasbourg. some of the soldier hasten to the cottage, one of the 
banditti serving them as guide. their first visit was to the fatal 
barn, where they were fortunate enough to find two of the baron's 
servant still alive, though desperate wounded. the rest had expire 
beneath the sword of the robbers, and of these my unhappy stephano was 
one. 

alarm at our escape, the robber in their haste to overtake us, had 
neglect to visit the cottage. in consequence, the soldier found the 
two waiting-women unhurt, and bury in the same death-like slumber 
which had overpower their mistress. there was nobody else found in 
the cottage, except a child not above four years old, which the 
soldier brought away with them. we were busy ourselves with 
conjecture respecting the birth of this little unfortunate, when 
marguerite rush into the room with the baby in her arms. she fell at 
the feet of the officer who was making us this report, and blessed him 
a thousand times for the preservation of her child. 

when the first burst of maternal tender was over, i besought her to 
declare, by what means she had been united to a man whose principles 
seem so total discordant with her own. she bent her eyes 
downwards, and wipe a few tear from her cheek. 

'gentlemen,' said she after a silence of some minutes, 'i would request 
a favour of you: you have a right to know on whom you confer an 
obligation. i will not therefore stifle a confession which cover me 
with shame; but permit me to comprise it in as few words as possible. 

'i was born in strasbourg of respectable parents; their name i must at 
present conceal: my father still lives, and deserve not to be 
involved in my infamy; if you grant my request, you shall be informed 
of my family name. a villain made himself master of my affections, and 
to follow him i quit my father's house. yet though my passion 
overpower my virtue, i sank not into that degeneracy of vice, but too 
commonly the lot of women who make the first false step. i love my 
seducer; dearly love him! i was true to his bed; this baby, and the 
youth who warn you, my lord baron, of your lady's danger, are the 
pledge of our affection. even at this moment i lament his loss, 
though 'tis to him that i owe all the misery of my existence. 

'he was of noble birth, but he had squander away his paternal 
inheritance. his relations considered him as a disgrace to their name, 
and utterly discard him. his excesses drew upon him the indignation 
of the police. he was oblige to fly from strasbourg, and saw no other 
resource from beggary than an union with the banditti who infest the 
neighbouring forest, and whose troop was chiefly compose of young men 
of family in the same predicament with himself. i was determined not 
to forsake him. i follow him to the cavern of the brigands, and 
share with him the misery inseparable from a life of pillage. but 
though i was aware that our existence was support by plunder, i knew 
not all the horrible circumstances attach to my lover's profession. 
these he conceal from me with the utmost care; he was conscious that 
my sentiment were not sufficient deprave to look without horror 
upon assassination: he supposed, and with justice, that i should fly 
with detest from the embrace of a murderer. eight years of 
possession had not abate his love for me; and he cautious remove 
from my knowledge every circumstance, which might lead me to suspect 
the crime in which he but too often participated. he succeed 
perfectly: it was not till after my seducer's death, that i discover 
his hand to have been stain with the blood of innocence. 

'one fatal night he was brought back to the cavern cover with wounds: 
he received them in attack an english traveller, whom his companion 
immediately sacrifice to their resentment. he had only time to 
entreat my pardon for all the sorrow which he had cause me: he 
pressed my hand to his lips, and expired. my grief was inexpressible. 
as soon as its violence abated, i resolve to return to strasbourg, to 
throw myself with my two children at my father's feet, and implore his 
forgiveness, though i little hope to obtain it. what was my 
consternation when informed that no one entrust with the secret of 
their retreat was ever permit to quit the troop of the banditti; 
that i must give up all hope of ever rejoin society, and consent 
instantly to accept one of their band for my husband! my prayer 
and remonstrance were vain. they cast lot to decide to whose 
possession i should fall; i became the property of the infamous 
baptiste. a robber, who had once been a monk, pronounced over us a 
burlesque rather than a religious ceremony: i and my children were 
deliver into the hand of my new husband, and he convey us 
immediately to his home. 

'he assured me that he had long entertain for me the most ardent 
regard; but that friendship for my deceased lover had oblige him to 
stifle his desires. he endeavour to reconcile me to my fate, and for 
some time treat me with respect and gentleness: at length finding 
that my aversion rather increase than diminished, he obtain those 
favours by violence, which i persist to refuse him. no resource 
remain for me but to bear my sorrow with patience; i was conscious 
that i deserve them but too well. flight was forbidden: my children 
were in the power of baptiste, and he had sworn that if i attempt to 
escape, their lives should pay for it. i had had too many 
opportunity of witness the barbarous of his nature to doubt his 
fulfill his oath to the very letter. sad experience had convinced 
me of the horrors of my situation: my first lover had careful 
conceal them from me; baptiste rather rejoice in opening my eyes to 
the cruelty of his profession, and strove to familiarise me with 
blood and slaughter. 

'my nature was licentious and warm, but not cruel: my conduct had been 
imprudent, but my heart was not unprincipled. judge then what i must 
have felt at being a continual witness of crime the most horrible and 
revolting! judge how i must have grieve at being united to a man who 
received the unsuspect guest with an air of open and 
hospitality, at the very moment that he meditate his destruction. 
chagrin and discontent prey upon my constitution: the few charm 
bestow on me by nature wither away, and the dejection of my 
countenance denote the suffering of my heart. i was tempt a 
thousand times to put an end to my existence; but the remembrance of my 
children held my hand. i tremble to leave my dear boys in my tyrant's 
power, and tremble yet more for their virtue than their lives. the 
second was still too young to benefit by my instructions; but in the 
heart of my eldest i labour unceasing to plant those principles, 
which might enable him to avoid the crime of his parents. he listen 
to me with docility, or rather with eagerness. even at his early age, 
he show that he was not calculate for the society of villains; and 
the only comfort which i enjoy among my sorrows, was to witness the 
dawn virtue of my theodore. 

'such was my situation, when the perfidy of don alphonso's postillion 
conduct him to the cottage. his youth, air, and manners interested 
me most forcibly in his behalf. the absence of my husband's son gave 
me an opportunity which i had long wish to find, and i resolve to 
risque every thing to preserve the stranger. the vigilance of baptiste 
prevent me from warning don alphonso of his danger: i knew that my 
betray the secret would be immediately punish with death; and 
however embitter was my life by calamities, i want courage to 
sacrifice it for the sake of preserve that of another person. my only 
hope rest upon procure succour from strasbourg: at this i resolve 
to try; and should an opportunity offer of warning don alphonso of his 
danger unobserved, i was determined to seize it with avidity. by 
baptiste's orders i went upstairs to make the stranger's bed: i spread 
upon it sheet in which a traveller had been murder but a few nights 
before, and which still were stain with blood. i hope that these 
mark would not escape the vigilance of our guest, and that he would 
collect from them the designs of my perfidious husband. neither was 
this the only step which i took to preserve the stranger. theodore was 
confine to his bed by illness. i stole into his room unobserved by my 
tyrant, communicate to him my project, and he enter into it with 
eagerness. he rose in spite of his malady, and dress himself with 
all speed. i fasten one of the sheet round his arms, and lower 
him from the window. he flew to the stable, took claude's horse, and 
hasten to strasbourg. had he been accost by the banditti, he was 
to have declared himself sent upon a message by baptiste, but 
fortunately he reach the town without meeting any obstacle. 
immediately upon his arrival at strasbourg, he entreat assistance 
from the magistrature: his story pass from mouth to mouth, and at 
length came to the knowledge of my lord the baron. anxious for the 
safety of his lady, whom he knew would be upon the road that evening, 
it struck him that she might have fallen into the power of the robbers. 
he accompany theodore who guide the soldier towards the cottage, 
and arrive just in time to save us from fall once more into the 
hand of our enemies.' 

here i interrupt marguerite to enquire why the sleepy potion had been 
present to me. she said that baptiste supposed me to have arms about 
me, and wish to incapacitate me from making resistance: it was a 
precaution which he always took, since as the traveller had no hope 
of escaping, despair would have incite them to sell their lives dearly. 

the baron then desire marguerite to inform him, what were her present 
plans. i join him in declare my readiness to show my gratitude to 
her for the preservation of my life. 

'disgusted with a world,' she replied, 'in which i have met with 
nothing but misfortunes, my only wish is to retire into a convent. but 
first i must provide for my children. i find that my mother is no 
more, probably driven to an untimely grave by my desertion! my father 
is still living; he is not an hard man; perhaps, gentlemen, in spite of 
my ingratitude and imprudence, your intercession may induce him to 
forgive me, and to take charge of his unfortunate grand-sons. if you 
obtain this boon for me, you will repay my service a thousand-fold!' 

both the baron and myself assured marguerite, that we would spare no 
pains to obtain her pardon: and that even should her father be 
inflexible, she need be under no apprehension respecting the fate of 
her children. i engaged myself to provide for theodore, and the baron 
promise to take the youngest under his protection. 

the grateful mother thank us with tear for what she call 
generosity, but which in fact was no more than a proper sense of our 
obligation to her. she then left the room to put her little boy to 
bed, whom fatigue and sleep had compleat overpowered. 

the baroness, on recover and being informed from what danger i had 
rescue her, set no bounds to the expression of her gratitude. she 
was join so warm by her husband in pressing me to accompany them to 
their castle in bavaria, that i found it impossible to resist their 
entreaties. during a week which we pass at strasbourg, the interests 
of marguerite were not forgotten: in our application to her father we 
succeed as ample as we could wish. the good old man had lost his 
wife: he had no children but this unfortunate daughter, of whom he had 
received no news for almost fourteen years. he was surround by 
distant relations, who wait with impatience for his decease in order 
to get possession of his money. when therefore marguerite appear 
again so unexpectedly, he considered her as a gift from heaven: he 
received her and her children with open arms, and insist upon their 
establish themselves in his house without delay. the disappointed 
cousin were oblige to give place. the old man would not hear of his 
daughter's retiring into a convent: he said that she was too necessary 
to his happiness, and she was easily persuade to relinquish her 
design. but no persuasion could induce theodore to give up the plan 
which i had at first marked out for him. he had attach himself to me 
most sincerely during my stay at strasbourg; and when i was on the 
point of leave it, he besought me with tear to take him into my 
service: he set forth all his little talent in the most favourable 
colours, and try to convince me that i should find him of infinite 
use to me upon the road. i was unwill to charge myself with a lad 
but scarcely turn of thirteen, whom i knew could only be a burthen to 
me: however, i could not resist the entreaty of this affectionate 
youth, who in fact possessed a thousand estimable qualities. with some 
difficulty he persuade his relations to let him follow me, and that 
permission once obtained, he was dub with the title of my page. 
have pass a week at strasbourg, theodore and myself set out for 
bavaria in company with the baron and his lady. these latter as well 
as myself had forced marguerite to accept several presents of value, 
both for herself, and her youngest son: on leave her, i promise his 
mother faithfully that i would restore theodore to her within the year. 

i have related this adventure at length, lorenzo, that you might 
understand the means by which 'the adventurer, alphonso d'alvarada got 
introduce into the castle of lindenberg.' judge from this specimen 
how much faith should be given to your aunt's assertions! 



volume ii 



chapter i 

avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee! 
thy bone are marrowless, thy blood is cold! 
thou hast no speculation in those eyes 
which thou dost glare with! hence, horrible shadow! 
unreal mockery hence! 
macbeth. 

continuation of the history of don raymond. 

my journey was uncommonly agreeable: i found the baron a man of some 
sense, but little knowledge of the world. he had past a great part of 
his life without stirring beyond the precincts of his own domains, and 
consequently his manners were far from being the most polished: but he 
was hearty, good-humoured, and friendly. his attention to me was all 
that i could wish, and i had every reason to be satisfy with his 
behaviour. his ruling passion was hunting, which he had brought himself 
to consider as a serious occupation; and when talk over some 
remarkable chace, he treat the subject with as much gravity as it had 
been a battle on which the fate of two kingdom was depending. i 
happen to be a tolerable sportsman: soon after my arrival at 
lindenberg i gave some proof of my dexterity. the baron immediately 
marked me down for a man of genius, and vow to me an eternal 
friendship. 

that friendship was become to me by no means indifferent. at the 
castle of lindenberg i beheld for the first time your sister, the 
lovely agnes. for me whose heart was unoccupied, and who grieve at 
the void, to see her and to love her were the same. i found in agnes 
all that was requisite to secure my affection. she was then scarcely 
sixteen; her person light and elegant was already formed; she possessed 
several talent in perfection, particularly those of music and drawing: 
her character was gay, open, and good-humoured; and the graceful 
simplicity of her dress and manners form an advantageous contrast to 
the art and studied coquetry of the parisian dames, whom i had just 
quitted. from the moment that i beheld her, i felt the most lively 
interest in her fate. i made many enquiry respecting her of the 
baroness. 

'she is my niece,' reply that lady; 'you are still ignorant, don 
alphonso, that i am your countrywoman. i am sister to the duke of 
medina celi: agnes is the daughter of my second brother, don gaston: 
she has been destined to the convent from her cradle, and will soon 
make her profession at madrid.' 

(here lorenzo interrupt the marquis by an exclamation of surprise. 

'intended for the convent from her cradle?' said he; 'by heaven, this 
is the first word that i ever heard of such a design!' 

'i believe it, my dear lorenzo,' answer don raymond; 'but you must 
listen to me with patience. you will not be less surprised, when i 
relate some particulars of your family still unknown to you, and which 
i have learnt from the mouth of agnes herself.' 

he then resume his narrative as follows.) 

you cannot but be aware that your parent were unfortunately slave to 
the grossest superstition: when this foible was call into play, 
their every other sentiment, their every other passion yield to its 
irresistible strength. while she was big with agnes, your mother was 
seize by a dangerous illness, and given over by her physicians. in 
this situation, donna inesilla vowed, that if she recover from her 
malady, the child then living in her bosom if a girl should be 
dedicated to st. clare, if a boy to st. benedict. her prayer were 
heard; she got rid of her complaint; agnes enter the world alive, and 
was immediately destined to the service of st. clare. 

don gaston readily chime in with his lady's wishes: but knowing the 
sentiment of the duke, his brother, respecting a monastic life, it was 
determined that your sister's destination should be careful conceal 
from him. the better to guard the secret, it was resolve that agnes 
should accompany her aunt, donna rodolpha into germany, whither that 
lady was on the point of following her new-married husband, baron 
lindenberg. on her arrival at that estate, the young agnes was put 
into a convent, situated but a few mile from the castle. the nun to 
whom her education was confide perform their charge with exactitude: 
they made her a perfect mistress of many talents, and strove to infuse 
into her mind a taste for the retirement and tranquil pleasure of a 
convent. but a secret instinct made the young recluse sensible that 
she was not born for solitude: in all the freedom of youth and gaiety, 
she scruple not to treat as ridiculous many ceremony which the nun 
regard with awe; and she was never more happy than when her lively 
imagination inspired her with some scheme to plague the stiff lady 
abbess, or the ugly ill-tempered old porteress. she look with 
disgust upon the prospect before her: however no alternative was 
offer to her, and she submit to the decree of her parents, though 
not without secret repining. 

that repugnance she had not art enough to conceal long: don gaston was 
informed of it. alarmed, lorenzo, lest your affection for her should 
oppose itself to his projects, and lest you should positively object to 
your sister's misery, he resolve to keep the whole affair from your 
knowledge as well as the duke's, till the sacrifice should be 
consummated. the season of her taking the veil was fixed for the time 
when you should be upon your travels: in the meanwhile no hint was 
drop of donna inesilla's fatal vow. your sister was never permit 
to know your direction. all your letters were read before she received 
them, and those parts effaced, which were likely to nourish her 
inclination for the world: her answer were dictate either by her 
aunt, or by dame cunegonda, her governess. these particulars i learnt 
partly from agnes, partly from the baroness herself. 

i immediately determined upon rescue this lovely girl from a fate so 
contrary to her inclinations, and ill-suited to her merit. i 
endeavour to ingratiate myself into her favour: i boast of my 
friendship and intimacy with you. she listen to me with avidity; she 
seem to devour my words while i spoke in your praise, and her eyes 
thank me for my affection to her brother. my constant and unremitt 
attention at length gain me her heart, and with difficulty i oblige 
her to confess that she love me. when however, i propose her 
quit the castle of lindenberg, she reject the idea in positive 
terms. 

'be generous, alphonso,' she said; 'you possess my heart, but use not 
the gift ignobly. employ not your ascendancy over me in persuade me 
to take a step, at which i should hereafter have to blush. i am young 
and deserted: my brother, my only friend, is separate from me, and my 
other relations act with me as my enemies. take pity on my unprotected 
situation. instead of seduce me to an action which would cover me 
with shame, strive rather to gain the affection of those who govern 
me. the baron esteem you. my aunt, to other ever harsh proud and 
contemptuous, remember that you rescue her from the hand of 
murderers, and wear with you alone the appearance of kindness and 
benignity. try then your influence over my guardians. if they consent 
to our union my hand is yours: from your account of my brother, i 
cannot doubt your obtain his approbation: and when they find the 
impossible of execute their design, i trust that my parent will 
excuse my disobedience, and expiate by some other sacrifice my mother's 
fatal vow.' 

from the first moment that i beheld agnes, i had endeavour to 
conciliate the favour of her relations. authorise by the confession 
of her regard, i redouble my exertions. my principal battery was 
direct against the baroness; it was easy to discover that her word 
was law in the castle: her husband paid her the most absolute 
submission, and considered her as a superior being. she was about 
forty: in her youth she had been a beauty; but her charm had been 
upon that large scale which can but ill sustain the shock of years: 
however she still possessed some remains of them. her understanding 
was strong and excellent when not obscure by prejudice, which 
unlucki was but seldom the case. her passion were violent: she 
spare no pains to gratify them, and pursue with unremitting vengeance 
those who oppose themselves to her wishes. the warmest of friends, 
the most inveterate of enemies, such was the baroness lindenberg. 

i labour incessant to please her: unlucki i succeed but too 
well. she seem gratify by my attention, and treat me with a 
distinction accord by her to no one else. one of my daily 
occupation was reading to her for several hours: those hour i should 
much rather have past with agnes; but as i was conscious that 
complaisance for her aunt would advance our union, i submit with a 
good grace to the penance impose upon me. donna rodolpha's library 
was principally compose of old spain romances: these were her 
favourite studies, and once a day one of these unmerciful volumes was 
put regularly into my hands. i read the wearisome adventure of 
'perceforest,' 'tirante the white,' 'palmerin of england,' and 'the 
knight of the sun,' till the book was on the point of fall from my 
hand through ennui. however, the increase pleasure which the 
baroness seem to take in my society, encourage me to persevere; and 
latterly she show for me a partiality so marked, that agnes advise 
me to seize the first opportunity of declare our mutual passion to 
her aunt. 

one evening, i was alone with donna rodolpha in her own apartment. as 
our reading generally treat of love, agnes was never permit to 
assist at them. i was just congratulate myself on have finished 
'the love of tristan and the queen iseult----' 

'ah! the unfortunates!' cry the baroness; 'how say you, segnor? do 
you think it possible for man to feel an attachment so disinterested 
and sincere?' 

'i cannot doubt it,' reply i; 'my own heart furnish me with the 
certainty. ah! donna rodolpha, might i but hope for your approbation 
of my love! might i but confess the name of my mistress without 
incur your resentment!' 

she interrupt me. 

'suppose, i were to spare you that confession? suppose i were to 
acknowledge that the object of your desire is not unknown to me? 
suppose i were to say that she returns your affection, and lament not 
less sincerely than yourself the unhappy vow which separate her from 
you?' 

'ah! donna rodolpha!' i exclaimed, throw myself upon my knee before 
her, and pressing her hand to my lips, 'you have discover my secret! 
what is your decision? must i despair, or may i reckon upon your 
favour?' 

she withdrew not the hand which i held; but she turn from me, and 
cover her face with the other. 

'how can i refuse it you?' she replied; 'ah! don alphonso, i have long 
perceive to whom your attention were directed, but till now i 
perceive not the impression which they made upon my heart. 

at length i can no long hide my weakness either from myself or from 
you. i yield to the violence of my passion, and own that i adore you! 
for three long month i stifle my desires; but grown strong by 
resistance, i submit to their impetuosity. pride, fear, and honour, 
respect for myself, and my engagement to the baron, all are 
vanquished. i sacrifice them to my love for you, and it still seem to 
me that i pay too mean a price for your possession.' 

she pause for an answer.--judge, my lorenzo, what must have been my 
confusion at this discovery. i at once saw all the magnitude of this 
obstacle, which i had raise myself to my happiness. the baroness had 
placed those attention to her own account, which i had merely paid her 
for the sake of agnes: and the strength of her expressions, the looks 
which accompany them, and my knowledge of her revengeful disposition 
made me tremble for myself and my beloved. i was silent for some 
minutes. i knew not how to reply to her declaration: i could only 
resolve to clear up the mistake without delay, and for the present to 
conceal from her knowledge the name of my mistress. no soon had she 
avowed her passion than the transport which before were evident in my 
features gave place to consternation and constraint. i drop her 
hand, and rose from my knees. the change in my countenance did not 
escape her observation. 

'what means this silence?' said she in a tremble voice; 'where is 
that joy which you led me to expect?' 

'forgive me, segnora,' i answered, 'if what necessity forces from me 
should seem harsh and ungrateful: to encourage you in an error, which, 
however it may flatter myself, must prove to you the source of 
disappointment, would make me appear criminal in every eye. honour 
oblige me to inform you that you have mistaken for the solicitude of 
love what was only the attention of friendship. the latter sentiment 
is that which i wish to excite in your bosom: to entertain a warmer, 
respect for you forbid me, and gratitude for the baron's generous 
treatment. perhaps these reason would not be sufficient to shield me 
from your attractions, were it not that my affection are already 
bestow upon another. you have charms, segnora, which might captivate 
the most insensible; no heart unoccupy could resist them. happy is 
it for me that mine is no long in my possession; or i should have to 
reproach myself for ever with have violate the law of hospitality. 
recollect yourself, noble lady; recollect what is owe by you to 
honour, by me to the baron, and replace by esteem and friendship those 
sentiment which i never can return.' 

the baroness turn pale at this unexpected and positive declaration: 
she doubt whether she slept or woke. at length recover from her 
surprise, consternation gave place to rage, and the blood rush back 
into her cheek with violence. 

'villain!' she cried; 'monster of deceit! thus is the avowal of my 
love received? is it thus that.... but no, no! it cannot, it 
shall not be! alphonso, behold me at your feet! be witness of my 
despair! look with pity on a woman who love you with sincere 
affection! she who possess your heart, how has she merit such a 
treasure? what sacrifice has she made to you? 

what raise her above rodolpha?' 

i endeavour to lift her from her knees. 

'for god's sake, segnora, restrain these transports: they disgrace 
yourself and me. your exclamation may be heard, and your secret 
divulge to your attendants. i see that my presence only irritate 
you: permit me to retire.' 

i prepared to quit the apartment: the baroness caught me sudden by 
the arm. 

'and who is this happy rival?' said she in a menace tone; 'i will 
know her name, and when i know it.... ! she is someone in my power; 
you entreat my favour, my protection! let me but find her, let me 
but know who dare to rob me of your heart, and she shall suffer every 
torment which jealousy and disappointment can inflict! who is she? 
answer me this moment. hope not to conceal her from my vengeance! 
spy shall be set over you; every step, every look shall be watched; 
your eyes will discover my rival; i shall know her, and when she is 
found, tremble, alphonso for her and for yourself!' 

as she utter these last words her fury mount to such a pitch as to 
stop her powers of respiration. she panted, groaned, and at length 
faint away. as she was fall i caught her in my arms, and placed 
her upon a sopha. then hasten to the door, i summon her women to 
her assistance; i committed her to their care, and seize the 
opportunity of escaping. 

agitate and confuse beyond expression i bent my steps towards the 
garden. the benignity with which the baroness had listen to me at 
first raise my hope to the highest pitch: i imagine her to have 
perceive my attachment for her niece, and to approve of it. extreme 
was my disappointment at understanding the true purport of her 
discourse. i knew not what course to take: the superstition of the 
parent of agnes, aid by her aunt's unfortunate passion, seem to 
oppose such obstacle to our union as were almost insurmountable. 

as i past by a low parlour, whose window look into the garden, 
through the door which stood half open i observe agnes seat at a 
table. she was occupy in drawing, and several unfinished sketch 
were scattered round her. i entered, still undetermined whether i 
should acquaint her with the declaration of the baroness. 

'oh! is it only you?' said she, raise her head; 'you are no stranger, 
and i shall continue my occupation without ceremony. take a chair, and 
seat yourself by me.' 

i obeyed, and placed myself near the table. unconscious what i was 
doing, and total occupy by the scene which had just passed, i took 
up some of the drawings, and cast my eye over them. one of the 
subject struck me from its singularity. it represent the great hall 
of the castle of lindenberg. a door conduct to a narrow staircase 
stood half open. in the foreground appear a groupe of figures, 
placed in the most grotesque attitudes; terror was express upon every 
countenance. 

here was one upon his knee with his eyes cast up to heaven, and 
pray most devoutly; there another was creep away upon all fours. 
some hid their face in their cloak or the lap of their companions; 
some had conceal themselves beneath a table, on which the remnant of 
a feast were visible; while other with gape mouth and eyes 
wide-stretched pointed to a figure, supposed to have create this 
disturbance. it represent a female of more than human stature, 
clothe in the habit of some religious order. her face was veiled; on 
her arm hung a chaplet of beads; her dress was in several place 
stain with the blood which trickle from a wound upon her bosom. in 
one hand she held a lamp, in the other a large knife, and she seem 
advance towards the iron gate of the hall. 

'what do this mean, agnes?' said i; 'is this some invention of your 
own?' 

she cast her eye upon the drawing. 

'oh! no,' she replied; ''tis the invention of much wise head than 
mine. but can you possibly have live at lindenberg for three whole 
month without hearing of the bleeding nun?' 

'you are the first, who ever mention the name to me. pray, who may 
the lady be?' 

'that is more than i can pretend to tell you. all my knowledge of her 
history come from an old tradition in this family, which has been 
hand down from father to son, and is firm credit throughout the 
baron's domains. nay, the baron believe it himself; and as for my 
aunt who has a natural turn for the marvellous, she would soon doubt 
the veracity of the bible, than of the bleeding nun. shall i tell you 
this history?' 

i answer that she would oblige me much by relate it: she resume 
her drawing, and then proceed as follow in a tone of burlesque 
gravity. 

'it is surprising that in all the chronicle of past times, this 
remarkable personage is never once mentioned. fain would i recount to 
you her life; but unlucki till after her death she was never known to 
have existed. then first did she think it necessary to make some noise 
in the world, and with that intention she made bold to seize upon the 
castle of lindenberg. have a good taste, she took up her abode in the 
best room of the house: and once establish there, she began to amuse 
herself by knock about the table and chair in the middle of the 
night. perhaps she was a bad sleeper, but this i have never been able 
to ascertain. according to the tradition, this entertainment commence 
about a century ago. it was accompany with shrieking, howling, 
groaning, swearing, and many other agreeable noise of the same kind. 
but though one particular room was more especially honour with her 
visits, she did not entire confine herself to it. she occasional 
venture into the old galleries, pace up and down the spacious halls, 
or sometimes stopping at the door of the chambers, she wept and wail 
there to the universal terror of the inhabitants. in these nocturnal 
excursion she was seen by different people, who all describe her 
appearance as you behold it here, trace by the hand of her unworthy 
historian.' 

the singular of this account insensible engaged my attention. 

'did she never speak to those who met her?' said i. 

'not she. the specimen indeed, which she gave nightly of her talent 
for conversation, were by no means inviting. sometimes the castle rung 
with oath and execrations: a moment after she repeated her 
paternoster: now she howl out the most horrible blasphemies, and then 
chaunte de profundis, as orderly as if still in the choir. in short 
she seem a mighty capricious being: but whether she pray or 
cursed, whether she was impious or devout, she always contrived to 
terrify her auditor out of their senses. the castle became scarcely 
habitable; and its lord was so frightened by these midnight revels, 
that one fine morning he was found dead in his bed. this success 
seem to please the nun mightily, for now she made more noise than 
ever. but the next baron prove too cunning for her. he made his 
appearance with a celebrated exorcise in his hand, who fear not to 
shut himself up for a night in the haunt chamber. there it seem 
that he had an hard battle with the ghost, before she would promise to 
be quiet. she was obstinate, but he was more so, and at length she 
consent to let the inhabitant of the castle take a good night's 
rest. for some time after no news was heard of her. but at the end of 
five years the exorcise died, and then the nun venture to peep abroad 
again. however, she was now grown much more tractable and 
well-behaved. she walk about in silence, and never made her 
appearance above once in five years. this custom, if you will believe 
the baron, she still continues. he is fully persuaded, that on the 
fifth of may of every fifth year, as soon as the clock strike one, the 
door of the haunt chamber opens. (observe, that this room has been 
shut up for near a century.) then out walk the ghostly nun with her 
lamp and dagger: she descend the staircase of the eastern tower; and 
cross the great hall! on that night the porter always leaves the 
gate of the castle open, out of respect to the apparition: not that 
this is thought by any means necessary, since she could easily whip 
through the keyhole if she chose it; but merely out of politeness, and 
to prevent her from making her exit in a way so derogatory to the 
dignity of her ghost-ship.' 

'and whither do she go on quit the castle?' 

'to heaven, i hope; but if she does, the place certainly is not to her 
taste, for she always returns after an hour's absence. the lady then 
retire to her chamber, and is quiet for another five years.' 

'and you believe this, agnes?' 

'how can you ask such a question? no, no, alphonso! i have too much 
reason to lament superstition's influence to be its victim myself. 
however i must not avow my incredulity to the baroness: she entertain 
not a doubt of the truth of this history. as to dame cunegonda, my 
governess, she protest that fifteen years ago she saw the spectre with 
her own eyes. she related to me one evening how she and several other 
domestic had been terrify while at supper by the appearance of the 
bleeding nun, as the ghost is call in the castle: 'tis from her 
account that i drew this sketch, and you may be certain that cunegonda 
was not omitted. there she is! i shall never forget what a passion 
she was in, and how ugly she look while she scold me for have 
made her picture so like herself!' 

here she pointed to a burlesque figure of an old woman in an attitude 
of terror. 

in spite of the melancholy which oppress me, i could not help smile 
at the playful imagination of agnes: she had perfectly preserve dame 
cunegonda's resemblance, but had so much exaggerate every fault, and 
render every feature so irresistible laughable, that i could easily 
conceive the duenna's anger. 

'the figure is admirable, my dear agnes! i knew not that you possessed 
such talent for the ridiculous.' 

'stay a moment,' she replied; 'i will show you a figure still more 
ridiculous than dame cunegonda's. if it please you, you may dispose 
of it as seem best to yourself.' 

she rose, and went to a cabinet at some little distance. unlock a 
drawer, she took out a small case, which she opened, and present to 
me. 

'do you know the resemblance?' said she smiling. 

it was her own. 

transport at the gift, i pressed the portrait to my lip with 
passion: i threw myself at her feet, and declared my gratitude in the 
warmest and most affectionate terms. she listen to me with 
complaisance, and assured me that she share my sentiments: when 
sudden she utter a loud shriek, disengaged the hand which i held, 
and flew from the room by a door which open to the garden. amaze at 
this abrupt departure, i rose hasty from my knees. i beheld with 
confusion the baroness standing near me glowing with jealousy, and 
almost choake with rage. on recover from her swoon, she had 
torture her imagination to discover her conceal rival. no one 
appear to deserve her suspicion more than agnes. she immediately 
hasten to find her niece, tax her with encourage my addresses, and 
assure herself whether her conjecture were well-grounded. 
unfortunately she had already seen enough to need no other 
confirmation. she arrive at the door of the room at the precise 
moment, when agnes gave me her portrait. she heard me profess an 
everlasting attachment to her rival, and saw me kneel at her feet. 
she advanced to separate us; we were too much occupy by each other to 
perceive her approach, and were not aware of it, till agnes beheld her 
standing by my side. 

rage on the part of donna rodolpha, embarrassment on mine, for some 
time kept us both silent. the lady recover herself first. 

'my suspicion then were just,' said she; 'the coquetry of my niece has 
triumphed, and 'tis to her that i am sacrificed. in one respect 
however i am fortunate: i shall not be the only one who lament a 
disappointed passion. you too shall know, what it is to love without 
hope! i daily expect orders for restore agnes to her parents. 
immediately upon her arrival in spain, she will take the veil, and 
place an insuperable barrier to your union. you may spare your 
supplications.' she continued, perceive me on the point of speaking; 
'my resolution is fixed and immoveable. your mistress shall remain a 
close prisoner in her chamber till she exchange this castle for the 
cloister. solitude will perhaps recall her to a sense of her duty: but 
to prevent your oppose that wish event, i must inform you, don 
alphonso, that your presence here is no long agreeable either to the 
baron or myself. it was not to talk nonsense to my niece that your 
relations sent you to germany: your business was to travel, and i 
should be sorry to impede any long so excellent a design. farewell, 
segnor; remember, that tomorrow morning we meet for the last time.' 

have said this, she dart upon me a look of pride, contempt, and 
malice, and quit the apartment. i also retired to mine, and 
consume the night in plan the means of rescue agnes from the 
power of her tyrannical aunt. 

after the positive declaration of its mistress, it was impossible for 
me to make a long stay at the castle of lindenberg. accordingly i the 
next day announce my immediate departure. the baron declared that it 
gave him sincere pain; and he express himself in my favour so warmly, 
that i endeavour to win him over to my interest. scarcely had i 
mention the name of agnes when he stop me short, and said, that it 
was total out of his power to interfere in the business. i saw that 
it was in vain to argue; the baroness govern her husband with 
despotic sway, and i easily perceive that she had prejudiced him 
against the match. agnes did not appear: i entreat permission to 
take leave of her, but my prayer was rejected. i was oblige to depart 
without seeing her. 

at quit him the baron shook my hand affectionately, and assured me 
that as soon as his niece was gone, i might consider his house as my 
own. 

'farewell, don alphonso!' said the baroness, and stretch out her hand 
to me. 

i took it, and offer to carry it to my lips. she prevent me. 

her husband was at the other end of the room, and out of hearing. 

'take care of yourself,' she continued; 'my love is become hatred, and 
my wound pride shall not be unatoned. go where you will, my 
vengeance shall follow you!' 

she accompany these words with a look sufficient to make me tremble. 
i answer not, but hasten to quit the castle. 

as my chaise drove out of the court, i look up to the window of your 
sister's chamber. nobody was to be seen there: i threw myself back 
despondent in my carriage. i was attend by no other servant than a 
frenchman whom i had hire at strasbourg in stephano's room, and my 
little page whom i before mention to you. the fidelity, 
intelligence, and good temper of theodore had already made him dear to 
me; but he now prepared to lay an obligation on me, which made me look 
upon him as a guardian genius. scarcely had we proceed half a mile 
from the castle, when he rode up to the chaise-door. 

'take courage, segnor!' said he in spanish, which he had already learnt 
to speak with fluency and correctness. 'while you were with the baron, 
i watch the moment when dame cunegonda was below stairs, and mount 
into the chamber over that of donna agnes. i sang as loud as i could a 
little germany air well-known to her, hope that she would recollect my 
voice. i was not disappointed, for i soon heard her window open. i 
hasten to let down a string with which i had provided myself: upon 
hearing the case closed again, i drew up the string, and fasten 
to it i found this scrap of paper.' 

he then present me with a small note address to me. i open it 
with impatience: it contained the following words written in pencil: 

conceal yourself for the next fortnight in some neighbouring village. 
my aunt will believe you to have quit lindenberg, and i shall be 
restore to liberty. i will be in the west pavilion at twelve on the 
night of the thirtieth. fail not to be there, and we shall have an 
opportunity of concert our future plans. adieu. 
agnes. 

at peruse these lines my transport exceed all bounds; neither did 
i set any to the expression of gratitude which i heap upon theodore. 
in fact his address and attention merit my warmest praise. you will 
readily believe that i had not entrust him with my passion for agnes; 
but the arch youth had too much discernment not to discover my secret, 
and too much discretion not to conceal his knowledge of it. he 
observe in silence what was go on, nor strove to make himself an 
agent in the business till my interests require his interference. i 
equally admire his judgment, his penetration, his address, and his 
fidelity. this was not the first occasion in which i had found him of 
infinite use, and i was every day more convinced of his quick and 
capacity. during my short stay at strasbourg, he had applied himself 
diligent to learning the rudiments of spanish: he continue to study 
it, and with so much success that he spoke it with the same facility as 
his native language. he past the greatest part of his time in reading; 
he had acquire much information for his age; and united the advantage 
of a lively countenance and prepossessing figure to an excellent 
understanding and the very best of hearts. he is now fifteen; he is 
still in my service, and when you see him, i am sure that he will 
please you. but excuse this digression: i return to the subject which 
i quitted. 

i obey the instruction of agnes. i proceed to munich. there i 
left my chaise under the care of lucas, my france servant, and then 
return on horseback to a small village about four mile distant from 
the castle of lindenberg. upon arrive there a story was related to 
the host at whose inn i descended, which prevent his wonder at my 
making so long a stay in his house. the old man fortunately was 
credulous and incurious: he believe all i said, and sought to know no 
more than what i thought proper to tell him. nobody was with me but 
theodore; both were disguised, and as we kept ourselves close, we were 
not suspect to be other than what we seemed. in this manner the 
fortnight pass away. during that time i had the pleasing conviction 
that agnes was once more at liberty. she past through the village with 
dame cunegonda: she seem in health and spirits, and talk to her 
companion without any appearance of constraint. 

'who are those ladies?' said i to my host, as the carriage past. 

'baron lindenberg's niece with her governess,' he replied; 'she go 
regularly every friday to the convent of st. catharine, in which she 
was brought up, and which is situated about a mile from hence.' 

you may be certain that i wait with impatience for the ensue 
friday. i again beheld my lovely mistress. she cast her eyes upon me, 
as she pass the inn-door. a blush which overspread her cheek told me 
that in spite of my disguise i had been recognised. i bowed 
profoundly. she return the compliment by a slight inclination of the 
head as if made to one inferior, and look another way till the 
carriage was out of sight. 

the long-expected, long-wished for night arrived. it was calm, and the 
moon was at the full. as soon as the clock struck eleven i hasten to 
my appointment, determined not to be too late. theodore had provided a 
ladder; i ascend the garden wall without difficulty; the page 
follow me, and drew the ladder after us. i post myself in the west 
pavilion, and wait impatient for the approach of agnes. every 
breeze that whispered, every leaf that fell, i believe to be her 
footstep, and hasten to meet her. thus was i oblige to pass a full 
hour, every minute of which appear to me an age. the castle bell at 
length toll twelve, and scarcely could i believe the night to be no 
further advanced. another quarter of an hour elapsed, and i heard the 
light foot of my mistress approach the pavilion with precaution. i 
flew to receive her, and conduct her to a seat. i threw myself at 
her feet, and was express my joy at seeing her, when she thus 
interrupt me. 

'we have no time to lose, alphonso: the moments are precious, for 
though no more a prisoner, cunegonda watches my every step. an express 
is arrive from my father; i must depart immediately for madrid, and 
'tis with difficulty that i have obtain a week's delay. the 
superstition of my parents, support by the representations of my 
cruel aunt, leaves me no hope of soften them to compassion. in this 
dilemma i have resolve to commit myself to your honour: god grant 
that you may never give me cause to repent my resolution! flight is my 
only resource from the horrors of a convent, and my imprudence must be 
excuse by the urgent of the danger. now listen to the plan by which 
i hope to effect my escape. 

'we are now at the thirtieth of april. on the fifth day from this the 
visionary nun is expect to appear. in my last visit to the convent i 
provided myself with a dress proper for the character: a friend, whom 
i have left there and to whom i made no scruple to confide my secret, 
readily consent to supply me with a religious habit. provide a 
carriage, and be with it at a little distance from the great gate of 
the castle. as soon as the clock strike 'one,' i shall quit my 
chamber, drest in the same apparel as the ghost is supposed to wear. 
whoever meet me will be too much terrify to oppose my escape. i 
shall easily reach the door, and throw myself under your protection. 
thus far success is certain: but oh! alphonso, should you deceive me! 
should you despise my imprudence and reward it with ingratitude, the 
world will not hold a being more wretched than myself! i feel all the 
danger to which i shall be exposed. i feel that i am give you a 
right to treat me with levity: but i rely upon your love, upon your 
honour! the step which i am on the point of taking, will incense my 
relations against me: should you desert me, should you betray the 
trust repose in you, i shall have no friend to punish your insult, or 
support my cause. on yourself alone rest all my hope, and if your own 
heart do not plead in my behalf, i am undone for ever!' 

the tone in which she pronounced these words was so touching, that in 
spite of my joy at receiving her promise to follow me, i could not help 
being affected. i also repine in secret at not have taken the 
precaution to provide a carriage at the village, in which case i might 
have carry off agnes that very night. such an attempt was now 
impracticable: neither carriage or horse were to be procure near 
than munich, which was distant from lindenberg two good days journey. 
i was therefore oblige to chime in with her plan, which in truth 
seem well arranged: her disguise would secure her from being stop 
in quit the castle, and would enable her to step into the carriage 
at the very gate without difficulty or lose time. 

agnes recline her head mournful upon my shoulder, and by the light 
of the moon i saw tear flowing down her cheek. i strove to dissipate 
her melancholy, and encourage her to look forward to the prospect of 
happiness. i protest in the most solemn terms that her virtue and 
innocence would be safe in my keeping, and that till the church had 
made her my lawful wife, her honour should be held by me as sacred as a 
sister's. i told her that my first care should be to find you out, 
lorenzo, and reconcile you to our union; and i was continue to speak 
in the same strain, when a noise without alarm me. sudden the door 
of the pavilion was thrown open, and cunegonda stood before us. she 
had heard agnes steal out of her chamber, follow her into the garden, 
and perceive her enter the pavilion. favoured by the tree which 
shade it, and unperceived by theodore who wait at a little distance, 
she had approach in silence, and overheard our whole conversation. 

'admirable!' cry cunegonda in a voice shrill with passion, while 
agnes utter a loud shriek; 'by st. barbara, young lady, you have an 
excellent invention! you must personate the bleeding nun, truly? what 
impiety! what incredulity! marry, i have a good mind to let you 
pursue your plan: when the real ghost met you, i warrant, you would be 
in a pretty condition! don alphonso, you ought to be ashamed of 
yourself for seduce a young ignorant creature to leave her family and 
friends: however, for this time at least i shall mar your wicked 
designs. the noble lady shall be informed of the whole affair, and 
agnes must defer play the spectre till a better opportunity. 
farewell, segnor-- donna agnes, let me have the honour of conduct 
your ghost-ship back to your apartment.' 

she approach the sopha on which her tremble pupil was seated, took 
her by the hand, and prepared to lead her from the pavilion. 

i detain her, and strove by entreaties, soothing, promises, and 
flattery to win her to my party: but finding all that i could say of 
no avail, i abandoned the vain attempt. 

'your obstinacy must be its own punishment,' said i; 'but one resource 
remains to save agnes and myself, and i shall not hesitate to employ 
it.' 

terrify at this menace, she again endeavour to quit the pavilion; 
but i seize her by the wrist, and detain her forcibly. at the same 
moment theodore, who had follow her into the room, closed the door, 
and prevent her escape. i took the veil of agnes: i threw it round 
the duenna's head, who utter such piercing shriek that in spite of 
our distance from the castle, i dread their being heard. at length i 
succeed in gag her so compleat that she could not produce a 
single sound. theodore and myself with some difficulty next contrived 
to bind her hand and feet with our handkerchiefs; and i advise agnes 
to regain her chamber with all diligence. i promise that no harm 
should happen to cunegonda, bad her remember that on the fifth of may i 
should be in wait at the great gate of the castle, and took of her 
an affectionate farewell. tremble and uneasy she had scarce power 
enough to signify her consent to my plans, and flee back to her 
apartment in disorder and confusion. 

in the meanwhile theodore assist me in carry off my antiquated 
prize. she was hoist over the wall, placed before me upon my horse 
like a portmanteau, and i gallop away with her from the castle of 
lindenberg. the unlucky duenna never had made a more disagreeable 
journey in her life: she was jolt and shaken till she was become 
little more than an animate mummy; not to mention her fright when we 
wade through a small river through which it was necessary to pass in 
order to regain the village. before we reach the inn, i had already 
determined how to dispose of the troublesome cunegonda. we enter the 
street in which the inn stood, and while the page knocked, i wait at 
a little distance. the landlord open the door with a lamp in his 
hand. 

'give me the light!' said theodore; 'my master is coming.' 

he snatch the lamp hastily, and purposely let it fall upon the 
ground: the landlord return to the kitchen to re-light the lamp, 
leave the door open. i profit by the obscurity, sprang from my 
horse with cunegonda in my arms, dart up stairs, reach my chamber 
unperceived, and unlock the door of a spacious closet, stow her 
within it, and then turn the key. the landlord and theodore soon 
after appear with lights: the former express himself a little 
surprise at my return so late, but ask no impertinent questions. 
he soon quit the room, and left me to exult in the success of my 
undertaking. 

i immediately paid a visit to my prisoner. i strove to persuade her 
submit with patience to her temporary confinement. my attempt was 
unsuccessful. unable to speak or move, she express her fury by her 
looks, and except at meal i never dare to unbind her, or release her 
from the gag. at such times i stood over her with a drawn sword, and 
protested, that if she utter a single cry, i would plunge it in her 
bosom. as soon as she had done eating, the gag was replaced. i was 
conscious that this proceeding was cruel, and could only be justified 
by the urgent of circumstances: as to theodore, he had no scruple 
upon the subject. cunegonda's captivity entertain him beyond 
measure. during his abode in the castle, a continual warfare had been 
carry on between him and the duenna; and now that he found his enemy 
so absolutely in his power, he triumph without mercy. he seem to 
think of nothing but how to find out new means of plague her: 
sometimes he affected to pity her misfortune, then laugh at, abused, 
and mimicke her; he play her a thousand tricks, each more provoking 
than the other, and amuse himself by telling her that her elope 
must have occasion much surprise at the baron's. this was in fact 
the case. no one except agnes could imagine what was become of dame 
cunegonda: every hole and corner was search for her; the pond were 
dragged, and the wood underwent a thorough examination. still no dame 
cunegonda made her appearance. agnes kept the secret, and i kept the 
duenna: the baroness, therefore, remain in total ignorance 
respecting the old woman's fate, but suspect her to have perish by 
suicide. thus past away five days, during which i had prepared every 
thing necessary for my enterprise. on quit agnes, i had made it my 
first business to dispatch a peasant with a letter to luca at munich, 
order him to take care that a coach and four should arrive about ten 
o'clock on the fifth of may at the village of rosenwald. he obey my 
instruction punctually: the equipage arrive at the time appointed. 
as the period of her lady's elope drew nearer, cunegonda's rage 
increased. i verily believe that spight and passion would have kill 
her, had i not lucky discover her prepossession in favour of cherry 
brandy. with this favourite liquor she was plentiful supplied, and 
theodore always remain to guard her, the gag was occasional 
removed. the liquor seem to have a wonderful effect in soften the 
acrimony of her nature; and her confinement not admit of any other 
amusement, she got drunk regularly once a day just by way of passing 
the time. 

the fifth of may arrived, a period by me never to be forgotten! before 
the clock struck twelve, i betook myself to the scene of action. 
theodore follow me on horseback. i conceal the carriage in a 
spacious cavern of the hill, on whose brow the castle was situated: 
this cavern was of considerable depth, and among the peasant was known 
by the name of lindenberg hole. the night was calm and beautiful: the 
moonbeam fell upon the antient tower of the castle, and shed upon 
their summit a silver light. all was still around me: nothing was to 
be heard except the night breeze sigh among the leaves, the distant 
bark of village dogs, or the owl who had establish herself in a 
nook of the desert eastern turret. i heard her melancholy shriek, 
and look upwards. she sat upon the ride of a window, which i 
recognize to be that of the haunt room. this brought to my 
remembrance the story of the bleeding nun, and i sigh while i 
reflect on the influence of superstition and weakness of human 
reason. sudden i heard a faint chorus steal upon the silence of the 
night. 

'what can occasion that noise, theodore?' 

'a stranger of distinction,' reply he, 'passed through the village 
today in his way to the castle: he is report to be the father of 
donna agnes. doubtless, the baron has given an entertainment to 
celebrate his arrival.' 

the castle bell announce the hour of midnight: this was the usual 
signal for the family to retire to bed. soon after i perceive lights 
in the castle moving backwards and forward in different directions. i 
conjecture the company to be separating. i could hear the heavy door 
grate as they open with difficulty, and as they closed again the 
rotten case rattle in their frames. the chamber of agnes was on 
the other side of the castle. i tremble lest she should have fail 
in obtain the key of the haunt room: through this it was 
necessary for her to pass in order to reach the narrow staircase by 
which the ghost was supposed to descend into the great hall. agitate 
by this apprehension, i kept my eyes constant fixed upon the window, 
where i hope to perceive the friendly glare of a lamp borne by agnes. 
i now heard the massy gate unbarred. by the candle in his hand i 
distinguished old conrad, the porter. he set the portal door wide 
open, and retired. the lights in the castle gradual disappeared, and 
at length the whole building was wrapt in darkness. 

while i sat upon a broken ridge of the hill, the still of the scene 
inspired me with melancholy idea not altogether unpleasing. the 
castle which stood full in my sight, form an object equally awful and 
picturesque. its ponderous wall tinge by the moon with solemn 
brightness, its old and partly-ruined tower lift themselves into 
the cloud and seeming to frown on the plain around them, its lofty 
battlements oergrown with ivy, and fold gate expand in honour of 
the visionary inhabitant, made me sensible of a sad and reverential 
horror. yet did not these sensation occupy me so fully, as to prevent 
me from witness with impatience the slow progress of time. i 
approach the castle, and venture to walk round it. a few ray of 
light still glimmer in the chamber of agnes. i observe them with 
joy. i was still gaze upon them, when i perceive a figure draw near 
the window, and the curtain was careful closed to conceal the lamp 
which burn there. convinced by this observation that agnes had not 
abandoned our plan, i return with a light heart to my former station. 

the half-hour struck! the three-quarters struck! my bosom beat high 
with hope and expectation. at length the wished-for sound was heard. 
the bell toll 'one,' and the mansion echo with the noise loud and 
solemn. i look up to the case of the haunt chamber. scarcely 
had five minutes elapsed, when the expect light appeared. i was now 
close to the tower. the window was not so far from the ground but that 
i fancy i perceive a female figure with a lamp in her hand moving 
slow along the apartment. the light soon fade away, and all was 
again dark and gloomy. 

occasional gleam of bright dart from the staircase window as 
the lovely ghost past by them. i trace the light through the hall: 
it reach the portal, and at length i beheld agnes pass through the 
fold gates. she was habit exactly as she had describe the 
spectre. a chaplet of bead hung upon her arm; her head was envelop 
in a long white veil; her nun's dress was stain with blood, and she 
had taken care to provide herself with a lamp and dagger. she advanced 
towards the spot where i stood. i flew to meet her, and clasp her in 
my arms. 

'agnes!' said i while i pressed her to my bosom, 
agnes! agnes! thou art mine! 
agnes! agnes! i am thine! 
in my vein while blood shall roll, 
thou art mine! 
i am thine! 
thine my body! thine my soul! 

terrify and breathless she was unable to speak: she dropt her lamp 
and dagger, and sank upon my bosom in silence. i raise her in my 
arms, and convey her to the carriage. theodore remain behind in 
order to release dame cunegonda. i also charged him with a letter to 
the baroness explain the whole affair, and entreat her good 
offices in reconcile don gaston to my union with his daughter. i 
discover to her my real name: i prove to her that my birth and 
expectations justified my pretend to her niece, and assured her, 
though it was out of my power to return her love, that i would strive 
unceasing to obtain her esteem and friendship. 

i step into the carriage, where agnes was already seated. theodore 
closed the door, and the postillion drove away. at first i was 
delight with the rapid of our progress; but as soon as we were in 
no danger of pursuit, i call to the drivers, and bad them moderate 
their pace. they strove in vain to obey me. the horse refuse to 
answer the rein, and continue to rush on with astonish swiftness. 
the postillion redouble their effort to stop them, but by kick 
and plunge the beast soon release themselves from this restraint. 
utter a loud shriek, the driver were hurl upon the ground. 
immediately thick cloud obscure the sky: the wind howl around us, 
the lightning flashed, and the thunder roar tremendously. never did 
i behold so frightful a tempest! terrify by the jar of contend 
elements, the horse seem every moment to increase their speed. 
nothing could interrupt their career; they drag the carriage through 
hedge and ditches, dashed down the most dangerous precipices, and 
seem to vye in swift with the rapid of the winds. 

all this while my companion lay motionless in my arms. truly alarm 
by the magnitude of the danger, i was in vain attempt to recall her 
to her senses; when a loud crash announced, that a stop was put to our 
progress in the most disagreeable manner. the carriage was shatter to 
pieces. in fall i struck my temple against a flint. the pain of 
the wound, the violence of the shock, and apprehension for the safety 
of agnes combine to overpower me so compleatly, that my senses forsook 
me, and i lay without animation on the ground. 

i probably remain for some time in this situation, since when i 
open my eyes, it was broad daylight. several peasant were standing 
round me, and seem dispute whether my recovery was possible. i 
spoke germany tolerably well. as soon as i could utter an articulate 
sound, i enquire after agnes. what was my surprise and distress, when 
assured by the peasants, that nobody had been seen answer the 
description which i gave of her! they told me that in go to their 
daily labour they had been alarm by observing the fragment of my 
carriage, and by hearing the groan of an horse, the only one of the 
four which remain alive: the other three lay dead by my side. nobody 
was near me when they came up, and much time had been lost, before they 
succeed in recover me. uneasy beyond expression respecting the 
fate of my companion, i besought the peasant to disperse themselves in 
search of her: i describe her dress, and promise immense rewards to 
whoever brought me any intelligence. as for myself, it was impossible 
for me to join in the pursuit: i had broken two of my rib in the fall: 
my arm being dislocate hung useless by my side; and my left leg was 
shatter so terribly, that i never expect to recover its use. 

the peasant comply with my request: all left me except four, who 
made a litter of bough and prepared to convey me to the neighbouring 
town. i enquire its name. it prove to be ratisbon, and i could 
scarcely persuade myself that i had travelled to such a distance in a 
single night. i told the countrymen that at one o'clock that morning i 
had past through the village of rosenwald. they shook their head 
wistfully, and made sign to each other that i must certainly be 
delirious. i was convey to a decent inn and immediately put to bed. 
a physician was sent for, who set my arm with success. he then 
examine my other hurts, and told me that i need be under no 
apprehension of the consequence of any of them; but ordered me to keep 
myself quiet, and be prepared for a tedious and painful cure. i 
answer him that if he hope to keep me quiet, he must first endeavour 
to procure me some news of a lady who had quit rosenwald in my 
company the night before, and had been with me at the moment when the 
coach broke down. he smiled, and only reply by advise me to make 
myself easy, for that all proper care should be taken of me. as he 
quit me, the hostess met him at the door of the room. 

'the gentleman is not quite in his right senses;' i heard him say to 
her in a low voice; ''tis the natural consequence of his fall, but that 
will soon be over.' 

one after another the peasant return to the inn, and informed me 
that no trace had been discover of my unfortunate mistress. 

uneasy now became despair. i entreat them to renew their search 
in the most urgent terms, double the promise which i had already 
made them. my wild and frantic manner confirmed the bye-standers in 
the idea of my being delirious. no sign of the lady have appeared, 
they believe her to be a creature fabricate by my over-heated brain, 
and paid no attention to my entreaties. however, the hostess assured 
me that a fresh enquiry should be made, but i found afterwards that her 
promise was only given to quiet me. no further steps were taken in the 
business. 

though my baggage was left at munich under the care of my france 
servant, have prepared myself for a long journey, my purse was ample 
furnished: besides my equipage prove me to be of distinction, and in 
consequence all possible attention was paid me at the inn. the day 
pass away: still no news arrive of agnes. the anxiety of fear now 
gave place to despondency. i cease to rave about her and was plunge 
in the depth of melancholy reflections. perceive me to be silent and 
tranquil, my attendant believe my delirium to have abated, and that 
my malady had taken a favourable turn. according to the physician's 
order i swallow a compose medicine; and as soon as the night shut 
in, my attendant withdrew and left me to repose. 

that repose i woo in vain. the agitation of my bosom chase away 
sleep. restless in my mind, in spite of the fatigue of my body, i 
continue to toss about from side to side, till the clock in a 
neighbouring steeple struck 'one.' as i listen to the mournful 
hollow sound, and heard it die away in the wind, i felt a sudden 
chill spread itself over my body. i shudder without knowing 
wherefore; cold dew pour down my forehead, and my hair stood 
bristle with alarm. sudden i heard slow and heavy steps ascend 
the staircase. by an involuntary movement i start up in my bed, and 
drew back the curtain. a single rush-light which glimmer upon the 
hearth shed a faint gleam through the apartment, which was hung with 
tapestry. the door was thrown open with violence. a figure entered, 
and drew near my bed with solemn measured steps. with tremble 
apprehension i examine this midnight visitor. god almighty! it was 
the bleeding nun! it was my lost companion! her face was still 
veiled, but she no long held her lamp and dagger. she lift up her 
veil slowly. what a sight present itself to my startle eyes! i 
beheld before me an animate corse. her countenance was long and 
haggard; her cheek and lip were bloodless; the pale of death was 
spread over her features, and her eyeball fixed stedfast upon me 
were lustreless and hollow. 

i gaze upon the spectre with horror too great to be described. my 
blood was frozen in my veins. i would have call for aid, but the 
sound expire ere it could pass my lips. my nerves were bound up in 
impotence, and i remain in the same attitude inanimate as a statue. 

the visionary nun look upon me for some minutes in silence: there was 
something petrify in her regard. at length in a low sepulchral voice 
she pronounced the following words. 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! i am thine! 
in thy vein while blood shall roll, 
i am thine! 
thou art mine! 
mine thy body! mine thy soul!----" 

breathless with fear, i listen while she repeated my own expressions. 
the apparition seat herself opposite to me at the foot of the bed, 
and was silent. her eyes were fixed earnest upon mine: they seem 
endow with the property of the rattlesnake's, for i strove in vain to 
look off her. my eyes were fascinated, and i had not the power of 
withdraw them from the spectre's. 

in this attitude she remain for a whole long hour without speak or 
moving; nor was i able to do either. at length the clock struck two. 
the apparition rose from her seat, and approach the side of the bed. 
she grasp with her icy finger my hand which hung lifeless upon the 
coverture, and pressing her cold lip to mine, again repeated, 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! 
i am thine! &c.----" 

she then drop my hand, quit the chamber with slow steps, and the 
door closed after her. till that moment the faculty of my body had 
been all suspended; those of my mind had alone been waking. the charm 
now cease to operate: the blood which had been frozen in my vein 
rush back to my heart with violence: i utter a deep groan, and sank 
lifeless upon my pillow. 

the adjoin room was only separate from mine by a thin partition: 
it was occupy by the host and his wife: the former was rouze by my 
groan, and immediately hasten to my chamber: the hostess soon 
follow him. with some difficulty they succeed in restore me to 
my senses, and immediately sent for the physician, who arrive in all 
diligence. he declared my fever to be very much increased, and that if 
i continue to suffer such violent agitation, he would not take upon 
him to ensure my life. some medicine which he gave me in some degree 
tranquillize my spirits. i fell into a sort of slumber towards 
daybreak; but fearful dream prevent me from derive any benefit 
from my repose. agnes and the bleeding nun present themselves by 
turn to my fancy, and combine to harass and torment me. i awoke 
fatigue and unrefreshed. my fever seem rather augment than 
diminished; the agitation of my mind impede my fracture bone from 
knitting: i had frequent faint fits, and during the whole day the 
physician judge it expedient not to quit me for two hour together. 

the singular of my adventure made me determine to conceal it from 
every one, since i could not expect that a circumstance so strange 
should gain credit. i was very uneasy about agnes. i knew not what 
she would think at not finding me at the rendezvous, and dread her 
entertaining suspicion of my fidelity. however, i depend upon 
theodore's discretion, and trust that my letter to the baroness would 
convince her of the rectitude of my intentions. these consideration 
somewhat lighten my inquietude upon her account: but the impression 
left upon my mind by my nocturnal visitor grew strong with every 
succeed moment. the night drew near; i dread its arrival. yet i 
strove to persuade myself that the ghost would appear no more, and at 
all event i desire that a servant might sit up in my chamber. 

the fatigue of my body from not have slept on the former night, 
co-operating with the strong opiate administer to me in profusion, 
at length procure me that repose of which i was so much in need. i 
sank into a profound and tranquil slumber, and had already slept for 
some hours, when the neighbouring clock rouze me by striking 'one'. 
its sound brought with it to my memory all the horrors of the night 
before. the same cold shiver seize me. i start up in my bed, 
and perceive the servant fast asleep in an armed-chair near me. i 
call him by his name: he made no answer. i shook him forcibly by 
the arm, and strove in vain to wake him. he was perfectly insensible 
to my efforts. i now heard the heavy steps ascend the staircase; 
the door was thrown open, and again the bleeding nun stood before me. 
once more my limb were chain in second infancy. once more i heard 
those fatal words repeated, 

"raymond! raymond! thou art mine! 
raymond! raymond! i am thine! &c.----" 

the scene which had shock me so sensible on the former night, was 
again presented. the spectre again pressed her lip to mine, again 
touched me with her rot fingers, and as on her first appearance, 
quit the chamber as soon as the clock told 'two.' 

even night was this repeated. far from grow accustomed to the 
ghost, every succeed visit inspired me with greater horror. her idea 
pursue me continually, and i became the prey of habitual melancholy. 
the constant agitation of my mind naturally retarded the 
re-establishment of my health. several month elapse before i was 
able to quit my bed; and when at length i was move to a sopha, i was 
so faint, spiritless, and emaciated, that i could not cross the room 
without assistance. the looks of my attendant sufficient denote 
the little hope, which they entertain of my recovery. the profound 
sadness, which oppress me without remission made the physician 
consider me to be an hypochondriac. the cause of my distress i 
careful conceal in my own bosom, for i knew that no one could give 
me relief: the ghost was not even visible to any eye but mine. i had 
frequent cause attendant to sit up in my room: but the moment that 
the clock struck 'one,' irresistible slumber seize them, nor left them 
till the departure of the ghost. 

you may be surprize that during this time i made no enquiry after 
your sister. theodore, who with difficulty had discover my abode, 
had quiet my apprehension for her safety: at the same time he 
convinced me that all attempt to release her from captivity must be 
fruitless till i should be in a condition to return to spain. the 
particulars of her adventure which i shall now relate to you, were 
partly communicate to me by theodore, and partly by agnes herself. 

on the fatal night when her elope was to have taken place, accident 
had not permit her to quit her chamber at the appoint time. at 
length she venture into the haunt room, descended the staircase 
leading into the hall, found the gate open as she expected, and left 
the castle unobserved. what was her surprize at not finding me ready 
to receive her! she examine the cavern, range through every alley of 
the neighbouring wood, and pass two full hour in this fruitless 
enquiry. she could discover no trace either of me or of the carriage. 
alarm and disappointed, her only resource was to return to the castle 
before the baroness miss her: but here she found herself in a fresh 
embarrassment. the bell had already toll 'two:' the ghostly hour was 
past, and the careful porter had lock the fold gates. after much 
irresolute she venture to knock softly. lucky for her, conrad was 
still awake: he heard the noise and rose, murmur at being call up 
a second time. no soon had he open one of the doors, and beheld 
the supposed apparition wait there for admittance, than he utter a 
loud cry, and sank upon his knees. agnes profit by his terror. she 
glide by him, flew to her own apartment, and have thrown off her 
spectre's trappings, retired to bed endeavour in vain to account for 
my disappearing. 

in the mean while theodore have seen my carriage drive off with the 
false agnes, return joyful to the village. the next morning he 
release cunegonda from her confinement, and accompany her to the 
castle. there he found the baron, his lady, and don gaston, dispute 
together upon the porter's relation. all of them agree in believe 
the existence of spectres: but the latter contended, that for a ghost 
to knock for admittance was a proceeding till then unwitnessed, and 
total incompatible with the immaterial nature of a spirit. they were 
still discuss this subject when the page appear with cunegonda and 
clear up the mystery. on hearing his deposition, it was agree 
unanimous that the agnes whom theodore had seen step into my carriage 
must have been the bleeding nun, and that the ghost who had terrify 
conrad was no other than don gaston's daughter. 

the first surprize which this discovery occasion being over, the 
baroness resolve to make it of use in persuade her niece to take the 
veil. fear lest so advantageous an establishment for his daughter 
should induce don gaston to renounce his resolution, she suppress my 
letter, and continue to represent me as a needy unknown adventurer. a 
childish vanity had led me to conceal my real name even from my 
mistress; i wish to be love for myself, not for being the son and 
heir of the marquis de las cisternas. the consequence was that my rank 
was known to no one in the castle except the baroness, and she took 
good care to confine the knowledge to her own breast. don gaston 
have approve his sister's design, agnes was summon to appear 
before them. she was tax with have meditate an elopement, oblige 
to make a full confession, and was amaze at the gentle with which 
it was received: but what was her affliction, when informed that the 
failure of her project must be attribute to me! cunegonda, tutor by 
the baroness, told her that when i release her, i had desire her to 
inform her lady that our connexion was at an end, that the whole affair 
was occasion by a false report, and that it by no means suit my 
circumstances to marry a woman without fortune or expectations. 

to this account my sudden disappear gave but too great an air of 
probability. theodore, who could have contradict the story, by donna 
rodolpha's order was kept out of her sight: what prove a still 
greater confirmation of my being an impostor, was the arrival of a 
letter from yourself declare that you had no sort of acquaintance 
with alphonso d'alvarada. these seeming proof of my perfidy, aid by 
the artful insinuation of her aunt, by cunegonda's flattery, and her 
father's threat and anger, entire conquer your sister's repugnance 
to a convent. incense at my behaviour, and disgust with the world in 
general, she consent to receive the veil. she past another month at 
the castle of lindenberg, during which my non-appearance confirmed her 
in her resolution, and then accompany don gaston into spain. 
theodore was now set at liberty. he hasten to munich, where i had 
promise to let him hear from me; but finding from luca that i had 
never arrive there, he pursue his search with indefatigable 
perseverance, and at length succeed in rejoin me at ratisbon. 

so much was i altered, that scarcely could he recollect my features: 
the distress visible upon his sufficient testify how lively was the 
interest which he felt for me. the society of this amiable boy, whom i 
had always considered rather as a companion than a servant, was now my 
only comfort. his conversation was gay yet sensible, and his 
observations shrewd and entertaining: he had picked up much more 
knowledge than is usual at his age: but what render him most 
agreeable to me, was his have a delightful voice, and some skill in 
music. he had also acquire some taste in poetry, and even venture 
sometimes to write verse himself. he occasional compose little 
ballad in spanish, his composition were but indifferent, i must 
confess; yet they were pleasing to me from their novelty, and hearing 
him sing them to his guitar was the only amusement, which i was capable 
of receiving. theodore perceive well enough that something prey 
upon my mind; but as i conceal the cause of my grief even from him, 
respect would not permit him to pry into my secrets. 

one evening i was lie upon my sopha, plunge in reflection very far 
from agreeable: theodore amuse himself by observing from the window a 
battle between two postillions, who were quarrel in the inn-yard. 

'ha! ha!' cry he suddenly; 'yonder is the great mogul.' 

'who?' said i. 

'only a man who made me a strange speech at munich.' 

'what was the purport of it?' 

'now you put me in mind of it, segnor, it was a kind of message to you; 
but truly it was not worth delivering. i believe the fellow to be mad, 
for my part. when i came to munich in search of you, i found him 
living at 'the king of the romans,' and the host gave me an odd account 
of him. by his accent he is supposed to be a foreigner, but of what 
country nobody can tell. he seem to have no acquaintance in the 
town, spoke very seldom, and never was seen to smile. he had neither 
servant or baggage; but his purse seem well-furnished, and he did 
much good in the town. some supposed him to be an arabia astrologer, 
other to be a travel mountebank, and many declared that he was 
doctor faustus, whom the devil had sent back to germany. the landlord, 
however told me, that he had the best reason to believe him to be the 
great mogul incognito.' 

'but the strange speech, theodore.' 

'true, i had almost forgotten the speech: indeed for that matter, it 
would not have been a great loss if i had forgotten it altogether. you 
are to know, segnor, that while i was enquiring about you of the 
landlord, this stranger pass by. he stopped, and look at me 
earnestly. 'youth!' said he in a solemn voice, 'he whom you seek, has 
found that which he would fain lose. my hand alone can dry up the 
blood: bid your master wish for me when the clock strikes, 'one.' 

'how?' cry i, start from my sopha. (the words which theodore had 
repeated, seem to imply the stranger's knowledge of my secret) 'fly 
to him, my boy! entreat him to grant me one moment's conversation!' 

theodore was surprise at the vivace of my manner: however, he ask 
no questions, but hasten to obey me. i wait his return 
impatiently. but a short space of time had elapse when he again 
appear and usher the expect guest into my chamber. he was a man 
of majestic presence: his countenance was strong marked, and his 
eyes were large, black, and sparkling: yet there was a something in 
his look which, the moment that i saw him, inspired me with a secret 
awe, not to say horror. he was drest plainly, his hair was unpowdered, 
and a band of black velvet which encircle his forehead spread over his 
features an additional gloom. his countenance wore the mark of 
profound melancholy; his step was slow, and his manner grave, stately, 
and solemn. 

he salute me with politeness; and have reply to the usual 
compliments of introduction, he motion to theodore to quit the 
chamber. the page instantly withdrew. 

'i know your business,' said he, without give me time to speak. 

'i have the power of release you from your nightly visitor; but this 
cannot be done before sunday. on the hour when the sabbath morning 
breaks, spirits of dark have least influence over mortals. after 
saturday the nun shall visit you no more.' 

'may i not enquire,' said i, 'by what means you are in possession of a 
secret which i have careful conceal from the knowledge of everyone?' 

'how can i be ignorant of your distress, when their cause at this 
moment stand beside you?' 

i started. the stranger continued. 

'though to you only visible for one hour in the twenty-four, neither 
day or night do she ever quit you; nor will she ever quit you till 
you have grant her request.' 

'and what is that request?' 

'that she must herself explain: it lie not in my knowledge. wait with 
patience for the night of saturday: all shall be then clear up.' 

i dare not press him further. he soon after change the conversation 
and talk of various matters. he name people who had cease to exist 
for many centuries, and yet with whom he appear to have been 
personally acquainted. i could not mention a country however distant 
which he had not visited, nor could i sufficient admire the extent 
and variety of his information. i remark to him that have 
travelled, seen, and known so much, must have given him infinite 
pleasure. he shook his head mournfully. 

'no one,' he replied, 'is adequate to comprehend the misery of my 
lot! fate oblige me to be constant in movement: i am not permit 
to pass more than a fortnight in the same place. i have no friend in 
the world, and from the restless of my destiny i never can acquire 
one. fain would i lay down my miserable life, for i envy those who 
enjoy the quiet of the grave: but death elude me, and flies from my 
embrace. in vain do i throw myself in the way of danger. i plunge 
into the ocean; the wave throw me back with abhorrence upon the shore: 
i rush into fire; the flame recoil at my approach: i oppose myself to 
the fury of banditti; their sword become blunted, and break against my 
breast: the hungry tiger shudder at my approach, and the alligator 
flies from a monster more horrible than itself. god has set his seal 
upon me, and all his creature respect this fatal mark!' 

he put his hand to the velvet, which was bound round his forehead. 
there was in his eyes an expression of fury, despair, and malevolence, 
that struck horror to my very soul. an involuntary convulsion made me 
shudder. the stranger perceive it. 

'such is the curse impose on me,' he continued: 'i am doom to 
inspire all who look on me with terror and detestation. you already 
feel the influence of the charm, and with every succeed moment will 
feel it more. i will not add to your suffering by my presence. 
farewell till saturday. as soon as the clock strike twelve, expect me 
at your chamber door.' 

have said this he departed, leave me in astonishment at the 
mysterious turn of his manner and conversation. 

his assurance that i should soon be relieved from the apparition's 
visit produce a good effect upon my constitution. theodore, whom i 
rather treat as an adopt child than a domestic, was surprize at 
his return to observe the amendment in my looks. he congratulate me 
on this symptom of return health, and declared himself delight at 
my have received so much benefit from my conference with the great 
mogul. upon enquiry i found that the stranger had already past eight 
days in ratisbon: according to his own account, therefore, he was only 
to remain there six days longer. saturday was still at the distance of 
three. oh! with what impatience did i expect its arrival! in the 
interim, the bleeding nun continue her nocturnal visits; but hope 
soon to be release from them altogether, the effects which they 
produce on me became less violent than before. 

the wished-for night arrived. to avoid create suspicion i retired to 
bed at my usual hour: but as soon as my attendant had left me, i 
dress myself again, and prepared for the stranger's reception. he 
enter my room upon the turn of midnight. a small chest was in his 
hand, which he placed near the stove. he salute me without speaking; 
i return the compliment, observing an equal silence. he then open 
his chest. the first thing which he produce was a small wooden 
crucifix: he sank upon his knees, gaze upon it mournfully, and cast 
his eyes towards heaven. he seem to be pray devoutly. at length 
he bowed his head respectfully, kiss the crucifix thrice, and quit 
his kneel posture. he next drew from the chest a cover goblet: 
with the liquor which it contained, and which appear to be blood, he 
sprinkle the floor, and then dip in it one end of the crucifix, he 
describe a circle in the middle of the room. round about this he 
placed various reliques, sculls, thigh-bones &c; i observed, that he 
disposed them all in the form of crosses. lastly he took out a large 
bible, and beckon me to follow him into the circle. i obeyed. 

'be cautious not to utter a syllable!' whisper the stranger; 'step 
not out of the circle, and as you love yourself, dare not to look upon 
my face!' 

holding the crucifix in one hand, the bible in the other, he seem to 
read with profound attention. the clock struck 'one'! as usual i heard 
the spectre's steps upon the staircase: but i was not seize with the 
accustomed shivering. i wait her approach with confidence. she 
enter the room, drew near the circle, and stopped. the stranger 
mutter some words, to me unintelligible. then raise his head from 
the book, and extend the crucifix towards the ghost, he pronounced 
in a voice distinct and solemn, 

'beatrice! beatrice! beatrice!' 

'what wouldst thou?' reply the apparition in a hollow falter tone. 

'what disturb thy sleep? why dost thou afflict and torture this 
youth? how can rest be restore to thy unquiet spirit?' 

'i dare not tell!--i must not tell!--fain would i repose in my grave, 
but stern command force me to prolong my punishment!' 

'knowest thou this blood? knowest thou in whose vein it flowed? 

beatrice! beatrice! in his name i charge thee to answer me!' 

'i dare not disobey my taskers.' 

'darest thou disobey me?' 

he spoke in a commanding tone, and drew the sable band from his 
forehead. in spite of his injunction to the contrary, curiosity would 
not suffer me to keep my eyes off his face: i raise them, and beheld 
a burning cross impress upon his brow. for the horror with which this 
object inspired me i cannot account, but i never felt its equal! my 
senses left me for some moments; a mysterious dread overcame my 
courage, and had not the exorcise caught my hand, i should have fallen 
out of the circle. 

when i recover myself, i perceive that the burning cross had 
produce an effect no less violent upon the spectre. her countenance 
express reverence, and horror, and her visionary limb were shaken by 
fear. 

'yes!' she said at length; 'i tremble at that mark!--respect it!--i 
obey you! know then, that my bone lie still unburied: they rot in the 
obscurity of lindenberg hole. none but this youth has the right of 
consign them to the grave. his own lip have made over to me his 
body and his soul: never will i give back his promise, never shall he 
know a night devoid of terror, unless he engage to collect my 
moulder bones, and deposit them in the family vault of his 
andalusian castle. then let thirty masses be said for the repose of my 
spirit, and i trouble this world no more. now let me depart! those 
flame are scorching!' 

he let the hand drop slow which held the crucifix, and which till 
then he had pointed towards her. the apparition bowed her head, and 
her form melt into air. the exorcise led me out of the circle. he 
replace the bible &c. in the chest, and then address himself to me, 
who stood near him speechless from astonishment. 

'don raymond, you have heard the conditions on which repose is promise 
you. be it your business to fulfil them to the letter. for me nothing 
more remains than to clear up the dark still spread over the 
spectre's history, and inform you that when living, beatrice bore the 
name of las cisternas. she was the great aunt of your grandfather: in 
quality of your relation, her ashes demand respect from you, though the 
enormity of her crime must excite your abhorrence. the nature of 
those crime no one is more capable of explain to you than myself: 
i was personally acquaint with the holy man who proscribe her 
nocturnal riot in the castle of lindenberg, and i hold this narrative 
from his own lips. 

'beatrice de las cisterna took the veil at an early age, not by her 
own choice, but at the express command of her parents. she was then 
too young to regret the pleasure of which her profession deprived her: 
but no soon did her warm and voluptuous character begin to be 
develop than she abandoned herself freely to the impulse of her 
passions, and seize the first opportunity to procure their 
gratification. this opportunity was at length presented, after many 
obstacle which only add new force to her desires. she contrived to 
elope from the convent, and flee to germany with the baron lindenberg. 
she live at his castle several month as his avowed concubine: all 
bavaria was scandalize by her impudent and abandoned conduct. her 
feast vie in luxury with cleopatra's, and lindenberg became the 
theatre of the most unbridled debauchery. not satisfy with 
display the incontinence of a prostitute, she professed herself an 
atheist: she took every opportunity to scoff at her monastic vows, 
and loaded with ridicule the most sacred ceremony of religion. 

'possessed of a character so depraved, she did not long confine her 
affection to one object. soon after her arrival at the castle, the 
baron's younger brother attract her notice by his strong-marked 
features, gigantic stature, and herculean limbs. she was not of an 
humour to keep her inclination long unknown; but she found in otto von 
lindenberg her equal in depravity. he return her passion just 
sufficient to increase it; and when he had work it up to the 
desire pitch, he fixed the price of his love at his brother's murder. 
the wretch consent to this horrible agreement. a night was pitch 
upon for perpetrate the deed. otto, who reside on a small estate a 
few mile distant from the castle, promise that at one in the morning 
he would be wait for her at lindenberg hole; that he would bring 
with him a party of chosen friends, by whose aid he doubt not being 
able to make himself master of the castle; and that his next step 
should be the unite her hand to his. it was this last promise, which 
overrule every scruple of beatrice, since in spite of his affection 
for her, the baron had declared positively that he never would make her 
his wife. 

'the fatal night arrived. the baron slept in the arms of his 
perfidious mistress, when the castle-bell struck 'one.' immediately 
beatrice drew a dagger from underneath the pillow, and plunge it in 
her paramour's heart. the baron utter a single dreadful groan, and 
expired. the murderess quit her bed hastily, took a lamp in one 
hand, in the other the bloody dagger, and bent her course towards the 
cavern. the porter dare not to refuse opening the gate to one more 
dread in the castle than its master. beatrice reach lindenberg 
hole unopposed, where according to promise she found otto wait for 
her. he received and listen to her narrative with transport: but ere 
she had time to ask why he came unaccompanied, he convinced her that he 
wish for no witness to their interview. anxious to conceal his 
share in the murder, and to free himself from a woman, whose violent 
and atrocious character made him tremble with reason for his own 
safety, he had resolve on the destruction of his wretched agent. 
rush upon her suddenly, he wrest the dagger from her hand: he 
plunge it still reek with his brother's blood in her bosom, and put 
an end to her existence by repeated blows. 

'otto now succeed to the barony of lindenberg. the murder was 
attribute solely to the fugitive nun, and no one suspect him to have 
persuade her to the action. but though his crime was unpunished by 
man, god's justice permit him not to enjoy in peace his 
blood-stained honours. her bone lie still unbury in the cave, the 
restless soul of beatrice continue to inhabit the castle. drest in 
her religious habit in memory of her vow broken to heaven, furnish 
with the dagger which had drank the blood of her paramour, and holding 
the lamp which had guide her flying steps, every night did she stand 
before the bed of otto. the most dreadful confusion reign through the 
castle; the vaulted chambers resound with shriek and groans; and the 
spectre, as she range along the antique galleries, utter an 
incoherent mixture of prayer and blasphemies. otto was unable to 
withstand the shock which he felt at this fearful vision: its horror 
increase with every succeed appearance: his alarm at length became 
so insupportable that his heart burst, and one morning he was found in 
his bed total deprived of warmth and animation. his death did not 
put an end to the nocturnal riots. the bone of beatrice continue to 
lie unburied, and her ghost continue to haunt the castle. 

'the domain of lindenberg now fell to a distant relation. but 
terrify by the account given him of the bleeding nun (so was the 
spectre call by the multitude), the new baron call to his 
assistance a celebrated exorciser. this holy man succeed in obliging 
her to temporary repose; but though she discover to him her history, 
he was not permit to reveal it to others, or cause her skeleton to 
be remove to hallow ground. that office was reserved for you, and 
till your coming, her ghost was doom to wander about the castle and 
lament the crime which she had there committed. however, the exorcise 
oblige her to silence during his lifetime. so long as he existed, the 
haunt chamber was shut up, and the spectre was invisible. at his 
death which happen in five years after, she again appeared, but only 
once on every fifth year, on the same day and at the same hour when she 
plunge her knife in the heart of her sleep lover: she then visit 
the cavern which held her moulder skeleton, return to the castle 
as soon as the clock struck 'two,' and was seen no more till the next 
five years had elapsed. 

'she was doom to suffer during the space of a century. that period 
is past. nothing now remains but to consign to the grave the ashes of 
beatrice. i have been the means of release you from your visionary 
tormentor; and amidst all the sorrow which oppress me, to think that i 
have been of use to you, is some consolation. youth, farewell! may 
the ghost of your relation enjoy that rest in the tomb, which the 
almighty's vengeance has deny to me for ever!' 

here the stranger prepared to quit the apartment. 

'stay yet one moment!' said i; 'you have satisfy my curiosity with 
regard to the spectre, but you leave me in prey to yet greater 
respecting yourself. deign to inform me, to whom i am under such real 
obligations. you mention circumstances long past, and person long 
dead: you were personally acquaint with the exorciser, who by your 
own account has been deceased near a century. how am i to account for 
this? what means that burning cross upon your forehead, and why did 
the sight of it strike such horror to my soul?' 

on these points he for some time refuse to satisfy me. at length 
overcome by my entreaties, he consent to clear up the whole, on 
condition that i would defer his explanation till the next day. with 
this request i was oblige to comply, and he left me. in the morning 
my first care was to enquire after the mysterious stranger. conceive 
my disappointment when informed that he had already quit ratisbon. 
i dispatch messenger in pursuit of him but in vain. no trace of 
the fugitive were discovered. since that moment i never have heard any 
more of him, and 'tis most probable that i never shall.' 

(lorenzo here interrupt his friend's narrative. 

'how?' said he; 'you have never discover who he was, or even form a 
guess?' 

'pardon me,' reply the marquis; 'when i related this adventure to my 
uncle, the cardinal-duke, he told me that he had no doubt of this 
singular man's being the celebrated character known universally by the 
name of 'the wandering jew.' his not being permit to pass more than 
fourteen days on the same spot, the burning cross impress upon his 
forehead, the effect which it produce upon the beholders, and many 
other circumstances give this supposition the colour of truth. the 
cardinal is fully persuade of it; and for my own part i am inclined to 
adopt the only solution which offer itself to this riddle. i return 
to the narrative from which i have digressed.') 

from this period i recover my health so rapid as to astonish my 
physicians. the bleeding nun appear no more, and i was soon able to 
set out for lindenberg. the baron received me with open arms. i 
confide to him the sequel of my adventure; and he was not a little 
pleased to find that his mansion would be no long trouble with the 
phantom's quiennial visits. i was sorry to perceive that absence had 
not weaken donna rodolpha's imprudent passion. in a private 
conversation which i had with her during my short stay at the castle, 
she renew her attempt to persuade me to return her affection. 
regarding her as the primary cause of all my sufferings, i entertain 
for her no other sentiment than disgust. the skeleton of beatrice was 
found in the place which she had mentioned. this being all that i 
sought at lindenberg, i hasten to quit the baron's domains, equally 
anxious to perform the obsequies of the murder nun, and escape the 
importune of a woman whom i detested. i departed, follow by donna 
rodolpha's menace that my contempt should not be long unpunished. 

i now bent my course towards spain with all diligence. luca with my 
baggage had join me during my abode at lindenberg. i arrive in my 
native country without any accident, and immediately proceed to my 
father's castle in andalusia. the remains of beatrice were deposit 
in the family vault, all due ceremony performed, and the number of 
masses said which she had required. nothing now hinder me from 
employ all my endeavour to discover the retreat of agnes. the 
baroness had assured me that her niece had already taken the veil: 
this intelligence i suspect to have been forge by jealousy, and 
hope to find my mistress still at liberty to accept my hand. i 
enquire after her family; i found that before her daughter could reach 
madrid, donna inesilla was no more: you, my dear lorenzo, were said to 
be abroad, but where i could not discover: your father was in a 
distant province on a visit to the duke de medina, and as to agnes, no 
one could or would inform me what was become of her. theodore, 
according to promise, had return to strasbourg, where he found his 
grandfather dead, and marguerite in possession of his fortune. all her 
persuasion to remain with her were fruitless: he quit her a second 
time, and follow me to madrid. he exert himself to the utmost in 
forwarding my search: but our united endeavour were unattended by 
success. the retreat which conceal agnes remain an impenetrable 
mystery, and i began to abandon all hope of recover her. 

about eight month ago i was return to my hotel in a melancholy 
humour, have past the evening at the play-house. the night was dark, 
and i was unaccompanied. plunge in reflection which were far from 
being agreeable, i perceive not that three men had follow me from 
the theatre; till, on turning into an unfrequented street, they all 
attack me at the same time with the utmost fury. i sprang back a few 
paces, drew my sword, and threw my cloak over my left arm. the 
obscurity of the night was in my favour. for the most part the blow 
of the assassins, being aim at random, fail to touch me. i at 
length was fortunate enough to lay one of my adversary at my feet; 
but before this i had already received so many wounds, and was so 
warm pressed, that my destruction would have been inevitable, had not 
the clash of sword call a cavalier to my assistance. he ran 
towards me with his sword drawn: several domestic follow him with 
torches. his arrival made the combat equal: yet would not the bravo 
abandon their design till the servant were on the point of join us. 
they then flee away, and we lost them in the obscurity. 

the stranger now address himself to me with politeness, and enquire 
whether i was wounded. faint with the loss of blood, i could scarcely 
thank him for his seasonable aid, and entreat him to let some of his 
servant convey me to the hotel de las cisternas. i no soon 
mention the name than he profest himself an acquaintance of my 
father's, and declared that he would not permit my being transport to 
such a distance before my wound had been examined. he add that his 
house was hard by, and beg me to accompany him thither. his manner 
was so earnest, that i could not reject his offer, and leaning upon his 
arm, a few minutes brought me to the porch of a magnificent hotel. 

on enter the house, an old grey-headed domestic came to welcome my 
conductor: he enquire when the duke, his master, meant to quit the 
country, and was answer that he would remain there yet some months. 
my deliver then desire the family surgeon to be summon without 
delay. his orders were obeyed. i was seat upon a sopha in a noble 
apartment; and my wound being examined, they were declared to be very 
slight. the surgeon, however, advise me not to expose myself to the 
night air; and the stranger pressed me so earnest to take a bed in 
his house, that i consent to remain where i was for the present. 

being now left alone with my deliverer, i took the opportunity of 
thank him in more express terms, than i had done hitherto: but he 
beg me to be silent upon the subject. 

'i esteem myself happy,' said he, 'in have had it in my power to 
render you this little service; and i shall think myself eternal 
oblige to my daughter for detain me so late at the convent of st. 
clare. the high esteem in which i have ever held the marquis de las 
cisternas, though accident has not permit our being so intimate as i 
could wish, make me rejoice in the opportunity of making his son's 
acquaintance. i am certain that my brother in whose house you now are, 
will lament his not being at madrid to receive you himself: but in the 
duke's absence i am master of the family, and may assure you in his 
name, that every thing in the hotel de medina is perfectly at your 
disposal.' 

conceive my surprize, lorenzo, at discover in the person of my 
preserver don gaston de medina: it was only to be equal by my 
secret satisfaction at the assurance that agnes inhabit the convent 
of st. clare. this latter sensation was not a little weakened, when in 
answer to my seemingly indifferent question he told me that his 
daughter had really taken the veil. i suffer not my grief at this 
circumstance to take root in my mind: i flatter myself with the idea 
that my uncle's credit at the court of rome would remove this obstacle, 
and that without difficulty i should obtain for my mistress a 
dispensation from her vows. buoy up with this hope i calm the 
uneasy of my bosom; and i redouble my endeavour to appear 
grateful for the attention and pleased with the society of don gaston. 

a domestic now enter the room, and informed me that the bravo whom i 
had wound discover some sign of life. i desire that he might be 
carry to my father's hotel, and that as soon as he recover his 
voice, i would examine him respecting his reason for attempt my 
life. i was answer that he was already able to speak, though with 
difficulty: don gaston's curiosity made him press me to interrogate 
the assassin in his presence, but this curiosity i was by no means 
inclined to gratify. one reason was, that doubt from whence the 
blow came, i was unwill to place before don gaston's eyes the guilt 
of a sister: another was, that i fear to be recognize for alphonso 
d'alvarada, and precaution taken in consequence to keep me from the 
sight of agnes. to avow my passion for his daughter, and endeavour to 
make him enter into my schemes, what i knew of don gaston's character 
convinced me would be an imprudent step: and considering it to be 
essential that he should know me for no other than the conde de las 
cisternas, i was determined not to let him hear the bravo's confession. 
i insinuate to him, that as i suspect a lady to be concerned in the 
business, whose name might accidental escape from the assassin, it 
was necessary for me to examine the man in private. don gaston's 
delicacy would not permit his urge the point any longer, and in 
consequence the bravo was convey to my hotel. 

the next morning i took leave of my host, who was to return to the duke 
on the same day. my wound had been so trifling that, except being 
oblige to wear my arm in a sling for a short time, i felt no 
inconvenience from the night's adventure. the surgeon who examine the 
bravo's wound declared it to be mortal: he had just time to confess 
that he had been instigate to murder me by the revengeful donna 
rodolpha, and expire in a few minutes after. 

all my thought were now bent upon get to the speech of my lovely 
nun. theodore set himself to work, and for this time with better 
success. he attack the garden of st. clare so forcibly with bribe 
and promise that the old man was entire gain over to my interests; 
and it was settled that i should be introduce into the convent in the 
character of his assistant. the plan was put into execution without 
delay. disguise in a common habit, and a black patch covering one of 
my eyes, i was present to the lady prioress, who condescend to 
approve of the gardener's choice. i immediately enter upon my 
employment. botany have been a favourite study with me, i was by no 
means at a loss in my new station. for some days i continue to work 
in the convent garden without meeting the object of my disguise: on the 
fourth morning i was more successful. i heard the voice of agnes, and 
was speeding towards the sound, when the sight of the domina stop 
me. i drew back with caution, and conceal myself behind a thick 
clump of trees. 

the prioress advanced and seat herself with agnes on a bench at no 
great distance. i heard her in an angry tone blame her companion's 
continual melancholy: she told her that to weep the loss of any lover 
in her situation was a crime; but that to weep the loss of a faithless 
one was folly and absurd in the extreme. agnes reply in so low a 
voice that i could not distinguish her words, but i perceive that she 
use terms of gentle and submission. the conversation was 
interrupt by the arrival of a young pensioner who informed the domina 
that she was wait for in the parlour. the old lady rose, kiss the 
cheek of agnes, and retired. the newcomer remained. agnes spoke much 
to her in praise of somebody whom i could not make out, but her auditor 
seem highly delighted, and interested by the conversation. the nun 
show her several letters; the other peruse them with evident 
pleasure, obtain permission to copy them, and withdrew for that 
purpose to my great satisfaction. 

no soon was she out of sight, than i quit my concealment. fear 
to alarm my lovely mistress, i drew near her gently, intend to 
discover myself by degrees. but who for a moment can deceive the eyes 
of love? she raise her head at my approach, and recognise me in 
spite of my disguise at a single glance. she rose hasty from her 
seat with an exclamation of surprize, and attempt to retire; but i 
follow her, detain her, and entreat to be heard. persuade of my 
falsehood she refuse to listen to me, and ordered me positively to 
quit the garden. it was now my turn to refuse. i protest that 
however dangerous might be the consequences, i would not leave her till 
she had heard my justification. i assured her that she had been 
deceive by the artifice of her relations; that i could convince her 
beyond the power of doubt that my passion had been pure and 
disinterested; and i ask her what should induce me to seek her in the 
convent, were i influence by the selfish motive which my enemy had 
ascribe to me. 

my prayers, my arguments, and vow not to quit her, till she had 
promise to listen to me, united to her fear lest the nun should see 
me with her, to her natural curiosity, and to the affection which she 
still felt for me in spite of my supposed desertion, at length 
prevailed. she told me that to grant my request at that moment was 
impossible; but she engaged to be in the same spot at eleven that 
night, and to converse with me for the last time. have obtain this 
promise i release her hand, and she flee back with rapid towards 
the convent. 

i communicate my success to my ally, the old gardener: he pointed out 
an hiding place where i might shelter myself till night without fear of 
a discovery. thither i betook myself at the hour when i ought to have 
retired with my supposed master, and wait impatient for the 
appoint time. the chill of the night was in my favour, since it 
kept the other nun confine to their cells. agnes alone was 
insensible of the inclement of the air, and before eleven join me at 
the spot which had witness our former interview. secure from 
interruption, i related to her the true cause of my disappear on the 
fatal fifth of may. she was evidently much affected by my narrative: 
when it was concluded, she confessed the injustice of her suspicions, 
and blame herself for have taken the veil through despair at my 
ingratitude. 

'but now it is too late to repine!' she added; 'the die is thrown: i 
have pronounced my vows, and dedicated myself to the service of heaven. 
i am sensible, how ill i am calculate for a convent. my disgust at a 
monastic life increase daily: ennui and discontent are my constant 
companions; and i will not conceal from you that the passion which i 
formerly felt for one so near being my husband is not yet extinguish 
in my bosom. but we must part! insuperable barrier divide us from 
each other, and on this side the grave we must never meet again!' 

i now exert myself to prove that our union was not so impossible as 
she seem to think it. i vaunt to her the cardinal-duke of lerma's 
influence at the court of rome: i assured her that i should easily 
obtain a dispensation from her vows; and i doubt not but don gaston 
would coincide with my views, when informed of my real name and long 
attachment. agnes reply that since i encourage such an hope, i 
could know but little of her father. liberal and kind in every other 
respect, superstition form the only stain upon his character. upon 
this head he was inflexible; he sacrifice his dearest interests to his 
scruples, and would consider it an insult to suppose him capable of 
authorise his daughter to break her vow to heaven. 

'but suppose,' said i interrupt her; 'suppose that he should 
disapprove of our union; let him remain ignorant of my proceedings, 
till i have rescue you from the prison in which you are now confined. 
once my wife, you are free from his authority: i need from him no 
pecuniary assistance; and when he see his resentment to be unavailing, 
he will doubtless restore you to his favour. but let the worst happen; 
should don gaston be irreconcileable, my relations will vie with each 
other in making you forget his loss: and you will find in my father a 
substitute for the parent of whom i shall deprive you.' 

'don raymond,' reply agnes in a firm and resolute voice, 'i love my 
father: he has treat me harsh in this one instance; but i have 
received from him in every other so many proof of love that his 
affection is become necessary to my existence. were i to quit the 
convent, he never would forgive me; nor can i think that on his 
deathbed he would leave me his curse, without shudder at the very 
idea. besides, i am conscious myself, that my vow are binding: 
wilful did i contract my engagement with heaven; i cannot break it 
without a crime. then banish from your mind the idea of our being ever 
united. i am devoted to religion; and however i may grieve at our 
separation, i would oppose obstacle myself, to what i feel would 
render me guilty.' 

i strove to overrule these ill-grounded scruples: we were still 
dispute upon the subject, when the convent bell summon the nun to 
matins. agnes was oblige to attend them; but she left me not till i 
had compel her to promise that on the following night she would be 
at the same place at the same hour. these meeting continue for 
several week uninterrupted; and 'tis now, lorenzo, that i must implore 
your indulgence. reflect upon our situation, our youth, our long 
attachment: weigh all the circumstances which attend our 
assignations, and you will confess the temptation to have been 
irresistible; you will even pardon me when i acknowledge, that in an 
unguarded moment, the honour of agnes was sacrifice to my passion.' 

(lorenzo's eyes sparkle with fury: a deep crimson spread itself over 
his face. he start from his seat, and attempt to draw his sword. 
the marquis was aware of his movement, and caught his hand: he pressed 
it affectionately. 

'my friend! my brother! hear me to the conclusion! till then restrain 
your passion, and be at least convinced, that if what i have related is 
criminal, the blame must fall upon me, and not upon your sister.' 

lorenzo suffer himself to be prevail upon by don raymond's 
entreaties. he resume his place, and listen to the rest of the 
narrative with a gloomy and impatient countenance. the marquis thus 
continued.) 

'scarcely was the first burst of passion past when agnes, recover 
herself, start from my arms with horror. she call me infamous 
seducer, loaded me with the bitterest reproaches, and beat her bosom in 
all the wild of delirium. ashamed of my imprudence, i with 
difficulty found words to excuse myself. i endeavour to console her; 
i threw myself at her feet, and entreat her forgiveness. she forced 
her hand from me, which i had taken, and would have prest to my lips. 

'touch me not!' she cry with a violence which terrify me; 'monster 
of perfidy and ingratitude, how have i been deceive in you! i look 
upon you as my friend, my protector: i trust myself in your hand 
with confidence, and rely upon your honour, thought that mine ran no 
risque. and 'tis by you, whom i adored, that i am cover with infamy! 
'tis by you that i have been seduce into break my vow to god, that 
i am reduce to a level with the basest of my sex! shame upon you, 
villain, you shall never see me more!' 

she start from the bank on which she was seated. i endeavour to 
detain her; but she disengaged herself from me with violence, and took 
refuge in the convent. 

i retired, fill with confusion and inquietude. the next morning i 
fail not as usual to appear in the garden; but agnes was no where to 
be seen. at night i wait for her at the place where we generally 
met; i found no better success. several days and nights pass away in 
the same manner. at length i saw my offend mistress cross the walk 
on whose border i was working: she was accompany by the same young 
pensioner, on whose arm she seem from weakness oblige to support 
herself. she look upon me for a moment, but instantly turn her 
head away. i wait her return; but she pass on to the convent 
without pay any attention to me, or the penitent looks with which i 
implore her forgiveness. 

as soon as the nun were retired, the old garden join me with a 
sorrowful air. 

'segnor,' said he, 'it grieve me to say, that i can be no long of 
use to you. the lady whom you use to meet has just assured me that if 
i admitted you again into the garden, she would discover the whole 
business to the lady prioress. she bade me tell you also, that your 
presence was an insult, and that if you still possess the least respect 
for her, you will never attempt to see her more. excuse me then for 
inform you that i can favour your disguise no longer. should the 
prioress be acquaint with my conduct, she might not be contented with 
dismiss me her service: out of revenge she might accuse me of 
have profane the convent, and cause me to be thrown into the prison 
of the inquisition.' 

fruitless were my attempt to conquer his resolution. he deny me all 
future entrance into the garden, and agnes persevere in neither 
letting me see or hear from her. in about a fortnight after, a violent 
illness which had seize my father oblige me to set out for andalusia. 
i hasten thither, and as i imagined, found the marquis at the point 
of death. though on its first appearance his complaint was declared 
mortal, he linger out several months; during which my attendance upon 
him during his malady, and the occupation of settle his affair after 
his decease, permit not my quit andalusia. within these four 
days i return to madrid, and on arrive at my hotel, i there found 
this letter wait for me. 

(here the marquis unlock the drawer of a cabinet: he took out a 
fold paper, which he present to his auditor. lorenzo open it, 
and recognise his sister's hand. the contents were as follows. 

into what an abyss of misery have you plunge me! raymond, you force 
me to become as criminal as yourself. i had resolve never to see you 
more; if possible, to forget you; if not, only to remember you with 
hate. a being for whom i already feel a mother's tenderness, solicit 
me to pardon my seducer, and apply to his love for the means of 
preservation. raymond, your child lives in my bosom. i tremble at the 
vengeance of the prioress; i tremble much for myself, yet more for the 
innocent creature whose existence depend upon mine. both of us are 
lost, should my situation be discovered. advise me then what steps to 
take, but seek not to see me. the gardener, who undertake to deliver 
this, is dismissed, and we have nothing to hope from that quarter: the 
man engaged in his place is of incorruptible fidelity. the best means 
of convey to me your answer, is by conceal it under the great 
statue of st. francis, which stand in the capuchin cathedral. thither 
i go every thursday to confession, and shall easily have an opportunity 
of secure your letter. i hear that you are now absent from madrid; 
need i entreat you to write the very moment of your return? i will not 
think it. ah! raymond! mine is a cruel situation! deceive by my 
nearest relations, compel to embrace a profession the duty of 
which i am ill-calculated to perform, conscious of the sanctity of 
those duties, and seduce into violate them by one whom i least 
suspect of perfidy, i am now oblige by circumstances to chuse 
between death and perjury. woman's timidity, and maternal affection, 
permit me not to balance in the choice. i feel all the guilt into 
which i plunge myself, when i yield to the plan which you before 
propose to me. my poor father's death which has taken place since we 
met, has remove one obstacle. he sleep in his grave, and i no long 
dread his anger. but from the anger of god, oh! raymond! who shall 
shield me? who can protect me against my conscience, against myself? 
i dare not dwell upon these thoughts; they will drive me mad. i have 
taken my resolution: procure a dispensation from my vows; i am ready 
to fly with you. write to me, my husband! tell me, that absence has 
not abate your love, tell me that you will rescue from death your 
unborn child, and its unhappy mother. i live in all the agony of 
terror: every eye which is fixed upon me seem to read my secret and 
my shame. and you are the cause of those agonies! oh! when my heart 
first love you, how little did it suspect you of making it feel such 
pangs! 

agnes. 

have peruse the letter, lorenzo restore it in silence. the marquis 
replace it in the cabinet, and then proceeded.) 

'excessive was my joy at reading this intelligence so 
earnestly-desired, so little expected. my plan was soon arranged. 
when don gaston discover to me his daughter's retreat, i entertain 
no doubt of her readiness to quit the convent: i had, therefore, 
entrust the cardinal-duke of lerma with the whole affair, who 
immediately busy himself in obtain the necessary bull. 
fortunately i had afterwards neglect to stop his proceedings. not 
long since i received a letter from him, state that he expect daily 
to receive the order from the court of rome. upon this i would 
willing have relyed: but the cardinal wrote me word, that i must 
find some means of convey agnes out of the convent, unknown to the 
prioress. he doubt not but this latter would be much incense by 
lose a person of such high rank from her society, and consider the 
renunciation of agnes as an insult to her house. he represent her as 
a woman of a violent and revengeful character, capable of proceeding to 
the greatest extremities. it was therefore to be feared, lest by 
confine agnes in the convent she should frustrate my hopes, and 
render the pope's mandate unavailing. influence by this 
consideration, i resolve to carry off my mistress, and conceal her 
till the arrival of the expect bull in the cardinal-duke's estate. 
he approve of my design, and profest himself ready to give a shelter 
to the fugitive. i next cause the new garden of st. clare to be 
seize privately, and confine in my hotel. by this means i became 
master of the key to the garden door, and i had now nothing more to do 
than prepare agnes for the elopement. this was done by the letter, 
which you saw me deliver this evening. i told her in it, that i should 
be ready to receive her at twelve tomorrow night, that i had secure 
the key of the garden, and that she might depend upon a speedy release. 

you have now, lorenzo, heard the whole of my long narrative. i have 
nothing to say in my excuse, save that my intentions towards your 
sister have been ever the most honourable: that it has always been, 
and still is my design to make her my wife: and that i trust, when you 
consider these circumstances, our youth, and our attachment, you will 
not only forgive our momentary lapse from virtue, but will aid me in 
repair my fault to agnes, and secure a lawful title to her person 
and her heart. 



chapter ii 

o you! whom vanity's light bark convey 
on fame's mad voyage by the wind of praise, 
with what a shift gale your course you ply, 
for ever sunk too low, or borne too high! 
who pants for glory find but short repose, 
a breath revive him, and a breath o'er-throws. 
pope. 

here the marquis conclude his adventures. lorenzo, before he could 
determine on his reply, past some moments in reflection. at length he 
broke silence. 

'raymond,' said he taking his hand, 'strict honour would oblige me to 
wash off in your blood the stain thrown upon my family; but the 
circumstances of your case forbid me to consider you as an enemy. the 
temptation was too great to be resisted. 'tis the superstition of my 
relations which has occasion these misfortunes, and they are more the 
offender than yourself and agnes. what has past between you cannot be 
recalled, but may yet be repair by unite you to my sister. you 
have ever been, you still continue to be, my dearest and indeed my only 
friend. i feel for agnes the truest affection, and there is no one on 
whom i would bestow her more willing than on yourself. pursue then 
your design. i will accompany you tomorrow night, and conduct her 
myself to the house of the cardinal. my presence will be a sanction 
for her conduct, and prevent her incur blame by her flight from the 
convent.' 

the marquis thank him in terms by no means deficient in gratitude. 
lorenzo then informed him that he had nothing more to apprehend from 
donna rodolpha's enmity. five month had already elapse since, in an 
excess of passion, she broke a blood-vessel and expire in the course 
of a few hours. he then proceed to mention the interests of antonia. 
the marquis was much surprize at hearing of this new relation: his 
father had carry his hatred of elvira to the grave, and had never 
given the least hint that he knew what was become of his eldest son's 
widow. don raymond assured his friend that he was not mistaken in 
supposing him ready to acknowledge his sister-in-law and her amiable 
daughter. the preparation for the elope would not permit his 
visiting them the next day; but in the meanwhile he desire lorenzo to 
assure them of his friendship, and to supply elvira upon his account 
with any sum which she might want. this the youth promise to do, as 
soon as her abode should be known to him: he then took leave of his 
future brother, and return to the palace de medina. 

the day was already on the point of break when the marquis retired 
to his chamber. conscious that his narrative would take up some hours, 
and wish to secure himself from interrupt on return to the 
hotel, he ordered his attendant not to sit up for him. consequently, 
he was somewhat surprise on enter his antiroom, to find theodore 
establish there. the page sat near a table with a pen in his hand, 
and was so total occupy by his employment that he perceive not his 
lord's approach. the marquis stop to observe him. theodore wrote a 
few lines, then paused, and scratch out a part of the writing: then 
wrote again, smiled, and seem highly pleased with what he had been 
about. at last he threw down his pen, sprang from his chair, and 
clap his hand together joyfully. 

'there it is!' cry he aloud: 'now they are charming!' 

his transport were interrupt by a laugh from the marquis, who 
suspect the nature of his employment. 

'what is so charming, theodore?' 

the youth started, and look round. he blushed, ran to the table, 
seize the paper on which he had been writing, and conceal it in 
confusion. 

'oh! my lord, i knew not that you were so near me. can i be of use to 
you? luca is already gone to bed.' 

'i shall follow his example when i have given my opinion of your 
verses.' 

'my verses, my lord?' 

'nay, i am sure that you have been writing some, for nothing else could 
have kept you awake till this time of the morning. where are they, 
theodore? i shall like to see your composition.' 

theodore's cheek glow with still deep crimson: he long to show 
his poetry, but first chose to be pressed for it. 

'indeed, my lord, they are not worthy your attention.' 

'not these verses, which you just now declared to be so charming? 

come, come, let me see whether our opinion are the same. i promise 
that you shall find in me an indulgent critic.' 

the boy produce his paper with seeming reluctance; but the 
satisfaction which sparkle in his dark expressive eyes betray the 
vanity of his little bosom. the marquis smile while he observe the 
emotion of an heart as yet but little skilled in veil its 
sentiments. he seat himself upon a sopha: theodore, while hope and 
fear contend on his anxious countenance, wait with inquietude for 
his master's decision, while the marquis read the following lines. 

love and age 

the night was dark; the wind blew cold; 
anacreon, grown morose and old, 
sat by his fire, and fed the chearful flame: 
sudden the cottage-door expands, 
and lo! before him cupid stands, 
cast round a friendly glance, and greet him by his name. 

'what is it thou?' the startle sire 
in sullen tone exclaimed, while ire 
with crimson flushed his pale and wrinkle cheek: 
'wouldst thou again with amorous rage 
inflame my bosom? steel by age, 
vain boy, to pierce my breast thine arrow are too weak. 

'what seek you in this desart drear? 
no smile or sports inhabit here; 
ne'er did these val witness dalliance sweet: 
eternal winter bind the plains; 
age in my house despotic reigns, 
my garden boast no flower, my bosom boast no heat. 

'begone, and seek the blooming bower, 
where some ripe virgin court thy power, 
or bid provoking dream flit round her bed; 
on damon's amorous breast repose; 
wanton--on chloe's lip of rose, 
or make her blush cheek a pillow for thy head. 

'be such thy haunts; these regions cold 
avoid! nor think grown wise and old 
this hoary head again thy yoke shall bear: 
remember that my fairest years 
by thee were marked with sigh and tears, 
i think thy friendship false, and shun the guileful snare. 

'i have not yet forgot the pains 
i felt, while bound in julia's chains; 
the ardent flame with which my bosom burned; 
the nights i pass deprived of rest; 
the jealous pang which rack my breast; 
my disappointed hopes, and passion unreturned. 

'then fly, and curse mine eyes no more! 
fly from my peaceful cottage-door! 
no day, no hour, no moment shalt thou stay. 
i know thy falsehood, scorn thy arts, 
distrust thy smiles, and fear thy darts; 
traitor, begone, and seek some other to betray!' 

'does age, old man, your wit confound?' 
reply the offend god, and frowned; 
(his frown was sweet as is the virgin's smile!) 
'do you to me these words address? 
to me, who do not love you less, 
though you my friendship scorn, and pleasure past revile! 

'if one proud fair you chance to find, 
an hundred other nymph were kind, 
whose smile might well for julia's frown atone: 
but such is man! his partial hand 
unnumbered favours write on sand, 
but stamp one little fault on solid lasting stone. 

'ingrate! who led thee to the wave, 
at noon where lesbia love to lave? 
who name the bower alone where daphne lay? 
and who, when caelia shriek for aid, 
bad you with kiss hush the maid? 
what other was't than love, oh! false anacreon, say! 

'then you could call me--"gentle boy! 
"my only bliss! my source of joy!"-- 
then you could prize me dear than your soul! 
could kiss, and dance me on your knees; 
and swear, not wine itself would please, 
had not the lip of love first touched the flowing bowl! 

'must those sweet days return no more? 
must i for aye your loss deplore, 
banish your heart, and from your favour driven? 
ah! no; my fear that smile denies; 
that heave breast, those sparkle eyes 
declare me ever dear and all my fault forgiven. 

'again beloved, esteemed, carest, 
cupid shall in thine arms be prest, 
sport on thy knees, or on thy bosom sleep: 
my torch thine age-struck heart shall warm; 
my hand pale winter's rage disarm, 
and youth and spring shall here once more their revel keep.'-- 

a feather now of golden hue 
he smile from his pinion drew; 
this to the poet's hand the boy commits; 
and straight before anacreon's eyes 
the fairest dream of fancy rise, 
and round his favoured head wild inspiration flits. 

his bosom glow with amorous fire 
eager he grasp the magic lyre; 
swift o'er the tuneful chord his finger move: 
the feather pluck from cupid's wing 
sweep the too-long-neglected string, 
while soft anacreon sing the power and praise of love. 

soon as that name was heard, the wood 
shook off their snows; the melting flood 
broke their cold chains, and winter flee away. 
once more the earth was deckt with flowers; 
mild zephyr breathe through blooming bowers; 
high tower the glorious sun, and pour the blaze of day. 

attract by the harmonious sound, 
sylvan and faun the cot surround, 
and curious crowd the minstrel to behold: 
the wood-nymphs haste the spell to prove; 
eager they run; they list, they love, 
and while they hear the strain, forget the man is old. 

cupid, to nothing constant long, 
perch on the harp attend the song, 
or stifle with a kiss the dulcet notes: 
now on the poet's breast reposes, 
now twine his hoary locks with roses, 
or borne on wings of gold in wanton circle floats. 

then thus anacreon--'i no more 
at other shrine my vow will pour, 
since cupid deign my numbers to inspire: 
from phoebu or the blue-eyed maid 
now shall my verse request no aid, 
for love alone shall be the patron of my lyre. 

'in lofty strain, of early days, 
i spread the king's or hero's praise, 
and struck the martial chord with epic fire: 
but farewell, hero! farewell, king! 
your deed my lip no more shall sing, 
for love alone shall be the subject of my lyre. 


the marquis return the paper with a smile of encouragement. 

'your little poem please me much,' said he; 'however, you must not 
count my opinion for anything. i am no judge of verses, and for my own 
part, never compose more than six lines in my life: those six produce 
so unlucky an effect that i am fully resolve never to compose another. 
but i wander from my subject. i was go to say that you cannot 
employ your time worse than in making verses. an author, whether good 
or bad, or between both, is an animal whom everybody is privileged to 
attack; for though all are not able to write books, all conceive 
themselves able to judge them. a bad composition carry with it its 
own punishment, contempt and ridicule. a good one excite envy, and 
entail upon its author a thousand mortifications. he find himself 
assail by partial and ill-humoured criticism: one man find fault 
with the plan, another with the style, a third with the precept, which 
it strive to inculcate; and they who cannot succeed in finding fault 
with the book, employ themselves in stigmatize its author. they 
malicious rake out from obscurity every little circumstance which may 
throw ridicule upon his private character or conduct, and aim at 
wound the man, since they cannot hurt the writer. in short, to 
enter the lists of literature is wilful to expose yourself to the 
arrow of neglect, ridicule, envy, and disappointment. whether you 
write well or ill, be assured that you will not escape from blame; 
indeed this circumstance contain a young author's chief consolation: 
he remember that lope de vega and calderona had unjust and envious 
critics, and he modest conceive himself to be exactly in their 
predicament. but i am conscious that all these sage observations are 
thrown away upon you. authorship is a mania to conquer which no 
reason are sufficient strong; and you might as easily persuade me 
not to love, as i persuade you not to write. however, if you cannot 
help being occasional seize with a poetical paroxysm, take at least 
the precaution of communicate your verse to none but those whose 
partiality for you secure their approbation.' 

'then, my lord, you do not think these lines tolerable?' said theodore 
with an humble and dejected air. 

'you mistake my meaning. as i said before, they have pleased me much; 
but my regard for you make me partial, and other might judge them 
less favourably. i must still remark that even my prejudice in your 
favour do not blind me so much as to prevent my observing several 
faults. for instance, you make a terrible confusion of metaphors; you 
are too apt to make the strength of your lines consist more in the 
words than sense; some of the verse only seem introduce in order to 
rhyme with others; and most of the best idea are borrow from other 
poets, though possibly you are unconscious of the theft yourself. 
these fault may occasional be excuse in a work of length; but a 
short poem must be correct and perfect.' 

'all this is true, segnor; but you should consider that i only write 
for pleasure.' 

'your defect are the less excusable. their incorrect may be 
forgiven in those who work for money, who are oblige to compleat a 
given task in a given time, and are paid according to the bulk, not 
value of their productions. but in those whom no necessity forces to 
turn author, who merely write for fame, and have full leisure to polish 
their compositions, fault are impardonable, and merit the sharpest 
arrow of criticism.' 

the marquis rose from the sopha; the page look discourage and 
melancholy, and this did not escape his master's observation. 

'however' add he smiling, 'i think that these lines do you no 
discredit. your versification is tolerably easy, and your ear seem to 
be just. the peruse of your little poem upon the whole gave me much 
pleasure; and if it is not ask too great a favour, i shall be highly 
oblige to you for a copy.' 

the youth's countenance immediately clear up. he perceive not the 
smile, half approving, half ironical, which accompany the request, 
and he promise the copy with great readiness. the marquis withdrew to 
his chamber, much amuse by the instantaneous effect produce upon 
theodore's vanity by the conclusion of his criticism. he threw himself 
upon his couch; sleep soon stole over him, and his dream present him 
with the most flatter pictures of happiness with agnes. 

on reach the hotel de medina, lorenzo's first care was to enquire 
for letters. he found several wait for him; but that which he 
sought was not amongst them. leonella had found it impossible to write 
that evening. however, her impatience to secure don christoval's 
heart, on which she flatter herself with have made no slight 
impression, permit her not to pass another day without inform him 
where she was to be found. on her return from the capuchin church, she 
had related to her sister with exultation how attentive an handsome 
cavalier had been to her; as also how his companion had undertaken to 
plead antonia's cause with the marquis de las cisternas. elvira 
received this intelligence with sensation very different from those 
with which it was communicated. she blame her sister's imprudence in 
confiding her history to an absolute stranger, and express her fear 
lest this inconsiderate step should prejudice the marquis against her. 
the greatest of her apprehension she conceal in her own breast. she 
had observe with inquietude that at the mention of lorenzo, a deep 
blush spread itself over her daughter's cheek. the timid antonia dare 
not to pronounce his name: without knowing wherefore, she felt 
embarrass when he was made the subject of discourse, and endeavour 
to change the conversation to ambrosio. elvira perceive the emotion 
of this young bosom: in consequence, she insist upon leonella's 
break her promise to the cavaliers. a sigh, which on hearing this 
order escape from antonia, confirmed the wary mother in her resolution. 

through this resolution leonella was determined to break: she 
conceive it to be inspired by envy, and that her sister dread her 
being elevated above her. without impart her design to anyone, she 
took an opportunity of dispatch the following note to lorenzo; it 
was deliver to him as soon as he woke. 

'doubtless, segnor don lorenzo, you have frequent accused me of 
ingratitude and forgetfulness: but on the word of a virgin, it was out 
of my power to perform my promise yesterday. i know not in what words 
to inform you how strange a reception my sister gave your kind wish to 
visit her. she is an odd woman, with many good points about her; but 
her jealousy of me frequent make her conceive notions quite 
unaccountable. on hearing that your friend had paid some little 
attention to me, she immediately took the alarm: she blame my 
conduct, and has absolutely forbidden me to let you know our abode. my 
strong sense of gratitude for your kind offer of service, and ... 
shall i confess it? my desire to behold once more the too amiable don 
christoval, will not permit my obey her injunctions. i have 
therefore stolen a moment to inform you, that we lodge in the strada di 
san iago, four door from the palace d'albornos, and nearly opposite to 
the barber's miguel coello. enquire for donna elvira dalfa, since in 
compliance with her father-in-law's order, my sister continue to be 
call by her maiden name. at eight this evening you will be sure of 
finding us: but let not a word drop which may raise a suspicion of my 
have written this letter. should you see the conde d'ossorio, tell 
him ... i blush while i declare it ... 

tell him that his presence will be but too acceptable to the 
sympathetic leonella. 

the latter sentence were written in red ink, to express the blush of 
her cheek, while she committed an outrage upon her virgin modesty. 

lorenzo had no soon peruse this note than he set out in search of 
don christoval. not being able to find him in the course of the day, 
he proceed to donna elvira's alone, to leonella's infinite 
disappointment. the domestic by whom he sent up his name, have 
already declared his lady to be at home, she had no excuse for refuse 
his visit: yet she consent to receive it with much reluctance. that 
reluctance was increase by the change which his approach produce in 
antonia's countenance; nor was it by any means abate when the youth 
himself appeared. the symmetry of his person, animation of his 
features, and natural elegance of his manners and address, convinced 
elvira that such a guest must be dangerous for her daughter. she 
resolve to treat him with distant politeness, to decline his service 
with gratitude for the tender of them, and to make him feel, without 
offence, that his future visit would be far from acceptable. 

on his entrance he found elvira, who was indisposed, recline upon a 
sopha: antonia sat by her embroidery frame, and leonella, in a 
pastoral dress, held 'montemayor's diana.' in spite of her being the 
mother of antonia, lorenzo could not help expect to find in elvira 
leonella's true sister, and the daughter of 'as honest a painstaking 
shoe-maker, as any in cordova.' a single glance was sufficient to 
undeceive him. he beheld a woman whose features, though impair by 
time and sorrow, still bore the mark of distinguished beauty: a 
serious dignity reign upon her countenance, but was temper by a 
grace and sweet which render her truly enchanting. lorenzo 
fancy that she must have resemble her daughter in her youth, and 
readily excuse the imprudence of the late conde de las cisternas. she 
desire him to be seated, and immediately resume her place upon the 
sopha. 

antonia received him with a simple reverence, and continue her work: 
her cheek were suffuse with crimson, and she strove to conceal her 
emotion by leaning over her embroidery frame. her aunt also chose to 
play off her airs of modesty; she affected to blush and tremble, and 
wait with her eyes cast down to receive, as she expected, the 
compliments of don christoval. finding after some time that no sign of 
his approach was given, she venture to look round the room, and 
perceive with vexation that medina was unaccompanied. impatience 
would not permit her wait for an explanation: interrupt lorenzo, 
who was deliver raymond's message, she desire to know what was 
become of his friend. 

he, who thought it necessary to maintain himself in her good graces, 
strove to console her under her disappointment by commit a little 
violence upon truth. 

'ah! segnora,' he reply in a melancholy voice 'how grieve will he be 
at lose this opportunity of pay you his respects! a relation's 
illness has oblige him to quit madrid in haste: but on his return, he 
will doubtless seize the first moment with transport to throw himself 
at your feet!' 

as he said this, his eyes met those of elvira: she punish his 
falsehood sufficient by dart at him a look expressive of 
displeasure and reproach. neither did the deceit answer his intention. 
vex and disappointed leonella rose from her seat, and retired in 
dudgeon to her own apartment. 

lorenzo hasten to repair the fault, which had injure him in elvira's 
opinion. he related his conversation with the marquis respecting her: 
he assured her that raymond was prepared to acknowledge her for his 
brother's widow; and that till it was in his power to pay his 
compliments to her in person, lorenzo was commission to supply his 
place. this intelligence relieved elvira from an heavy weight of 
uneasiness: she had now found a protector for the fatherless antonia, 
for whose future fortune she had suffer the greatest apprehensions. 
she was not sparing of her thanks to him who had interfere so 
generous in her behalf; but still she gave him no invitation to 
repeat his visit. 

however, when upon rising to depart he request permission to enquire 
after her health occasionally, the polite earnest of his manner, 
gratitude for his services, and respect for his friend the marquis, 
would not admit of a refusal. she consent reluctantly to receive 
him: he promise not to abuse her goodness, and quit the house. 

antonia was now left alone with her mother: a temporary silence 
ensued. both wish to speak upon the same subject, but neither knew 
how to introduce it. the one felt a bashful which seal up her 
lips, and for which she could not account: the other fear to find 
her apprehension true, or to inspire her daughter with notions to 
which she might be still a stranger. at length elvira began the 
conversation. 

'that is a charming young man, antonia; i am much pleased with him. 
was he long near you yesterday in the cathedral?' 

'he quit me not for a moment while i staid in the church: he gave 
me his seat, and was very obliging and attentive.' 

'indeed? why then have you never mention his name to me? your aunt 
lanche out in praise of his friend, and you vaunt ambrosio's 
eloquence: but neither said a word of don lorenzo's person and 
accomplishments. had not leonella spoken of his readiness to undertake 
our cause, i should not have known him to be in existence.' 

she paused. antonia coloured, but was silent. 

'perhaps you judge him less favourable than i do. in my opinion his 
figure is pleasing, his conversation sensible, and manners engaging. 
still he may have struck you differently: you may think him 
disagreeable, and ...'. 

'disagreeable? oh! dear mother, how should i possibly think him so? i 
should be very ungrateful were i not sensible of his kindness 
yesterday, and very blind if his merit had escape me. his figure is 
so graceful, so noble! his manners so gentle, yet so manly! i never 
yet saw so many accomplishment united in one person, and i doubt 
whether madrid can produce his equal.' 

'why then were you so silent in praise of this phoenix of madrid? 

why was it conceal from me that his society had afford you 
pleasure?' 

'in truth, i know not: you ask me a question which i cannot resolve 
myself. i was on the point of mention him a thousand times: his 
name was constant upon my lips, but when i would have pronounced it, 
i want courage to execute my design. however, if i did not speak of 
him, it was not that i thought of him the less.' 

'that i believe; but shall i tell you why you want courage? it was 
because, accustomed to confide to me your most secret thoughts, you 
knew not how to conceal, yet fear to acknowledge, that your heart 
nourish a sentiment which you were conscious i should disapprove. 
come hither to me, my child.' 

antonia quit her embroidery frame, threw herself upon her knee by 
the sopha, and hid her face in her mother's lap. 

'fear not, my sweet girl! consider me equally as your friend and 
parent, and apprehend no reproof from me. i have read the emotion of 
your bosom; you are yet ill-skilled in conceal them, and they could 
not escape my attentive eye. this lorenzo is dangerous to your repose; 
he has already made an impression upon your heart. 'tis true that i 
perceive easily that your affection is returned; but what can be the 
consequence of this attachment? you are poor and friendless, my 
antonia; lorenzo is the heir of the duke of medina celi. even should 
himself mean honourably, his uncle never will consent to your union; 
nor without that uncle's consent, will i. by sad experience i know 
what sorrow she must endure, who marry into a family unwill to 
receive her. then struggle with your affection: whatever pains it may 
cost you, strive to conquer it. your heart is tender and susceptible: 
it has already received a strong impression; but when once convinced 
that you should not encourage such sentiments, i trust, that you have 
sufficient fortitude to drive them from your bosom.' 

antonia kiss her hand, and promise implicit obedience. elvira then 
continued. 

'to prevent your passion from grow stronger, it will be needful to 
prohibit lorenzo's visits. the service which he has render me 
permit not my forbidding them positively; but unless i judge too 
favourable of his character, he will discontinue them without taking 
offence, if i confess to him my reasons, and throw myself entire on 
his generosity. the next time that i see him, i will honestly avow to 
him the embarrassment which his presence occasions. how say you, my 
child? is not this measure necessary?' 

antonia subscribe to every thing without hesitation, though not 
without regret. her mother kiss her affectionately, and retired to 
bed. antonia follow her example, and vow so frequent never more 
to think of lorenzo, that till sleep closed her eyes she thought of 
nothing else. 

while this was passing at elvira's, lorenzo hasten to rejoin the 
marquis. every thing was ready for the second elope of agnes; and 
at twelve the two friends with a coach and four were at the garden wall 
of the convent. don raymond drew out his key, and unlock the door. 
they entered, and wait for some time in expectation of being join 
by agnes. at length the marquis grew impatient: beginning to fear 
that his second attempt would succeed no better than the first, he 
propose to reconnoitre the convent. the friends advanced towards it. 
every thing was still and dark. the prioress was anxious to keep the 
story a secret, fear lest the crime of one of its member should 
bring disgrace upon the whole community, or that the interposition of 
powerful relations should deprive her vengeance of its intended victim. 
she took care therefore to give the lover of agnes no cause to suppose 
that his design was discovered, and his mistress on the point of 
suffering the punishment of her fault. the same reason made her reject 
the idea of arrest the unknown seduce in the garden; such a 
proceeding would have create much disturbance, and the disgrace of her 
convent would have been noise about madrid. she contented herself 
with confine agnes closely; as to the lover, she left him at liberty 
to pursue his designs. what she had expect was the result. the 
marquis and lorenzo wait in vain till the break of day: they then 
retired without noise, alarm at the failure of their plan, and 
ignorant of the cause of its ill-success. 

the next morning lorenzo went to the convent, and request to see his 
sister. the prioress appear at the grate with a melancholy 
countenance: she informed him that for several days agnes had appear 
much agitated; that she had been prest by the nun in vain to reveal 
the cause, and apply to their tender for advice and consolation; 
that she had obstinate persist in conceal the cause of her 
distress; but that on thursday evening it had produce so violent an 
effect upon her constitution, that she had fallen ill, and was actually 
confine to her bed. lorenzo did not credit a syllable of this 
account: he insist upon seeing his sister; if she was unable to come 
to the grate, he desire to be admitted to her cell. the prioress 
cross herself! she was shock at the very idea of a man's profane 
eye pervade the interior of her holy mansion, and professed herself 
astonish that lorenzo could think of such a thing. she told him that 
his request could not be granted; but that if he return the next day, 
she hope that her beloved daughter would then be sufficient 
recover to join him at the parlour grate. 

with this answer lorenzo was oblige to retire, unsatisfy and 
tremble for his sister's safety. 

he return the next morning at an early hour. 'agnes was worse; the 
physician had pronounced her to be in imminent danger; she was ordered 
to remain quiet, and it was utterly impossible for her to receive her 
brother's visit.' lorenzo storm at this answer, but there was no 
resource. he raved, he entreated, he threatened: no means were left 
untry to obtain a sight of agnes. his endeavour were as fruitless 
as those of the day before, and he return in despair to the marquis. 
on his side, the latter had spare no pains to discover what had 
occasion his plot to fail: don christoval, to whom the affair was 
now entrusted, endeavour to worm out the secret from the old 
porteress of st. clare, with whom he had form an acquaintance; but 
she was too much upon her guard, and he gain from her no 
intelligence. the marquis was almost distracted, and lorenzo felt 
scarcely less inquietude. both were convinced that the purpose 
elope must have been discovered: they doubt not but the malady 
of agnes was a pretence, but they knew not by what means to rescue her 
from the hand of the prioress. 

regularly every day did lorenzo visit the convent: as regularly was he 
informed that his sister rather grew worse than better. certain that 
her indisposition was feigned, these account did not alarm him: but 
his ignorance of her fate, and of the motive which induce the 
prioress to keep her from him, excited the most serious uneasiness. he 
was still uncertain what steps he ought to take, when the marquis 
received a letter from the cardinal-duke of lerma. it inclose the 
pope's expect bull, order that agnes should be release from her 
vows, and restore to her relations. this essential paper decided at 
once the proceedings of her friends: they resolve that lorenzo should 
carry it to the domina without delay, and demand that his sister should 
be instantly given up to him. against this mandate illness could not 
be pleaded: it gave her brother the power of remove her instantly to 
the palace de medina, and he determined to use that power on the 
following day. 

his mind relieved from inquietude respecting his sister, and his 
spirits raise by the hope of soon restore her to freedom, he now had 
time to give a few moments to love and to antonia. at the same hour as 
on his former visit he repair to donna elvira's: she had given 
orders for his admission. as soon as he was announced, her daughter 
retired with leonella, and when he enter the chamber, he found the 
lady of the house alone. she received him with less distance than 
before, and desire him to place himself near her upon the sopha. she 
then without lose time open her business, as had been agree 
between herself and antonia. 

'you must not think me ungrateful, don lorenzo, or forgetful how 
essential are the service which you have render me with the marquis. 
i feel the weight of my obligations; nothing under the sun should 
induce my taking the step to which i am now compel but the interest 
of my child, of my beloved antonia. my health is declining; god only 
know how soon i may be summon before his throne. my daughter will 
be left without parents, and should she lose the protection of the 
cisterna family, without friends. 

she is young and artless, uninstructed in the world's perfidy, and with 
charm sufficient to render her an object of seduction. judge then, how 
i must tremble at the prospect before her! judge how anxious i must be 
to keep her from their society who may excite the yet dormant passion 
of her bosom. you are amiable, don lorenzo: antonia has a 
susceptible, a loving heart, and is grateful for the favours confer 
upon us by your interference with the marquis. your presence make me 
tremble: i fear lest it should inspire her with sentiment which may 
embitter the remainder of her life, or encourage her to cherish hope 
in her situation unjustifiable and futile. pardon me when i avow my 
terrors, and let my frank plead in my excuse. i cannot forbid you 
my house, for gratitude restrain me; i can only throw myself upon your 
generosity, and entreat you to spare the feelings of an anxious, of a 
doting mother. believe me when i assure you that i lament the 
necessity of reject your acquaintance; but there is no remedy, and 
antonia's interest oblige me to beg you to forbear your visits. by 
comply with my request, you will increase the esteem which i already 
feel for you, and of which everything convince me that you are truly 
deserving.' 

'your frank charm me,' reply lorenzo; 'you shall find that in 
your favourable opinion of me you were not deceived. yet i hope that 
the reasons, now in my power to allege, will persuade you to withdraw a 
request which i cannot obey without infinite reluctance. i love your 
daughter, love her most sincerely: i wish for no greater happiness 
than to inspire her with the same sentiments, and receive her hand at 
the altar as her husband. 'tis true, i am not rich myself; my father's 
death has left me but little in my own possession; but my expectations 
justify my pretend to the conde de las cisternas' daughter.' 

he was proceeding, but elvira interrupt him. 

'ah! don lorenzo, you forget in that pompous title the mean of my 
origin. you forget that i have now past fourteen years in spain, 
disavow by my husband's family, and existing upon a stipend barely 
sufficient for the support and education of my daughter. nay, i have 
even been neglect by most of my own relations, who out of envy affect 
to doubt the reality of my marriage. my allowance being discontinue 
at my father-in-law's death, i was reduce to the very brink of want. 
in this situation i was found by my sister, who amongst all her foible 
possess a warm, generous, and affectionate heart. she aid me with 
the little fortune which my father left her, persuade me to visit 
madrid, and has support my child and myself since our quit 
murcia. then consider not antonia as descended from the conde de la 
cisternas: consider her as a poor and unprotected orphan, as the 
grand-child of the tradesman torribio dalfa, as the needy pensioner of 
that tradesman's daughter. reflect upon the difference between such a 
situation, and that of the nephew and heir of the potent duke of 
medina. i believe your intentions to be honourable; but as there are 
no hope that your uncle will approve of the union, i foresee that the 
consequence of your attachment must be fatal to my child's repose.' 

'pardon me, segnora; you are misinform if you suppose the duke of 
medina to resemble the generality of men. his sentiment are liberal 
and disinterested: he love me well; and i have no reason to dread his 
forbidding the marriage when he perceive that my happiness depend 
upon antonia. but supposing him to refuse his sanction, what have i 
still to fear? my parent are no more; my little fortune is in my own 
possession: it will be sufficient to support antonia, and i shall 
exchange for her hand medina's dukedom without one sigh of regret.' 

'you are young and eager; it is natural for you to entertain such 
ideas. but experience has taught me to my cost that curse accompany 
an unequal alliance. i married the conde de las cisterna in 
opposition to the will of his relations; many an heart-pang has 
punish me for the imprudent step. whereever we bent our course, a 
father's execrate pursue gonzalvo. poverty overtook us, and no 
friend was near to relieve our wants. still our mutual affection 
existed, but alas! not without interruption. 

accustomed to wealth and ease, ill could my husband support the 
transition to distress and indigence. he look back with repine to 
the comfort which he once enjoyed. he regret the situation which 
for my sake he had quitted; and in moments when despair possessed his 
mind, has reproach me with have made him the companion of want and 
wretchedness! he has call me his bane! the source of his sorrows, 
the cause of his destruction! ah god! he little knew how much keen 
were my own heart's reproaches! he was ignorant that i suffer 
trebly, for myself, for my children, and for him! 'tis true that his 
anger seldom last long: his sincere affection for me soon revive in 
his heart; and then his repentance for the tear which he had made me 
shed torture me even more than his reproaches. he would throw himself 
on the ground, implore my forgiveness in the most frantic terms, and 
load himself with curse for being the murder of my repose. taught 
by experience that an union contract against the inclination of 
family on either side must be unfortunate, i will save my daughter 
from those misery which i have suffered. without your uncle's 
consent, while i live, she never shall be yours. undoubted he will 
disapprove of the union; his power is immense, and antonia shall not be 
expose to his anger and persecution.' 

'his persecution? how easily may that be avoided! let the worst 
happen, it is but quit spain. my wealth may easily be realised; 
the indian island will offer us a secure retreat; i have an estate, 
though not of value, in hispaniola: thither will we fly, and i shall 
consider it to be my native country, if it give me antonia's 
undisturbed possession.' 

'ah! youth, this is a fond romantic vision. gonzalvo thought the same. 
he fancy that he could leave spain without regret; but the moment of 
parting undeceive him. you know not yet what it is to quit your 
native land; to quit it, never to behold it more! 

you know not, what it is to exchange the scene where you have pass 
your infancy, for unknown realm and barbarous climates! to be 
forgotten, utterly eternal forgotten, by the companion of your 
youth! to see your dearest friends, the fondest object of your 
affection, perishing with disease incidental to indian atmospheres, 
and find yourself unable to procure for them necessary assistance! i 
have felt all this! my husband and two sweet babe found their grave 
in cuba: nothing would have save my young antonia but my sudden 
return to spain. ah! don lorenzo, could you conceive what i suffer 
during my absence! could you know how sorely i regret all that i 
left behind, and how dear to me was the very name of spain! i envy 
the wind which blew towards it: and when the spain sailor chaunte 
some well-known air as he past my window, tear fill my eyes while i 
thought upon my native land. gonzalvo too ... my husband ...'. 

elvira paused. her voice faltered, and she conceal her face with her 
handkerchief. after a short silence she rose from the sopha, and 
proceeded. 

'excuse my quit you for a few moments: the remembrance of what i 
have suffer has much agitate me, and i need to be alone. till i 
return peruse these lines. after my husband's death i found them among 
his papers; had i known soon that he entertain such sentiments, 
grief would have kill me. he wrote these verse on his voyage to 
cuba, when his mind was cloud by sorrow, and he forgot that he had a 
wife and children. 

what we are losing, ever seem to us the most precious: gonzalvo was 
quit spain for ever, and therefore was spain dear to his eyes 
than all else which the world contained. read them, don lorenzo; they 
will give you some idea of the feelings of a banish man!' 

elvira put a paper into lorenzo's hand, and retired from the chamber. 
the youth examine the contents, and found them to be as follows. 

the exile 

farewell, oh! native spain! farewell for ever! 
these banish eyes shall view thy coast no more; 
a mournful presage tell my heart, that never 
gonzalvo's steps again shall press thy shore. 

hush are the winds; while soft the vessel sailing 
with gentle motion plow the unruffled main, 
i feel my bosom's boast courage failing, 
and curse the wave which bear me far from spain. 

i see it yet! beneath yon blue clear heaven 
still do the spires, so well beloved, appear; 
from yonder craggy point the gale of even 
still waft my native accent to mine ear: 

prop on some moss-crowned rock, and gaily singing, 
there in the sun his nets the fisher dries; 
oft have i heard the plaintive ballad, bring 
scene of past joy before my sorrow eyes. 

ah! happy swain! he waits the accustomed hour, 
when twilight-gloom obscure the close sky; 
then gladly seek his love paternal bower, 
and shares the feast his native field supply: 

friendship and love, his cottage guests, receive him 
with honest welcome and with smile sincere; 
no threaten woe of present joy bereave him, 
no sigh his bosom owns, his cheek no tear. 

ah! happy swain! such bliss to me denying, 
fortune thy lot with envy bid me view; 
me, who from home and spain an exile flying, 
bid all i value, all i love, adieu. 

no more mine ear shall list the well-known ditty 
sung by some mountain-girl, who tend her goats, 
some village-swain implore amorous pity, 
or shepherd chaunt wild his rustic notes: 

no more my arms a parent's fond embraces, 
no more my heart domestic calm, must know; 
far from these joys, with sigh which memory traces, 
to sultry skies, and distant clime i go. 

where indian sun engender new diseases, 
where snake and tiger breed, i bend my way 
to brave the feverish thirst no art appeases, 
the yellow plague, and mad blaze of day: 

but not to feel slow pang consume my liver, 
to die by piece-meal in the bloom of age, 
my boil blood drank by insatiate fever, 
and brain delirious with the day-star's rage, 

can make me know such grief, as thus to sever 
with many a bitter sigh, dear land, from thee; 
to feel this heart must doat on thee for ever, 
and feel, that all thy joy are torn from me! 

ah me! how oft will fancy's spell in slumber 
recall my native country to my mind! 
how oft regret will bid me sadly number 
each lost delight and dear friend left behind! 

wild murcia's vales, and love romantic bowers, 
the river on whose bank a child i played, 
my castle's antient halls, its frown towers, 
each much-regretted wood, and well-known glade, 

dream of the land where all my wish centre, 
thy scenes, which i am doom no more to know, 
full oft shall memory trace, my soul's tormentor, 
and turn each pleasure past to present woe. 

but lo! the sun beneath the wave retires; 
night speed apace her empire to restore: 
cloud from my sight obscure the village-spires, 
now seen but faintly, and now seen no more. 

oh! breathe not, winds! still be the water's motion! 
sleep, sleep, my bark, in silence on the main! 
so when to-morrow's light shall gild the ocean, 
once more mine eyes shall see the coast of spain. 

vain is the wish! my last petition scorning, 
fresh blow the gale, and high the billow swell: 
far shall we be before the break of morning; 
oh! then for ever, native spain, farewell! 


lorenzo had scarcely time to read these lines, when elvira return to 
him: the give a free course to her tear had relieved her, and her 
spirits had regain their usual composure. 

'i have nothing more to say, my lord,' said she; 'you have heard my 
apprehensions, and my reason for beg you not to repeat your 
visits. i have thrown myself in full confidence upon your honour: i 
am certain that you will not prove my opinion of you to have been too 
favourable.' 

'but one question more, segnora, and i leave you. should the duke of 
medina approve my love, would my address be unacceptable to yourself 
and the fair antonia?' 

'i will be open with you, don lorenzo: there being little probability 
of such an union taking place, i fear that it is desire but too 
ardent by my daughter. you have made an impression upon her young 
heart, which give me the most serious alarm: to prevent that 
impression from grow stronger, i am oblige to decline your 
acquaintance. for me, you may be sure that i should rejoice at 
establish my child so advantageously. conscious that my 
constitution, impair by grief and illness, forbid me to expect a 
long continuance in this world, i tremble at the thought of leave her 
under the protection of a perfect stranger. the marquis de las 
cisterna is total unknown to me: 

he will marry; his lady may look upon antonia with an eye of 
displeasure, and deprive her of her only friend. should the duke, your 
uncle, give his consent, you need not doubt obtain mine, and my 
daughter's: but without his, hope not for ours. at all events, what 
ever steps you may take, what ever may be the duke's decision, till you 
know it let me beg your forbearing to strengthen by your presence 
antonia's prepossession. if the sanction of your relations authorise 
your address her as your wife, my door fly open to you: if that 
sanction is refused, be satisfy to possess my esteem and gratitude, 
but remember, that we must meet no more.' 

lorenzo promise reluctantly to conform to this decree: but he add 
that he hope soon to obtain that consent which would give him a claim 
to the renewal of their acquaintance. he then explain to her why the 
marquis had not call in person, and made no scruple of confiding to 
her his sister's history. he conclude by saying that he hope to set 
agnes at liberty the next day; and that as soon as don raymond's fear 
were quiet upon this subject, he would lose no time in assure donna 
elvira of his friendship and protection. 

the lady shook her head. 

'i tremble for your sister,' said she; 'i have heard many trait of the 
domina of st. clare's character, from a friend who was educated in the 
same convent with her. she report her to be haughty, inflexible, 
superstitious, and revengeful. i have since heard that she is 
infatuated with the idea of rendering her convent the most regular in 
madrid, and never forgave those whose imprudence threw upon it the 
slightest stain. though naturally violent and severe, when her 
interests require it, she well know how to assume an appearance of 
benignity. she leaves no means untry to persuade young women of rank 
to become member of her community: she is implacable when once 
incensed, and has too much intrepid to shrink at taking the most 
rigorous measure for punishing the offender. doubtless, she will 
consider your sister's quit the convent as a disgrace thrown upon 
it: she will use every artifice to avoid obey the mandate of his 
holiness, and i shudder to think that donna agnes is in the hand of 
this dangerous woman.' 

lorenzo now rose to take leave. elvira gave him her hand at parting, 
which he kiss respectfully; and telling her that he soon hope for 
the permission to salute that of antonia, he return to his hotel. 
the lady was perfectly satisfy with the conversation which had past 
between them. she look forward with satisfaction to the prospect of 
his becoming her son-in-law; but prudence bad her conceal from her 
daughter's knowledge the flatter hope which herself now venture to 
entertain. 

scarcely was it day, and already lorenzo was at the convent of st. 
clare, furnish with the necessary mandate. the nun were at matins. 
he wait impatient for the conclusion of the service, and at length 
the prioress appear at the parlour grate. agnes was demanded. the 
old lady replied, with a melancholy air, that the dear child's 
situation grew hourly more dangerous; that the physician despair of 
her life; but that they had declared the only chance for her recovery 
to consist in keeping her quiet, and not to permit those to approach 
her whose presence was likely to agitate her. not a word of all this 
was believe by lorenzo, any more than he credit the expression of 
grief and affection for agnes, with which this account was interlarded. 
to end the business, he put the pope's bull into the hand of the 
domina, and insist that, ill or in health, his sister should be 
deliver to him without delay. 

the prioress received the paper with an air of humility: but no soon 
had her eye glance over the contents, than her resentment baffle all 
the effort of hypocrisy. a deep crimson spread itself over her face, 
and she dart upon lorenzo looks of rage and menace. 

'this order is positive,' said she in a voice of anger, which she in 
vain strove to disguise; 'willingly would i obey it; but unfortunately 
it is out of my power.' 

lorenzo interrupt her by an exclamation of surprize. 

'i repeat it, segnor; to obey this order is total out of my power. 
from tender to a brother's feelings, i would have communicate the 
sad event to you by degrees, and have prepared you to hear it with 
fortitude. my measure are broken through: this order command me to 
deliver up to you the sister agnes without delay; i am therefore 
oblige to inform you without circumlocution, that on friday last, she 
expired.' 

lorenzo start back with horror, and turn pale. a moment's 
recollection convinced him that this assertion must be false, and it 
restore him to himself. 

'you deceive me!' said he passionately; 'but five minutes past since 
you assured me that though ill she was still alive. produce her this 
instant! see her i must and will, and every attempt to keep her from 
me will be unavailing.' 

'you forget yourself, segnor; you owe respect to my age as well as my 
profession. your sister is no more. if i at first conceal her 
death, it was from dread lest an event so unexpected should produce 
on you too violent an effect. in truth, i am but ill repaid for my 
attention. and what interest, i pray you, should i have in detain 
her? to know her wish of quit our society is a sufficient reason 
for me to wish her absence, and think her a disgrace to the sisterhood 
of st. clare: but she has forfeit my affection in a manner yet more 
culpable. her crime were great, and when you know the cause of her 
death, you will doubtless rejoice, don lorenzo, that such a wretch is 
no long in existence. she was taken ill on thursday last on 
return from confession in the capuchin chapel. her malady seem 
attend with strange circumstances; but she persist in conceal 
its cause: thanks to the virgin, we were too ignorant to suspect it! 
judge then what must have been our consternation, our horror, when she 
was deliver the next day of a stillborn child, whom she immediately 
follow to the grave. how, segnor? is it possible that your 
countenance express no surprize, no indignation? is it possible that 
your sister's infamy was known to you, and that still she possessed 
your affection? in that case, you have no need of my compassion. i 
can say nothing more, except repeat my inability of obey the orders 
of his holiness. agnes is no more, and to convince you that what i say 
is true, i swear by our blessed saviour, that three days have past 
since she was buried.' 

here she kiss a small crucifix which hung at her girdle. she then 
rose from her chair, and quit the parlour. as she withdrew, she 
cast upon lorenzo a scornful smile. 

'farewell, segnor,' said she; 'i know no remedy for this accident: i 
fear that even a second bull from the pope will not procure your 
sister's resurrection.' 

lorenzo also retired, penetrate with affliction: but don raymond's at 
the news of this event amount to madness. he would not be convinced 
that agnes was really dead, and continue to insist that the wall of 
st. clare still confine her. no argument could make him abandon his 
hope of regain her: every day some fresh scheme was invent for 
procure intelligence of her, and all of them were attend with the 
same success. 

on his part, medina gave up the idea of ever seeing his sister more: 
yet he believe that she had been taken off by unfair means. under 
this persuasion, he encourage don raymond's researches, determined, 
should he discover the least warrant for his suspicions, to take a 
severe vengeance upon the unfeeling prioress. the loss of his sister 
affected him sincerely; nor was it the least cause of his distress that 
propriety oblige him for some time to defer mention antonia to the 
duke. in the meanwhile his emissary constant surround elvira's 
door. he had intelligence of all the movements of his mistress: as she 
never fail every thursday to attend the sermon in the capuchin 
cathedral, he was secure of seeing her once a week, though in 
compliance with his promise, he careful shun her observation. 
thus two long month pass away. still no information was procure of 
agnes: all but the marquis credit her death; and now lorenzo 
determined to disclose his sentiment to his uncle. he had already 
dropt some hint of his intention to marry; they had been as favourable 
received as he could expect, and he harbour no doubt of the success 
of his application. 



chapter iii 

while in each other's arms entrance they lay, 
they blessed the night, and curst the coming day. 
lee. 

the burst of transport was past: ambrosio's lust was satisfied; 
pleasure fled, and shame usurp her seat in his bosom. confuse and 
terrify at his weakness, he drew himself from matilda's arms. his 
perjury present itself before him: he reflect on the scene which 
had just been acted, and tremble at the consequence of a discovery. 
he look forward with horror; his heart was despondent, and became the 
abode of satiety and disgust. he avoid the eyes of his partner in 
frailty; a melancholy silence prevailed, during which both seem 
busy with disagreeable reflections. 

matilda was the first to break it. she took his hand gently, and 
pressed it to her burning lips. 

'ambrosio!' she murmur in a soft and tremble voice. 

the abbot start at the sound. he turn his eyes upon matilda's: 
they were fill with tears; her cheek were cover with blushes, and 
her supplicate looks seem to solicit his compassion. 

'dangerous woman!' said he; 'into what an abyss of misery have you 
plunge me! should your sex be discovered, my honour, nay my life, 
must pay for the pleasure of a few moments. fool that i was, to trust 
myself to your seductions! what can now be done? how can my offence be 
expiated? what atone can purchase the pardon of my crime? 
wretched matilda, you have destroy my quiet for ever!' 

'to me these reproaches, ambrosio? to me, who have sacrifice for you 
the world's pleasures, the luxury of wealth, the delicacy of sex, my 
friends, my fortune, and my fame? what have you lost, which i 
preserved? have _i_ not share in your guilt? have you not share in 
my pleasure? guilt, did i say? in what consist ours, unless in the 
opinion of an ill-judging world? let that world be ignorant of them, 
and our joy become divine and blameless! unnatural were your vow of 
celibacy; man was not create for such a state; and were love a crime, 
god never would have made it so sweet, so irresistible! then banish 
those cloud from your brow, my ambrosio! indulge in those pleasure 
freely, without which life is a worthless gift: cease to reproach me 
with have taught you what is bliss, and feel equal transport with 
the woman who adore you!' 

as she spoke, her eyes were fill with a delicious languor. her bosom 
panted: she twin her arms voluptuous round him, drew him towards 
her, and glewe her lip to his. ambrosio again rage with desire: 
the die was thrown: his vow were already broken; he had already 
committed the crime, and why should he refrain from enjoy its 
reward? he clasp her to his breast with redouble ardour. no long 
repressed by the sense of shame, he gave a loose to his intemperate 
appetites. while the fair wanton put every invention of lust in 
practice, every refinement in the art of pleasure which might heighten 
the bliss of her possession, and render her lover's transport still 
more exquisite, ambrosio riot in delight till then unknown to him: 
swift flee the night, and the morning blush to behold him still 
clasp in the embrace of matilda. 

intoxicate with pleasure, the monk rose from the syren's luxurious 
couch. he no long reflect with shame upon his incontinence, or 
dread the vengeance of offend heaven. his only fear was lest death 
should rob him of enjoyments, for which his long fast had only given a 
keen edge to his appetite. matilda was still under the influence of 
poison, and the voluptuous monk tremble less for his preserver's life 
than his concubine's. deprived of her, he would not easily find 
another mistress with whom he could indulge his passion so fully, and 
so safely. he therefore pressed her with earnest to use the means 
of preservation which she had declared to be in her possession. 

'yes!' reply matilda; 'since you have made me feel that life is 
valuable, i will rescue mine at any rate. no danger shall appall me: 
i will look upon the consequence of my action boldly, nor shudder at 
the horrors which they present. i will think my sacrifice scarcely 
worthy to purchase your possession, and remember that a moment past in 
your arms in this world o'er-pays an age of punishment in the next. 
but before i take this step, ambrosio, give me your solemn oath never 
to enquire by what means i shall preserve myself.' 

he did so in a manner the most binding. 

'i thank you, my beloved. this precaution is necessary, for though you 
know it not, you are under the command of vulgar prejudices: the 
business on which i must be employ this night, might startle you from 
its singularity, and lower me in your opinion. tell me; are you 
possessed of the key of the low door on the western side of the garden?' 

'the door which open into the burying-ground common to us and the 
sisterhood of st. clare? i have not the key, but can easily procure 
it.' 

'you have only this to do. admit me into the burying-ground at 
midnight; watch while i descend into the vault of st. clare, lest some 
pry eye should observe my actions; leave me there alone for an hour, 
and that life is safe which i dedicate to your pleasures. to prevent 
create suspicion, do not visit me during the day. remember the key, 
and that i expect you before twelve. hark! i hear steps approaching! 
leave me; i will pretend to sleep.' 

the friar obeyed, and left the cell. as he open the door, father 
pablo made his appearance. 

'i come,' said the latter, 'to enquire after the health of my young 
patient.' 

'hush!' reply ambrosio, lay his finger upon his lip; 'speak 
softly; i am just come from him. he has fallen into a profound 
slumber, which doubtless will be of service to him. do not disturb him 
at present, for he wish to repose.' 

father pablo obeyed, and hearing the bell ring, accompany the abbot 
to matins. ambrosio felt embarrass as he enter the chapel. guilt 
was new to him, and he fancy that every eye could read the 
transactions of the night upon his countenance. he strove to pray; his 
bosom no long glow with devotion; his thought insensible wander 
to matilda's secret charms. but what he want in purity of heart, he 
supply by exterior sanctity. the better to cloak his transgression, 
he redouble his pretension to the semblance of virtue, and never 
appear more devoted to heaven as since he had broken through his 
engagements. thus did he unconscious add hypocrisy to perjury and 
incontinence; he had fallen into the latter error from yielding to 
seduction almost irresistible; but he was now guilty of a voluntary 
fault by endeavour to conceal those into which another had betray 
him. 

the matins concluded, ambrosio retired to his cell. the pleasure 
which he had just taste for the first time were still impress upon 
his mind. his brain was bewildered, and present a confuse chaos of 
remorse, voluptuousness, inquietude, and fear. he look back with 
regret to that peace of soul, that security of virtue, which till then 
had been his portion. he had indulge in excesses whose very idea but 
four and twenty hour before he had recoil at with horror. he 
shudder at reflect that a trifling indiscretion on his part, or on 
matilda's, would overturn that fabric of reputation which it had cost 
him thirty years to erect, and render him the abhorrence of that people 
of whom he was then the idol. conscience paint to him in glaring 
colours his perjury and weakness; apprehension magnify to him the 
horrors of punishment, and he already fancy himself in the prison of 
the inquisition. to these torment idea succeed matilda's beauty, 
and those delicious lesson which, once learnt, can never be forgotten. 
a single glance thrown upon these reconcile him with himself. he 
considered the pleasure of the former night to have been purchase at 
an easy price by the sacrifice of innocence and honour. their very 
remembrance fill his soul with ecstacy; he cursed his foolish vanity, 
which had induce him to waste in obscurity the bloom of life, ignorant 
of the blessing of love and woman. he determined at all event to 
continue his commerce with matilda, and call every argument to his 
aid which might confirm his resolution. he ask himself, provided his 
irregularity was unknown, in what would his fault consist, and what 
consequence he had to apprehend? by adhere strict to every rule 
of his order save chastity, he doubt not to retain the esteem of men, 
and even the protection of heaven. he trust easily to be forgiven so 
slight and natural a deviation from his vows: but he forgot that 
have pronounced those vows, incontinence, in laymen the most venial 
of errors, became in his person the most heinous of crimes. 

once decided upon his future conduct, his mind became more easy. he 
threw himself upon his bed, and strove by sleep to recruit his 
strength exhaust by his nocturnal excesses. he awoke refreshed, and 
eager for a repetition of his pleasures. obedient to matilda's order, 
he visit not her cell during the day. father pablo mention in the 
refectory that rosario had at length been prevail upon to follow his 
prescription; but that the medicine had not produce the slightest 
effect, and that he believe no mortal skill could rescue him from the 
grave. with this opinion the abbot agreed, and affected to lament the 
untimely fate of a youth, whose talent had appear so promising. 

the night arrived. ambrosio had taken care to procure from the porter 
the key of the low door opening into the cemetery. furnish with this, 
when all was silent in the monastery, he quit his cell, and hasten 
to matilda's. she had left her bed, and was drest before his arrival. 

'i have been expect you with impatience,' said she; 'my life depend 
upon these moments. have you the key?' 

'i have.' 

'away then to the garden. we have no time to lose. follow me!' 

she took a small cover basket from the table. bearing this in one 
hand, and the lamp, which was flaming upon the hearth, in the other, 
she hasten from the cell. ambrosio follow her. both maintain a 
profound silence. she move on with quick but cautious steps, pass 
through the cloisters, and reach the western side of the garden. her 
eyes flash with a fire and wild which impress the monk at once 
with awe and horror. a determined desperate courage reign upon her 
brow. she gave the lamp to ambrosio; then taking from him the key, she 
unlock the low door, and enter the cemetery. it was a vast and 
spacious square plant with yew trees: half of it belong to the 
abbey; the other half was the property of the sisterhood of st. clare, 
and was protect by a roof of stone. the division was marked by an 
iron railing, the wicket of which was generally left unlocked. 

thither matilda bent her course. she open the wicket and sought for 
the door leading to the subterraneous vaults, where repose the 
moulder body of the votary of st. clare. the night was 
perfectly dark; neither moon or stars were visible. lucky there was 
not a breath of wind, and the friar bore his lamp in full security: by 
the assistance of its beams, the door of the sepulchre was soon 
discovered. it was sunk within the hollow of a wall, and almost 
conceal by thick festoon of ivy hanging over it. three steps of 
rough-hewn stone conduct to it, and matilda was on the point of 
descend them when she sudden start back. 

'there are people in the vaults!' she whisper to the monk; 'conceal 
yourself till they are past. 

she took refuge behind a lofty and magnificent tomb, erect in honour 
of the convent's foundress. ambrosio follow her example, careful 
hiding his lamp lest its beam should betray them. but a few moments 
had elapse when the door was pushed open leading to the subterraneous 
caverns. ray of light proceed up the staircase: they enable the 
conceal spectator to observe two female drest in religious habits, 
who seem engaged in earnest conversation. the abbot had no 
difficulty to recognize the prioress of st. clare in the first, and one 
of the elder nun in her companion. 

'every thing is prepared,' said the prioress; 'her fate shall be 
decided tomorrow. all her tear and sigh will be unavailing. no! in 
five and twenty years that i have been superior of this convent, never 
did i witness a transaction more infamous!' 

'you must expect much opposition to your will;' the other reply in a 
mild voice; 'agnes has many friends in the convent, and in particular 
the mother st. ursula will espouse her cause most warmly. in truth, 
she merit to have friends; and i wish i could prevail upon you to 
consider her youth, and her peculiar situation. she seem sensible of 
her fault; the excess of her grief prove her penitence, and i am 
convinced that her tear flow more from contrition than fear of 
punishment. reverend mother, would you be persuade to mitigate the 
severity of your sentence, would you but deign to overlook this first 
transgression, i offer myself as the pledge of her future conduct.' 

'overlook it, say you? mother camilla, you amaze me! what? after 
disgrace me in the presence of madrid's idol, of the very man on whom 
i most wish to impress an idea of the strict of my discipline? 
how despicable must i have appear to the reverend abbot! no, mother, 
no! i never can forgive the insult. i cannot better convince ambrosio 
that i abhor such crimes, than by punishing that of agnes with all the 
rigour of which our severe law admit. cease then your supplications; 
they will all be unavailing. my resolution is taken: tomorrow agnes 
shall be made a terrible example of my justice and resentment.' 

the mother camilla seem not to give up the point, but by this time 
the nun were out of hearing. the prioress unlock the door which 
communicate with st. clare's chapel, and have enter with her 
companion, closed it again after them. 

matilda now asked, who was this agnes with whom the prioress was thus 
incensed, and what connexion she could have with ambrosio. he related 
her adventure; and he added, that since that time his idea have 
undergone a thorough revolution, he now felt much compassion for the 
unfortunate nun. 

'i design,' said he, 'to request an audience of the domina tomorrow, 
and use every means of obtain a mitigate of her sentence.' 

'beware of what you do!' interrupt matilda; 'your sudden change of 
sentiment may naturally create surprize, and may give birth to 
suspicion which it is most our interest to avoid. rather, redouble 
your outward austerity, and thunder out menace against the error of 
others, the better to conceal your own. abandon the nun to her fate. 
your interfere might be dangerous, and her imprudence merit to be 
punished: she is unworthy to enjoy love's pleasures, who has not wit 
enough to conceal them. but in discuss this trifling subject i 
waste moments which are precious. the night flies apace, and much must 
be done before morning. the nun are retired; all is safe. give me 
the lamp, ambrosio. i must descend alone into these caverns: wait 
here, and if any one approaches, warn me by your voice; but as you 
value your existence, presume not to follow me. your life would fall a 
victim to your imprudent curiosity.' 

thus saying she advanced towards the sepulchre, still holding her lamp 
in one hand, and her little basket in the other. she touched the door: 
it turn slow upon its grating hinges, and a narrow winding 
staircase of black marble present itself to her eyes. she descended 
it. ambrosio remain above, watch the faint beam of the lamp as 
they still proceed up the stairs. they disappeared, and he found 
himself in total darkness. 

left to himself he could not reflect without surprize on the sudden 
change in matilda's character and sentiments. but a few days had past 
since she appear the mildest and softest of her sex, devoted to his 
will, and look up to him as to a superior being. now she assume a 
sort of courage and manly in her manners and discourse but 
ill-calculated to please him. she spoke no long to insinuate, but 
command: he found himself unable to cope with her in argument, and was 
unwilling oblige to confess the superior of her judgment. every 
moment convinced him of the astonish powers of her mind: but what 
she gain in the opinion of the man, she lost with interest in the 
affection of the lover. he regret rosario, the fond, the gentle, 
and submissive: he grieve that matilda prefer the virtue of his 
sex to those of her own; and when he thought of her expression 
respecting the devoted nun, he could not help blame them as cruel and 
unfeminine. pity is a sentiment so natural, so appropriate to the 
female character, that it is scarcely a merit for a woman to possess 
it, but to be without it is a grievous crime. ambrosio could not 
easily forgive his mistress for being deficient in this amiable 
quality. however, though he blame her insensibility, he felt the 
truth of her observations; and though he pity sincerely the 
unfortunate agnes, he resolve to drop the idea of interpose in her 
behalf. 

near an hour had elapsed, since matilda descended into the caverns; 
still she return not. ambrosio's curiosity was excited. he drew 
near the staircase. he listened. all was silent, except that at 
interval he caught the sound of matilda's voice, as it wound along the 
subterraneous passages, and was re-echoed by the sepulchre's vaulted 
roofs. she was at too great a distance for him to distinguish her 
words, and ere they reach him they were deaden into a low murmur. 
he long to penetrate into this mystery. he resolve to disobey her 
injunction and follow her into the cavern. he advanced to the 
staircase; he had already descended some steps when his courage fail 
him. he remember matilda's menace if he infringe her orders, and 
his bosom was fill with a secret unaccountable awe. he return up 
the stairs, resume his former station, and wait impatient for the 
conclusion of this adventure. 

sudden he was sensible of a violent shock: an earthquake rock the 
ground. the column which support the roof under which he stood were 
so strong shaken, that every moment menace him with its fall, and at 
the same moment he heard a loud and tremendous burst of thunder. it 
ceased, and his eyes being fixed upon the staircase, he saw a bright 
column of light flash along the cavern beneath. it was seen but for 
an instant. no soon did it disappear, than all was once more quiet 
and obscure. profound dark again surround him, and the silence 
of night was only broken by the whirr bat, as she flit slow by 
him. 

with every instant ambrosio's amaze increased. another hour 
elapsed, after which the same light again appear and was lost again 
as suddenly. it was accompany by a strain of sweet but solemn music, 
which as it stole through the vault below, inspired the monk with 
mingle delight and terror. it had not long been hushed, when he heard 
matilda's steps upon the staircase. she ascend from the cavern; the 
most lively joy animate her beautiful features. 

'did you see any thing?' she asked. 

'twice i saw a column of light flash up the staircase.' 

'nothing else?' 

'nothing.' 

'the morning is on the point of breaking. let us retire to the abbey, 
lest daylight should betray us.' 

with a light step she hasten from the burying-ground. she regain 
her cell, and the curious abbot still accompany her. she closed the 
door, and disembarrass herself of her lamp and basket. 

'i have succeeded!' she cried, throw herself upon his bosom: 
'succeeded beyond my fondest hopes! i shall live, ambrosio, shall live 
for you! the step which i shudder at taking prove to me a source of 
joy inexpressible! oh! that i dare communicate those joy to you! 
oh! that i were permit to share with you my power, and raise you as 
high above the level of your sex, as one bold deed has exalted me above 
mine!' 

'and what prevent you, matilda?' interrupt the friar; 'why is your 
business in the cavern made a secret? do you think me undeserv of 
your confidence? matilda, i must doubt the truth of your affection, 
while you have joy in which i am forbidden to share.' 

'you reproach me with injustice. i grieve sincerely that i am oblige 
to conceal from you my happiness. but i am not to blame: the fault 
lie not in me, but in yourself, my ambrosio! you are still too much 
the monk. your mind is enslave by the prejudice of education; and 
superstition might make you shudder at the idea of that which 
experience has taught me to prize and value. at present you are unfit 
to be trust with a secret of such importance: but the strength of 
your judgment; and the curiosity which i rejoice to see sparkle in 
your eyes, make me hope that you will one day deserve my confidence. 
till that period arrives, restrain your impatience. remember that you 
have given me your solemn oath never to enquire into this night's 
adventures. i insist upon your keeping this oath: for though' she 
add smiling, while she seal his lip with a wanton kiss; 'though i 
forgive your break your vow to heaven, i expect you to keep your 
vow to me.' 

the friar return the embrace which had set his blood on fire. the 
luxurious and unbounded excesses of the former night were renewed, and 
they separate not till the bell rang for matins. 

the same pleasure were frequent repeated. the monk rejoice in the 
feign rosario's unexpected recovery, and none of them suspect his 
real sex. the abbot possessed his mistress in tranquillity, and 
perceive his frailty unsuspected, abandoned himself to his passion 
in full security. shame and remorse no long torment him. frequent 
repetition made him familiar with sin, and his bosom became proof 
against the sting of conscience. in these sentiment he was 
encourage by matilda; but she soon was aware that she had satiate her 
lover by the unbounded freedom of her caresses. her charm becoming 
accustomed to him, they cease to excite the same desire which at 
first they had inspired. the delirium of passion being past, he had 
leisure to observe every trifling defect: where none were to be found, 
satiety made him fancy them. the monk was glut with the full of 
pleasure: a week had scarcely elapse before he was weary of his 
paramour: his warm constitution still made him seek in her arms the 
gratification of his lust: but when the moment of passion was over, he 
quit her with disgust, and his humour, naturally inconstant, made 
him sigh impatient for variety. 

possession, which cloy man, only increase the affection of woman. 
matilda with every succeed day grew more attach to the friar. 
since he had obtain her favours, he was become dear to her than 
ever, and she felt grateful to him for the pleasure in which they had 
equally been sharers. unfortunately as her passion grew ardent, 
ambrosio's grew cold; the very mark of her fond excited his 
disgust, and its excess serve to extinguish the flame which already 
burn but feeble in his bosom. matilda could not but remark that her 
society seem to him daily less agreeable: he was inattentive while 
she spoke: her musical talents, which she possessed in perfection, had 
lost the power of amuse him; or if he deign to praise them, his 
compliments were evidently forced and cold. he no long gaze upon 
her with affection, or applaud her sentiment with a lover's 
partiality. this matilda well perceived, and redouble her effort to 
revive those sentiment which he once had felt. she could not but fail, 
since he considered as importune the pains which she took to please 
him, and was disgust by the very means which she use to recall the 
wanderer. still, however, their illicit commerce continued: but it 
was clear that he was led to her arms, not by love, but the craving of 
brutal appetite. his constitution made a woman necessary to him, and 
matilda was the only one with whom he could indulge his passion 
safely: in spite of her beauty, he gaze upon every other female with 
more desire; but fear that his hypocrisy should be made public, he 
confine his inclination to his own breast. 

it was by no means his nature to be timid: but his education had 
impress his mind with fear so strongly, that apprehension was now 
become part of his character. had his youth been pass in the world, 
he would have shown himself possessed of many brilliant and manly 
qualities. he was naturally enterprizing, firm, and fearless: he had 
a warrior's heart, and he might have shone with splendour at the head 
of an army. there was no want of generous in his nature: the 
wretched never fail to find in him a compassionate auditor: his 
abilities were quick and shining, and his judgment, vast, solid, and 
decisive. with such qualifications he would have been an ornament to 
his country: that he possessed them, he had given proof in his 
earliest infancy, and his parent had beheld his dawn virtue with 
the fondest delight and admiration. unfortunately, while yet a child 
he was deprived of those parents. he fell into the power of a relation 
whose only wish about him was never to hear of him more; for that 
purpose he gave him in charge to his friend, the former superior of the 
capuchins. the abbot, a very monk, use all his endeavour to persuade 
the boy that happiness exist not without the wall of a convent. he 
succeed fully. to deserve admittance into the order of st. francis 
was ambrosio's highest ambition. his instructor careful repressed 
those virtue whose grandeur and disinterested were ill-suited to 
the cloister. instead of universal benevolence, he adopt a selfish 
partiality for his own particular establishment: he was taught to 
consider compassion for the error of other as a crime of the blackest 
dye: the noble frank of his temper was exchange for servile 
humility; and in order to break his natural spirit, the monk terrify 
his young mind by place before him all the horrors with which 
superstition could furnish them: they paint to him the torment of 
the damn in colours the most dark, terrible, and fantastic, and 
threaten him at the slightest fault with eternal perdition. no 
wonder that his imagination constant dwelling upon these fearful 
object should have render his character timid and apprehensive. add 
to this, that his long absence from the great world, and total 
unacquaintance with the common danger of life, made him form of them 
an idea far more dismal than the reality. while the monk were busy 
in root out his virtue and narrow his sentiments, they allow 
every vice which had fallen to his share to arrive at full perfection. 
he was suffer to be proud, vain, ambitious, and disdainful: he was 
jealous of his equals, and despise all merit but his own: he was 
implacable when offended, and cruel in his revenge. still in spite of 
the pains taken to pervert them, his natural good quality would 
occasional break through the gloom cast over them so carefully: 

at such times the contest for superior between his real and acquire 
character was striking and unaccountable to those unacquainted with his 
original disposition. he pronounced the most severe sentence upon 
offenders, which, the moment after, compassion induce him to mitigate: 
he undertook the most daring enterprizes, which the fear of their 
consequence soon oblige him to abandon: his inborn genius dart a 
brilliant light upon subject the most obscure; and almost 
instantaneous his superstition replunge them in dark more 
profound than that from which they had just been rescued. his brother 
monks, regarding him as a superior being, remark not this 
contradiction in their idol's conduct. they were persuade that what 
he did must be right, and supposed him to have good reason for 
change his resolutions. the fact was, that the different sentiment 
with which education and nature had inspired him were combat in his 
bosom: it remain for his passions, which as yet no opportunity had 
call into play, to decide the victory. unfortunately his passion 
were the very worst judges, to whom he could possibly have applied. 
his monastic seclusion had till now been in his favour, since it gave 
him no room for discover his bad qualities. the superior of his 
talent raise him too far above his companion to permit his being 
jealous of them: his exemplary piety, persuasive eloquence, and 
pleasing manners had secure him universal esteem, and consequently he 
had no injury to revenge: his ambition was justified by his 
acknowledge merit, and his pride considered as no more than proper 
confidence. he never saw, much less converse with, the other sex: he 
was ignorant of the pleasure in woman's power to bestow, and if he 
read in the course of his study 

'that men were fond, he smiled, and wonder how!' 

for a time, spare diet, frequent watching, and severe penance cool 
and represt the natural warmth of his constitution: but no soon did 
opportunity present itself, no soon did he catch a glimpse of joy to 
which he was still a stranger, than religion's barrier were too feeble 
to resist the overwhelming torrent of his desires. all impediment 
yield before the force of his temperament, warm, sanguine, and 
voluptuous in the excess. 

as yet his other passion lay dormant; but they only need to be once 
awakened, to display themselves with violence as great and irresistible. 

he continue to be the admiration of madrid. the enthusiasm create by 
his eloquence seem rather to increase than diminish. 

every thursday, which was the only day when he appear in public, the 
capuchin cathedral was crowded with auditors, and his discourse was 
always received with the same approbation. he was name confessor to 
all the chief family in madrid; and no one was count fashionable 
who was injoine penance by any other than ambrosio. in his resolution 
of never stirring out of his convent, he still persisted. this 
circumstance create a still greater opinion of his sanctity and 
self-denial. above all, the women sang forth his praises loudly, less 
influence by devotion than by his noble countenance, majestic air, and 
well-turned, graceful figure. the abbey door was throng with 
carriage from morning to night; and the noblest and fairest dame of 
madrid confessed to the abbot their secret peccadilloes. 

the eyes of the luxurious friar devour their charms: had his 
penitent consult those interpreters, he would have need no other 
means of express his desires. for his misfortune, they were so 
strong persuade of his continence, that the possibility of his 
harbour indecent thought never once enter their imaginations. 
the climate's heat, 'tis well known, operate with no small influence 
upon the constitution of the spain ladies: but the most abandoned 
would have thought it an easy task to inspire with passion the marble 
statue of st. francis than the cold and rigid heart of the immaculate 
ambrosio. 

on his part, the friar was little acquaint with the depravity of the 
world; he suspect not that but few of his penitent would have 
reject his addresses. yet had he been better instruct on this 
head, the danger attend such an attempt would have seal up his 
lip in silence. he knew that it would be difficult for a woman to 
keep a secret so strange and so important as his frailty; and he even 
tremble lest matilda should betray him. anxious to preserve a 
reputation which was infinite dear to him, he saw all the risque of 
commit it to the power of some vain giddy female; and as the 
beauty of madrid affected only his senses without touching his heart, 
he forgot them as soon as they were out of his sight. the danger of 
discovery, the fear of being repulsed, the loss of reputation, all 
these consideration counsel him to stifle his desires: and though 
he now felt for it the most perfect indifference, he was necessitate 
to confine himself to matilda's person. 

one morning, the confluence of penitent was greater than usual. he was 
detain in the confessional chair till a late hour. at length the 
crowd was dispatched, and he prepared to quit the chapel, when two 
female enter and drew near him with humility. they threw up their 
veils, and the youngest entreat him to listen to her for a few 
moments. the melody of her voice, of that voice to which no man ever 
listen without interest, immediately caught ambrosio's attention. he 
stopped. the petitioner seem bowed down with affliction: her cheek 
were pale, her eyes dim with tears, and her hair fell in disorder 
over her face and bosom. still her countenance was so sweet, so 
innocent, so heavenly, as might have charm an heart less susceptible, 
than that which pant in the abbot's breast. with more than usual 
soft of manner he desire her to proceed, and heard her speak as 
follow with an emotion which increase every moment. 

'reverend father, you see an unfortunate, threaten with the loss of 
her dearest, of almost her only friend! my mother, my excellent mother 
lie upon the bed of sickness. a sudden and dreadful malady seize her 
last night; and so rapid has been its progress, that the physician 
despair of her life. human aid fail me; nothing remains for me but to 
implore the mercy of heaven. father, all madrid ring with the report 
of your piety and virtue. deign to remember my mother in your prayers: 
perhaps they may prevail on the almighty to spare her; and should that 
be the case, i engage myself every thursday in the next three month to 
illuminate the shrine of st. francis in his honour.' 

'so!' thought the monk; 'here we have a second vincentio della ronda. 
rosario's adventure began thus,' and he wish secret that this might 
have the same conclusion. 

he accede to the request. the petitioner return him thanks with 
every mark of gratitude, and then continued. 

'i have yet another favour to ask. we are stranger in madrid; my 
mother needs a confessor, and know not to whom she should apply. we 
understand that you never quit the abbey, and alas! my poor mother is 
unable to come hither! if you would have the goodness, reverend 
father, to name a proper person, whose wise and pious consolation may 
soften the agony of my parent's deathbed, you will confer an 
everlasting favour upon heart not ungrateful.' 

with this petition also the monk complied. indeed, what petition would 
he have refused, if urge in such enchanting accents? the suppliant 
was so interesting! her voice was so sweet, so harmonious! her very 
tear became her, and her affliction seem to add new lustre to her 
charms. he promise to send to her a confessor that same evening, and 
beg her to leave her address. the companion present him with a 
card on which it was written, and then withdrew with the fair 
petitioner, who pronounced before her departure a thousand benediction 
on the abbot's goodness. his eyes follow her out of the chapel. it 
was not till she was out of sight that he examine the card, on which 
he read the following words. 

'donna elvira dalfa, strada di san iago, four door from the palace 
d'albornos.' 

the suppliant was no other than antonia, and leonella was her 
companion. the latter had not consent without difficulty to 
accompany her niece to the abbey: ambrosio had inspired her with such 
awe that she tremble at the very sight of him. her fear had 
conquer even her natural loquacity, and while in his presence she 
utter not a single syllable. 

the monk retired to his cell, whither he was pursue by antonia's 
image. he felt a thousand new emotion spring in his bosom, and he 
tremble to examine into the cause which gave them birth. they were 
total different from those inspired by matilda, when she first 
declared her sex and her affection. he felt not the provocation of 
lust; no voluptuous desire riot in his bosom; nor did a burning 
imagination picture to him the charm which modesty had veiled from his 
eyes. on the contrary, what he now felt was a mingle sentiment of 
tenderness, admiration, and respect. a soft and delicious melancholy 
infuse itself into his soul, and he would not have exchange it for 
the most lively transport of joy. society now disgust him: he 
delight in solitude, which permit his indulge the vision of 
fancy: his thought were all gentle, sad, and soothing, and the whole 
wide world present him with no other object than antonia. 

'happy man!' he exclaim in his romantic enthusiasm; 'happy man, who 
is destined to possess the heart of that lovely girl! what delicacy in 
her features! what elegance in her form! how enchanting was the timid 
innocence of her eyes, and how different from the wanton expression, 
the wild luxurious fire which sparkle in matilda's! oh! sweet must 
one kiss be snatch from the rosy lip of the first, than all the full 
and lustful favours bestow so freely by the second. matilda glut me 
with enjoyment even to loathing, forces me to her arms, ape the 
harlot, and glory in her prostitution. disgusting! did she know the 
inexpressible charm of modesty, how irresistible it enthrall the heart 
of man, how firm it chain him to the throne of beauty, she never 
would have thrown it off. what would be too dear a price for this 
lovely girl's affections? what would i refuse to sacrifice, could i be 
release from my vows, and permit to declare my love in the sight of 
earth and heaven? while i strove to inspire her with tenderness, with 
friendship and esteem, how tranquil and undisturbed would the hour 
roll away! gracious god! to see her blue downcast eyes beam upon mine 
with timid fondness! to sit for days, for years listen to that 
gentle voice! to acquire the right of obliging her, and hear the 
artless expression of her gratitude! to watch the emotion of her 
spotless heart! to encourage each dawn virtue! to share in her joy 
when happy, to kiss away her tear when distrest, and to see her fly to 
my arms for comfort and support! yes; if there is perfect bliss on 
earth, 'tis his lot alone, who become that angel's husband.' 

while his fancy coin these ideas, he pace his cell with a disorder 
air. his eyes were fixed upon vacancy: his head recline upon his 
shoulder; a tear roll down his cheek, while he reflect that the 
vision of happiness for him could never be realized. 

'she is lost to me!' he continued; 'by marriage she cannot be mine: 
and to seduce such innocence, to use the confidence repose in me to 
work her ruin.... oh! it would be a crime, black than yet the 
world ever witnessed! fear not, lovely girl! your virtue runs no 
risque from me. not for indy would i make that gentle bosom know the 
torture of remorse.' 

again he pace his chamber hastily. then stopping, his eye fell upon 
the picture of his once-admired madona. he tore it with indignation 
from the wall: he threw it on the ground, and spurn it from him with 
his foot. 

'the prostitute!' 

unfortunate matilda! her paramour forgot that for his sake alone she 
had forfeit her claim to virtue; and his only reason for despise 
her was that she had love him much too well. 

he threw himself into a chair which stood near the table. he saw the 
card with elvira's address. he took it up, and it brought to his 
recollection his promise respecting a confessor. he pass a few 
minutes in doubt: but antonia's empire over him was already too much 
decided to permit his making a long resistance to the idea which struck 
him. he resolve to be the confessor himself. he could leave the 
abbey unobserved without difficulty: by wrapping up his head in his 
cowl he hope to pass through the street without being recognised: by 
taking these precautions, and by recommend secrecy to elvira's 
family, he doubt not to keep madrid in ignorance that he had broken 
his vow never to see the outside of the abbey walls. matilda was the 
only person whose vigilance he dreaded: but by inform her at the 
refectory that during the whole of that day, business would confine him 
to his cell, he thought himself secure from her wakeful jealousy. 
accordingly, at the hour when the spaniard are generally taking their 
siesta, he venture to quit the abbey by a private door, the key of 
which was in his possession. the cowl of his habit was thrown over his 
face: from the heat of the weather the street were almost total 
deserted: the monk met with few people, found the strada di san iago, 
and arrive without accident at donna elvira's door. he rang, was 
admitted, and immediately usher into an upper apartment. 

it was here that he ran the greatest risque of a discovery. had 
leonella been at home, she would have recognize him directly: her 
communicative disposition would never have permit her to rest till 
all madrid was informed that ambrosio had venture out of the abbey, 
and visit her sister. fortune here stood the monk's friend. on 
leonella's return home, she found a letter instruct her that a 
cousin was just dead, who had left what little he possessed between 
herself and elvira. to secure this bequest she was oblige to set out 
for cordova without lose a moment. amidst all her foible her heart 
was truly warm and affectionate, and she was unwill to quit her 
sister in so dangerous a state. but elvira insist upon her taking 
the journey, conscious that in her daughter's forlorn situation no 
increase of fortune, however trifling, ought to be neglected. 
accordingly, leonella left madrid, sincerely grieve at her sister's 
illness, and give some few sigh to the memory of the amiable but 
inconstant don christoval. she was fully persuade that at first she 
had made a terrible breach in his heart: but hearing nothing more of 
him, she supposed that he had quit the pursuit, disgust by the 
low of her origin, and knowing upon other terms than marriage he 
had nothing to hope from such a dragon of virtue as she professed 
herself; or else, that being naturally capricious and changeable, the 
remembrance of her charm had been efface from the conde's heart by 
those of some new beauty. whatever was the cause of her lose him, 
she lament it sorely. she strove in vain, as she assured every body 
who was kind enough to listen to her, to tear his image from her too 
susceptible heart. she affected the airs of a lovesick virgin, and 
carry them all to the most ridiculous excess. she heave lamentable 
sighs, walk with her arms folded, utter long soliloquies, and her 
discourse generally turn upon some forsaken maid who expire of a 
broken heart! her fiery locks were always ornament with a garland of 
willow; every evening she was seen stray upon the bank of a rivulet 
by moonlight; and she declared herself a violent admirer of murmur 
stream and nightingales; 

'of lonely haunts, and twilight groves, 
'places which pale passion loves!' 

such was the state of leonella's mind, when oblige to quit madrid. 
elvira was out of patience at all these follies, and endeavour at 
persuade her to act like a reasonable woman. her advice was thrown 
away: leonella assured her at parting that nothing could make her 
forget the perfidious don christoval. in this point she was 
fortunately mistaken. an honest youth of cordova, journeyman to an 
apothecary, found that her fortune would be sufficient to set him up in 
a genteel shop of his own: in consequence of this reflection he avowed 
himself her admirer. leonella was not inflexible. the ardour of his 
sigh melt her heart, and she soon consent to make him the happiest 
of mankind. she wrote to inform her sister of her marriage; but, for 
reason which will be explain hereafter, elvira never answer her 
letter. 

ambrosio was conduct into the antichamber to that where elvira was 
reposing. the female domestic who had admitted him left him alone 
while she announce his arrival to her mistress. antonia, who had been 
by her mother's bedside, immediately came to him. 

'pardon me, father,' said she, advance towards him; when recognize 
his features, she stop suddenly, and utter a cry of joy. 'is it 
possible!' she continued; 

'do not my eyes deceive me? has the worthy ambrosio broken through his 
resolution, that he may soften the agony of the best of women? what 
pleasure will this visit give my mother! let me not delay for a moment 
the comfort which your piety and wisdom will afford her.' 

thus saying, she open the chamber door, present to her mother her 
distinguished visitor, and have placed an armed-chair by the side of 
the bed, withdrew into another department. 

elvira was highly gratify by this visit: her expectations had been 
raise high by general report, but she found them far exceeded. 
ambrosio, endow by nature with powers of pleasing, exert them to 
the utmost while converse with antonia's mother. with persuasive 
eloquence he calm every fear, and dissipated every scruple: he bad 
her reflect on the infinite mercy of her judge, despoil death of his 
darts and terrors, and taught her to view without shrink the abyss 
of eternity, on whose brink she then stood. elvira was absorb in 
attention and delight: while she listen to his exhortations, 
confidence and comfort stole insensible into her mind. she unbosom 
to him without hesitation her care and apprehensions. the latter 
respecting a future life he had already quieted: and he now remove 
the former, which she felt for the concern of this. she tremble for 
antonia. she had none to whose care she could recommend her, save to 
the marquis de las cisterna and her sister leonella. the protection 
of the one was very uncertain; and as to the other, though fond of her 
niece, leonella was so thoughtless and vain as to make her an improper 
person to have the sole direction of a girl so young and ignorant of 
the world. the friar no soon learnt the cause of her alarm than he 
beg her to make herself easy upon that head. he doubt not being 
able to secure for antonia a safe refuge in the house of one of his 
penitents, the marchioness of villa-franca: this was a lady of 
acknowledge virtue, remarkable for strict principles and extensive 
charity. should accident deprive her of this resource, he engaged to 
procure antonia a reception in some respectable convent: that is to 
say, in quality of boarder; for elvira had declared herself no friend 
to a monastic life, and the monk was either candid or complaisant 
enough to allow that her disapprobation was not unfounded. 

these proof of the interest which he felt for her completely won 
elvira's heart. in thank him she exhaust every expression which 
gratitude could furnish, and protest that now she should resign 
herself with tranquill to the grave. ambrosio rose to take leave: 
he promise to return the next day at the same hour, but request that 
his visit might be kept secret. 

'i am unwilling' said he, 'that my break through a rule impose by 
necessity should be generally known. had i not resolve never to quit 
my convent, except upon circumstances as urgent as that which has 
conduct me to your door, i should be frequent summon upon 
insignificant occasions: that time would be engross by the curious, 
the unoccupied, and the fanciful, which i now pass at the bedside of 
the sick, in comfort the expire penitent, and clearing the passage 
to eternity from thorns.' 

elvira commend equally his prudence and compassion, promising to 
conceal careful the honour of his visits. the monk then gave her his 
benediction, and retired from the chamber. 

in the antiroom he found antonia: he could not refuse himself the 
pleasure of passing a few moments in her society. he bad her take 
comfort, for that her mother seem compose and tranquil, and he hope 
that she might yet do well. he enquire who attend her, and engaged 
to send the physician of his convent to see her, one of the most 
skilful in madrid. he then launch out in elvira's commendation, 
praise her purity and fortitude of mind, and declared that she had 
inspired him with the highest esteem and reverence. antonia's innocent 
heart swell with gratitude: joy dance in her eyes, where a tear 
still sparkled. the hope which he gave her of her mother's recovery, 
the lively interest which he seem to feel for her, and the flatter 
way in which she was mention by him, add to the report of his 
judgment and virtue, and to the impression made upon her by his 
eloquence, confirmed the favourable opinion with which his first 
appearance had inspired antonia. she reply with diffidence, but 
without restraint: she fear not to relate to him all her little 
sorrows, all her little fear and anxieties; and she thank him for 
his goodness with all the genuine warmth which favours kindle in a 
young and innocent heart. such alone know how to estimate benefit at 
their full value. they who are conscious of mankind's perfidy and 
selfishness, ever receive an obligation with apprehension and distrust: 
they suspect that some secret motive must lurk behind it: they express 
their thanks with restraint and caution, and fear to praise a kind 
action to its full extent, aware that some future day a return may be 
required. not so antonia; she thought the world was compose only of 
those who resemble her, and that vice existed, was to her still a 
secret. the monk had been of service to her; he said that he wish 
her well; she was grateful for his kindness, and thought that no terms 
were strong enough to be the vehicle of her thanks. with what delight 
did ambrosio listen to the declaration of her artless gratitude! the 
natural grace of her manners, the unequalled sweet of her voice, 
her modest vivacity, her unstudied elegance, her expressive 
countenance, and intelligent eyes united to inspire him with pleasure 
and admiration, while the solidity and correct of her remark 
received additional beauty from the unaffected simplicity of the 
language in which they were conveyed. 

ambrosio was at length oblige to tear himself from this conversation 
which possessed for him but too many charms. he repeated to antonia 
his wish that his visit should not be made known, which desire she 
promise to observe. he then quit the house, while his enchantress 
hasten to her mother, ignorant of the mischief which her beauty had 
caused. she was eager to know elvira's opinion of the man whom she had 
praise in such enthusiast terms, and was delight to find it 
equally favourable, if not even more so, than her own. 

'even before he spoke,' said elvira, 'i was prejudiced in his favour: 
the fervour of his exhortations, dignity of his manner, and close 
of his reasoning, were very far from induce me to alter my opinion. 
his fine and full-toned voice struck me particularly; but surely, 
antonia, i have heard it before. it seem perfectly familiar to my 
ear. either i must have known the abbot in former times, or his voice 
bear a wonderful resemblance to that of some other, to whom i have 
often listened. 

there were certain tone which touched my very heart, and made me feel 
sensation so singular, that i strive in vain to account for them.' 

'my dearest mother, it produce the same effect upon me: yet certainly 
neither of us ever heard his voice till we came to madrid. i suspect 
that what we attribute to his voice, really proceeds from his pleasant 
manners, which forbid our considering him as a stranger. i know not 
why, but i feel more at my ease while converse with him than i 
usually do with people who are unknown to me. i fear not to repeat 
to him all my childish thoughts; and somehow i felt confident that he 
would hear my folly with indulgence. oh! i was not deceive in him! 
he listen to me with such an air of kindness and attention! he 
answer me with such gentleness, such condescension! he did not call 
me an infant, and treat me with contempt, as our cross old confessor at 
the castle use to do. i verily believe that if i had live in murcia 
a thousand years, i never should have like that fat old father 
dominic!' 

'i confess that father dominic had not the most pleasing manners in the 
world; but he was honest, friendly, and well-meaning.' 

'ah! my dear mother, those quality are so common!' 

'god grant, my child, that experience may not teach you to think them 
rare and precious: i have found them but too much so! but tell me, 
antonia; why is it impossible for me to have seen the abbot before?' 

'because since the moment when he enter the abbey, he has never been 
on the outside of its walls. he told me just now, that from his 
ignorance of the streets, he had some difficulty to find the strada di 
san iago, though so near the abbey.' 

'all this is possible, and still i may have seen him before he enter 
the abbey: in order to come out, it was rather necessary that he 
should first go in.' 

'holy virgin! as you say, that is very true.--oh! but might he not 
have been born in the abbey?' 

elvira smiled. 

'why, not very easily.' 

'stay, stay! now i recollect how it was. he was put into the abbey 
quite a child; the common people say that he fell from heaven, and was 
sent as a present to the capuchin by the virgin.' 

'that was very kind of her. and so he fell from heaven, antonia? 

he must have had a terrible tumble.' 

'many do not credit this, and i fancy, my dear mother, that i must 
number you among the unbelievers. indeed, as our landlady told my 
aunt, the general idea is that his parents, being poor and unable to 
maintain him, left him just born at the abbey door. the late superior 
from pure charity had him educated in the convent, and he prove to be 
a model of virtue, and piety, and learning, and i know not what else 
besides: in consequence, he was first received as a brother of the 
order, and not long ago was chosen abbot. however, whether this 
account or the other is the true one, at least all agree that when the 
monk took him under their care, he could not speak: therefore, you 
could not have heard his voice before he enter the monastery, because 
at that time he had no voice at all.' 

'upon my word, antonia, you argue very closely! your conclusion are 
infallible! i did not suspect you of being so able a logician.' 

'ah! you are mock me! but so much the better. it delight me to see 
you in spirits: besides you seem tranquil and easy, and i hope that 
you will have no more convulsions. oh! i was sure the abbot's visit 
would do you good!' 

'it has indeed done me good, my child. he has quiet my mind upon 
some points which agitate me, and i already feel the effects of his 
attention. my eyes grow heavy, and i think i can sleep a little. draw 
the curtains, my antonia: but if i should not wake before midnight, do 
not sit up with me, i charge you.' 

antonia promise to obey her, and have received her blessing drew the 
curtains of the bed. she then seat herself in silence at her 
embroidery frame, and beguile the hour with building castle in the 
air. her spirits were enliven by the evident change for the better 
in elvira, and her fancy present her with vision bright and 
pleasing. in these dream ambrosio made no despicable figure. she 
thought of him with joy and gratitude; but for every idea which fell to 
the friar's share, at least two were unconscious bestow upon 
lorenzo. thus pass the time, till the bell in the neighbouring 
steeple of the capuchin cathedral announce the hour of midnight: 
antonia remember her mother's injunctions, and obey them, though 
with reluctance. she undrew the curtains with caution. elvira was 
enjoy a profound and quiet slumber; her cheek glow with health's 
return colours: a smile declared that her dream were pleasant, and 
as antonia bent over her, she fancy that she heard her name 
pronounced. she kiss her mother's forehead softly, and retired to 
her chamber. there she knelt before a statue of st. rosolia, her 
patroness; she recommend herself to the protection of heaven, and as 
had been her custom from infancy, conclude her devotions by chaunt 
the following stanzas. 

midnight hymn 

now all is hushed; the solemn chime 
no long swell the nightly gale: 
thy awful presence, hour sublime, 
with spotless heart once more i hail. 

'tis now the moment still and dread, 
when sorcerer use their baleful power; 
when grave give up their bury dead 
to profit by the sanction hour: 

from guilt and guilty thought secure, 
to duty and devotion true, 
with bosom light and conscience pure, 
repose, thy gentle aid i woo. 

good angels, take my thanks, that still 
the snare of vice i view with scorn; 
thanks, that to-night as free from ill 
i sleep, as when i woke at morn. 

yet may not my unconscious breast 
harbour some guilt to me unknown? 
some wish impure, which unreprest 
you blush to see, and i to own? 

if such there be, in gentle dream 
instruct my feet to shun the snare; 
bid truth upon my error beam, 
and deign to make me still your care. 

chase from my peaceful bed away 
the witching spell, a foe to rest, 
the nightly goblin, wanton fay, 
the ghost in pain, and fiend unblest: 

let not the tempt in mine ear 
pour lesson of unhallowed joy; 
let not the night-mare, wandering near 
my couch, the calm of sleep destroy; 

let not some horrid dream affright 
with strange fantastic form mine eyes; 
but rather bid some vision bright 
display the bliss of yonder skies. 

show me the crystal dome of heaven, 
the world of light where angel lie; 
shew me the lot to mortal given, 
who guiltless live, who guiltless die. 

then show me how a seat to gain 
amidst those blissful realm of 
air; teach me to shun each guilty stain, 
and guide me to the good and fair. 

so every morn and night, my voice 
to heaven the grateful strain shall raise; 
in you as guardian powers rejoice, 
good angels, and exalt your praise: 

so will i strive with zealous fire 
each vice to shun, each fault correct; 
will love the lesson you inspire, 
and prize the virtue you protect. 

then when at length by high command 
my body seek the grave's repose, 
when death draw nigh with friendly hand 
my failing pilgrim eyes to close; 

pleased that my soul has 'scaped the wreck, 
sighless will i my life resign, 
and yield to god my spirit back, 
as pure as when it first was mine. 


have finished her usual devotions, antonia retired to bed. sleep soon 
stole over her senses; and for several hour she enjoy that calm 
repose which innocence alone can know, and for which many a monarch 
with pleasure would exchange his crown. 



chapter iv 

----ah! how dark 
these long-extended realm and rueful wastes; 
where nought but silence reigns, and night, dark night, 
dark as was chaos ere the infant sun 
was roll together, or had try its beam 
athwart the gloom profound! 
the sickly taper 
by glimmer through thy low-browed misty vaults, 
fur round with mouldy damps, and ropy slime, 
let fall a supernumerary horror, 
and only serve to make 
thy night more irksome! 
blair. 

return undiscovered to the abbey, ambrosio's mind was fill with the 
most pleasing images. he was wilful blind to the danger of expose 
himself to antonia's charms: he only remember the pleasure which her 
society had afford him, and rejoice in the prospect of that pleasure 
being repeated. he fail not to profit by elvira's indisposition to 
obtain a sight of her daughter every day. at first he bound his 
wish to inspire antonia with friendship: but no soon was he 
convinced that she felt that sentiment in its fullest extent, than his 
aim became more decided, and his attention assume a warm colour. 
the innocent familiarity with which she treat him, encourage his 
desires: grown use to her modesty, it no long command the same 
respect and awe: he still admire it, but it only made him more 
anxious to deprive her of that quality which form her principal 
charm. warmth of passion, and natural penetration, of which latter 
unfortunately both for himself and antonia he possessed an ample share, 
supply a knowledge of the arts of seduction. he easily distinguished 
the emotion which were favourable to his designs, and seize every 
means with avid of infuse corruption into antonia's bosom. this 
he found no easy matter. extreme simplicity prevent her from 
perceive the aim to which the monk's insinuation tended; but the 
excellent morals which she owe to elvira's care, the solidity and 
correct of her understanding, and a strong sense of what was right 
implant in her heart by nature, made her feel that his precept must 
be faulty. by a few simple words she frequent overthrew the whole 
bulk of his sophistic arguments, and made him conscious how weak they 
were when oppose to virtue and truth. on such occasion he took refuge 
in his eloquence; he overpower her with a torrent of philosophical 
paradoxes, to which, not understanding them, it was impossible for her 
to reply; and thus though he did not convince her that his reasoning 
was just, he at least prevent her from discover it to be false. 
he perceive that her respect for his judgment augment daily, and 
doubt not with time to bring her to the point desired. 

he was not unconscious that his attempt were highly criminal: he saw 
clearly the base of seduce the innocent girl: but his passion 
was too violent to permit his abandon his design. he resolve to 
pursue it, let the consequence be what they might. he depend upon 
finding antonia in some unguarded moment; and seeing no other man 
admitted into her society, nor hearing any mention either by her or 
by elvira, he imagine that her young heart was still unoccupied. while 
he wait for the opportunity of satisfying his unwarrantable lust, 
every day increase his cold for matilda. not a little was this 
occasion by the consciousness of his fault to her. to hide them 
from her he was not sufficient master of himself: yet he dread 
lest, in a transport of jealous rage, she should betray the secret on 
which his character and even his life depended. matilda could not but 
remark his indifference: he was conscious that she remark it, and 
fear her reproaches, shun her studiously. yet when he could not 
avoid her, her mild might have convinced him that he had nothing to 
dread from her resentment. she had resume the character of the gentle 
interesting rosario: she tax him not with ingratitude; but her eyes 
fill with involuntary tears, and the soft melancholy of her 
countenance and voice utter complaint far more touching than words 
could have conveyed. ambrosio was not unmoved by her sorrow; but 
unable to remove its cause, he forbore to show that it affected him. 
as her conduct convinced him that he need not fear her vengeance, he 
continue to neglect her, and avoid her company with care. matilda 
saw that she in vain attempt to regain his affections: yet she 
stifle the impulse of resentment, and continue to treat her 
inconstant lover with her former fond and attention. 

by degree elvira's constitution recover itself. she was no long 
trouble with convulsions, and antonia cease to tremble for her 
mother. ambrosio beheld this reestablishment with displeasure. he saw 
that elvira's knowledge of the world would not be the dupe of his 
sanctify demeanour, and that she would easily perceive his view upon 
her daughter. he resolve therefore, before she quit her chamber, 
to try the extent of his influence over the innocent antonia. 

one evening, when he had found elvira almost perfectly restore to 
health, he quit her early than was his usual custom. not finding 
antonia in the antichamber, he venture to follow her to her own. it 
was only separate from her mother's by a closet, in which flora, the 
waiting-woman, generally slept. antonia sat upon a sopha with her back 
towards the door, and read attentively. she heard not his approach, 
till he had seat himself by her. she started, and welcome him with 
a look of pleasure: then rising, she would have conduct him to the 
sitting-room; but ambrosio taking her hand, oblige her by gentle 
violence to resume her place. she comply without difficulty: she 
knew not that there was more impropriety in converse with him in one 
room than another. she thought herself equally secure of his 
principles and her own, and have replace herself upon the sopha, she 
began to prattle to him with her usual ease and vivacity. 

he examine the book which she had been reading, and had now placed 
upon the table. it was the bible. 

'how!' said the friar to himself; 'antonia read the bible, and is 
still so ignorant?' 

but, upon a further inspection, he found that elvira had made exactly 
the same remark. that prudent mother, while she admire the beauty 
of the sacred writings, was convinced that, unrestricted, no reading 
more improper could be permit a young woman. many of the narrative 
can only tend to excite idea the worst calculate for a female breast: 
every thing is call plainly and roundly by its name; and the annals 
of a brothel would scarcely furnish a greater choice of indecent 
expressions. yet this is the book which young women are recommend to 
study; which is put into the hand of children, able to comprehend 
little more than those passage of which they had better remain 
ignorant; and which but too frequent inculcate the first rudiments 
of vice, and give the first alarm to the still sleep passions. of 
this was elvira so fully convinced, that she would have prefer 
putt into her daughter's hand 'amadis de gaul,' or 'the valiant 
champion, tirante the white;' and would soon have authorise her 
study the lewd exploit of 'don galaor,' or the lascivious joke of 
the 'damsel plazer di mi vida.' she had in consequence made two 
resolution respecting the bible. the first was that antonia should 
not read it till she was of an age to feel its beauties, and profit by 
its morality: the second, that it should be copy out with her own 
hand, and all improper passage either alter or omitted. she had 
adhere to this determination, and such was the bible which antonia was 
reading: it had been lately deliver to her, and she peruse it with 
an avidity, with a delight that was inexpressible. ambrosio perceive 
his mistake, and replace the book upon the table. 

antonia spoke of her mother's health with all the enthusiast joy of a 
youthful heart. 

'i admire your filial affection,' said the abbot; 'it prove the 
excellence and sensibility of your character; it promise a treasure to 
him whom heaven has destined to possess your affections. the breast, 
so capable of fond for a parent, what will it feel for a lover? 
nay, perhaps, what feel it for one even now? tell me, my lovely 
daughter; have you known what it is to love? answer me with sincerity: 
forget my habit, and consider me only as a friend.' 

'what it is to love?' said she, repeating his question; 'oh! yes, 
undoubtedly; i have love many, many people.' 

'that is not what i mean. the love of which i speak can be felt only 
for one. have you never seen the man whom you wish to be your 
husband?' 

'oh! no, indeed!' 

this was an untruth, but she was unconscious of its falsehood: she knew 
not the nature of her sentiment for lorenzo; and never have seen him 
since his first visit to elvira, with every day his image grew less 
feeble impress upon her bosom. besides, she thought of an husband 
with all a virgin's terror, and negative the friar's demand without a 
moment's hesitation. 

'and do you not long to see that man, antonia? do you feel no void in 
your heart which you fain would have fill up? do you heave no sigh 
for the absence of some one dear to you, but who that some one is, you 
know not? perceive you not that what formerly could please, has charm 
for you no longer? that a thousand new wishes, new ideas, new 
sensations, have sprang in your bosom, only to be felt, never to be 
described? or while you fill every other heart with passion, is it 
possible that your own remains insensible and cold? it cannot be! 
that melting eye, that blush cheek, that enchanting voluptuous 
melancholy which at times overspread your features, all these mark 
belye your words. you love, antonia, and in vain would hide it from 
me.' 

'father, you amaze me! what is this love of which you speak? i 
neither know its nature, nor if i felt it, why i should conceal the 
sentiment.' 

'have you seen no man, antonia, whom though never seen before, you 
seem long to have sought? whose form, though a stranger's, was 
familiar to your eyes? the sound of whose voice soothe you, pleased 
you, penetrate to your very soul? in whose presence you rejoiced, for 
whose absence you lamented? with whom your heart seem to expand, and 
in whose bosom with confidence unbounded you repose the care of your 
own? have you not felt all this, antonia?' 

'certainly i have: the first time that i saw you, i felt it.' 

ambrosio started. scarcely dare he credit his hearing. 

'me, antonia?' he cried, his eyes sparkle with delight and 
impatience, while he seize her hand, and pressed it rapturous to his 
lips. 'me, antonia? you felt these sentiment for me?' 

'even with more strength than you have described. the very moment that 
i beheld you, i felt so pleased, so interested! i wait so eager to 
catch the sound of your voice, and when i heard it, it seem so sweet! 
it spoke to me a language till then so unknown! methought, it told me 
a thousand things which i wish to hear! it seem as if i had long 
known you; as if i had a right to your friendship, your advice, and 
your protection. 

i wept when you departed, and long for the time which should restore 
you to my sight.' 

'antonia! my charming antonia!' exclaim the monk, and caught her to 
his bosom; 'can i believe my senses? repeat it to me, my sweet girl! 
tell me again that you love me, that you love me truly and tenderly!' 

'indeed, i do: let my mother be excepted, and the world hold no one 
more dear to me!' 

at this frank avowal ambrosio no long possessed himself; wild with 
desire, he clasp the blush tremble in his arms. he fasten his 
lip greedy upon hers, suck in her pure delicious breath, violate 
with his bold hand the treasure of her bosom, and wound around him her 
soft and yielding limbs. startled, alarmed, and confuse at his action, 
surprize at first deprived her of the power of resistance. at length 
recover herself, she strove to escape from his embrace. 

'father! .... ambrosio!' she cried; 'release me, for god's sake!' 

but the licentious monk heed not her prayers: he persist in his 
design, and proceed to take still greater liberties. antonia prayed, 
wept, and struggled: terrify to the extreme, though at what she knew 
not, she exert all her strength to repulse the friar, and was on the 
point of shriek for assistance when the chamber door was sudden 
thrown open. ambrosio had just sufficient presence of mind to be 
sensible of his danger. reluctantly he quit his prey, and start 
hasty from the couch. antonia utter an exclamation of joy, flew 
towards the door, and found herself clasp in the arms of her mother. 

alarm at some of the abbot's speeches, which antonia had innocent 
repeated, elvira resolve to ascertain the truth of her suspicions. 
she had known enough of mankind not to be impose upon by the monk's 
reputed virtue. she reflect on several circumstances, which though 
trifling, on being put together seem to authorize her fears. his 
frequent visits, which as far as she could see, were confine to her 
family; his evident emotion, whenever she spoke of antonia; his being 
in the full prime and heat of manhood; and above all, his pernicious 
philosophy communicate to her by antonia, and which accord but ill 
with his conversation in her presence, all these circumstances inspired 
her with doubt respecting the purity of ambrosio's friendship. in 
consequence, she resolved, when he should next be alone with antonia, 
to endeavour at surprize him. her plan had succeeded. 'tis true, 
that when she enter the room, he had already abandoned his prey; but 
the disorder of her daughter's dress, and the shame and confusion 
stamp upon the friar's countenance, suffice to prove that her 
suspicion were but too well-founded. however, she was too prudent to 
make those suspicion known. she judge that to unmask the imposter 
would be no easy matter, the public being so much prejudiced in his 
favour: and have but few friends, she thought it dangerous to make 
herself so powerful an enemy. she affected therefore not to remark his 
agitation, seat herself tranquil upon the sopha, assign some 
trifling reason for have quit her room unexpectedly, and converse 
on various subject with seeming confidence and ease. 

reassure by her behaviour, the monk began to recover himself. he 
strove to answer elvira without appear embarrassed: but he was 
still too great a novice in dissimulation, and he felt that he must 
look confuse and awkward. he soon broke off the conversation, and 
rose to depart. what was his vexation, when on taking leave, elvira 
told him in polite terms, that being now perfectly reestablished, she 
thought it an injustice to deprive other of his company, who might be 
more in need of it! she assured him of her eternal gratitude, for the 
benefit which during her illness she had derive from his society and 
exhortations: and she lament that her domestic affairs, as well as 
the multitude of business which his situation must of necessity impose 
upon him, would in future deprive her of the pleasure of his visits. 
though deliver in the mildest language this hint was too plain to be 
mistaken. still, he was prepare to put in a remonstrance when an 
expressive look from elvira stop him short. he dare not press her 
to receive him, for her manner convinced him that he was discovered: 
he submit without reply, took an hasty leave, and retired to the 
abbey, his heart fill with rage and shame, with bitter and 
disappointment. 

antonia's mind felt relieved by his departure; yet she could not help 
lament that she was never to see him more. elvira also felt a 
secret sorrow; she had received too much pleasure from thinking him her 
friend, not to regret the necessity of change her opinion: but her 
mind was too much accustomed to the fallacy of worldly friendship to 
permit her present disappointment to weigh upon it long. she now 
endeavour to make her daughter aware of the risque which she had ran: 
but she was oblige to treat the subject with caution, lest in remove 
the bandage of ignorance, the veil of innocence should be rent away. 
she therefore contented herself with warning antonia to be upon her 
guard, and order her, should the abbot persist in his visits, never 
to receive them but in company. with this injunction antonia promise 
to comply. 

ambrosio hasten to his cell. he closed the door after him, and threw 
himself upon the bed in despair. the impulse of desire, the sting of 
disappointment, the shame of detection, and the fear of being public 
unmasked, render his bosom a scene of the most horrible confusion. 
he knew not what course to pursue. debar the presence of antonia, 
he had no hope of satisfying that passion which was now become a part 
of his existence. he reflect that his secret was in a woman's power: 
he tremble with apprehension when he beheld the precipice before him, 
and with rage, when he thought that had it not been for elvira, he 
should now have possessed the object of his desires. with the direct 
imprecation he vow vengeance against her; he swore that, cost what 
it would, he still would possess antonia. start from the bed, he 
pace the chamber with disorder steps, howl with impotent fury, 
dashed himself violent against the walls, and indulge all the 
transport of rage and madness. 

he was still under the influence of this storm of passion when he 
heard a gentle knock at the door of his cell. conscious that his voice 
must have been heard, he dare not refuse admittance to the importuner: 
he strove to compose himself, and to hide his agitation. have in 
some degree succeeded, he drew back the bolt: the door opened, and 
matilda appeared. 

at this precise moment there was no one with whose presence he could 
better have dispensed. he had not sufficient command over himself to 
conceal his vexation. he start back, and frowned. 

'i am busy,' said he in a stern and hasty tone; 'leave me!' 

matilda heed him not: she again fasten the door, and then advanced 
towards him with an air gentle and supplicating. 

'forgive me, ambrosio,' said she; 'for your own sake i must not obey 
you. fear no complaint from me; i come not to reproach you with your 
ingratitude. i pardon you from my heart, and since your love can no 
long be mine, i request the next best gift, your confidence and 
friendship. we cannot force our inclinations; the little beauty which 
you once saw in me has perish with its novelty, and if it can no 
long excite desire, mine is the fault, not yours. but why persist in 
shun me? why such anxiety to fly my presence? you have sorrows, 
but will not permit me to share them; you have disappointments, but 
will not accept my comfort; you have wishes, but forbid my aid your 
pursuits. 'tis of this which i complain, not of your indifference to 
my person. i have given up the claim of the mistress, but nothing 
shall prevail on me to give up those of the friend.' 

her mild had an instantaneous effect upon ambrosio's feelings. 

'generous matilda!' he replied, taking her hand, 'how far do you rise 
superior to the foible of your sex! yes, i accept your offer. i have 
need of an adviser, and a confident: in you i find every needful 
quality united. but to aid my pursuit .... ah! matilda, it lie 
not in your power!' 

'it lie in no one's power but mine. ambrosio, your secret is none to 
me; your every step, your every action has been observe by my 
attentive eye. you love.' 

'matilda!' 

'why conceal it from me? fear not the little jealousy which taint the 
generality of women: my soul disdain so despicable a passion. you 
love, ambrosio; antonia dalfa is the object of your flame. i know 
every circumstance respecting your passion: every conversation has 
been repeated to me. i have been informed of your attempt to enjoy 
antonia's person, your disappointment, and dismiss from elvira's 
house. you now despair of possess your mistress; but i come to 
revive your hopes, and point out the road to success.' 

'to success? oh! impossible!' 

'to them who dare nothing is impossible. rely upon me, and you may yet 
be happy. the time is come, ambrosio, when regard for your comfort and 
tranquill compel me to reveal a part of my history, with which you 
are still unacquainted. listen, and do not interrupt me: should my 
confession disgust you, remember that in making it my sole aim is to 
satisfy your wishes, and restore that peace to your heart which at 
present has abandoned it. i formerly mention that my guardian was a 
man of uncommon knowledge: he took pains to instil that knowledge into 
my infant mind. among the various science which curiosity had induce 
him to explore, he neglect not that which by most is esteem 
impious, and by many chimerical. i speak of those arts which relate to 
the world of spirits. his deep research into cause and effects, his 
unweary application to the study of natural philosophy, his profound 
and unlimited knowledge of the property and virtue of every gem 
which enrich the deep, of every herb which the earth produces, at 
length procure him the distinction which he had sought so long, so 
earnestly. his curiosity was fully slaked, his ambition ample 
gratified. he gave law to the elements; he could reverse the order of 
nature; his eye read the mandate of futurity, and the infernal spirits 
were submissive to his commands. why shrink you from me? i understand 
that enquiring look. your suspicion are right, though your terror 
are unfounded. my guardian conceal not from me his most precious 
acquisition. yet had i never seen you, i should never have exert my 
power. like you i shudder at the thought of magic: like you i had 
form a terrible idea of the consequence of raise a daemon. to 
preserve that life which your love had taught me to prize, i had 
recourse to means which i tremble at employing. you remember that 
night which i past in st. clare's sepulchre? then was it that, 
surround by moulder bodies, i dare to perform those mystic rite 
which summon to my aid a fallen angel. judge what must have been my 
joy at discover that my terror were imaginary: i saw the daemon 
obedient to my orders, i saw him tremble at my frown, and found that, 
instead of sell my soul to a master, my courage had purchase for 
myself a slave.' 

'rash matilda! what have you done? you have doom yourself to 
endless perdition; you have barter for momentary power eternal 
happiness! if on witchcraft depend the fruition of my desires, i 
renounce your aid most absolutely. the consequence are too horrible: 
i doat upon antonia, but am not so blind by lust as to sacrifice for 
her enjoyment my existence both in this world and the next.' 

'ridiculous prejudices! oh! blush, ambrosio, blush at being subject 
to their dominion. where is the risque of accept my offers? what 
should induce my persuade you to this step, except the wish of 
restore you to happiness and quiet. if there is danger, it must fall 
upon me: it is i who invoke the ministry of the spirits; mine 
therefore will be the crime, and yours the profit. but danger there is 
none: the enemy of mankind is my slave, not my sovereign. is there no 
difference between give and receiving laws, between serving and 
commanding? awake from your idle dreams, ambrosio! throw from you 
these terror so ill-suited to a soul like yours; leave them for common 
men, and dare to be happy! accompany me this night to st. clare's 
sepulchre, witness my incantations, and antonia is your own.' 

'to obtain her by such means i neither can, or will. cease then to 
persuade me, for i dare not employ hell's agency. 

'you dare not? how have you deceive me! that mind which i esteem 
so great and valiant, prove to be feeble, puerile, and grovelling, a 
slave to vulgar errors, and weak than a woman's.' 

'what? though conscious of the danger, wilful shall i expose myself 
to the seducer's arts? shall i renounce for ever my title to 
salvation? shall my eyes seek a sight which i know will blast them? 
no, no, matilda; i will not ally myself with god's enemy.' 

'are you then god's friend at present? have you not broken your 
engagement with him, renounce his service, and abandoned yourself to 
the impulse of your passions? are you not plan the destruction of 
innocence, the ruin of a creature whom he form in the mould of 
angels? if not of daemons, whose aid would you invoke to forward this 
laudable design? will the seraphim protect it, conduct antonia to 
your arms, and sanction with their ministry your illicit pleasures? 
absurd! but i am not deceived, ambrosio! it is not virtue which make 
you reject my offer: you would accept it, but you dare not. 'tis not 
the crime which hold your hand, but the punishment; 'tis not respect 
for god which restrain you, but the terror of his vengeance! fain 
would you offend him in secret, but you tremble to profess yourself his 
foe. now shame on the coward soul, which wants the courage either to 
be a firm friend or open enemy!' 

'to look upon guilt with horror, matilda, is in itself a merit: in this 
respect i glory to confess myself a coward. though my passion have 
made me deviate from her laws, i still feel in my heart an innate love 
of virtue. but it ill become you to tax me with my perjury: you, who 
first seduce me to violate my vows; you, who first rouze my sleep 
vices, made me feel the weight of religion's chains, and bad me be 
convinced that guilt had pleasures. yet though my principles have 
yield to the force of temperament, i still have sufficient grace to 
shudder at sorcery, and avoid a crime so monstrous, so unpardonable!' 

'unpardonable, say you? where then is your constant boast of the 
almighty's infinite mercy? has he of late set bounds to it? receive 
he no long a sinner with joy? you injure him, ambrosio; you will 
always have time to repent, and he have goodness to forgive. afford 
him a glorious opportunity to exert that goodness: the greater your 
crime, the greater his merit in pardoning. away then with these 
childish scruples: be persuade to your good, and follow me to the 
sepulchre.' 

'oh! cease, matilda! that scoff tone, that bold and impious 
language, is horrible in every mouth, but most so in a woman's. let us 
drop a conversation which excite no other sentiment than horror and 
disgust. i will not follow you to the sepulchre, or accept the 
service of your infernal agents. antonia shall be mine, but mine by 
human means.' 

'then yours she will never be! you are banish her presence; her 
mother has open her eyes to your designs, and she is now upon her 
guard against them. nay more, she love another. a youth of 
distinguished merit possess her heart, and unless you interfere, a 
few days will make her his bride. this intelligence was brought me by 
my invisible servants, to whom i had recourse on first perceive your 
indifference. they watch your every action, related to me all that 
past at elvira's, and inspired me with the idea of favour your 
designs. their report have been my only comfort. though you shun 
my presence, all your proceedings were known to me: nay, i was 
constant with you in some degree, thanks to this precious gift!' 

with these words she drew from beneath her habit a mirror of polish 
steel, the border of which were marked with various strange and 
unknown characters. 

'amidst all my sorrows, amidst all my regrets for your coldness, i was 
sustain from despair by the virtue of this talisman. on pronounce 
certain words, the person appear in it on whom the observer's thought 
are bent: thus though _i_ was exile from your sight, you, ambrosio, 
were ever present to mine.' 

the friar's curiosity was excited strongly. 

'what you relate is incredible! matilda, are you not amuse yourself 
with my credulity?' 

'be your own eyes the judge.' 

she put the mirror into his hand. curiosity induce him to take it, 
and love, to wish that antonia might appear. matilda pronounced the 
magic words. immediately, a thick smoke rose from the character 
trace upon the borders, and spread itself over the surface. it 
disperse again gradually; a confuse mixture of colours and image 
present themselves to the friar's eyes, which at length arrange 
themselves in their proper places, he beheld in miniature antonia's 
lovely form. 

the scene was a small closet belong to her apartment. she was 
undress to bathe herself. the long tresses of her hair were already 
bound up. the amorous monk had full opportunity to observe the 
voluptuous contour and admirable symmetry of her person. she threw 
off her last garment, and advance to the bath prepared for her, she 
put her foot into the water. it struck cold, and she drew it back 
again. though unconscious of being observed, an inbred sense of 
modesty induce her to veil her charms; and she stood hesitate upon 
the brink, in the attitude of the venus de medicis. at this moment a 
tame linnet flew towards her, nestle its head between her breasts, and 
nibble them in wanton play. the smile antonia strove in vain to 
shake off the bird, and at length raise her hand to drive it from its 
delightful harbour. ambrosio could bear no more: his desire were 
work up to phrenzy. 

'i yield!' he cried, dashing the mirror upon the ground: 'matilda, i 
follow you! do with me what you will!' 

she wait not to hear his consent repeated. it was already midnight. 
she flew to her cell, and soon return with her little basket and the 
key of the cemetery, which had remain in her possession since her 
first visit to the vaults. she gave the monk no time for reflection. 

'come!' she said, and took his hand; 'follow me, and witness the 
effects of your resolve!' 

this said, she drew him hasty along. they pass into the 
burying-ground unobserved, open the door of the sepulchre, and found 
themselves at the head of the subterraneous staircase. as yet the 
beam of the full moon had guide their steps, but that resource now 
fail them. matilda had neglect to provide herself with a lamp. 
still holding ambrosio's hand she descended the marble steps; but the 
profound obscurity with which they were overspread oblige them to walk 
slow and cautiously. 

'you tremble!' said matilda to her companion; 'fear not; the destined 
spot is near.' 

they reach the foot of the staircase, and continue to proceed, 
feeling their way along the walls. on turning a corner suddenly, they 
descry faint gleam of light which seem burning at a distance. 
thither they bent their steps: the ray proceed from a small 
sepulchral lamp which flame unceasing before the statue of st. 
clare. it tinge with dim and cheerless beam the massy column which 
support the roof, but was too feeble to dissipate the thick gloom in 
which the vault above were buried. 

matilda took the lamp. 

'wait for me!' said she to the friar; 'in a few moments i am here 
again.' 

with these words she hasten into one of the passage which branch 
in various directions from this spot, and form a sort of labyrinth. 
ambrosio was now left alone: dark the most profound surround him, 
and encourage the doubt which began to revive in his bosom. he had 
been hurried away by the delirium of the moment: the shame of 
betray his terrors, while in matilda's presence, had induce him to 
repress them; but now that he was abandoned to himself, they resume 
their former ascendancy. he tremble at the scene which he was soon to 
witness. he knew not how far the delusion of magic might operate upon 
his mind, and possibly might force him to some deed whose commission 
would make the breach between himself and heaven irreparable. in this 
fearful dilemma, he would have implore god's assistance, but was 
conscious that he had forfeit all claim to such protection. gladly 
would he have return to the abbey; but as he had past through 
innumerable cavern and winding passages, the attempt of regain the 
stairs was hopeless. his fate was determined: no possibility of 
escape present itself: he therefore combat his apprehensions, and 
call every argument to his succour, which might enable him to support 
the try scene with fortitude. he reflect that antonia would be the 
reward of his daring: he inflamed his imagination by enumerate her 
charms. he persuade himself that (as matilda had observed), he always 
should have time sufficient for repentance, and that as he employ her 
assistance, not that of the daemons, the crime of sorcery could not be 
laid to his charge. he had read much respecting witchcraft: he 
understood that unless a formal act was sign renounce his claim to 
salvation, satan would have no power over him. he was fully determined 
not to execute any such act, whatever threat might be used, or 
advantage held out to him. 

such were his meditation while wait for matilda. they were 
interrupt by a low murmur which seem at no great distance from him. 
he was startled. he listened. some minutes past in silence, after 
which the murmur was repeated. it appear to be the groan of one 
in pain. in any other situation, this circumstance would only have 
excited his attention and curiosity: 

in the present, his predominant sensation was that of terror. his 
imagination total engross by the idea of sorcery and spirits, he 
fancy that some unquiet ghost was wandering near him; or else that 
matilda had fallen a victim to her presumption, and was perishing under 
the cruel fang of the daemons. the noise seem not to approach, but 
continue to be heard at intervals. sometimes it became more audible, 
doubtless as the suffering of the person who utter the groan became 
more acute and insupportable. ambrosio now and then thought that he 
could distinguish accents; and once in particular he was almost 
convinced that he heard a faint voice exclaim, 

'god! oh! god! no hope! no succour!' 

yet deep groan follow these words. they die away gradually, and 
universal silence again prevailed. 

'what can this mean?' thought the bewilder monk. 

at that moment an idea which flash into his mind, almost petrify 
him with horror. he started, and shudder at himself. 

'should it be possible!' he groan involuntarily; 'should it but be 
possible, oh! what a monster am i!' 

he wish to resolve his doubts, and to repair his fault, if it were 
not too late already: but these generous and compassionate sentiment 
were soon put to flight by the return of matilda. he forgot the 
groan sufferer, and remember nothing but the danger and 
embarrassment of his own situation. the light of the return lamp 
gilded the walls, and in a few moments after matilda stood beside him. 
she had quit her religious habit: she was now cloathe in a long 
sable robe, on which was trace in gold embroidery a variety of unknown 
characters: it was fasten by a girdle of precious stones, in which 
was fixed a poignard. her neck and arms were uncovered. in her hand 
she bore a golden wand. her hair was loose and flow wildly upon her 
shoulders; her eyes sparkle with terrific expression; and her whole 
demeanour was calculate to inspire the behold with awe and 
admiration. 

'follow me!' she said to the monk in a low and solemn voice; 'all is 
ready!' 

his limb trembled, while he obey her. she led him through various 
narrow passages; and on every side as they past along, the beam of the 
lamp display none but the most revolting objects; skulls, bones, 
graves, and image whose eyes seem to glare on them with horror and 
surprize. at length they reach a spacious cavern, whose lofty roof 
the eye sought in vain to discover. a profound obscurity hover 
through the void. damp vapours struck cold to the friar's heart; and 
he listen sadly to the blast while it howl along the lonely vaults. 
here matilda stopped. she turn to ambrosio. his cheek and lip 
were pale with apprehension. by a glance of mingle scorn and anger 
she reprove his pusillanimity, but she spoke not. she placed the lamp 
upon the ground, near the basket. she motion that ambrosio should be 
silent, and began the mysterious rites. she drew a circle round him, 
another round herself, and then taking a small phial from the basket, 
pour a few drops upon the ground before her. she bent over the 
place, mutter some indistinct sentences, and immediately a pale 
sulphurous flame arose from the ground. it increase by degrees, and 
at length spread its wave over the whole surface, the circle alone 
excepted in which stood matilda and the monk. it then ascend the 
huge column of unhewn stone, glide along the roof, and form the 
cavern into an immense chamber total cover with blue tremble 
fire. it emit no heat: on the contrary, the extreme chill of 
the place seem to augment with every moment. matilda continue her 
incantations: at interval she took various articles from the basket, 
the nature and name of most of which were unknown to the friar: but 
among the few which he distinguished, he particularly observe three 
human fingers, and an agnu dei which she broke in pieces. she threw 
them all into the flame which burn before her, and they were 
instantly consumed. 

the monk beheld her with anxious curiosity. sudden she utter a 
loud and piercing shriek. she appear to be seize with an access of 
delirium; she tore her hair, beat her bosom, use the most frantic 
gestures, and drawing the poignard from her girdle plunge it into her 
left arm. the blood gush out plentifully, and as she stood on the 
brink of the circle, she took care that it should fall on the outside. 
the flame retired from the spot on which the blood was pouring. a 
volume of dark cloud rose slow from the ensanguined earth, and 
ascend gradually, till it reach the vault of the cavern. at the 
same time a clap of thunder was heard: the echo peal fearful along 
the subterraneous passages, and the ground shook beneath the feet of 
the enchantress. 

it was now that ambrosio repent of his rashness. the solemn 
singular of the charm had prepared him for something strange and 
horrible. he wait with fear for the spirit's appearance, whose 
coming was announce by thunder and earthquakes. he look wildly 
round him, expect that some dreadful apparition would meet his eyes, 
the sight of which would drive him mad. a cold shiver seize his 
body, and he sank upon one knee, unable to support himself. 

'he comes!' exclaim matilda in a joyful accent. 

ambrosio started, and expect the daemon with terror. what was his 
surprize, when the thunder cease to roll, a full strain of melodious 
music sound in the air. at the same time the cloud dispersed, and he 
beheld a figure more beautiful than fancy's pencil ever drew. it was a 
youth seemingly scarce eighteen, the perfection of whose form and face 
was unrivalled. he was perfectly naked: a bright star sparkle upon 
his forehead; two crimson wings extend themselves from his shoulders; 
and his silken locks were confine by a band of many-coloured fires, 
which play round his head, form themselves into a variety of 
figures, and shone with a brilliance far surpassing that of precious 
stones. circlet of diamond were fasten round his arms and ankles, 
and in his right hand he bore a silver branch, imitate myrtle. his 
form shone with dazzle glory: he was surround by cloud of 
rose-coloured light, and at the moment that he appeared, a refreshing 
air breathe perfume through the cavern. enchant at a vision so 
contrary to his expectations, ambrosio gaze upon the spirit with 
delight and wonder: yet however beautiful the figure, he could not but 
remark a wild in the daemon's eyes, and a mysterious melancholy 
impress upon his features, betray the fallen angel, and inspire 
the spectator with secret awe. 

the music ceased. matilda address herself to the spirit: she spoke 
in a language unintelligible to the monk, and was answer in the same. 
she seem to insist upon something which the daemon was unwill to 
grant. he frequent dart upon ambrosio angry glances, and at such 
times the friar's heart sank within him. matilda appear to grow 
incensed. she spoke in a loud and commanding tone, and her gesture 
declared that she was threaten him with her vengeance. her menace 
had the desire effect: the spirit sank upon his knee, and with a 
submissive air present to her the branch of myrtle. no soon had 
she received it, than the music was again heard; a thick cloud spread 
itself over the apparition; the blue flame disappeared, and total 
obscurity reign through the cave. the abbot move not from his 
place: his faculty were all bound up in pleasure, anxiety, and 
surprize. at length the dark dispersing, he perceive matilda 
standing near him in her religious habit, with the myrtle in her hand. 
no trace of the incantation, and the vault were only illuminate by 
the faint ray of the sepulchral lamp. 

'i have succeeded,' said matilda, 'though with more difficulty than i 
expected. lucifer, whom i summon to my assistance, was at first 
unwill to obey my commands: to enforce his compliance i was 
constrained to have recourse to my strongest charms. they have 
produce the desire effect, but i have engaged never more to invoke 
his agency in your favour. beware then, how you employ an opportunity 
which never will return. my magic arts will now be of no use to you: 
in future you can only hope for supernatural aid by invoke the 
daemon yourself, and accept the conditions of their service. this 
you will never do: you want strength of mind to force them to 
obedience, and unless you pay their establish price, they will not be 
your voluntary servants. in this one instance they consent to obey 
you: i offer you the means of enjoy your mistress, and be careful 
not to lose the opportunity. receive this constellate myrtle: while 
you bear this in your hand, every door will fly open to you. it will 
procure you access tomorrow night to antonia's chamber: then breathe 
upon it thrice, pronounce her name, and place it upon her pillow. a 
death-like slumber will immediately seize upon her, and deprive her of 
the power of resist your attempts. sleep will hold her till break 
of morning. in this state you may satisfy your desire without danger 
of being discovered; since when daylight shall dispel the effects of 
the enchantment, antonia will perceive her dishonour, but be ignorant 
of the ravisher. be happy then, my ambrosio, and let this service 
convince you that my friendship is disinterested and pure. the night 
must be near expiring: let us return to the abbey, lest our absence 
should create surprize.' 

the abbot received the talisman with silent gratitude. his idea were 
too much bewilder by the adventure of the night to permit his 
express his thanks audibly, or indeed as yet to feel the whole value 
of her present. matilda took up her lamp and basket, and guide her 
companion from the mysterious cavern. she restore the lamp to its 
former place, and continue her route in darkness, till she reach the 
foot of the staircase. the first beam of the rising sun dart down 
it facilitate the ascent. matilda and the abbot hasten out of the 
sepulchre, closed the door after them, and soon regain the abbey's 
western cloister. no one met them, and they retired unobserved to 
their respective cells. 

the confusion of ambrosio's mind now began to appease. he rejoice in 
the fortunate issue of his adventure, and reflect upon the virtue 
of the myrtle, look upon antonia as already in his power. 
imagination retrace to him those secret charm betray to him by the 
enchant mirror, and he wait with impatience for the approach of 
midnight. 




volume iii 



chapter i 

the cricket sing, and man's o'er-laboured sense 
repair itself by rest: our tarquin thus 
did soft press the rushes, ere he waken 
the chastity he wounded--cytherea, 
how brave thou becom'st thy bed! fresh lily! 
and white than the sheets! 
cymbeline. 

all the research of the marquis de las cisterna prove vain: agnes 
was lost to him for ever. despair produce so violent an effect upon 
his constitution, that the consequence was a long and severe illness. 
this prevent him from visiting elvira as he had intended; and she 
being ignorant of the cause of his neglect, it gave her no trifling 
uneasiness. his sister's death had prevent lorenzo from 
communicate to his uncle his designs respecting antonia: the 
injunction of her mother forbad his present himself to her without 
the duke's consent; and as she heard no more of him or his proposals, 
elvira conjecture that he had either met with a better match, or had 
been command to give up all thought of her daughter. every day made 
her more uneasy respecting antonia's fate: while she retain the 
abbot's protection, she bore with fortitude the disappointment of her 
hope with regard to lorenzo and the marquis. that resource now fail 
her. she was convinced that ambrosio had meditate her daughter's 
ruin: and when she reflect that her death would leave antonia 
friendless and unprotected in a world so base, so perfidious and 
depraved, her heart swell with the bitter of apprehension. at 
such times she would sit for hour gaze upon the lovely girl; and 
seeming to listen to her innocent prattle, while in reality her 
thought dwelt upon the sorrow into which a moment would suffice to 
plunge her. then she would clasp her in her arms suddenly, lean her 
head upon her daughter's bosom, and bedew it with her tears. 

an event was in preparation which, had she known it, would have 
relieved her from her inquietude. lorenzo now wait only for a 
favourable opportunity to inform the duke of his intended marriage: 
however, a circumstance which occur at this period, oblige him to 
delay his explanation for a few days longer. 

don raymond's malady seem to gain ground. lorenzo was constant at 
his bedside, and treat him with a tender truly fraternal. both 
the cause and effects of the disorder were highly afflict to the 
brother of agnes: yet theodore's grief was scarcely less sincere. that 
amiable boy quit not his master for a moment, and put every means in 
practice to console and alleviate his sufferings. the marquis had 
conceive so rooted an affection for his deceased mistress, that it was 
evident to all that he never could survive her loss: nothing could 
have prevent him from sink under his grief but the persuasion of 
her being still alive, and in need of his assistance. though convinced 
of its falsehood, his attendant encourage him in a belief which 
form his only comfort. he was assured daily that fresh perquisite 
were making respecting the fate of agnes: story were invent 
recount the various attempt made to get admittance into the 
convent; and circumstances were related which, though they did not 
promise her absolute recovery, at least were sufficient to keep his 
hope alive. the marquis constant fell into the most terrible excess 
of passion when informed of the failure of these supposed attempts. 
still he would not credit that the succeed one would have the same 
fate, but flatter himself that the next would prove more fortunate. 

theodore was the only one who exert himself to realize his master's 
chimoeras. he was eternal busy in plan scheme for enter 
the convent, or at least of obtain from the nun some intelligence 
of agnes. to execute these scheme was the only inducement which could 
prevail on him to quit don raymond. he became a very proteus, change 
his shape every day; but all his metamorphose were to very little 
purpose: he regularly return to the palace de las cisterna without 
any intelligence to confirm his master's hopes. one day he took it 
into his head to disguise himself as a beggar. he put a patch over his 
left eye, took his guitar in hand, and post himself at the gate of 
the convent. 

'if agnes is really confine in the convent,' thought he, 'and hear my 
voice, she will recollect it, and possibly may find means to let me 
know that she is here.' 

with this idea he mingle with a crowd of beggar who assemble daily 
at the gate of st. clare to receive soup, which the nun were 
accustomed to distribute at twelve o'clock. all were provided with 
jug or bowls to carry it away; but as theodore had no utensil of this 
kind, he beg leave to eat his portion at the convent door. this was 
grant without difficulty: his sweet voice, and in spite of his 
patch eye, his engaging countenance, won the heart of the good old 
porteress, who, aid by a lay-sister, was busy in serving to each 
his mess. theodore was bad to stay till the other should depart, and 
promise that his request should then be granted. the youth desire no 
better, since it was not to eat soup that he present himself at the 
convent. he thank the porteress for her permission, retired from the 
door, and seating himself upon a large stone, amuse himself in tune 
his guitar while the beggar were served. 

as soon as the crowd was gone, theodore was beckon to the gate, and 
desire to come in. he obey with infinite readiness, but affected 
great respect at passing the hallow threshold, and to be much daunt 
by the presence of the reverend ladies. his feign timid flatter 
the vanity of the nuns, who endeavour to reassure him. the porteress 
took him into her awn little parlour: in the meanwhile, the lay-sister 
went to the kitchen, and soon return with a double portion of soup, 
of better quality than what was given to the beggars. his hostess 
add some fruits and confection from her own private store, and both 
encourage the youth to dine heartily. to all these attention he 
reply with much seeming gratitude, and abundance of blessing upon 
his benefactresses. while he ate, the nun admire the delicacy of his 
features, the beauty of his hair, and the sweet and grace which 
accompany all his actions. they lament to each other in whispers, 
that so charming a youth should be expose to the seduction of the 
world, and agreed, that he would be a worthy pillar of the catholic 
church. they conclude their conference by resolve that heaven would 
be render a real service if they entreat the prioress to intercede 
with ambrosio for the beggar's admission into the order of capuchins. 

this being determined, the porteress, who was a person of great 
influence in the convent, post away in all haste to the domina's 
cell. here she made so flaming a narrative of theodore's merit that 
the old lady grew curious to see him. accordingly, the porteress was 
commission to convey him to the parlour grate. in the interim, the 
supposed beggar was sift the lay-sister with respect to the fate of 
agnes: her evidence only corroborate the domina's assertions. she 
said that agnes had been taken ill on return from confession, had 
never quit her bed from that moment, and that she had herself been 
present at the funeral. she even attested have seen her dead body, 
and assist with her own hand in adjust it upon the bier. this 
account discourage theodore: yet as he had pushed the adventure so 
far, he resolve to witness its conclusion. 

the porteress now returned, and ordered him to follow her. he obeyed, 
and was conduct into the parlour, where the lady prioress was already 
post at the grate. the nun surround her, who all flock with 
eager to a scene which promise some diversion. theodore salute 
them with profound respect, and his presence had the power to smooth 
for a moment even the stern brow of the superior. she ask several 
question respecting his parents, his religion, and what had reduce 
him to a state of beggary. to these demand his answer were perfectly 
satisfactory and perfectly false. he was then ask his opinion of a 
monastic life: he reply in terms of high estimation and respect for 
it. upon this, the prioress told him that his obtain an entrance 
into a religious order was not impossible; that her recommendation 
would not permit his poverty to be an obstacle, and that if she found 
him deserving it, he might depend in future upon her protection. 
theodore assured her that to merit her favour would be his highest 
ambition; and have ordered him to return next day, when she would 
talk with him further, the domina quit the parlour. 

the nuns, whom respect for the superior had till then kept silent, now 
crowded all together to the grate, and assail the youth with a 
multitude of questions. he had already examine each with attention: 
alas! agnes was not amongst them. the nun heap question upon 
question so thick that it was scarcely possible for him to reply. 
one ask where he was born, since his accent declared him to be a 
foreigner: another want to know, why he wore a patch upon his left 
eye: sister helena enquire whether he had not a sister like him, 
because she should like such a companion; and sister rachael was fully 
persuade that the brother would be the pleasant companion of the 
two. theodore amuse himself with retail to the credulous nun for 
truth all the strange story which his imagination could invent. he 
related to them his supposed adventures, and penetrate every auditor 
with astonishment, while he talk of giants, savages, ship-wrecks, and 
island inhabit 

'by anthropophagi, and men whose head 
do grow beneath their shoulders,' 

with many other circumstances to the full as remarkable. he said, that 
he was born in terra incognita, was educated at an hottentot 
university, and had past two years among the america of silesia. 

'for what regards the loss of my eye' said he, 'it was a just 
punishment upon me for disrespect to the virgin, when i made my second 
pilgrimage to loretto. i stood near the altar in the miraculous 
chapel: the monk were proceeding to array the statue in her best 
apparel. the pilgrim were ordered to close their eyes during this 
ceremony: but though by nature extremely religious, curiosity was too 
powerful. at the moment ..... i shall penetrate you with horror, 
reverend ladies, when i reveal my crime! .... at the moment that 
the monk were change her shift, i venture to open my left eye, and 
gave a little peep towards the statue. that look was my last! the 
glory which surround the virgin was too great to be supported. i 
hasty shut my sacrilegious eye, and never have been able to unclose 
it since!' 

at the relation of this miracle the nun all cross themselves, and 
promise to intercede with the blessed virgin for the recovery of his 
sight. they express their wonder at the extent of his travels, and 
at the strange adventure which he had met with at so early an age. 
they now remark his guitar, and enquire whether he was an adept in 
music. he reply with modesty that it was not for him to decide upon 
his talents, but request permission to appeal to them as judges. 
this was grant without difficulty. 

'but at least,' said the old porteress, 'take care not to sing any 
thing profane.' 

'you may depend upon my discretion,' reply theodore: 'you shall hear 
how dangerous it is for young women to abandon themselves to their 
passions, illustrate by the adventure of a damsel who fell sudden in 
love with an unknown knight.' 

'but is the adventure true?' enquire the porteress. 

'every word of it. it happen in denmark, and the heroine was thought 
so beautiful that she was known by no other name but that of "the 
lovely maid".' 

'in denmark, say you?' mumble an old nun; 'are not the people all 
black in denmark?' 

'by no means, reverend lady; they are of a delicate pea-green with 
flame-coloured hair and whiskers.' 

'mother of god! pea-green?' exclaim sister helena; 'oh! 'tis 
impossible!' 

'impossible?' said the porteress with a look of contempt and 
exultation: 'not at all: when i was a young woman, i remember seeing 
several of them myself.' 

theodore now put his instrument in proper order. he had read the story 
of a king of england whose prison was discover by a minstrel; and he 
hope that the same scheme would enable him to discover agnes, should 
she be in the convent. he chose a ballad which she had taught him 
herself in the castle of lindenberg: she might possibly catch the 
sound, and he hope to hear her reply to some of the stanzas. his 
guitar was now in tune, and he prepared to strike it. 

'but before i begin,' said he 'it is necessary to inform you, ladies, 
that this same denmark is terribly infest by sorcerers, witches, and 
evil spirits. every element possess its appropriate daemons. the 
wood are haunt by a malignant power, call "the erl- or 
oak-king:" he it is who blight the trees, spoils the harvest, and 
command the imp and goblins: he appear in the form of an old man of 
majestic figure, with a golden crown and long white beard: his 
principal amusement is to entice young children from their parents, and 
as soon as he get them into his cave, he tear them into a thousand 
pieces--the river are govern by another fiend, call "the 
water-king:" his province is to agitate the deep, occasion 
ship-wrecks, and drag the drown sailor beneath the waves: he wear 
the appearance of a warrior, and employ himself in lure young 
virgin into his snare: what he do with them, when he catch them 
in the water, reverend ladies, i leave for you to imagine--"the 
fire-king" seem to be a man all form of flames: he raise the 
meteor and wandering lights which beguile traveller into pond and 
marshes, and he direct the lightning where it may do most 
mischief--the last of these elementary daemon is call "the 
cloud-king;" his figure is that of a beautiful youth, and he is 
distinguished by two large sable wings: though his outside is so 
enchanting, he is not a bit better disposed than the others: he is 
continual employ in raise storms, tear up forest by the 
roots, and blow castle and convent about the ear of their 
inhabitants. the first has a daughter, who is queen of the elves and 
fairies; the second has a mother, who is a powerful enchantress: 
neither of these ladies are worth more than the gentlemen: i do not 
remember to have heard any family assign to the two other daemons, 
but at present i have no business with any of them except the fiend of 
the waters. he is the hero of my ballad; but i thought it necessary 
before i began, to give you some account of his proceedings--' 

theodore then play a short symphony; after which, stretch his 
voice to its utmost extent to facilitate its reach the ear of agnes, 
he sang the following stanzas. 

the water-king 

a denmark ballad 

with gentle murmur flow the tide, 
while by the fragrant flowery side 
the lovely maid with carol gay 
to mary's church pursue her way. 

the water-fiend's malignant eye 
along the bank beheld her hie; 
straight to his mother-witch he sped, 
and thus in suppliant accent said: 

'oh! mother! mother! now advise, 
how i may yonder maid surprize: 
oh! mother! mother! now explain, 
how i may yonder maid obtain.' 

the witch she gave him armour white; 
she form him like a gallant knight; 
of water clear next made her hand 
a steed, whose housing were of sand. 

the water-king then swift he went; 
to mary's church his steps he bent: 
he bound his courser to the door, 
and pace the church-yard three times four. 

his courser to the door bound he, 
and pace the church-yard four time three: 
then hasten up the aisle, where all 
the people flocked, both great and small. 

the priest said, as the knight drew near, 
'and wherefore come the white chief here?' 
the lovely maid she smile aside; 
'oh! would i were the white chief's bride!' 

he stept o'er bench one and two; 
'oh! lovely maid, i die for you!' 
he stept o'er bench two and three; 
'oh! lovely maiden, go with me!' 

then sweet she smiled, the lovely maid, 
and while she gave her hand, she said, 
'betide me joy, betide me woe, 
o'er hill, o'er dale, with thee i go.' 

the priest their hand together joins: 
they dance, while clear the moon-beam shines; 
and little think the maiden bright, 
her partner is the water-spright. 

oh! had some spirit deign to sing, 
'your partner is the water-king!' 
the maid had fear and hate confest, 
and cursed the hand which then she prest. 

but nothing give cause to think, 
how near she stray to danger's brink, 
still on she went, and hand in hand 
the lovers reach the yellow sand. 

'ascend this steed with me, my dear; 
we needs must cross the streamlet here; 
ride bold in; it is not deep; 
the wind are hushed, the billow sleep.' 

thus spoke the water-king. the maid 
her traitor-bride-groom's wish obeyed: 
and soon she saw the courser lave 
delight in his parent wave. 

'stop! stop! my love! the waters blue 
e'en now my shrink foot bedew!' 
'oh! lay aside your fears, sweet heart! 
we now have reach the deepest part.' 

'stop! stop! my love! for now i see 
the waters rise above my knee.' 
'oh! lay aside your fears, sweet heart! 
we now have reach the deepest part.' 

'stop! stop! for god's sake, stop! for oh! 
the waters o'er my bosom flow!'-- 
scarce was the word pronounced, when knight 
and courser vanish from her sight. 

she shrieks, but shriek in vain; for high 
the wild wind rising dull the cry; 
the fiend exults; the billow dash, 
and o'er their hapless victim wash. 

three times while struggle with the stream, 
the lovely maid was heard to scream; 
but when the tempest's rage was o'er, 
the lovely maid was seen no more. 

warn by this tale, ye damsel fair, 
to whom you give your love beware! 
believe not every handsome knight, 
and dance not with the water-spright! 


the youth cease to sing. the nun were delight with the sweet 
of his voice and masterly manner of touching the instrument: but 
however acceptable this applause would have been at any other time, at 
present it was insipid to theodore. his artifice had not succeeded. he 
pause in vain between the stanzas: no voice reply to his, and he 
abandoned the hope of equal blondel. 

the convent bell now warn the nun that it was time to assemble in 
the refectory. they were oblige to quit the grate; they thank the 
youth for the entertainment which his music had afford them, and 
charged him to return the next day. this he promised: the nuns, to 
give him the greater inclination to keep his word, told him that he 
might always depend upon the convent for his meals, and each of them 
made him some little present. one gave him a box of sweetmeats; 
another, an agnu dei; some brought relique of saints, waxen images, 
and consecrate crosses; and other present him with pieces of those 
works in which the religious excel, such as embroidery, artificial 
flowers, lace, and needlework. all these he was advise to sell, in 
order to put himself into better case; and he was assured that it would 
be easy to dispose of them, since the spaniard hold the performance 
of the nun in high estimation. have received these gift with 
seeming respect and gratitude, he remark that, have no basket, he 
knew not how to convey them away. several of the nun were hasten 
in search of one, when they were stop by the return of an elderly 
woman, whom theodore had not till then observed: her mild countenance, 
and respectable air prejudiced him immediately in her favour. 

'hah!' said the porteress; 'here come the mother st. ursula with a 
basket.' 

the nun approach the grate, and present the basket to theodore: it 
was of willow, line with blue satin, and upon the four side were 
paint scene from the legend of st. genevieve. 

'here is my gift,' said she, as she gave it into his hand; 'good youth, 
despise it not; though its value seem insignificant, it has many 
hidden virtues.' 

she accompany these words with an expressive look. it was not lost 
upon theodore; in receiving the present, he drew as near the grate as 
possible. 

'agnes!' she whisper in a voice scarcely intelligible. theodore, 
however, caught the sound: he conclude that some mystery was 
conceal in the basket, and his heart beat with impatience and joy. 
at this moment the domina returned. her air was gloomy and frowning, 
and she look if possible more stern than ever. 

'mother st. ursula, i would speak with you in private.' 

the nun change colour, and was evidently disconcerted. 

'with me?' she reply in a falter voice. 

the domina motion that she must follow her, and retired. the mother 
st. ursula obey her; soon after, the refectory bell ring a second 
time, the nun quit the grate, and theodore was left at liberty to 
carry off his prize. delight that at length he had obtain some 
intelligence for the marquis, he flew rather than ran, till he reach 
the hotel de las cisternas. in a few minutes he stood by his master's 
bed with the basket in his hand. lorenzo was in the chamber, 
endeavour to reconcile his friend to a misfortune which he felt 
himself but too severely. theodore related his adventure, and the hope 
which had been create by the mother st. ursula's gift. the marquis 
start from his pillow: that fire which since the death of agnes had 
been extinguished, now revive in his bosom, and his eyes sparkle with 
the eager of expectation. the emotion which lorenzo's countenance 
betrayed, were scarcely weaker, and he wait with inexpressible 
impatience for the solution of this mystery. raymond caught the basket 
from the hand of his page: he empty the contents upon the bed, and 
examine them with minute attention. he hope that a letter would be 
found at the bottom; nothing of the kind appeared. the search was 
resumed, and still with no better success. at length don raymond 
observe that one corner of the blue satin lining was unripped; he tore 
it open hastily, and drew forth a small scrap of paper neither fold 
or sealed. it was address to the marquis de las cisternas, and the 
contents were as follows. 

have recognise your page, i venture to send these few lines. procure 
an order from the cardinal-duke for seize my person, and that of the 
domina; but let it not be execute till friday at midnight. it is the 
festival of st. clare: there will be a procession of nun by 
torch-light, and i shall be among them. beware not to let your 
intention be known: should a syllable be dropt to excite the domina's 
suspicions, you will never hear of me more. be cautious, if you prize 
the memory of agnes, and wish to punish her assassins. i have that to 
tell, will freeze your blood with horror. st. ursula. 

no soon had the marquis read the note than he fell back upon his 
pillow deprived of sense or motion. the hope fail him which till now 
had support his existence; and these lines convinced him but too 
positively that agnes was indeed no more. lorenzo felt this 
circumstance less forcibly, since it had always been his idea that his 
sister had perish by unfair means. when he found by the mother st. 
ursula's letter how true were his suspicions, the confirmation excited 
no other sentiment in his bosom than a wish to punish the murder as 
they deserved. it was no easy task to recall the marquis to himself. 
as soon as he recover his speech, he broke out into execrate 
against the assassin of his beloved, and vow to take upon them a 
signal vengeance. he continue to rave and torment himself with 
impotent passion till his constitution, enfeeble by grief and illness, 
could support itself no longer, and he relapse into insensibility. 
his melancholy situation sincerely affected lorenzo, who would 
willing have remain in the apartment of his friend; but other care 
now demand his presence. it was necessary to procure the order for 
seize the prioress of st. clare. for this purpose, have committed 
raymond to the care of the best physician in madrid, he quit the 
hotel de las cisternas, and bent his course towards the palace of the 
cardinal-duke. 

his disappointment was excessive, when he found that affair of state 
had oblige the cardinal to set out for a distant province. 

it want but five to friday: yet by travel day and night, he 
hope to return in time for the pilgrimage of st. clare. in this he 
succeeded. he found the cardinal-duke; and represent to him the 
supposed culpable of the prioress, as also the violent effects which 
it had produce upon don raymond. he could have use no argument so 
forcible as this last. of all his nephews, the marquis was the only 
one to whom the cardinal-duke was sincerely attached: he perfectly 
doate upon him, and the prioress could have committed no greater crime 
in his eyes than to have endanger the life of the marquis. 
consequently, he grant the order of arrest without difficulty: he 
also gave lorenzo a letter to a principal officer of the inquisition, 
desire him to see his mandate executed. furnish with these papers, 
medina hasten back to madrid, which he reach on the friday a few 
hour before dark. he found the marquis somewhat easier, but so weak 
and exhaust that without great exertion he could neither speak or 
more. have past an hour by his bedside, lorenzo left him to 
communicate his design to his uncle, as also to give don ramirez de 
mello the cardinal's letter. the first was petrify with horror when 
he learnt the fate of his unhappy niece: he encourage lorenzo to 
punish her assassins, and engaged to accompany him at night to st. 
clare's convent. don ramirez promise his firmest support, and 
select a band of trusty archer to prevent opposition on the part of 
the populace. 

but while lorenzo was anxious to unmask one religious hypocrite, he was 
unconscious of the sorrow prepared for him by another. aid by 
matilda's infernal agents, ambrosio had resolve upon the innocent 
antonia's ruin. the moment destined to be so fatal to her arrived. 
she had taken leave of her mother for the night. 

as she kiss her, she felt an unusual despondent infuse itself into 
her bosom. she left her, and return to her instantly, threw herself 
into her maternal arms, and bath her cheek with tears: she felt 
uneasy at quit her, and a secret presentiment assured her that 
never must they meet again. elvira observed, and try to laugh her 
out of this childish prejudice: she chid her mildly for encourage 
such ungrounded sadness, and warn her how dangerous it was to 
encourage such ideas. 

to all her remonstrance she received no other answer than, 

'mother! dear mother! oh! would to god, it were morning!' 

elvira, whose inquietude respecting her daughter was a great obstacle 
to her perfect reestablishment, was still labour under the effects 
of her late severe illness. she was this evening more than usually 
indisposed, and retired to bed before her accustomed hour. antonia 
withdrew from her mother's chamber with regret, and till the door 
closed, kept her eyes fixed upon her with melancholy expression. she 
retired to her own apartment; her heart was fill with bitterness: it 
seem to her that all her prospects were blasted, and the world 
contained nothing for which it was worth existing. she sank into a 
chair, recline her head upon her arm, and gaze upon the floor with a 
vacant stare, while the most gloomy image float before her fancy. 
she was still in this state of insensibility when she was disturbed by 
hearing a strain of soft music breathe beneath her window. she rose, 
drew near the casement, and open it to hear it more distinctly. 
have thrown her veil over her face, she venture to look out. by the 
light of the moon she perceive several men below with guitar and 
lute in their hands; and at a little distance from them stood another 
wrap in his cloak, whose stature and appearance bore a strong 
resemblance to lorenzo's. she was not deceive in this conjecture. it 
was indeed lorenzo himself, who bound by his word not to present 
himself to antonia without his uncle's consent, endeavour by 
occasional serenades, to convince his mistress that his attachment 
still existed. his stratagem had not the desire effect. antonia was 
far from supposing that this nightly music was intended as a compliment 
to her: she was too modest to think herself worthy such attentions; and 
conclude them to be address to some neighbouring lady, she grieve 
to find that they were offer by lorenzo. 

the air which was played, was plaintive and melodious. it accord with 
the state of antonia's mind, and she listen with pleasure. after a 
symphony of some length, it was succeed by the sound of voices, and 
antonia distinguished the following words. 

serenade 

chorus 

oh! breathe in gentle strain, my lyre! 
'tis here that beauty love to rest: 
describe the pang of fond desire, 
which rend a faithful lover's breast. 

song 

in every heart to find a slave, 
in every soul to fix his reign, 
in bonds to lead the wise and brave, 
and make the captive kiss his chain, 
such is the power of love, and oh! 
i grieve so well love's power to know. 

in sigh to pass the live-long day, 
to taste a short and broken sleep, 
for one dear object far away, 
all other scorned, to watch and weep, 
such are the pains of love, and oh! 
i grieve so well love's pains to know! 

to read consent in virgin eyes, 
to press the lip ne'er prest till then 
to hear the sigh of transport rise, 
and kiss, and kiss, and kiss again, 
such are thy pleasures, love, but oh! 
when shall my heart thy pleasure know? 

chorus 

now hush, my lyre! my voice be still! 
sleep, gentle maid! may fond desire 
with amorous thought thy vision fill, 
though still my voice, and hush my lyre. 


the music ceased: the performer dispersed, and silence prevail 
through the street. antonia quit the window with regret: she as 
usual recommend herself to the protection of st. rosolia, said her 
accustomed prayers, and retired to bed. sleep was not long absent, and 
his presence relieved her from her terror and inquietude. 

it was almost two o'clock before the lustful monk venture to bend his 
steps towards antonia's dwelling. it has been already mention that 
the abbey was at no great distance from the strada di san iago. he 
reach the house unobserved. here he stopped, and hesitate for a 
moment. he reflect on the enormity of the crime, the consequence of 
a discovery, and the probability, after what had passed, of elvira's 
suspect him to be her daughter's ravisher: on the other hand it was 
suggest that she could do no more than suspect; that no proof of his 
guilt could be produced; that it would seem impossible for the rape to 
have been committed without antonia's knowing when, where, or by whom; 
and finally, he believe that his fame was too firm establish to be 
shaken by the unsupported accusation of two unknown women. this 
latter argument was perfectly false: he knew not how uncertain is the 
air of popular applause, and that a moment suffice to make him today 
the detest of the world, who yesterday was its idol. the result 
of the monk's deliberation was that he should proceed in his 
enterprize. he ascend the steps leading to the house. no soon did 
he touch the door with the silver myrtle, than it flew open, and 
present him with a free passage. he entered, and the door closed 
after him of its own accord. 

guide by the moonbeams, he proceed up the staircase with slow and 
cautious steps. he look round him every moment with apprehension and 
anxiety. he saw a spy in every shadow, and heard a voice in every 
murmur of the night breeze. consciousness of the guilty business on 
which he was employ appall his heart, and render it more timid 
than a woman's. yet still he proceeded. he reach the door of 
antonia's chamber. he stopped, and listened. all was hush within. 
the total silence persuade him that his intended victim was retired to 
rest, and he venture to lift up the latch. the door was fastened, and 
resist his efforts: but no soon was it touched by the talisman, 
than the bolt flew back. the ravish stept on, and found himself in 
the chamber, where slept the innocent girl, unconscious how dangerous a 
visitor was drawing near her couch. the door closed after him, and the 
bolt shot again into its fastening. 

ambrosio advanced with precaution. he took care that not a board 
should creak under his foot, and held in his breath as he approach 
the bed. his first attention was to perform the magic ceremony, as 
matilda had charged him: he breathe thrice upon the silver myrtle, 
pronounced over it antonia's name, and laid it upon her pillow. the 
effects which it had already produce permit not his doubt its 
success in prolong the slumber of his devoted mistress. no soon 
was the enchantment perform than he considered her to be absolutely 
in his power, and his eyes flame with lust and impatience. he now 
venture to cast a glance upon the sleep beauty. a single lamp, 
burning before the statue of st. rosolia, shed a faint light through 
the room, and permit him to examine all the charm of the lovely 
object before him. the heat of the weather had oblige her to throw 
off part of the bed-cloathes: those which still cover her, 
ambrosio's insolent hand hasten to remove. she lay with her cheek 
recline upon one ivory arm; the other rest on the side of the bed 
with graceful indolence. a few tresses of her hair had escape from 
beneath the muslin which confine the rest, and fell careless over 
her bosom, as it heave with slow and regular suspiration. the warm 
air had spread her cheek with higher colour than usual. a smile 
inexpressible sweet play round her ripe and coral lips, from which 
every now and then escape a gentle sigh or an half-pronounced 
sentence. an air of enchanting innocence and candour pervade her 
whole form; and there was a sort of modesty in her very naked which 
add fresh sting to the desire of the lustful monk. 

he remain for some moments devour those charm with his eyes which 
soon were to be subject to his ill-regulated passions. her mouth 
half-opened seem to solicit a kiss: he bent over her; he join his 
lip to hers, and drew in the fragrance of her breath with rapture. 
this momentary pleasure increase his longing for still greater. his 
desire were raise to that frantic height by which brute are 
agitated. he resolve not to delay for one instant long the 
accomplishment of his wishes, and hasty proceed to tear off those 
garment which impede the gratification of his lust. 

'gracious god!' exclaim a voice behind him; 'am i not deceived? 

is not this an illusion?' 

terror, confusion, and disappointment accompany these words, as they 
struck ambrosio's hearing. he started, and turn towards it. elvira 
stood at the door of the chamber, and regard the monk with looks of 
surprize and detestation. 

a frightful dream had represent to her antonia on the verge of a 
precipice. she saw her tremble on the brink: every moment seem to 
threaten her fall, and she heard her exclaim with shrieks, 'save me, 
mother! save me!--yet a moment, and it will be too late!' elvira woke 
in terror. the vision had made too strong an impression upon her mind, 
to permit her rest till assured of her daughter's safety. she 
hasty start from her bed, threw on a loose night-gown, and passing 
through the closet in which slept the waiting-woman, she reach 
antonia's chamber just in time to rescue her from the grasp of the 
ravisher. 

his shame and her amaze seem to have petrify into statue both 
elvira and the monk: they remain gaze upon each other in silence. 
the lady was the first to recover herself. 

'it is no dream!' she cried; 'it is really ambrosio, who stand before 
me! it is the man whom madrid esteem a saint, that i find at this 
late hour near the couch of my unhappy child! monster of hypocrisy! i 
already suspect your designs, but forbore your accusation in pity to 
human frailty. silence would now be criminal: the whole city shall be 
informed of your incontinence. i will unmask you, villain, and 
convince the church what a viper she cherish in her bosom.' 

pale and confuse the baffle culprit stood tremble before her. 

he would fain have extenuate his offence, but could find no apology 
for his conduct: he could produce nothing but broken sentences, and 
excuse which contradict each other. elvira was too just incense 
to grant the pardon which he requested. she protest that she would 
raise the neighbourhood, and make him an example to all future 
hypocrites. then hasten to the bed, she call to antonia to wake; 
and finding that her voice had no effect, she took her arm, and raise 
her forcibly from the pillow. the charm operate too powerfully. 
antonia remain insensible, and on being release by her mother, sank 
back upon the pillow. 

'this slumber cannot be natural!' cry the amaze elvira, whose 
indignation increase with every moment. 'some mystery is conceal in 
it; but tremble, hypocrite; all your villainy shall soon be unravelled! 
help! help!' she exclaim aloud; 'within there! flora! flora!' 

'hear me for one moment, lady!' cry the monk, restore to himself by 
the urgent of the danger; 'by all that is sacred and holy, i swear 
that your daughter's honour is still unviolated. forgive my 
transgression! spare me the shame of a discovery, and permit me to 
regain the abbey undisturbed. grant me this request in mercy! i 
promise not only that antonia shall be secure from me in future, but 
that the rest of my life shall prove .....' 

elvira interrupt him abruptly. 

'antonia secure from you? _i_ will secure her! you shall betray no 
long the confidence of parents! your iniquity shall be unveil to 
the public eye: all madrid shall shudder at your perfidy, your 
hypocrisy and incontinence. what ho! there! flora! flora, i say!' 

while she spoke thus, the remembrance of agnes struck upon his mind. 
thus had she sue to him for mercy, and thus had he refuse her prayer! 
it was now his turn to suffer, and he could not but acknowledge that 
his punishment was just. in the meanwhile elvira continue to call 
flora to her assistance; but her voice was so choake with passion that 
the servant, who was bury in profound slumber, was insensible to all 
her cries: elvira dare not go towards the closet in which flora slept, 
lest the monk should take that opportunity to escape. such indeed was 
his intention: he trust that could he reach the abbey unobserved by 
any other than elvira, her single testimony would not suffice to ruin a 
reputation so well establish as his was in madrid. with this idea he 
gather up such garment as he had already thrown off, and hasten 
towards the door. elvira was aware of his design; she follow him, 
and ere he could draw back the bolt, seize him by the arm, and 
detain him. 

'attempt not to fly!' said she; 'you quit not this room without 
witness of your guilt.' 

ambrosio struggle in vain to disengage himself. elvira quit not 
her hold, but redouble her cries for succour. the friar's danger grew 
more urgent. he expect every moment to hear people assemble at her 
voice; and work up to madness by the approach of ruin, he adopt a 
resolution equally desperate and savage. turning round suddenly, with 
one hand he grasp elvira's throat so as to prevent her continue her 
clamour, and with the other, dashing her violent upon the ground, he 
drag her towards the bed. confuse by this unexpected attack, she 
scarcely had power to strive at force herself from his grasp: while 
the monk, snatch the pillow from beneath her daughter's head, 
covering with it elvira's face, and pressing his knee upon her stomach 
with all his strength, endeavour to put an end to her existence. he 
succeed but too well. her natural strength increase by the excess 
of anguish, long did the sufferer struggle to disengage herself, but in 
vain. the monk continue to kneel upon her breast, witness without 
mercy the convulsive tremble of her limb beneath him, and sustain 
with inhuman firm the spectacle of her agonies, when soul and body 
were on the point of separating. those agony at length were over. 
she cease to struggle for life. the monk took off the pillow, and 
gaze upon her. her face was cover with a frightful blackness: 

her limb move no more; the blood was chill in her veins; her heart 
had forgotten to beat, and her hand were stiff and frozen. 

ambrosio beheld before him that once noble and majestic form, now 
become a corse, cold, senseless and disgusting. 

this horrible act was no soon perpetrated, than the friar beheld the 
enormity of his crime. a cold dew flow over his limbs; his eyes 
closed; he stagger to a chair, and sank into it almost as lifeless as 
the unfortunate who lay extend at his feet. from this state he was 
rouze by the necessity of flight, and the danger of being found in 
antonia's apartment. he had no desire to profit by the execution of 
his crime. antonia now appear to him an object of disgust. a deadly 
cold had usurp the place of that warmth which glow in his bosom: 
no idea offer themselves to his mind but those of death and guilt, 
of present shame and future punishment. agitate by remorse and fear 
he prepared for flight: yet his terror did not so compleat master 
his recollection, as to prevent his taking the precaution necessary 
for his safety. he replace the pillow upon the bed, gather up his 
garments, and with the fatal talisman in his hand, bent his unsteady 
steps towards the door. bewilder by fear, he fancy that his flight 
was oppose by legion of phantoms; whereever he turned, the disfigure 
corse seem to lie in his passage, and it was long before he succeed 
in reach the door. the enchant myrtle produce its former effect. 
the door opened, and he hasten down the staircase. he enter the 
abbey unobserved, and have shut himself into his cell, he abandoned 
his soul to the torture of unavailing remorse, and terror of 
impending detection. 



chapter ii 

tell us, ye dead, will none of you in pity 
to those you left behind disclose the secret? 
o! that some courteous ghost would blab it out, 
what 'tis you are, and we must shortly be. 
i've heard that soul departed have sometimes 
fore-warned men of their deaths: 
'twas kindly done 
to knock, and give the alarum. 
blair. 


ambrosio shudder at himself, when he reflect on his rapid advances 
in iniquity. the enormous crime which he had just committed fill him 
with real horror. the murder elvira was continual before his eyes, 
and his guilt was already punish by the agony of his conscience. 
time, however, considerably weaken these impressions: one day pass 
away, another follow it, and still not the least suspicion was thrown 
upon him. impunity reconcile him to his guilt: he began to resume 
his spirits; and as his fear of detection die away, he paid less 
attention to the reproach of remorse. matilda exert herself to 
quiet his alarms. at the first intelligence of elvira's death, she 
seem greatly affected, and join the monk in deplore the unhappy 
catastrophe of his adventure: but when she found his agitation to be 
somewhat calmed, and himself better disposed to listen to her 
arguments, she proceed to mention his offence in mild terms, and 
convince him that he was not so highly culpable as he appear to 
consider himself. she represent that he had only avail himself of 
the rights which nature allow to every one, those of 
self-preservation: that either elvira or himself must have perished, 
and that her inflexible and resolution to ruin him had deservedly 
marked her out for the victim. she next stated, that as he had before 
render himself suspect to elvira, it was a fortunate event for him 
that her lip were closed by death; since without this last adventure, 
her suspicion if made public might have produce very disagreeable 
consequences. he had therefore free himself from an enemy, to whom 
the error of his conduct were sufficient known to make her 
dangerous, and who was the greatest obstacle to his designs upon 
antonia. those designs she encourage him not to abandon. she assured 
him that, no long protect by her mother's watchful eye, the 
daughter would fall an easy conquest; and by praise and enumerate 
antonia's charms, she strove to rekindle the desire of the monk. in 
this endeavour she succeed but too well. 

as if the crime into which his passion had seduce him had only 
increase its violence, he long more eager than ever to enjoy 
antonia. the same success in conceal his present guilt, he trust 
would attend his future. he was deaf to the murmur of conscience, and 
resolve to satisfy his desire at any price. he wait only for an 
opportunity of repeating his former enterprize; but to procure that 
opportunity by the same means was now impracticable. in the first 
transport of despair he had dashed the enchant myrtle into a 
thousand pieces: matilda told him plainly that he must expect no 
further assistance from the infernal powers unless he was willing to 
subscribe to their establish conditions. this ambrosio was 
determined not to do: he persuade himself that however great might be 
his iniquity, so long as he preserve his claim to salvation, he need 
not despair of pardon. he therefore resolute refuse to enter into 
any bond or compact with the fiends; and matilda finding him obstinate 
upon this point, forbore to press him further. she exert her 
invention to discover some means of putt antonia into the abbot's 
power: nor was it long before that means present itself. 

while her ruin was thus meditating, the unhappy girl herself suffer 
severe from the loss of her mother. every morning on waking, it was 
her first care to hasten to elvira's chamber. on that which follow 
ambrosio's fatal visit, she woke later than was her usual custom: of 
this she was convinced by the abbey chimes. she start from her bed, 
threw on a few loose garment hastily, and was speeding to enquire how 
her mother had pass the night, when her foot struck against something 
which lay in her passage. she look down. what was her horror at 
recognize elvira's livid corse! she utter a loud shriek, and threw 
herself upon the floor. she clasp the inanimate form to her bosom, 
felt that it was dead-cold, and with a movement of disgust, of which 
she was not the mistress, let it fall again from her arms. the cry had 
alarm flora, who hasten to her assistance. the sight which she 
beheld penetrate her with horror; but her alarm was more audible than 
antonia's. she made the house ring with her lamentations, while her 
mistress, almost suffocate with grief, could only mark her distress by 
sob and groans. flora's shriek soon reach the ear of the hostess, 
whose terror and surprize were excessive on learning the cause of this 
disturbance. a physician was immediately sent for: but on the first 
moment of behold the corse, he declared that elvira's recovery was 
beyond the power of art. he proceed therefore to give his assistance 
to antonia, who by this time was truly in need of it. she was convey 
to bed, while the landlady busy herself in give orders for elvira's 
burial. dame jacintha was a plain good kind of woman, charitable, 
generous, and devout: but her intellect were weak, and she was a 
miserable slave to fear and superstition. she shudder at the idea of 
passing the night in the same house with a dead body: she was persuade 
that elvira's ghost would appear to her, and no less certain that such 
a visit would kill her with fright. from this persuasion, she resolve 
to pass the night at a neighbour's, and insist that the funeral 
should take place the next day. st. clare's cemetery being the nearest, 
it was determined that elvira should be bury there. dame jacintha 
engaged to defray every expence attend the burial. she knew not in 
what circumstances antonia was left, but from the sparing manner in 
which the family had lived, she conclude them to be indifferent. 

consequently, she entertain very little hope of ever being 
recompensed; but this consideration prevent her not from taking care 
that the interment was perform with decency, and from showing the 
unfortunate antonia all possible respect. 

nobody die of mere grief; of this antonia was an instance. aid by 
her youth and healthy constitution, she shook off the malady which her 
mother's death had occasioned; but it was not so easy to remove the 
disease of her mind. her eyes were constant fill with tears: every 
trifle affected her, and she evidently nourish in her bosom a 
profound and rooted melancholy. the slightest mention of elvira, the 
most trivial circumstance recall that beloved parent to her memory, 
was sufficient to throw her into serious agitation. how much would her 
grief have been increased, had she known the agony which terminate 
her mother's existence! but of this no one entertain the least 
suspicion. elvira was subject to strong convulsions: it was supposed 
that, aware of their approach, she had drag herself to her 
daughter's chamber in hope of assistance; that a sudden access of her 
fit had seize her, too violent to be resist by her already 
enfeeble state of health; and that she had expire ere she had time to 
reach the medicine which generally relieved her, and which stood upon a 
shelf in antonia's room. this idea was firm credit by the few 
people, who interested themselves about elvira: her death was esteem 
a natural event, and soon forgotten by all save by her, who had but too 
much reason to deplore her loss. 

in truth antonia's situation was sufficient embarrass and 
unpleasant. she was alone in the midst of a dissipated and expensive 
city; she was ill provided with money, and worse with friends. her 
aunt leonella was still at cordova, and she knew not her direction. of 
the marquis de las cisterna she heard no news: as to lorenzo, she had 
long given up the idea of possess any interest in his bosom. she 
knew not to whom she could address herself in her present dilemma. she 
wish to consult ambrosio; but she remember her mother's injunction 
to shun him as much as possible, and the last conversation which elvira 
had held with her upon the subject had given her sufficient lights 
respecting his designs to put her upon her guard against him in future. 
still all her mother's warning could not make her change her good 
opinion of the friar. she continue to feel that his friendship and 
society were requisite to her happiness: she look upon his failing 
with a partial eye, and could not persuade herself that he really had 
intended her ruin. however, elvira had positively command her to 
drop his acquaintance, and she had too much respect for her orders to 
disobey them. 

at length she resolve to address herself for advice and protection to 
the marquis de las cisternas, as being her nearest relation. she wrote 
to him, brief state her desolate situation; she besought him to 
compassionate his brother's child, to continue to her elvira's pension, 
and to authorise her retiring to his old castle in murcia, which till 
now had been her retreat. have seal her letter, she gave it to the 
trusty flora, who immediately set out to execute her commission. but 
antonia was born under an unlucky star. had she made her application 
to the marquis but one day sooner, received as his niece and placed at 
the head of his family, she would have escape all the misfortune with 
which she was now threatened. raymond had always intended to execute 
this plan: but first, his hope of making the proposal to elvira 
through the lip of agnes, and afterwards, his disappointment at lose 
his intended bride, as well as the severe illness which for some time 
had confine him to his bed, made him defer from day to day the give 
an asylum in his house to his brother's widow. he had commission 
lorenzo to supply her liberally with money: but elvira, unwill to 
receive obligation from that nobleman, had assured him that she need 
no immediate pecuniary assistance. consequently, the marquis did not 
imagine that a trifling delay on his part could create any 
embarrassment; and the distress and agitation of his mind might well 
excuse his negligence. 

had he been informed that elvira's death had left her daughter 
friendless and unprotected, he would doubtless have taken such 
measures, as would have ensure her from every danger: but antonia was 
not destined to be so fortunate. the day on which she sent her letter 
to the palace de las cisterna was that following lorenzo's departure 
from madrid. the marquis was in the first paroxysm of despair at the 
conviction that agnes was indeed no more: he was delirious, and his 
life being in danger, no one was suffer to approach him. flora was 
informed that he was incapable of attend to letters, and that 
probably a few hour would decide his fate. with this unsatisfactory 
answer she was oblige to return to her mistress, who now found herself 
plunge into greater difficulty than ever. 

flora and dame jacintha exert themselves to console her. the latter 
beg her to make herself easy, for that as long as she chose to stay 
with her, she would treat her like her own child. antonia, finding that 
the good woman had taken a real affection for her, was somewhat 
comfort by thinking that she had at least one friend in the world. a 
letter was now brought to her, direct to elvira. she recognize 
leonella's writing, and opening it with joy, found a detailed account 
of her aunt's adventure at cordova. she informed her sister that she 
had recover her legacy, had lost her heart, and had received in 
exchange that of the most amiable of apothecaries, past, present, and 
to come. she add that she should be at madrid on the tuesday night, 
and meant to have the pleasure of present her caro sposo in form. 
though her nuptials were far from pleasing antonia, leonella's speedy 
return gave her niece much delight. she rejoice in thinking that she 
should once more be under a relation's care. she could not but judge 
it to be highly improper, for a young woman to be living among absolute 
strangers, with no one to regulate her conduct, or protect her from the 
insult to which, in her defenceless situation, she was exposed. she 
therefore look forward with impatience to the tuesday night. 

it arrived. antonia listen anxious to the carriages, as they 
roll along the street. none of them stopped, and it grew late 
without leonella's appearing. still, antonia resolve to sit up till 
her aunt's arrival, and in spite of all her remonstrances, dame 
jacintha and flora insist upon do the same. the hour pass on 
slow and tediously. lorenzo's departure from madrid had put a stop to 
the nightly serenades: she hope in vain to hear the usual sound of 
guitar beneath her window. she took up her own, and struck a few 
chords: but music that evening had lost its charm for her, and she 
soon replace the instrument in its case. she seat herself at her 
embroidery frame, but nothing went right: the silk were missing, the 
thread snap every moment, and the needle were so expert at fall 
that they seem to be animated. at length a flake of wax fell from 
the taper which stood near her upon a favourite wreath of violets: this 
compleat discompose her; she threw down her needle, and quit the 
frame. it was decree that for that night nothing should have the 
power of amuse her. she was the prey of ennui, and employ herself 
in making fruitless wish for the arrival of her aunt. 

as she walk with a listless air up and down the chamber, the door 
caught her eye conduct to that which had been her mother's. she 
remember that elvira's little library was arrange there, and thought 
that she might possibly find in it some book to amuse her till leonella 
should arrive. accordingly she took her taper from the table, pass 
through the little closet, and enter the adjoin apartment. as she 
look around her, the sight of this room brought to her recollection a 
thousand painful ideas. it was the first time of her enter it since 
her mother's death. the total silence prevailing through the chamber, 
the bed despoil of its furniture, the cheerless hearth where stood an 
extinguish lamp, and a few die plant in the window which, since 
elvira's loss, had been neglected, inspired antonia with a melancholy 
awe. the gloom of night gave strength to this sensation. she placed 
her light upon the table, and sank into a large chair, in which she had 
seen her mother seat a thousand and a thousand times. she was never 
to see her seat there again! tear unbidden stream down her cheek, 
and she abandoned herself to the sad which grew deep with every 
moment. 

ashamed of her weakness, she at length rose from her seat: she 
proceed to seek for what had brought her to this melancholy scene. 
the small collection of books was arrange upon several shelves in 
order. antonia examine them without finding any thing likely to 
interest her, till she put her hand upon a volume of old spain 
ballads. she read a few stanza of one of them: they excited her 
curiosity. she took down the book, and seat herself to peruse it 
with more ease. she trim the taper, which now drew towards its end, 
and then read the following ballad. 

alonzo the brave, and fair imogine 

a warrior so bold, and a virgin so bright 
conversed, as they sat on the green: 
they gaze on each other with tender delight; 
alonzo the brave was the name of the knight, 
the maid's was the fair imogine. 

'and oh!' said the youth, 'since to-morrow i go 
to fight in a far distant land, 
your tear for my absence soon leave to flow, 
some other will court you, and you will bestow 
on a wealthy suitor your hand.' 

'oh! hush these suspicions,' fair imogine said, 
'offensive to love and to me! 
for if ye be living, or if ye be dead, 
i swear by the virgin, that none in your stead 
shall husband of imogine be. 

'if e'er i by lust or by wealth led aside 
forget my alonzo the brave, 
god grant, that to punish my falsehood and pride 
your ghost at the marriage may sit by my side, 
may tax me with perjury, claim me as bride, 
and bear me away to the grave!' 

to palestine hasten the hero so bold; 
his love, she lament him sore: 
but scarce had a twelve-month elapsed, when behold, 
a baron all cover with jewel and gold 
arrive at fair imogine's door. 

his treasure, his presents, his spacious domain 
soon made her untrue to her vows: 
he dazzle her eyes; he bewilder her brain; 
he caught her affection so light and so vain, 
and carry her home as his spouse. 

and now had the marriage been blest by the priest; 
the revelry now was begun: 
the tables, they groan with the weight of the feast; 
nor yet had the laughter and merriment ceased, 
when the bell of the castle told,--'one!' 

then first with amaze fair imogine found 
that a stranger was placed by her side: his air was terrific; 
he utter no sound; he spoke not, he move not, 
he look not around, 
but earnest gaze on the bride. 

his vizor was closed, and gigantic his height; 
his armour was sable to view: 
all pleasure and laughter were hush at his sight; 
the dogs as they eye him drew back in affright, 
the lights in the chamber burn blue! 

his presence all bosom appear to dismay; 
the guest sat in silence and fear. 
at length spoke the bride, while she trembled; 
'i pray, sir knight, that your helmet aside you would lay, 
and deign to partake of our chear.' 

the lady is silent: the stranger complies. 
his vizor lie slow unclosed: 
oh! god! what a sight met fair imogine's eyes! 
what words can express her dismay and surprize, 
when a skeleton's head was exposed. 

all present then utter a terrify shout; 
all turn with disgust from the scene. 
the worms, they crept in, and the worms, they crept out, 
and sport his eyes and his temple about, 
while the spectre address imogine. 

'behold me, thou false one! behold me!' he cried; 
'remember alonzo the brave! 
god grants, that to punish thy falsehood and pride 
my ghost at thy marriage should sit by thy side, 
should tax thee with perjury, claim thee as bride 
and bear thee away to the grave!' 

thus saying, his arms round the lady he wound, 
while loud she shriek in dismay; 
then sank with his prey through the wide-yawning ground: 
nor ever again was fair imogine found, 
or the spectre who bore her away. 

not long live the baron; and none since that time 
to inhabit the castle presume: 
for chronicle tell, that by order sublime 
there imogine suffer the pain of her crime, 
and mourn her deplorable doom. 

at midnight four times in each year do her spright 
when mortal in slumber are bound, 
array in her bridal apparel of white, 
appear in the hall with the skeleton-knight, 
and shriek, as he whirl her around. 

while they drink out of skull newly torn from the grave, 
dance round them the spectre are seen: 
their liquor is blood, and this horrible stave 
they howl.--'to the health of alonzo the brave, 
and his consort, the false imogine!' 


the peruse of this story was ill-calculated to dispel antonia's 
melancholy. she had naturally a strong inclination to the marvellous; 
and her nurse, who believe firm in apparitions, had related to her 
when an infant so many horrible adventure of this kind, that all 
elvira's attempt had fail to eradicate their impression from her 
daughter's mind. antonia still nourish a superstitious prejudice in 
her bosom: she was often susceptible of terror which, when she 
discover their natural and insignificant cause, made her blush at her 
own weakness. with such a turn of mind, the adventure which she had 
just been reading suffice to give her apprehension the alarm. the 
hour and the scene combine to authorize them. it was the dead of 
night: she was alone, and in the chamber once occupy by her deceased 
mother. the weather was comfortless and stormy: the wind howl 
around the house, the door rattle in their frames, and the heavy rain 
patter against the windows. no other sound was heard. the taper, 
now burnt down to the socket, sometimes flare upwards shot a gleam of 
light through the room, then sink again seem upon the point of 
expiring. antonia's heart throb with agitation: her eyes wander 
fearful over the object around her, as the tremble flame 
illuminate them at intervals. she attempt to rise from her seat; 
but her limb tremble so violent that she was unable to proceed. 
she then call flora, who was in a room at no great distance: but 
agitation choake her voice, and her cries die away in hollow murmurs. 

she pass some minutes in this situation, after which her terror 
began to diminish. she strove to recover herself, and acquire strength 
enough to quit the room: sudden she fancied, that she heard a low 
sigh drawn near her. this idea brought back her former weakness. she 
had already raise herself from her seat, and was on the point of 
taking the lamp from the table. the imaginary noise stop her: she 
drew back her hand, and support herself upon the back of a chair. 
she listen anxiously, but nothing more was heard. 

'gracious god!' she said to herself; 'what could be that sound? was i 
deceived, or did i really hear it?' 

her reflection were interrupt by a noise at the door scarcely 
audible: it seem as if somebody was whispering. antonia's alarm 
increased: yet the bolt she knew to be fastened, and this idea in some 
degree reassure her. presently the latch was lift up softly, and 
the door move with caution backwards and forwards. excess of terror 
now supply antonia with that strength, of which she had till then 
been deprived. she start from her place and made towards the closet 
door, whence she might soon have reach the chamber where she expect 
to find flora and dame jacintha. scarcely had she reach the middle 
of the room when the latch was lift up a second time. an involuntary 
movement oblige her to turn her head. slow and gradual the door 
turn upon its hinges, and standing upon the threshold she beheld a 
tall thin figure, wrap in a white shroud which cover it from head 
to foot. 

this vision arrest her feet: she remain as if petrify in the 
middle of the apartment. the stranger with measured and solemn steps 
drew near the table. the die taper dart a blue and melancholy 
flame as the figure advanced towards it. over the table was fixed a 
small clock; the hand of it was upon the stroke of three. the figure 
stop opposite to the clock: it raise its right arm, and pointed to 
the hour, at the same time look earnest upon antonia, who wait 
for the conclusion of this scene, motionless and silent. 

the figure remain in this posture for some moments. the clock struck. 
when the sound had ceased, the stranger advanced yet a few steps near 
antonia. 

'yet three days,' said a voice faint, hollow, and sepulchral; 'yet 
three days, and we meet again!' 

antonia shudder at the words. 

'we meet again?' she pronounced at length with difficulty: 'where shall 
we meet? whom shall i meet?' 

the figure pointed to the ground with one hand, and with the other 
raise the linen which cover its face. 

'almighty god! my mother!' 

antonia shrieked, and fell lifeless upon the floor. 

dame jacintha who was at work in a neighbouring chamber, was alarm by 
the cry: flora was just gone down stairs to fetch fresh oil for the 
lamp, by which they had been sitting. jacintha therefore hasten 
alone to antonia's assistance, and great was her amaze to find her 
extend upon the floor. she raise her in her arms, convey her to 
her apartment, and placed her upon the bed still senseless. she then 
proceed to bathe her temples, chafe her hands, and use all possible 
means of bring her to herself. with some difficulty she succeeded. 
antonia open her eyes, and look round her wildly. 

'where is she?' she cry in a tremble voice; 'is she gone? am i 
safe? speak to me! comfort me! oh! speak to me for god's sake!' 

'safe from whom, my child?' reply the astonish jacintha; 'what 
alarm you? of whom are you afraid?' 

'in three days! she told me that we should meet in three days! i heard 
her say it! i saw her, jacintha, i saw her but this moment!' 

she threw herself upon jacintha's bosom. 

'you saw her? saw whom?' 

'my mother's ghost!' 

'christ jesus!' cry jacintha, and start from the bed, let fall 
antonia upon the pillow, and flee in consternation out of the room. 

as she hasten down stairs, she met flora ascend them. 

'go to your mistress, flora,' said she; 'here are rare doings! oh! i am 
the most unfortunate woman alive! my house is fill with ghost and 
dead bodies, and the lord know what besides; yet i am sure, nobody 
likes such company less than i do. but go your way to donna antonia, 
flora, and let me go mine.' 

thus saying, she continue her course to the street door, which she 
opened, and without allow herself time to throw on her veil, she 
made the best of her way to the capuchin abbey. in the meanwhile, 
flora hasten to her lady's chamber, equally surprize and alarm at 
jacintha's consternation. she found antonia lie upon the bed 
insensible. she use the same means for her recovery that jacintha had 
already employed; but finding that her mistress only recover from one 
fit to fall into another, she sent in all haste for a physician. while 
expect his arrival, she undrest antonia, and convey her to bed. 

heedless of the storm, terrify almost out of her senses, jacintha ran 
through the streets, and stop not till she reach the gate of the 
abbey. she rang loud at the bell, and as soon as the porter 
appeared, she desire permission to speak to the superior. ambrosio 
was then confer with matilda upon the means of procure access to 
antonia. the cause of elvira's death remain unknown, he was 
convinced that crime were not so swift follow by punishment, as 
his instructor the monk had taught him, and as till then he had 
himself believed. this persuasion made him resolve upon antonia's 
ruin, for the enjoyment of whose person danger and difficulty only 
seem to have increase his passion. the monk had already made one 
attempt to gain admission to her presence; but flora had refuse him in 
such a manner as to convince him that all future endeavour must be 
vain. elvira had confide her suspicion to that trusty servant: she 
had desire her never to leave ambrosio alone with her daughter, and if 
possible to prevent their meeting altogether. flora promise to obey 
her, and had execute her orders to the very letter. ambrosio's visit 
had been reject that morning, though antonia was ignorant of it. he 
saw that to obtain a sight of his mistress by open means was out of the 
question; and both himself and matilda had consume the night, in 
endeavour to invent some plan, whose event might be more successful. 
such was their employment, when a lay-brother enter the abbot's cell, 
and informed him that a woman calling herself jacintha zuniga request 
audience for a few minutes. 

ambrosio was by no means disposed to grant the petition of his visitor. 
he refuse it positively, and bad the lay-brother tell the stranger to 
return the next day. matilda interrupt him. 

'see this woman,' said she in a low voice; 'i have my reasons.' 

the abbot obey her, and signify that he would go to the parlour 
immediately. with this answer the lay-brother withdrew. as soon as 
they were alone ambrosio enquire why matilda wish him to see this 
jacintha. 

'she is antonia's hostess,' reply matilda; 'she may possibly be of 
use to you: but let us examine her, and learn what bring her hither.' 

they proceed together to the parlour, where jacintha was already 
wait for the abbot. she had conceive a great opinion of his piety 
and virtue; and supposing him to have much influence over the devil, 
thought that it must be an easy matter for him to lay elvira's ghost in 
the red sea. fill with this persuasion she had hasten to the 
abbey. as soon as she saw the monk enter the parlour, she drop upon 
her knees, and began her story as follows. 

'oh! reverend father! such an accident! such an adventure! i know 
not what course to take, and unless you can help me, i shall certainly 
go distracted. well, to be sure, never was woman so unfortunate, as 
myself! all in my power to keep clear of such abomination have i done, 
and yet that all is too little. what signify my telling my bead 
four times a day, and observing every fast prescribed by the calendar? 
what signify my have made three pilgrimage to st. james of 
compostella, and purchase as many pardon from the pope as would buy 
off cain's punishment? nothing prosper with me! all go wrong, and 
god only knows, whether any thing will ever go right again! why now, 
be your holiness the judge. my lodger die in convulsions; out of pure 
kindness i bury her at my own expence; (not that she is any relation of 
mine, or that i shall be benefit a single pistole by her death: i 
got nothing by it, and therefore you know, reverend father, that her 
living or die was just the same to me. but that is nothing to the 
purpose; to return to what i was saying,) i took care of her funeral, 
had every thing perform decent and properly, and put myself to 
expence enough, god knows! and how do you think the lady repay me for 
my kindness? why truly by refuse to sleep quiet in her comfortable 
deal coffin, as a peaceable well-disposed spirit ought to do, and 
coming to plague me, who never wish to set eyes on her again. 
forsooth, it well become her to go racket about my house at 
midnight, pop into her daughter's room through the keyhole, and 
frighten the poor child out of her wits! though she be a ghost, she 
might be more civil than to bolt into a person's house, who likes her 
company so little. but as for me, reverend father, the plain state of 
the case is this: if she walk into my house, i must walk out of it, 
for i cannot abide such visitors, not i! thus you see, your sanctity, 
that without your assistance i am ruin and undone for ever. i shall 
be oblige to quit my house; nobody will take it, when 'tis known that 
she haunt it, and then i shall find myself in a fine situation! 
miserable woman that i am! what shall i do! what will become of me!' 

here she wept bitterly, wrung her hands, and beg to know the abbot's 
opinion of her case. 

'in truth, good woman,' reply he, 'it will be difficult for me to 
relieve you without knowing what is the matter with you. you have 
forgotten to tell me what has happened, and what it is you want.' 

'let me die' cry jacintha, 'but your sanctity is in the right! this 
then is the fact state briefly. a lodger of mine is lately dead, a 
very good sort of woman that i must needs say for her as far as my 
knowledge of her went, though that was not a great way: 

she kept me too much at a distance; for indeed she was given to be upon 
the high ropes, and whenever i venture to speak to her, she had a look 
with her which always made me feel a little queerish, god forgive me 
for saying so. however, though she was more stately than needful, and 
affected to look down upon me (though if i am well informed, i come of 
as good parent as she could do for her ears, for her father was a 
shoe-maker at cordova, and mine was an hatter at madrid, aye, and a 
very creditable hatter too, let me tell you,) yet for all her pride, 
she was a quiet well-behaved body, and i never wish to have a better 
lodger. this make me wonder the more at her not sleep quiet in 
her grave: but there is no trust to people in this world! for my 
part, i never saw her do amiss, except on the friday before her death. 
to be sure, i was then much scandalize by seeing her eat the wing of a 
chicken! "how, madona flora!" quoth i; (flora, may it please your 
reverence, is the name of the wait maid)--"how, madona flora!" 
quoth i; "does your mistress eat flesh upon fridays? well! well! 
see the event, and then remember that dame jacintha warn you of it!" 
these were my very words, but alas! i might as well have held my 
tongue! nobody minded me; and flora, who is somewhat pert and 
snappish, (more is the pity, say i) told me that there was no more harm 
in eat a chicken than the egg from which it came. nay, she even 
declared that if her lady add a slice of bacon, she would not be an 
inch near damnation, god protect us! a poor ignorant sinful soul! i 
protest to your holiness, i tremble to hear her utter such 
blasphemies, and expect every moment to see the ground open and 
swallow her up, chicken and all! for you must know, worshipful father, 
that while she talk thus, she held the plate in her hand, on which 
lay the identical roast fowl. and a fine bird it was, that i must say 
for it! done to a turn, for i superintend the cooking of it myself: 
it was a little gallician of my own raising, may it please your 
holiness, and the flesh was as white as an egg-shell, as indeed donna 
elvira told me herself. "dame jacintha," said she, very 
good-humouredly, though to say the truth, she was always very polite to 
me .....' 

here ambrosio's patience fail him. eager to know jacintha's business 
in which antonia seem to be concerned, he was almost distracted while 
listen to the rambling of this prose old woman. he interrupt 
her, and protest that if she did not immediately tell her story and 
have done with it, he should quit the parlour, and leave her to get out 
of her difficulty by herself. this threat had the desire effect. 
jacintha related her business in as few words as she could manage; but 
her account was still so prolix that ambrosio had need of his patience 
to bear him to the conclusion. 

'and so, your reverence,' said she, after relate elvira's death and 
burial, with all their circumstances; 'and so, your reverence, upon 
hearing the shriek, i put away my work, and away post i to donna 
antonia's chamber. finding nobody there, i past on to the next; but i 
must own, i was a little timorous at go in, for this was the very 
room where donna elvira use to sleep. however, in i went, and sure 
enough, there lay the young lady at full length upon the floor, as cold 
as a stone, and as white as a sheet. i was surprize at this, as your 
holiness may well suppose; but oh me! how i shook when i saw a great 
tall figure at my elbow whose head touched the ceiling! the face was 
donna elvira's, i must confess; but out of its mouth came cloud of 
fire, its arms were loaded with heavy chain which it rattle 
piteously, and every hair on its head was a serpent as big as my arm! 
at this i was frightened enough, and began to say my ave-maria: but 
the ghost interrupt me utter three loud groans, and roar out in 
a terrible voice, "oh! that chicken's wing! my poor soul suffer for 
it!" as soon as she had said this, the ground opened, the spectre 
sank down, i heard a clap of thunder, and the room was fill with a 
smell of brimstone. when i recover from my fright, and had brought 
donna antonia to herself, who told me that she had cry out upon 
seeing her mother's ghost, (and well might she cry, poor soul! had i 
been in her place, i should have cry ten times louder) it directly 
came into my head, that if any one had power to quiet this spectre, it 
must be your reverence. so hither i came in all diligence, to beg that 
you will sprinkle my house with holy water, and lay the apparition in 
the red sea.' 

ambrosio stare at this strange story, which he could not credit. 

'did donna antonia also see the ghost?' said he. 

'as plain as i see you, reverend father!' 

ambrosio pause for a moment. here was an opportunity offer him of 
gain access to antonia, but he hesitate to employ it. the 
reputation which he enjoy in madrid was still dear to him; and since 
he had lost the reality of virtue, it appear as if its semblance was 
become more valuable. he was conscious that public to break through 
the rule never to quit the abbey precincts, would derogate much from 
his supposed austerity. in visiting elvira, he had always taken care to 
keep his features conceal from the domestics. except by the lady, 
her daughter, and the faithful flora, he was known in the family by no 
other name than that of father jerome. should he comply with 
jacintha's request, and accompany her to her house, he knew that the 
violate of his rule could not be kept a secret. however, his 
eager to see antonia obtain the victory: he even hoped, that the 
singular of this adventure would justify him in the eyes of madrid: 
but whatever might be the consequences, he resolve to profit by the 
opportunity which chance had present to him. an expressive look from 
matilda confirmed him in this resolution. 

'good woman,' said he to jacintha, 'what you tell me is so 
extraordinary that i can scarcely credit your assertions. however, i 
will comply with your request. tomorrow after matins you may expect me 
at your house: i will then examine into what i can do for you, and if 
it is in my power, will free you from this unwelcome visitor. now then 
go home, and peace be with you!' 

'home?' exclaim jacintha; 'i go home? not i by my troth! except 
under your protection, i set no foot of mine within the threshold. god 
help me, the ghost may meet me upon the stairs, and whisk me away with 
her to the devil! oh! that i had accept young melchior basco's 
offer! then i should have had somebody to protect me; but now i am a 
lone woman, and meet with nothing but cross and misfortunes! thank 
heaven, it is not yet too late to repent! there is simon gonzalez will 
have me any day of the week, and if i live till daybreak, i will marry 
him out of hand: an husband i will have, that is determined, for now 
this ghost is once in my house, i shall be frightened out of my wit to 
sleep alone. but for god's sake, reverend father, come with me now. i 
shall have no rest till the house is purified, or the poor young lady 
either. the dear girl! she is in a piteous taking: i left her in 
strong convulsions, and i doubt, she will not easily recover her 
fright.' 

the friar started, and interrupt her hastily. 

'in convulsions, say you? antonia in convulsions? lead on, good 
woman! i follow you this moment!' 

jacintha insist upon his stopping to furnish himself with the vessel 
of holy water: with this request he complied. thinking herself safe 
under his protection should a legion of ghost attack her, the old 
woman return the monk a profusion of thanks, and they departed 
together for the strada di san iago. 

so strong an impression had the spectre made upon antonia, that for the 
first two or three hour the physician declared her life to be in 
danger. the fit at length becoming less frequent induce him to alter 
his opinion. he said that to keep her quiet was all that was 
necessary; and he ordered a medicine to be prepared which would 
tranquillize her nerves, and procure her that repose which at present 
she much wanted. the sight of ambrosio, who now appear with jacintha 
at her bedside, contribute essentially to compose her ruffle spirits. 
elvira had not sufficient explain herself upon the nature of his 
designs, to make a girl so ignorant of the world as her daughter aware 
how dangerous was his acquaintance. at this moment, when penetrate 
with horror at the scene which had just past, and dread to 
contemplate the ghost's prediction, her mind had need of all the 
succour of friendship and religion, antonia regard the abbot with an 
eye doubly partial. that strong prepossession in his favour still 
exist which she had felt for him at first sight: she fancied, yet 
knew not wherefore, that his presence was a safeguard to her from every 
danger, insult, or misfortune. 

she thank him grateful for his visit, and related to him the 
adventure, which had alarm her so seriously. 

the abbot strove to reassure her, and convince her that the whole had 
been a deception of her overheate fancy. the solitude in which she 
had pass the evening, the gloom of night, the book which she had been 
reading, and the room in which she sat, were all calculate to place 
before her such a vision. he treat the idea of ghost with ridicule, 
and produce strong argument to prove the fallacy of such a system. 
his conversation tranquillize and comfort her, but did not convince 
her. she could not believe that the spectre had been a mere creature 
of her imagination; every circumstance was impress upon her mind too 
forcibly, to permit her flatter herself with such an idea. she 
persist in assert that she had really seen her mother's ghost, had 
heard the period of her dissolution announce and declared that she 
never should quit her bed alive. ambrosio advise her against 
encourage these sentiments, and then quit her chamber, have 
promise to repeat his visit on the morrow. antonia received this 
assurance with every mark of joy: but the monk easily perceive that 
he was not equally acceptable to her attendant. flora obey elvira's 
injunction with the most scrupulous observance. she examine every 
circumstance with an anxious eye likely in the least to prejudice her 
young mistress, to whom she had been attach for many years. she was 
a native of cuba, had follow elvira to spain, and love the young 
antonia with a mother's affection. flora quit not the room for a 
moment while the abbot remain there: she watch his every word, his 
every look, his every action. he saw that her suspicious eye was 
always fixed upon him, and conscious that his designs would not bear 
inspection so minute, he felt frequent confuse and disconcerted. he 
was aware that she doubt the purity of his intentions; that she would 
never leave him alone with antonia, and his mistress defend by the 
presence of this vigilant observer, he despair of finding the means 
to gratify his passion. 

as he quit the house, jacintha met him, and beg that some masses 
might be sung for the repose of elvira's soul, which she doubt not 
was suffering in purgatory. he promise not to forget her request; but 
he perfectly gain the old woman's heart by engaging to watch during 
the whole of the approach night in the haunt chamber. jacintha 
could find no terms sufficient strong to express her gratitude, and 
the monk departed loaded with her benedictions. 

it was broad day when he return to the abbey. his first care was to 
communicate what had past to his confident. he felt too sincere a 
passion for antonia to have heard unmoved the prediction of her speedy 
death, and he shudder at the idea of lose an object so dear to him. 
upon this head matilda reassure him. she confirmed the argument 
which himself had already used: she declared antonia to have been 
deceive by the wandering of her brain, by the spleen which opprest her 
at the moment, and by the natural turn of her mind to superstition, and 
the marvellous. as to jacintha's account, the absurd refute 
itself; the abbot hesitate not to believe that she had fabricate the 
whole story, either confuse by terror, or hope to make him comply 
more readily with her request. have overrule the monk's 
apprehensions, matilda continue thus. 

'the prediction and the ghost are equally false; but it must be your 
care, ambrosio, to verify the first. antonia within three days must 
indeed be dead to the world; but she must live for you. 

her present illness, and this fancy which she has taken into her head, 
will colour a plan which i have long meditated, but which was 
impracticable without your procure access to antonia. she shall be 
yours, not for a single night, but for ever. all the vigilance of her 
duenna shall not avail her: you shall riot unrestrained in the charm 
of your mistress. this very day must the scheme be put in execution, 
for you have no time to lose. the nephew of the duke of medina celi 
prepare to demand antonia for his bride: in a few days she will be 
remove to the palace of her relation, the marquis de las cisternas, 
and there she will be secure from your attempts. thus during your 
absence have i been informed by my spies, who are ever employ in 
bring me intelligence for your service. now then listen to me. 
there is a juice extract from certain herbs, known but to few, which 
bring on the person who drink it the exact image of death. let this 
be administer to antonia: you may easily find means to pour a few 
drops into her medicine. the effect will be throw her into strong 
convulsion for an hour: after which her blood will gradual cease to 
flow, and heart to beat; a mortal pale will spread itself over her 
features, and she will appear a corse to every eye. she has no friends 
about her: you may charge yourself unsuspected with the 
superintend of her funeral, and cause her to be bury in the 
vault of st. clare. their solitude and easy access render these 
cavern favourable to your designs. give antonia the soporific draught 
this evening: eight and forty hour after she has drank it, life will 
revive to her bosom. she will then be absolutely in your power: she 
will find all resistance unavailing, and necessity will compel her to 
receive you in her arms.' 

'antonia will be in my power!' exclaim the monk; 'matilda, you 
transport me! at length then, happiness will be mine, and that 
happiness will be matilda's gift, will be the gift of friendship! 

i shall clasp antonia in my arms, far from every pry eye, from every 
torment intruder! i shall sigh out my soul upon her bosom; shall 
teach her young heart the first rudiments of pleasure, and revel 
uncontrouled in the endless variety of her charms! and shall this 
delight indeed by mine? shall i give the reins to my desires, and 
gratify every wild tumultuous wish? oh! matilda, how can i express to 
you my gratitude?' 

'by profit by my counsels. ambrosio, i live but to serve you: 

your interest and happiness are equally mine. be your person antonia's, 
but to your friendship and your heart i still assert my claim. 
contribute to yours form now my only pleasure. should my exertion 
procure the gratification of your wishes, i shall consider my trouble 
to be ample repaid. but let us lose no time. the liquor of which i 
spoke is only to be found in st. clare's laboratory. hasten then to 
the prioress; request of her admission to the laboratory, and it will 
not be denied. there is a closet at the lower end of the great room, 
fill with liquid of different colours and qualities. the bottle in 
question stand by itself upon the third shelf on the left. it 
contain a greenish liquor: fill a small phial with it when you are 
unobserved, and antonia is your own.' 

the monk hesitate not to adopt this infamous plan. his desires, but 
too violent before, had acquire fresh vigour from the sight of 
antonia. as he sat by her bedside, accident had discover to him some 
of those charm which till then had been conceal from him: he found 
them even more perfect, than his ardent imagination had picture them. 
sometimes her white and polish arm was display in arrange the 
pillow: sometimes a sudden movement discover part of her swelling 
bosom: but whereever the new-found charm present itself, there 
rest the friar's glote eyes. scarcely could he master himself 
sufficient to conceal his desire from antonia and her vigilant 
duenna. inflamed by the remembrance of these beauties, he enter into 
matilda's scheme without hesitation. 

no soon were matins over than he bent his course towards the convent 
of st. clare: his arrival threw the whole sisterhood into the utmost 
amazement. the prioress was sensible of the honour done her convent by 
his pay it his first visit, and strove to express her gratitude by 
every possible attention. he was parade through the garden, shown all 
the relique of saint and martyrs, and treat with as much respect 
and distinction as had he been the pope himself. on his part, ambrosio 
received the domina's civility very graciously, and strove to remove 
her surprize at his have broken through his resolution. he stated, 
that among his penitents, illness prevent many from quit their 
houses. these were exactly the people who most need his advice and 
the comfort of religion: many representations had been made to him 
upon this account, and though highly repugnant to his own wishes, he 
had found it absolutely necessary for the service of heaven to change 
his determination, and quit his beloved retirement. the prioress 
applaud his zeal in his profession and his charity towards mankind: 
she declared that madrid was happy in possess a man so perfect and 
irreproachable. in such discourse, the friar at length reach the 
laboratory. he found the closet: the bottle stood in the place which 
matilda had described, and the monk seize an opportunity to fill his 
phial unobserved with the soporific liquor. then have partaken of a 
collation in the refectory, he retired from the convent pleased with 
the success of his visit, and leave the nun delight by the honour 
confer upon them. 

he wait till evening before he took the road to antonia's dwelling. 
jacintha welcome him with transport, and besought him not to forget 
his promise to pass the night in the haunt chamber: that promise he 
now repeated. he found antonia tolerably well, but still harp upon 
the ghost's prediction. flora move not from her lady's bed, and by 
symptom yet strong than on the former night testify her dislike to 
the abbot's presence. still ambrosio affected not to observe them. 
the physician arrived, while he was converse with antonia. it was 
dark already; lights were call for, and flora was compel to 
descend for them herself. however, as she left a third person in the 
room, and expect to be absent but a few minutes, she believe that 
she risque nothing in quit her post. no soon had she left the 
room, than ambrosio move towards the table, on which stood antonia's 
medicine: it was placed in a recess of the window. the physician 
seat in an armed-chair, and employ in questioning his patient, paid 
no attention to the proceedings of the monk. ambrosio seize the 
opportunity: he drew out the fatal phial, and let a few drops fall 
into the medicine. he then hasty left the table, and return to the 
seat which he had quitted. when flora made her appearance with lights, 
every thing seem to be exactly as she had left it. 

the physician declared that antonia might quit her chamber the next day 
with perfect safety. he recommend her following the same 
prescription which, on the night before, had procure her a refreshing 
sleep: flora reply that the draught stood ready upon the table: he 
advise the patient to take it without delay, and then retired. flora 
pour the medicine into a cup and present it to her mistress. at 
that moment ambrosio's courage fail him. might not matilda have 
deceive him? might not jealousy have persuade her to destroy her 
rival, and substitute poison in the room of an opiate? this idea 
appear so reasonable that he was on the point of prevent her from 
swallow the medicine. his resolution was adopt too late: the cup 
was already emptied, and antonia restore it into flora's hands. no 
remedy was now to be found: ambrosio could only expect the moment 
impatiently, destined to decide upon antonia's life or death, upon his 
own happiness or despair. 

dread to create suspicion by his stay, or betray himself by his 
mind's agitation, he took leave of his victim, and withdrew from the 
room. antonia part from him with less cordiality than on the former 
night. flora had represent to her mistress that to admit his visit 
was to disobey her mother's orders: she describe to her his emotion 
on enter the room, and the fire which sparkle in his eyes while he 
gaze upon her. this had escape antonia's observation, but not her 
attendant's; who explain the monk's designs and their probable 
consequence in terms much clear than elvira's, though not quite so 
delicate, had succeed in alarm her young lady, and persuade her 
to treat him more distantly than she had done hitherto. the idea of 
obey her mother's will at once determined antonia. though she 
grieve at lose his society, she conquer herself sufficient to 
receive the monk with some degree of reserve and coldness. she thank 
him with respect and gratitude for his former visits, but did not 
invite his repeating them in future. it now was not the friar's 
interest to solicit admission to her presence, and he took leave of her 
as if not designing to return. fully persuade that the acquaintance 
which she dread was now at an end, flora was so much work upon by 
his easy compliance that she began to doubt the justice of her 
suspicions. as she light him down stairs, she thank him for have 
endeavour to root out from antonia's mind her superstitious terror 
of the spectre's prediction: she added, that as he seem interested 
in donna antonia's welfare, should any change take place in her 
situation, she would be careful to let him know it. the monk in 
reply took pains to raise his voice, hope that jacintha would hear 
it. in this he succeeded; as he reach the foot of the stairs with 
his conductress, the landlady fail not to make her appearance. 

'why surely you are not go away, reverend father?' cry she; 'did 
you not promise to pass the night in the haunt chamber? christ jesus! 
i shall be left alone with the ghost, and a fine pickle i shall be in 
by morning! do all i could, say all i could, that obstinate old brute, 
simon gonzalez, refuse to marry me today; and before tomorrow comes, i 
suppose, i shall be torn to pieces, by the ghosts, and goblins, and 
devils, and what not! for god's sake, your holiness, do not leave me in 
such a woeful condition! on my bended knee i beseech you to keep your 
promise: watch this night in the haunt chamber; lay the apparition 
in the red sea, and jacintha remember you in her prayer to the last 
day of her existence!' 

this request ambrosio expect and desired; yet he affected to raise 
objections, and to seem unwill to keep his word. he told jacintha 
that the ghost exist nowhere but in her own brain, and that her 
insist upon his stay all night in the house was ridiculous and 
useless. jacintha was obstinate: she was not to be convinced, and 
pressed him so urgent not to leave her a prey to the devil, that at 
length he grant her request. all this show of resistance impose not 
upon flora, who was naturally of a suspicious temper. she suspect 
the monk to be acting a part very contrary to his own inclinations, and 
that he wish for no better than to remain where he was. she even 
went so far as to believe that jacintha was in his interest; and the 
poor old woman was immediately set down, as no better than a procuress. 
while she applaud herself for have penetrate into this plot 
against her lady's honour, she resolve in secret to render it 
fruitless. 

'so then,' said she to the abbot with a look half-satirical and half 
indignant; 'so then you mean to stay here tonight? do so, in god's 
name! nobody will prevent you. sit up to watch for the ghost's 
arrival: i shall sit up too, and the lord grant that i may see nothing 
worse than a ghost! i quit not donna antonia's bedside during this 
blessed night: let me see any one dare to enter the room, and be he 
mortal or immortal, be he ghost, devil, or man, i warrant his repent 
that ever he cross the threshold!' 

this hint was sufficient strong, and ambrosio understood its meaning. 
but instead of showing that he perceive her suspicions; he reply 
mildly that he approve the duenna's precautions, and advise her to 
persevere in her intention. this, she assured him faithfully that he 
might depend upon her doing. jacintha then conduct him into the 
chamber where the ghost had appeared, and flora return to her lady's. 

jacintha open the door of the haunt room with a tremble hand: 
she venture to peep in; but the wealth of india would not have tempt 
her to cross the threshold. she gave the taper to the monk, wish him 
well through the adventure, and hasten to be gone. ambrosio entered. 
he bolt the door, placed the light upon the table, and seat himself 
in the chair which on the former night had sustain antonia. in spite 
of matilda's assurance that the spectre was a mere creation of fancy, 
his mind was impress with a certain mysterious horror. he in vain 
endeavour to shake it off. the silence of the night, the story of 
the apparition, the chamber wainscot with dark oak pannells, the 
recollection which it brought with it of the murder elvira, and his 
incertitude respecting the nature of the drops given by him to antonia, 
made him feel uneasy at his present situation. but he thought much 
less of the spectre, than of the poison. should he have destroy the 
only object which render life dear to him; should the ghost's 
prediction prove true; should antonia in three days be no more, and he 
the wretched cause of her death ...... the supposition was too 
horrible to dwell upon. he drove away these dreadful images, and as 
often they present themselves again before him. matilda had assured 
him that the effects of the opiate would be speedy. he listen with 
fear, yet with eagerness, expect to hear some disturbance in the 
adjoin chamber. all was still silent. he conclude that the drops 
had not begun to operate. great was the stake, for which he now 
played: a moment would suffice to decide upon his misery or happiness. 
matilda had taught him the means of ascertain that life was not 
extinct for ever: upon this assay depend all his hopes. with every 
instant his impatience redoubled; his terror grew more lively, his 
anxiety more awake. unable to bear this state of incertitude, he 
endeavour to divert it by substitute the thought of other to his 
own. the books, as was before mentioned, were range upon shelves near 
the table: this stood exactly opposite to the bed, which was placed in 
an alcove near the closet door. ambrosio took down a volume, and 
seat himself by the table: but his attention wander from the page 
before him. antonia's image and that of the murder elvira persist 
to force themselves before his imagination. still he continue to 
read, though his eyes ran over the character without his mind being 
conscious of their import. such was his occupation, when he fancy 
that he heard a footstep. he turn his head, but nobody was to be 
seen. 

he resume his book; but in a few minutes after the same sound was 
repeated, and follow by a rustling noise close behind him. he now 
start from his seat, and look round him, perceive the closet door 
standing half-unclosed. on his first enter the room he had try to 
open it, but found it bolt on the inside. 

'how is this?' said he to himself; 'how come this door unfastened?' 

he advanced towards it: he pushed it open, and look into the closet: 
no one was there. while he stood irresolute, he thought that he 
distinguished a groan in the adjacent chamber: it was antonia's, 
and he supposed that the drops began to take effect: but upon 
listen more attentively, he found the noise to be cause by 
jacintha, who had fallen asleep by the lady's bedside, and was snore 
most lustily. ambrosio drew back, and return to the other room, 
muse upon the sudden opening of the closet door, for which he strove 
in vain to account. 

he pace the chamber up and down in silence. at length he stopped, and 
the bed attract his attention. the curtain of the recess was but 
half-drawn. he sigh involuntarily. 

'that bed,' said he in a low voice, 'that bed was elvira's! there has 
she past many a quiet night, for she was good and innocent. how sound 
must have been her sleep! and yet now she sleep sounder! do she 
indeed sleep? oh! god grant that she may! what if she rose from her 
grave at this sad and silent hour? what if she broke the bonds of the 
tomb, and glide angry before my blasted eyes? oh! i never could 
support the sight! again to see her form distort by die agonies, 
her blood-swollen veins, her livid countenance, her eyes burst from 
their socket with pain! to hear her speak of future punishment, 
menace me with heaven's vengeance, tax me with the crime i have 
committed, with those i am go to commit ..... great god! what is 
that?' 

as he utter these words, his eyes which were fixed upon the bed, saw 
the curtain shaken gently backwards and forwards. the apparition was 
recall to his mind, and he almost fancy that he beheld elvira's 
visionary form recline upon the bed. a few moments consideration 
suffice to reassure him. 

'it was only the wind,' said he, recover himself. 

again he pace the chamber; but an involuntary movement of awe and 
inquietude constant led his eye towards the alcove. he drew near it 
with irresolution. he pause before he ascend the few steps which led 
to it. he put out his hand thrice to remove the curtain, and as often 
drew it back. 

'absurd terrors!' he cry at length, ashamed of his own weakness---- 

hasty he mount the steps; when a figure drest in white start from 
the alcove, and gliding by him, made with precipitation towards the 
closet. madness and despair now supply the monk with that courage, 
of which he had till then been destitute. he flew down the steps, 
pursue the apparition, and attempt to grasp it. 

'ghost, or devil, i hold you!' he exclaimed, and seize the spectre by 
the arm. 

'oh! christ jesus!' cry a shrill voice; 'holy father, how you gripe 
me! i protest that i meant no harm!' 

this address, as well as the arm which he held, convinced the abbot 
that the supposed ghost was substantial flesh and blood. he drew the 
intruder towards the table, and holding up the light, discover the 
features of ...... madona flora! 

incense at have been betray by this trifling cause into fear so 
ridiculous, he ask her sternly, what business had brought her to that 
chamber. flora, ashamed at being found out, and terrify at the 
severity of ambrosio's looks, fell upon her knees, and promise to make 
a full confession. 

'i protest, reverend father,' said she, 'that i am quite grieve at 
have disturbed you: nothing was further from my intention. i meant 
to get out of the room as quiet as i got in; and had you been 
ignorant that i watch you, you know, it would have been the same 
thing as if i had not watch you at all. to be sure, i did very wrong 
in being a spy upon you, that i cannot deny; but lord! your reverence, 
how can a poor weak woman resist curiosity? mine was so strong to know 
what you were doing, that i could not but try to get a little peep, 
without any body knowing any thing about it. so with that i left old 
dame jacintha sitting by my lady's bed, and i venture to steal into 
the closet. being unwill to interrupt you, i contented myself at 
first with putt my eye to the keyhole; but as i could see nothing by 
this means, i undrew the bolt, and while your back was turn to the 
alcove, i whipt me in soft and silently. here i lay snug behind the 
curtain, till your reverence found me out, and seize me ere i had time 
to regain the closet door. this is the whole truth, i assure you, holy 
father, and i beg your pardon a thousand times for my impertinence.' 

during this speech the abbot had time to recollect himself: he was 
satisfy with reading the penitent spy a lecture upon the danger of 
curiosity, and the mean of the action in which she had been just 
discovered. flora declared herself fully persuade that she had done 
wrong; she promise never to be guilty of the same fault again, and was 
retiring very humble and contrite to antonia's chamber, when the closet 
door was sudden thrown open, and in rush jacintha pale and out of 
breath. 

'oh! father! father!' she cry in a voice almost choake with 
terror; 'what shall i do! what shall i do! here is a fine piece of 
work! nothing but misfortunes! nothing but dead people, and die 
people! oh! i shall go distracted! i shall go distracted!' 

'speak! speak!' cry flora and the monk at the same time; 'what has 
happened? what is the matter?' 

'oh! i shall have another corse in my house! some witch has certainly 
cast a spell upon it, upon me, and upon all about me! poor donna 
antonia! there she lie in just such convulsions, as kill her 
mother! the ghost told her true! i am sure, the ghost has told her 
true!' 

flora ran, or rather flew to her lady's chamber: ambrosio follow her, 
his bosom tremble with hope and apprehension. they found antonia as 
jacintha had described, torn by rack convulsion from which they in 
vain endeavour to relieve her. the monk dispatch jacintha to the 
abbey in all haste, and commission her to bring father pablo back 
with her, without lose a moment. 

'i will go for him,' reply jacintha, 'and tell him to come hither; 
but as to bring him myself, i shall do no such thing. i am sure that 
the house is bewitched, and burn me if ever i set foot in it again.' 

with this resolution she set out for the monastery, and deliver to 
father pablo the abbot's orders. she then betook herself to the house 
of old simon gonzalez, whom she resolve never to quit, till she had 
made him her husband, and his dwelling her own. 

father pablo had no soon beheld antonia, than he pronounced her 
incurable. the convulsion continue for an hour: during that time 
her agony were much mild than those which her groan create in the 
abbot's heart. her every pang seem a dagger in his bosom, and he 
cursed himself a thousand times for have adopt so barbarous a 
project. the hour being expired, by degree the fit became less 
frequent, and antonia less agitated. she felt that her dissolution was 
approaching, and that nothing could save her. 

'worthy ambrosio,' she said in a feeble voice, while she pressed his 
hand to her lips; 'i am now at liberty to express, how grateful is my 
heart for your attention and kindness. i am upon the bed of death; yet 
an hour, and i shall be no more. i may therefore acknowledge without 
restraint, that to relinquish your society was very painful to me: but 
such was the will of a parent, and i dare not disobey. i die without 
repugnance: there are few, who will lament my leave them; there are 
few, whom i lament to leave. among those few, i lament for none more 
than for yourself; but we shall meet again, ambrosio! we shall one day 
meet in heaven: there shall our friendship be renewed, and my mother 
shall view it with pleasure!' 

she paused. the abbot shudder when she mention elvira: antonia 
impute his emotion to pity and concern for her. 

'you are grieve for me, father,' she continued; 'ah! sigh not for my 
loss. i have no crime to repent, at least none of which i am 
conscious, and i restore my soul without fear to him from whom i 
received it. i have but few request to make: yet let me hope that 
what few i have shall be granted. let a solemn mass be said for my 
soul's repose, and another for that of my beloved mother. not that i 
doubt her rest in her grave: i am now convinced that my reason 
wandered, and the falsehood of the ghost's prediction is sufficient to 
prove my error. but every one has some failing: my mother may have 
had hers, though i knew them not: i therefore wish a mass to be 
celebrated for her repose, and the expence may be defray by the 
little wealth of which i am possessed. whatever may then remain, i 
bequeath to my aunt leonella. when i am dead, let the marquis de las 
cisterna know that his brother's unhappy family can no long 
importune him. but disappointment make me unjust: they tell me that 
he is ill, and perhaps had it been in his power, he wish to have 
protect me. tell him then, father, only that i am dead, and that if 
he had any fault to me, i forgave him from my heart. this done, i have 
nothing more to ask for, than your prayers: promise to remember my 
requests, and i shall resign my life without a pang or sorrow.' 

ambrosio engaged to comply with her desires, and proceed to give her 
absolution. every moment announce the approach of antonia's fate: 
her sight failed; her heart beat sluggishly; her finger stiffened, and 
grew cold, and at two in the morning she expire without a groan. as 
soon as the breath had forsaken her body, father pablo retired, 
sincerely affected at the melancholy scene. on her part, flora gave 
way to the most unbridled sorrow. 

far different concern employ ambrosio: he sought for the pulse 
whose throbbing, so matilda had assured him, would prove antonia's 
death but temporal. he found it; he pressed it; it palpitate beneath 
his hand, and his heart was fill with ecstacy. however, he careful 
conceal his satisfaction at the success of his plan. he assume a 
melancholy air, and address himself to flora, warn her against 
abandon herself to fruitless sorrow. her tear were too sincere to 
permit her listen to his counsels, and she continue to weep 
unceasingly. 

the friar withdrew, first promising to give orders himself about the 
funeral, which, out of consideration for jacintha as he pretended, 
should take place with all expedition. plunge in grief for the loss 
of her beloved mistress, flora scarcely attend to what he said. 
ambrosio hasten to command the burial. he obtain permission from 
the prioress, that the corse should be deposit in st. clare's 
sepulchre: and on the friday morning, every proper and needful ceremony 
being performed, antonia's body was committed to the tomb. 

on the same day leonella arrive at madrid, intend to present her 
young husband to elvira. various circumstances had oblige her to 
defer her journey from tuesday to friday, and she had no opportunity of 
making this alteration in her plan known to her sister. as her heart 
was truly affectionate, and as she had ever entertain a sincere 
regard for elvira and her daughter, her surprize at hearing of their 
sudden and melancholy fate was fully equal by her sorrow and 
disappointment. ambrosio sent to inform her of antonia's bequest: at 
her solication, he promised, as soon as elvira's trifling debt were 
discharged, to transmit to her the remainder. this being settled, no 
other business detain leonella in madrid, and she return to cordova 
with all diligence. 



chapter iii 

oh! could i worship aught beneath the sky 
that earth hath seen or fancy could devise, 
thine altar, sacred liberty, should stand, 
built by no mercenary vulgar hand, 
with fragrant turf, and flower as wild and fair, 
as ever dress a bank, or scent summer air. 
cowper. 

his whole attention bent upon bring to justice the assassin of his 
sister, lorenzo little thought how severe his interest was suffering 
in another quarter. as was before mentioned, he return not to madrid 
till the evening of that day on which antonia was buried. signify to 
the grand inquisitor the order of the cardinal-duke (a ceremony not to 
be neglected, when a member of the church was to be arrest publicly) 
communicate his design to his uncle and don ramirez, and assemble a 
troop of attendant sufficient to prevent opposition, furnish him 
with full occupation during the few hour preceding midnight. 
consequently, he had no opportunity to enquire about his mistress, and 
was perfectly ignorant both of her death and her mother's. 

the marquis was by no means out of danger: his delirium was gone, but 
had left him so much exhaust that the physician decline pronounce 
upon the consequence likely to ensue. as for raymond himself, he 
wish for nothing more earnest than to join agnes in the grave. 
existence was hateful to him: he saw nothing in the world deserving 
his attention; and he hope to hear that agnes was revenged, and 
himself given over in the same moment. 

follow by raymond's ardent prayer for success, lorenzo was at the 
gate of st. clare a full hour before the time appoint by the mother 
st. ursula. he was accompany by his uncle, by don ramirez de mello, 
and a party of chosen archers. though in considerable numbers their 
appearance create no surprize: a great crowd was already assemble 
before the convent doors, in order to witness the procession. it was 
naturally supposed that lorenzo and his attendant were conduct 
thither by the same design. the duke of medina being recognised, the 
people drew back, and made way for his party to advance. lorenzo 
placed himself opposite to the great gate, through which the pilgrim 
were to pass. convinced that the prioress could not escape him, he 
wait patient for her appearance, which she was expect to make 
exactly at midnight. 

the nun were employ in religious duty establish in honour of st. 
clare, and to which no prophane was ever admitted. the chapel window 
were illuminated. as they stood on the outside, the auditor heard the 
full swell of the organ, accompany by a chorus of female voices, rise 
upon the still of the night. this die away, and was succeed by a 
single strain of harmony: it was the voice of her who was destined to 
sustain in the procession the character of st. clare. for this office 
the most beautiful virgin of madrid was always selected, and she upon 
whom the choice fell esteem it as the highest of honours. while 
listen to the music, whose melody distance only seem to render 
sweeter, the audience was wrap up in profound attention. universal 
silence prevail through the crowd, and every heart was fill with 
reverence for religion. every heart but lorenzo's. conscious that 
among those who chaunte the praises of their god so sweetly, there 
were some who cloak with devotion the foulest sins, their hymn 
inspired him with detest at their hypocrisy. he had long observe 
with disapprobation and contempt the superstition which govern 
madrid's inhabitants. his good sense had pointed out to him the 
artifice of the monks, and the gross absurd of their miracles, 
wonders, and supposititious reliques. he blush to see his countrymen 
the dupe of deception so ridiculous, and only wish for an 
opportunity to free them from their monkish fetters. that opportunity, 
so long desire in vain, was at length present to him. he resolve 
not to let it slip, but to set before the people in glaring colours how 
enormous were the abuse but too frequent practised in monasteries, 
and how unjust public esteem was bestow indiscriminate upon all 
who wore a religious habit. he long for the moment destined to 
unmask the hypocrites, and convince his countrymen that a sanctify 
exterior do not always hide a virtuous heart. 

the service lasted, till midnight was announce by the convent bell. 
that sound being heard, the music ceased: the voice die away softly, 
and soon after the lights disappear from the chapel windows. 
lorenzo's heart beat high, when he found the execution of his plan to 
be at hand. from the natural superstition of the people he had 
prepared himself for some resistance. but he trust that the mother 
st. ursula would bring good reason to justify his proceeding. he had 
force with him to repel the first impulse of the populace, till his 
argument should be heard: his only fear was lest the domina, 
suspect his design, should have spirited away the nun on whose 
deposition every thing depended. unless the mother st. ursula should 
be present, he could only accuse the prioress upon suspicion; and this 
reflection gave him some little apprehension for the success of his 
enterprize. the tranquill which seem to reign through the convent 
in some degree re-assured him: still he expect the moment eagerly, 
when the presence of his ally should deprive him of the power of 
doubting. 

the abbey of capuchin was only separate from the convent by the 
garden and cemetery. the monk had been invite to assist at the 
pilgrimage. they now arrived, march two by two with light torch 
in their hands, and chaunt hymn in honour of st. clare. father 
pablo was at their head, the abbot have excuse himself from 
attending. the people made way for the holy train, and the friar 
placed themselves in ranks on either side of the great gates. a few 
minutes suffice to arrange the order of the procession. this being 
settled, the convent door were thrown open, and again the female 
chorus sound in full melody. first appear a band of choristers: 
as soon as they had passed, the monk fell in two by two, and follow 
with steps slow and measured. next came the novices; they bore no 
tapers, as did the professed, but move on with eyes bent downwards, 
and seem to be occupy by telling their beads. to them succeed a 
young and lovely girl, who represent st. lucia: she held a golden 
bason in which were two eyes: her own were cover by a velvet 
bandage, and she was conduct by another nun habit as an angel. she 
was follow by st. catherine, a palm-branch in one hand, a flaming 
sword in the other: she was robe in white, and her brow was 
ornament with a sparkle diadem. after her appear st. genevieve, 
surround by a number of imps, who putt themselves into grotesque 
attitudes, drawing her by the robe, and sporting round her with antic 
gestures, endeavour to distract her attention from the book, on which 
her eyes were constant fixed. these merry devil greatly entertain 
the spectators, who testify their pleasure by repeated burst of 
laughter. the prioress had been careful to select a nun whose 
disposition was naturally solemn and saturnine. she had every reason 
to be satisfy with her choice: the drollery of the imp were 
entire thrown away, and st. genevieve move on without discompose a 
muscle. 

each of these saint was separate from the other by a band of 
choristers, exalt her praise in their hymns, but declare her to be 
very much inferior to st. clare, the convent's avowed patroness. these 
have passed, a long train of nun appeared, bearing like the 
chorister each a burning taper. next came the relique of st. clare, 
inclose in vase equally precious for their material and workmanship: 
but they attract not lorenzo's attention. the nun who bore the heart 
occupy him entirely. according to theodore's description, he doubt 
not her being the mother st. ursula. she seem to look round with 
anxiety. as he stood foremost in the rank by which the procession 
past, her eye caught lorenzo's. a flush of joy overspread her till 
then pallid cheek. she turn to her companion eagerly. 

'we are safe!' he heard her whisper; ''tis her brother!' 

his heart being now at ease, lorenzo gaze with tranquill upon the 
remainder of the show. now appear its most brilliant ornament. it 
was a machine fashion like a throne, rich with jewel and dazzle 
with light. it roll onwards upon conceal wheels, and was guide by 
several lovely children, dress as seraphs. the summit was cover 
with silver clouds, upon which recline the most beautiful form that 
eyes ever witnessed. it was a damsel represent st. clare: her dress 
was of inestimable price, and round her head a wreath of diamond 
form an artificial glory: but all these ornament yield to the 
lustre of her charms. as she advanced, a murmur of delight ran through 
the crowd. even lorenzo confessed secretly, that he never beheld more 
perfect beauty, and had not his heart been antonia's, it must have 
fallen a sacrifice to this enchanting girl. as it was, he considered 
her only as a fine statue: she obtain from him no tribute save cold 
admiration, and when she had pass him, he thought of her no more. 

'who is she?' ask a by-stander in lorenzo's hearing. 

'one whose beauty you must often have heard celebrated. her name is 
virginia de villa-franca: she is a pensioner of st. clare's convent, a 
relation of the prioress, and has been select with justice as the 
ornament of the procession.' 

the throne move onwards. it was follow by the prioress herself: 
she march at the head of the remain nun with a devout and 
sanctify air, and closed the procession. she move on slowly: her 
eyes were raise to heaven: her countenance calm and tranquil seem 
abstracted from all sublunary things, and no feature betray her 
secret pride at display the pomp and opulence of her convent. she 
pass along, accompany by the prayer and benediction of the 
populace: but how great was the general confusion and surprize, when 
don ramirez start forward, challenge her as his prisoner. 

for a moment amaze held the domina silent and immoveable: but no 
soon did she recover herself, than she exclaim against sacrilege 
and impiety, and call the people to rescue a daughter of the church. 
they were eager prepare to obey her; when don ramirez, protect by 
the archer from their rage, command them to forbear, and threaten 
them with the severest vengeance of the inquisition. at that dread 
word every arm fell, every sword shrunk back into its scabbard. the 
prioress herself turn pale, and trembled. the general silence 
convinced her that she had nothing to hope but from innocence, and she 
besought don ramirez in a faultere voice, to inform her of what crime 
she was accused. 

'that you shall know in time,' reply he; 'but first i must secure the 
mother st. ursula.' 

'the mother st. ursula?' repeated the domina faintly. 

at this moment casting her eyes round, she saw near her lorenzo and the 
duke, who had follow don ramirez. 

'ah! great god!' she cried, clasp her hand together with a frantic 
air; 'i am betrayed!' 

'betrayed?' reply st. ursula, who now arrive conduct by some of 
the archers, and follow by the nun her companion in the procession: 
'not betrayed, but discovered. in me recognise your accuser: you know 
not how well i am instruct in your guilt!--segnor!' she continued, 
turning to don ramirez; 'i commit myself to your custody. i charge the 
prioress of st. clare with murder, and stake my life for the justice of 
my accusation.' 

a general cry of surprize was utter by the whole audience, and an 
explanation was demand loudly. the tremble nuns, terrify at the 
noise and universal confusion, had dispersed, and flee different ways. 
some regain the convent; other sought refuge in the dwelling of 
their relations; and many, only sensible of their present danger, and 
anxious to escape from the tumult, ran through the streets, and 
wandered, they knew not whither. the lovely virginia was one of the 
first to fly: and in order that she might be better seen and heard, 
the people desire that st. ursula should harangue them from the vacant 
throne. the nun complied; she ascend the glittering machine, and 
then address the surrounding multitude as follows. 

'however strange and unseemly may appear my conduct, when considered to 
be adopt by a female and a nun, necessity will justify it most fully. 
a secret, an horrible secret weigh heavy upon my soul: no rest can be 
mine till i have reveal it to the world, and satisfy that innocent 
blood which call from the grave for vengeance. much have i dare to 
gain this opportunity of lighten my conscience. had i fail in my 
attempt to reveal the crime, had the domina but suspect that the 
mystery was none to me, my ruin was inevitable. angel who watch 
unceasing over those who deserve their favour, have enable me to 
escape detection: i am now at liberty to relate a tale, whose 
circumstances will freeze every honest soul with horror. mine is the 
task to rend the veil from hypocrisy, and show misguided parent to 
what danger the woman is exposed, who falls under the sway of a 
monastic tyrant. 

'among the votary of st. clare, none was more lovely, none more 
gentle, than agnes de medina. i knew her well; she entrust to me 
every secret of her heart; i was her friend and confident, and i love 
her with sincere affection. nor was i singular in my attachment. her 
piety unfeigned, her willing to oblige, and her angel 
disposition, render her the darling of all that was estimable in the 
convent. the prioress herself, proud, scrupulous and forbidding, could 
not refuse agnes that tribute of approbation which she bestow upon no 
one else. every one has some fault: alas! agnes had her weakness! 
she violate the law of our order, and incur the inveterate hate of 
the unforgive domina. st. clare's rule are severe: but grown 
antiquated and neglected, many of late years have either been 
forgotten, or change by universal consent into mild punishments. 
the penance, adjudge to the crime of agnes, was most cruel, most 
inhuman! the law had been long exploded: alas! it still existed, and 
the revengeful prioress now determined to revive it. 

this law decree that the offender should be plunge into a private 
dungeon, expressly constitute to hide from the world for ever the 
victim of cruelty and tyrannical superstition. in this dreadful abode 
she was to lead a perpetual solitude, deprived of all society, and 
believe to be dead by those whom affection might have prompt to 
attempt her rescue. thus was she to languish out the remainder of her 
days, with no other food than bread and water, and no other comfort 
than the free indulgence of her tears.' 

the indignation create by this account was so violent, as for some 
moments to interrupt st. ursula's narrative. when the disturbance 
ceased, and silence again prevail through the assembly, she continue 
her discourse, while at every word the domina's countenance betray 
her increase terrors. 

'a council of the twelve elder nun was called: i was of the number. 
the prioress in exaggerate colours describe the offence of agnes, and 
scruple not to propose the revival of this almost forgotten law. to 
the shame of our sex be it spoken, that either so absolute was the 
domina's will in the convent, or so much had disappointment, solitude, 
and self-denial harden their heart and sowere their temper that 
this barbarous proposal was assent to by nine voice out of the 
twelve. i was not one of the nine. frequent opportunity had 
convinced me of the virtue of agnes, and i love and pity her most 
sincerely. the mother bertha and cornelia join my party: we made 
the strongest opposition possible, and the superior found herself 
compel to change her intention. in spite of the majority in her 
favour, she fear to break with us openly. she knew that support by 
the medina family, our forces would be too strong for her to cope with: 
and she also knew that after being once imprison and supposed dead, 
should agnes be discovered, her ruin would be inevitable. she 
therefore gave up her design, though which much reluctance. she 
demand some days to reflect upon a mode of punishment which might be 
agreeable to the whole community; and she promised, that as soon as her 
resolution was fixed, the same council should be again summoned. two 
days pass away: on the evening of the third it was announce that on 
the next day agnes should be examined; and that according to her 
behaviour on that occasion, her punishment should be either 
strengthen or mitigated. 

'on the night preceding this examination, i stole to the cell of agnes 
at an hour when i supposed the other nun to be bury in sleep. i 
comfort her to the best of my power: i bad her take courage, told 
her to rely upon the support of her friends, and taught her certain 
signs, by which i might instruct her to answer the domina's question 
by an assent or negative. conscious that her enemy would strive to 
confuse, embarrass, and daunt her, i fear her being ensnare into 
some confession prejudicial to her interests. being anxious to keep my 
visit secret, i stay with agnes but a short time. i bad her not let 
her spirits be cast down; i mingle my tear with those which stream 
down her cheek, embrace her fondly, and was on the point of retiring, 
when i heard the sound of steps approach the cell. i start back. 
a curtain which veiled a large crucifix offer me a retreat, and i 
hasten to place myself behind it. the door opened. the prioress 
entered, follow by four other nuns. they advanced towards the bed of 
agnes. the superior reproach her with her error in the bitterest 
terms: she told her that she was a disgrace to the convent, that she 
was resolve to deliver the world and herself from such a monster, and 
command her to drink the contents of a goblet now present to her by 
one of the nuns. aware of the fatal property of the liquor, and 
tremble to find herself upon the brink of eternity, the unhappy girl 
strove to excite the domina's pity by the most affecting prayers. 

she sue for life in terms which might have melt the heart of a 
fiend: she promise to submit patient to any punishment, to shame, 
imprisonment, and torture, might she but be permit to live! oh! 
might she but live another month, or week, or day! her merciless enemy 
listen to her complaint unmoved: she told her that at first she 
meant to have spare her life, and that if she had alter her 
intention, she had to thank the opposition of her friends. she 
continue to insist upon her swallow the poison: she bad her 
recommend herself to the almighty's mercy, not to hers, and assured her 
that in an hour she would be number with the dead. perceive that 
it was vain to implore this unfeeling woman, she attempt to spring 
from her bed, and call for assistance: she hoped, if she could not 
escape the fate announce to her, at least to have witness of the 
violence committed. the prioress guess her design. she seize her 
forcibly by the arm, and pushed her back upon her pillow. at the same 
time drawing a dagger, and place it at the breast of the unfortunate 
agnes, she protest that if she utter a single cry, or hesitate a 
single moment to drink the poison, she would pierce her heart that 
instant. already half-dead with fear, she could make no further 
resistance. the nun approach with the fatal goblet. the domina 
oblige her to take it, and swallow the contents. she drank, and the 
horrid deed was accomplished. the nun then seat themselves round 
the bed. they answer her groan with reproaches; they interrupt 
with sarcasm the prayer in which she recommend her parting soul to 
mercy: they threaten her with heaven's vengeance and eternal 
perdition: they bad her despair of pardon, and strowe with yet sharper 
thorn death's painful pillow. such were the suffering of this young 
unfortunate, till release by fate from the malice of her tormentors. 
she expire in horror of the past, in fear for the future; and her 
agony were such as must have ample gratify the hate and vengeance 
of her enemies. as soon as her victim cease to breathe, the domina 
retired, and was follow by her accomplices. 

'it was now that i venture from my concealment. i dare not to assist 
my unhappy friend, aware that without preserve her, i should only 
have brought on myself the same destruction. shock and terrify 
beyond expression at this horrid scene, scarcely had i sufficient 
strength to regain my cell. as i reach the door of that of agnes, i 
venture to look towards the bed, on which lay her lifeless body, once 
so lovely and so sweet! i breathe a prayer for her departed spirit, 
and vow to revenge her death by the shame and punishment of her 
assassins. with danger and difficulty have i kept my oath. i unwari 
drop some words at the funeral of agnes, while thrown off my guard 
by excessive grief, which alarm the guilty conscience of the 
prioress. my every action was observed; my every step was traced. i 
was constant surround by the superior's spies. it was long before 
i could find the means of convey to the unhappy girl's relations an 
intimate of my secret. it was given out that agnes had expire 
suddenly: this account was credit not only by her friends in madrid, 
but even by those within the convent. the poison had left no mark 
upon her body: no one suspect the true cause of her death, and it 
remain unknown to all, save the assassin and myself. 

'i have no more to say: for what i have already said, i will answer 
with my life. i repeat that the prioress is a murderess; that she has 
driven from the world, perhaps from heaven, an unfortunate whose 
offence was light and venial; that she has abuse the power intrust 
to her hands, and has been a tyrant, a barbarian, and an hypocrite. i 
also accuse the four nuns, violante, camilla, alix, and mariana, as 
being her accomplices, and equally criminal.' 

here st. ursula end her narrative. it create horror and surprize 
throughout: but when she related the inhuman murder of agnes, the 
indignation of the mob was so audible testified, that it was scarcely 
possible to hear the conclusion. this confusion increase with every 
moment: at length a multitude of voice exclaim that the prioress 
should be given up to their fury. to this don ramirez refuse to 
consent positively. even lorenzo bad the people remember that she had 
undergone no trial, and advise them to leave her punishment to the 
inquisition. all representations were fruitless: the disturbance grew 
still more violent, and the populace more exasperated. in vain did 
ramirez attempt to convey his prisoner out of the throng. wherever he 
turned, a band of riot barred his passage, and demand her being 
deliver over to them more loud than before. ramirez ordered his 
attendant to cut their way through the multitude: oppress by 
numbers, it was impossible for them to draw their swords. he 
threaten the mob with the vengeance of the inquisition: but in this 
moment of popular phrenzy even this dreadful name had lost its effect. 
though regret for his sister made him look upon the prioress with 
abhorrence, lorenzo could not help pity a woman in a situation so 
terrible: but in spite of all his exertions, and those of the duke, of 
don ramirez, and the archers, the people continue to press onwards. 
they forced a passage through the guard who protect their destined 
victim, drag her from her shelter, and proceed to take upon her a 
most summary and cruel vengeance. wild with terror, and scarcely 
knowing what she said, the wretched woman shriek for a moment's 
mercy: she protest that she was innocent of the death of agnes, and 
could clear herself from the suspicion beyond the power of doubt. the 
riot heed nothing but the gratification of their barbarous 
vengeance. they refuse to listen to her: they show her every sort 
of insult, loaded her with mud and filth, and call her by the most 
opprobrious appellations. they tore her one from another, and each new 
tormentor was more savage than the former. they stifle with howl and 
execrate her shrill cries for mercy; and drag her through the 
streets, spurn her, trample her, and treat her with every 
species of cruelty which hate or vindictive fury could invent. at 
length a flint, aim by some well-directing hand, struck her full upon 
the temple. she sank upon the ground bath in blood, and in a few 
minutes terminate her miserable existence. yet though she no long 
felt their insults, the riot still exercise their impotent rage 
upon her lifeless body. they beat it, trod upon it, and ill-used it, 
till it became no more than a mass of flesh, unsightly, shapeless, and 
disgusting. 

unable to prevent this shocking event, lorenzo and his friends had 
beheld it with the utmost horror: but they were rouze from their 
compel inactivity, on hearing that the mob was attack the convent 
of st. clare. the incense populace, confound the innocent with the 
guilty, had resolve to sacrifice all the nun of that order to their 
rage, and not to leave one stone of the building upon another. alarm 
at this intelligence, they hasten to the convent, resolve to defend 
it if possible, or at least to rescue the inhabitant from the fury of 
the rioters. most of the nun had fled, but a few still remain in 
their habitation. their situation was truly dangerous. however, as 
they had taken the precaution of fastening the inner gates, with this 
assistance lorenzo hope to repel the mob, till don ramirez should 
return to him with a more sufficient force. 

have been conduct by the former disturbance to the distance of some 
street from the convent, he did not immediately reach it: when he 
arrived, the throng surrounding it was so excessive as to prevent his 
approach the gates. in the interim, the populace besiege the 
building with persevering rage: they batter the walls, threw light 
torch in at the windows, and swore that by break of day not a nun of 
st. clare's order should be left alive. lorenzo had just succeed in 
piercing his way through the crowd, when one of the gate was forced 
open. the riot pour into the interior part of the building, where 
they exercise their vengeance upon every thing which found itself in 
their passage. they broke the furniture into pieces, tore down the 
pictures, destroy the reliques, and in their hatred of her servant 
forgot all respect to the saint. some employ themselves in searching 
out the nuns, other in pull down parts of the convent, and other 
again in setting fire to the pictures and valuable furniture which it 
contained. these latter produce the most decisive desolation: indeed 
the consequence of their action were more sudden than themselves had 
expect or wished. the flame rising from the burning piles caught 
part of the building, which being old and dry, the conflagration spread 
with rapid from room to room. the wall were soon shaken by the 
devour element: the column gave way: the roof came tumble down 
upon the rioters, and crush many of them beneath their weight. 
nothing was to be heard but shriek and groans; the convent was wrap 
in flames, and the whole present a scene of devastate and horror. 

lorenzo was shock at have been the cause, however innocent, of this 
frightful disturbance: he endeavour to repair his fault by 
protect the helpless inhabitant of the convent. he enter it with 
the mob, and exert himself to repress the prevailing fury, till the 
sudden and alarm progress of the flame compel him to provide for 
his own safety. the people now hurried out, as eager as they had 
before throng in; but their numbers clog up the doorway, and the 
fire gain upon them rapidly, many of them perish ere they had time 
to effect their escape. lorenzo's good fortune direct him to a small 
door in a farther aisle of the chapel. the bolt was already undrawn: 
he open the door, and found himself at the foot of st. clare's 
sepulchre. 

here he stop to breathe. the duke and some of his attendant had 
follow him, and thus were in security for the present. they now 
consulted, what steps they should take to escape from this scene of 
disturbance: but their deliberation were considerably interrupt by 
the sight of volumes of fire rising from amidst the convent's massy 
walls, by the noise of some heavy arch tumble down in ruins, or by 
the mingle shriek of the nun and rioters, either suffocate in the 
press, perishing in the flames, or crush beneath the weight of the 
fall mansion. 

lorenzo enquired, whither the wicket led? he was answered, to the 
garden of the capuchins, and it was resolve to explore an outlet upon 
that side. accordingly the duke raise the latch, and pass into the 
adjoin cemetery. the attendant follow without ceremony. 
lorenzo, being the last, was also on the point of quit the 
colonnade, when he saw the door of the sepulchre open softly. 
someone look out, but on perceive stranger utter a loud shriek, 
start back again, and flew down the marble stairs. 

'what can this mean?' cry lorenzo; 'here is some mystery concealed. 
follow me without delay!' 

thus saying, he hasten into the sepulchre, and pursue the person who 
continue to fly before him. the duke knew not the cause of his 
exclamation, but supposing that he had good reason for it, he follow 
him without hesitation. the other did the same, and the whole party 
soon arrive at the foot of the stairs. 

the upper door have been left open, the neighbouring flame dart 
from above a sufficient light to enable lorenzo's catching a glance of 
the fugitive running through the long passage and distant vaults: but 
when a sudden turn deprived him of this assistance, total dark 
succeeded, and he could only trace the object of his enquiry by the 
faint echo of retiring feet. the pursuer were now compel to 
proceed with caution: as well as they could judge, the fugitive also 
seem to slacken pace, for they heard the steps follow each other at 
long intervals. they at length were bewilder by the labyrinth of 
passages, and disperse in various directions. carry away by his 
eager to clear up this mystery, and to penetrate into which he was 
impel by a movement secret and unaccountable, lorenzo heed not 
this circumstance till he found himself in total solitude. the noise of 
footstep had ceased. all was silent around, and no clue offer 
itself to guide him to the flying person. he stop to reflect on the 
means most likely to aid his pursuit. he was persuade that no common 
cause would have induce the fugitive to seek that dreary place at an 
hour so unusual: the cry which he had heard, seem utter in a voice 
of terror, and he was convinced that some mystery was attach to this 
event. after some minutes past in hesitation he continue to proceed, 
feeling his way along the wall of the passage. he had already past 
some time in this slow progress, when he descry a spark of light 
glimmer at a distance. guide by this observation, and have drawn 
his sword, he bent his steps towards the place, whence the beam seem 
to be emitted. 

it proceed from the lamp which flame before st. clare's statue. 
before it stood several females, their white garment stream in the 
blast, as it howl along the vaulted dungeons. curious to know what 
had brought them together in this melancholy spot, lorenzo drew near 
with precaution. the stranger seem earnest engaged in 
conversation. they heard not lorenzo's steps, and he approach 
unobserved, till he could hear their voice distinctly. 

'i protest,' continue she who was speak when he arrived, and to 
whom the rest were listen with great attention; 'i protest, that i 
saw them with my own eyes. i flew down the steps; they pursue me, and 
i escape fall into their hand with difficulty. had it not been 
for the lamp, i should never have found you.' 

'and what could bring them hither?' said another in a tremble voice; 
'do you think that they were look for us?' 

'god grant that my fear may be false,' rejoin the first; 'but i 
doubt they are murderers! if they discover us, we are lost! as for me, 
my fate is certain: my affinity to the prioress will be a sufficient 
crime to condemn me; and though till now these vault have afford me 
a retreat.......' 

here look up, her eye fell upon lorenzo, who had continue to 
approach softly. 

'the murderers!' she cried-- 

she start away from the statue's pedestal on which she had been 
seated, and attempt to escape by flight. her companion at the same 
moment utter a terrify scream, while lorenzo arrest the fugitive 
by the arm. frightened and desperate she sank upon her knee before 
him. 

'spare me!' she exclaimed; 'for christ's sake, spare me! i am 
innocent, indeed, i am!' 

while she spoke, her voice was almost choake with fear. the beam of 
the lamp dart full upon her face which was unveiled, lorenzo 
recognize the beautiful virginia de villa-franca. he hasten to 
raise her from the ground, and besought her to take courage. he 
promise to protect her from the rioters, assured her that her retreat 
was still a secret, and that she might depend upon his readiness to 
defend her to the last drop of his blood. during this conversation, 
the nun had thrown themselves into various attitudes: one knelt, and 
address herself to heaven; another hid her face in the lap of her 
neighbour; some listen motionless with fear to the discourse of the 
supposed assassin; while other embrace the statue of st. clare, and 
implore her protection with frantic cries. on perceive their 
mistake, they crowded round lorenzo and heap benediction on him by 
dozens. he found that, on hearing the threat of the mob, and 
terrify by the cruelty which from the convent tower they had seen 
inflict on the superior, many of the pensioner and nun had taken 
refuge in the sepulchre. among the former was to be reckon the 
lovely virginia. nearly related to the prioress, she had more reason 
than the rest to dread the rioters, and now besought lorenzo earnest 
not to abandon her to their rage. her companions, most of whom were 
women of noble family, made the same request, which he readily granted. 
he promise not to quit them, till he had seen each of them safe in the 
arms of her relations: but he advise their defer to quit the 
sepulchre for some time longer, when the popular fury should be 
somewhat calmed, and the arrival of military force have disperse the 
multitude. 

'would to god!' cry virginia, 'that i were already safe in my 
mother's embraces! how say you, segnor; will it be long, ere we may 
leave this place? every moment that i pass here, i pass in torture!' 

'i hope, not long,' said he; 'but till you can proceed with security, 
this sepulchre will prove an impenetrable asylum. here you run no 
risque of a discovery, and i would advise your remain quiet for the 
next two or three hours.' 

'two or three hours?' exclaim sister helena; 'if i stay another hour 
in these vaults, i shall expire with fear! not the wealth of world 
should bribe me to undergo again what i have suffer since my coming 
hither. blessed virgin! to be in this melancholy place in the middle 
of night, surround by the moulder body of my deceased 
companions, and expect every moment to be torn in pieces by their 
ghost who wander about me, and complain, and groan, and wail in 
accent that make my blood run cold, ..... christ jesus! it is 
enough to drive me to madness!' 

'excuse me,' reply lorenzo, 'if i am surprize that while menace by 
real woe you are capable of yielding to imaginary dangers. these 
terror are puerile and groundless: combat them, holy sister; i have 
promise to guard you from the rioters, but against the attack of 
superstition you must depend for protection upon yourself. the idea of 
ghost is ridiculous in the extreme; and if you continue to be sway 
by ideal terror ...' 

'ideal?' exclaim the nun with one voice; 'why we heard it ourselves, 
segnor! every one of us heard it! it was frequent repeated, and it 
sound every time more melancholy and deep. you will never persuade me 
that we could all have been deceived. not we, indeed; no, no; had the 
noise been merely create by fancy ....' 

'hark! hark!' interrupt virginia in a voice of terror; 'god preserve 
us! there it is again!' 

the nun clasp their hand together, and sank upon their knees. 

lorenzo look round him eagerly, and was on the point of yielding to 
the fear which already had possessed the women. universal silence 
prevailed. he examine the vault, but nothing was to be seen. he now 
prepared to address the nuns, and ridicule their childish 
apprehensions, when his attention was arrest by a deep and long-drawn 
groan. 

'what was that?' he cried, and started. 

'there, segnor!' said helena; 'now you must be convinced! you have 
heard the noise yourself! now judge, whether our terror are 
imaginary. since we have been here, that groan has been repeated 
almost every five minutes. doubtless, it proceeds from some soul in 
pain, who wish to be pray out of purgatory: but none of us here 
dare ask it the question. as for me, were i to see an apparition, the 
fright, i am very certain, would kill me out of hand.' 

as she said this, a second groan was heard yet more distinctly. the 
nun cross themselves, and hasten to repeat their prayer against 
evil spirits. lorenzo listen attentively. he even thought that he 
could distinguish sounds, as of one speak in complaint; but distance 
render them inarticulate. the noise seem to come from the midst of 
the small vault in which he and the nun then were, and which a 
multitude of passage branch out in various directions, form into 
a sort of star. lorenzo's curiosity which was ever awake, made him 
anxious to solve this mystery. he desire that silence might be kept. 
the nun obey him. all was hushed, till the general still was 
again disturbed by the groaning, which was repeated several times 
successively. he perceive it to be most audible, when upon following 
the sound he was conduct close to the shrine of st. clare: 

'the noise come from hence,' said he; 'whose is this statue?' 

helena, to whom he address the question, pause for a moment. 
sudden she clap her hand together. 

'aye!' cry she, 'it must be so. i have discover the meaning of 
these groans.' 

the nun crowded round her, and besought her eager to explain 
herself. she grave reply that for time immemorial the statue had 
been famous for perform miracles: from this she infer that the 
saint was concerned at the conflagration of a convent which she 
protected, and express her grief by audible lamentations. not have 
equal faith in the miraculous saint, lorenzo did not think this 
solution of the mystery quite so satisfactory, as the nuns, who 
subscribe to it without hesitation. in one point, 'tis true, that he 
agree with helena. 

he suspect that the groan proceed from the statue: the more he 
listened, the more was he confirmed in this idea. he drew near to 
the image, designing to inspect it more closely: but perceive his 
intention, the nun besought him for god's sake to desist, since if he 
touched the statue, his death was inevitable. 

'and in what consist the danger?' said he. 

'mother of god! in what?' reply helena, ever eager to relate a 
miraculous adventure; 'if you had only heard the hundredth part of 
those marvellous story about this statue which the domina use to 
recount! she assured us often and often, that if we only dare to lay 
a finger upon it, we might expect the most fatal consequences. among 
other things she told us that a robber have enter these vault by 
night, he observe yonder ruby, whose value is inestimable. do you see 
it, segnor? it sparkle upon the third finger of the hand, in which 
she hold a crown of thorns. this jewel naturally excited the 
villain's cupidity. he resolve to make himself master of it. for 
this purpose he ascend the pedestal: he support himself by 
grasping the saint's right arm, and extend his own towards the ring. 
what was his surprize, when he saw the statue's hand raise in a 
posture of menace, and heard her lip pronounce his eternal perdition! 
penetrate with awe and consternation, he desist from his attempt, 
and prepared to quit the sepulchre. in this he also failed. flight 
was deny him. he found it impossible to disengage the hand, which 
rest upon the right arm of the statue. in vain did he struggle: he 
remain fixed to the image, till the insupportable and fiery anguish 
which dart itself through his veins, compel his shriek for 
assistance. 

the sepulchre was now fill with spectators. the villain confessed 
his sacrilege, and was only release by the separation of his hand from 
his body. it has remain ever since fasten to the image. the 
robber turn hermit, and led ever after an exemplary life: but yet 
the saint's decree was performed, and tradition say that he continue 
to haunt this sepulchre, and implore st. clare's pardon with groan and 
lamentations. now i think of it, those which we have just heard, may 
very possibly have been utter by the ghost of this sinner: but of 
this i will not be positive. all that i can say is, that since that 
time no one has ever dare to touch the statue: then do not be 
foolhardy, good segnor! for the love of heaven, give up your design, 
nor expose yourself unnecessary to certain destruction.' 

not being convinced that his destruction would be so certain as helena 
seem to think it, lorenzo persist in his resolution. the nun 
besought him to desist in piteous terms, and even pointed out the 
robber's hand, which in effect was still visible upon the arm of the 
statue. this proof, as they imagined, must convince him. it was very 
far from do so; and they were greatly scandalize when he declared 
his suspicion that the dry and shrivel finger had been placed 
there by order of the prioress. in spite of their prayer and threat 
he approach the statue. he sprang over the iron rails which defend 
it, and the saint underwent a thorough examination. the image at first 
appear to be of stone, but prove on further inspection to be form 
of no more solid material than coloured wood. he shook it, and 
attempt to move it; but it appear to be of a piece with the base 
which it stood upon. he examine it over and over: still no clue 
guide him to the solution of this mystery, for which the nun were 
become equally solicitous, when they saw that he touched the statue 
with impunity. he paused, and listened: the groan were repeated at 
intervals, and he was convinced of being in the spot nearest to them. 
he muse upon this singular event, and ran over the statue with 
enquiring eyes. sudden they rest upon the shrivel hand. it 
struck him, that so particular an injunction was not given without 
cause, not to touch the arm of the image. he again ascend the 
pedestal; he examine the object of his attention, and discover a 
small knob of iron conceal between the saint's shoulder and what was 
supposed to have been the hand of the robber. this observation 
delight him. he applied his finger to the knob, and pressed it down 
forcibly. immediately a rumbling noise was heard within the statue, as 
if a chain tight stretch was flying back. startle at the sound the 
timid nun start away, prepared to hasten from the vault at the first 
appearance of danger. all remain quiet and still, they again 
gather round lorenzo, and beheld his proceedings with anxious 
curiosity. 

finding that nothing follow this discovery, he descended. as he took 
his hand from the saint, she tremble beneath his touch. this create 
new terror in the spectators, who believe the statue to be animated. 
lorenzo's idea upon the subject were widely different. he easily 
comprehend that the noise which he had heard, was occasion by his 
have loosen a chain which attach the image to its pedestal. he 
once more attempt to move it, and succeed without much exertion. 
he placed it upon the ground, and then perceive the pedestal to be 
hollow, and cover at the opening with an heavy iron grate. 

this excited such general curiosity that the sister forgot both their 
real and imaginary dangers. lorenzo proceed to raise the grate, in 
which the nun assist him to the utmost of their strength. the 
attempt was accomplished with little difficulty. a deep abyss now 
present itself before them, whose thick obscurity the eye strove in 
vain to pierce. the ray of the lamp were too feeble to be of much 
assistance. nothing was discernible, save a flight of rough unshapen 
steps which sank into the yawn gulph and were soon lost in darkness. 
the groan were heard no more; but all believe them to have ascend 
from this cavern. as he bent over it, lorenzo fancy that he 
distinguished something bright twinkling through the gloom. he gaze 
attentive upon the spot where it show itself, and was convinced 
that he saw a small spark of light, now visible, now disappearing. he 
communicate this circumstance to the nuns: they also perceive the 
spark; but when he declared his intention to descend into the cave, 
they united to oppose his resolution. all their remonstrance could not 
prevail on him to alter it. none of them had courage enough to 
accompany him; neither could he think of deprive them of the lamp. 
alone therefore, and in darkness, he prepared to pursue his design, 
while the nun were contented to offer up prayer for his success and 
safety. 

the steps were so narrow and uneven, that to descend them was like 
walking down the side of a precipice. the obscurity by which he was 
surround render his footing insecure. he was oblige to proceed 
with great caution, lest he should miss the steps and fall into the 
gulph below him. this he was several times on the point of doing. 
however, he arrive soon upon solid ground than he had expected: he 
now found that the thick dark and impenetrable mists which reign 
through the cavern had deceive him into the belief of its being much 
more profound than it prove upon inspection. he reach the foot of 
the stairs unhurt: he now stopped, and look round for the spark 
which had before caught his attention. he sought it in vain: all was 
dark and gloomy. he listen for the groans; but his ear caught no 
sound, except the distant murmur of the nun above, as in low voice 
they repeated their ave-marias. he stood irresolute to which side he 
should address his steps. at all event he determined to proceed: he 
did so, but slowly, fear lest instead of approaching, he should be 
retiring from the object of his search. the groan seem to announce 
one in pain, or at least in sorrow, and he hope to have the power of 
relieve the mourner's calamities. a plaintive tone, sound at no 
great distance, at length reach his hearing; he bent his course 
joyful towards it. it became more audible as he advanced; and he 
soon beheld again the spark of light, which a low project wall had 
hitherto conceal from him. 

it proceed from a small lamp which was placed upon an heap of stones, 
and whose faint and melancholy ray serve rather to point out, than 
dispell the horrors of a narrow gloomy dungeon form in one side of 
the cavern; it also show several other recess of similar 
construction, but whose depth was bury in obscurity. cold play 
the light upon the damp walls, whose dew-stained surface gave back a 
feeble reflection. a thick and pestilent fog cloud the height of 
the vaulted dungeon. as lorenzo advanced, he felt a piercing chill 
spread itself through his veins. the frequent groan still engaged him 
to move forwards. he turn towards them, and by the lamp's glimmer 
beam beheld in a corner of this loathsome abode, a creature stretch 
upon a bed of straw, so wretched, so emaciated, so pale, that he 
doubt to think her woman. she was half-naked: her long dishevelled 
hair fell in disorder over her face, and almost entire conceal it. 
one waste arm hung listless upon a tattered rug which cover her 
convulse and shiver limbs: the other was wrap round a small 
bundle, and held it close to her bosom. a large rosary lay near her: 
opposite to her was a crucifix, on which she bent her sunk eyes 
fixedly, and by her side stood a basket and a small earthen pitcher. 

lorenzo stopped: he was petrify with horror. he gaze upon the 
miserable object with disgust and pity. he tremble at the spectacle; 
he grew sick at heart: his strength fail him, and his limb were 
unable to support his weight. he was oblige to lean against the low 
wall which was near him, unable to go forward, or to address the 
sufferer. she cast her eyes towards the staircase: the wall conceal 
lorenzo, and she observe him not. 

'no one comes!' she at length murmured. 

as she spoke, her voice was hollow, and rattle in her throat: she 
sigh bitterly. 

'no one comes!' she repeated; 'no! they have forgotten me! they will 
come no more!' 

she pause for a moment: then continue mournfully. 

'two days! two long, long days, and yet no food! and yet no hope, no 
comfort! foolish woman! how can i wish to lengthen a life so 
wretched! yet such a death! o! god! to perish by such a death! to 
linger out such age in torture! till now, i knew not what it was to 
hunger! hark! no. no one comes! they will come no more!' 

she was silent. she shivered, and drew the rug over her naked 
shoulders. 

'i am very cold! i am still unused to the damp of this dungeon! 

'tis strange: but no matter. cold shall i soon be, and yet not feel 
it--i shall be cold, cold as thou art!' 

she look at the bundle which lay upon her breast. she bent over it, 
and kiss it: then drew back hastily, and shudder with disgust. 

'it was once so sweet! it would have been so lovely, so like him! i 
have lost it for ever! how a few days have change it! i should not 
know it again myself! yet it is dear to me! god! how dear! i will 
forget what it is: i will only remember what it was, and love it as 
well, as when it was so sweet! so lovely! so like him! i thought that 
i had wept away all my tears, but here is one still lingering.' 

she wipe her eyes with a tress of her hair. she put out her hand for 
the pitcher, and reach it with difficulty. she cast into it a look 
of hopeless enquiry. she sighed, and replace it upon the ground. 

'quite a void! not a drop! not one drop left to cool my scorched-up 
burning palate! now would i give treasure for a draught of water! 
and they are god's servants, who make me suffer thus! they think 
themselves holy, while they torture me like fiends! they are cruel and 
unfeeling; and 'tis they who bid me repent; and 'tis they, who threaten 
me with eternal perdition! saviour, saviour! you think not so!' 

she again fixed her eyes upon the crucifix, took her rosary, and while 
she told her beads, the quick motion of her lip declared her to be 
pray with fervency. 

while he listen to her melancholy accents, lorenzo's sensibility 
became yet more violent affected. the first sight of such misery had 
given a sensible shock to his feelings: but that being past, he now 
advanced towards the captive. she heard his steps, and utter a cry 
of joy, drop the rosary. 

'hark! hark! hark!' she cried: 'some one comes!' 

she strove to raise herself, but her strength was unequal to the 
attempt: she fell back, and as she sank again upon the bed of straw, 
lorenzo heard the rattling of heavy chains. he still approached, while 
the prisoner thus continued. 

'is it you, camilla? you are come then at last? oh! it was time! i 
thought that you had forsaken me; that i was doom to perish of 
hunger. give me to drink, camilla, for pity's sake! i am faint with 
long fasting, and grown so weak that i cannot raise myself from the 
ground. good camilla, give me to drink, lest i expire before you!' 

fear that surprize in her enfeeble state might be fatal, lorenzo 
was at a loss how to address her. 

'it is not camilla,' said he at length, speak in a slow and gentle 
voice. 

'who is it then?' reply the sufferer: 'alix, perhaps, or violante. 
my eyes are grown so dim and feeble that i cannot distinguish your 
features. but whichever it is, if your breast is sensible of the least 
compassion, if you are not more cruel than wolf and tigers, take pity 
on my sufferings. you know that i am die for want of sustenance. 
this is the third day, since these lip have received nourishment. do 
you bring me food? or come you only to announce my death, and learn 
how long i have yet to exist in agony?' 

'you mistake my business,' reply lorenzo; 'i am no emissary of the 
cruel prioress. i pity your sorrows, and come hither to relieve them.' 

'to relieve them?' repeated the captive; 'said you, to relieve them?' 

at the same time start from the ground, and support herself upon 
her hands, she gaze upon the stranger earnestly. 

'great god! it is no illusion! a man! speak! who are you? what 
bring you hither? come you to save me, to restore me to liberty, to 
life and light? oh! speak, speak quickly, lest i encourage an hope 
whose disappointment will destroy me.' 

'be calm!' reply lorenzo in a voice soothe and compassionate; 'the 
domina of whose cruelty you complain, has already paid the forfeit of 
her offences: you have nothing more to fear from her. 

a few minutes will restore you to liberty, and the embrace of your 
friends from whom you have been secluded. you may rely upon my 
protection. give me your hand, and be not fearful. let me conduct you 
where you may receive those attention which your feeble state 
requires.' 

'oh! yes! yes! yes!' cry the prisoner with an exult shriek; 
'there is a god then, and a just one! joy! joy! i shall once more 
breath the fresh air, and view the light of the glorious sunbeams! i 
will go with you! stranger, i will go with you! oh! heaven will bless 
you for pity an unfortunate! but this too must go with me,' she 
add point to the small bundle which she still clasp to her 
bosom; 'i cannot part with this. i will bear it away: it shall 
convince the world how dreadful are the abode so false term 
religious. good stranger, lend me your hand to rise: i am faint with 
want, and sorrow, and sickness, and my forces have quite forsaken me! 
so, that is well!' 

as lorenzo stoop to raise her, the beam of the lamp struck full upon 
his face. 

'almighty god!' she exclaimed; 'is it possible! that look! those 
features! oh! yes, it is, it is .....' 

she extend her arms to throw them round him; but her enfeeble frame 
was unable to sustain the emotion which agitate her bosom. she 
fainted, and again sank upon the bed of straw. 

lorenzo was surprize at her last exclamation. he thought that he had 
before heard such accent as her hollow voice had just formed, but 
where he could not remember. he saw that in her dangerous situation 
immediate physical aid was absolutely necessary, and he hasten to 
convey her from the dungeon. he was at first prevent from do so 
by a strong chain fasten round the prisoner's body, and fix her to 
the neighbouring wall. however, his natural strength being aid by 
anxiety to relieve the unfortunate, he soon forced out the staple to 
which one end of the chain was attached. then taking the captive in his 
arms, he bent his course towards the staircase. the ray of the lamp 
above, as well as the murmur of female voices, guide his steps. he 
gain the stairs, and in a few minutes after arrive at the iron-grate. 

the nun during his absence had been terribly torment by curiosity 
and apprehension: they were equally surprize and delight on seeing 
him sudden emerge from the cave. every heart was fill with 
compassion for the miserable creature whom he bore in his arms. while 
the nuns, and virginia in particular, employ themselves in strive 
to recall her to her senses, lorenzo related in few words the manner of 
his finding her. he then observe to them that by this time the tumult 
must have been quelled, and that he could now conduct them to their 
friends without danger. all were eager to quit the sepulchre: still 
to prevent all possibility of ill-usage, they besought lorenzo to 
venture out first alone, and examine whether the coast was clear. with 
this request he complied. helena offer to conduct him to the 
staircase, and they were on the point of departing, when a strong light 
flash from several passage upon the adjacent walls. at the same 
time steps were heard of people approach hastily, and whose number 
seem to be considerable. the nun were greatly alarm at this 
circumstance: they supposed their retreat to be discovered, and the 
riot to be advance in pursuit of them. hasty quit the 
prisoner who remain insensible, they crowded round lorenzo, and 
claim his promise to protect them. virginia alone forgot her own 
danger by strive to relieve the sorrow of another. she support 
the sufferer's head upon her knees, bathing her temple with 
rose-water, chafe her cold hands, and sprinkling her face with tear 
which were drawn from her by compassion. the stranger approach 
nearer, lorenzo was enable to dispel the fear of the suppliants. his 
name, pronounced by a number of voice among which he distinguished the 
duke's, peal along the vaults, and convinced him that he was the 
object of their search. he communicate this intelligence to the nuns, 
who received it with rapture. a few moments after confirmed his idea. 
don ramirez, as well as the duke, appeared, follow by attendant with 
torches. they had been seek him through the vaults, in order to let 
him know that the mob was dispersed, and the riot entire over. 
lorenzo recount brief his adventure in the cavern, and explain 
how much the unknown was in want of medical assistance. he besought 
the duke to take charge of her, as well as of the nun and pensioners. 

'as for me,' said he, 'other care demand my attention. while you with 
one half of the archer convey these ladies to their respective homes, 
i wish the other half to be left with me. i will examine the cavern 
below, and pervade the most secret recess of the sepulchre. i cannot 
rest till convinced that yonder wretched victim was the only one 
confine by superstition in these vaults.' 

the duke applaud his intention. don ramirez offer to assist him in 
his enquiry, and his proposal was accept with gratitude. 

the nun have made their acknowledgment to lorenzo, committed 
themselves to the care of his uncle, and were conduct from the 
sepulchre. virginia request that the unknown might be given to her 
in charge, and promise to let lorenzo know whenever she was 
sufficient recover to accept his visits. in truth, she made this 
promise more from consideration for herself than for either lorenzo or 
the captive. she had witness his politeness, gentleness, and 
intrepid with sensible emotion. she wish earnest to preserve 
his acquaintance; and in addition to the sentiment of pity which the 
prisoner excited, she hope that her attention to this unfortunate 
would raise her a degree in the esteem of lorenzo. she had no occasion 
to trouble herself upon this head. the kindness already display by 
her and the tender concern which she had shown for the sufferer had 
gain her an exalted place in his good graces. while occupy in 
alleviate the captive's sorrows, the nature of her employment adorn 
her with new charms, and render her beauty a thousand times more 
interesting. lorenzo view her with admiration and delight: he 
considered her as a minister angel descended to the aid of afflict 
innocence; nor could his heart have resist her attractions, had it 
not been steel by the remembrance of antonia. 

the duke now convey the nun in safety to the dwelling of their 
respective friends. the rescue prisoner was still insensible and gave 
no sign of life, except by occasional groans. she was borne upon a 
sort of litter; virginia, who was constant by the side of it, was 
apprehensive that exhaust by long abstinence, and shaken by the 
sudden change from bonds and dark to liberty and light, her frame 
would never get the better of the shock. lorenzo and don ramirez still 
remain in the sepulchre. after deliberate upon their proceedings, 
it was resolve that to prevent lose time, the archer should be 
divide into two bodies: that with one don ramirez should examine the 
cavern, while lorenzo with the other might penetrate into the further 
vaults. this being arranged, and his follower being provided with 
torches, don ramirez advanced to the cavern. he had already descended 
some steps when he heard people approach hasty from the interior 
part of the sepulchre. this surprize him, and he quit the cave 
precipitately. 

'do you hear footsteps?' said lorenzo; 'let us bend our course towards 
them. 'tis from this side that they seem to proceed.' 

at that moment a loud and piercing shriek induce him to quicken his 
steps. 

'help! help, for god's sake! cry a voice, whose melodious tone 
penetrate lorenzo's heart with terror. 

he flew towards the cry with the rapid of lightning, and was 
follow by don ramirez with equal swiftness. 



chapter iv 

great heaven! how frail thy creature man is made! 
how by himself insensible betrayed! 
in our own strength unhappily secure, 
too little cautious of the adverse power, 
on pleasure's flowery brink we idle stray, 
master as yet of our return way: 
till the strong gust of rage passion rise, 
till the dire tempest mingle earth and skies, 
and swift into the boundless ocean borne, 
our foolish confidence too late we mourn: 
round our devoted head the billow beat, 
and from our trouble view the lessen lands retreat. 
prior. 


all this while, ambrosio was unconscious of the dreadful scene which 
were passing so near. the execution of his designs upon antonia 
employ his every thought. hitherto, he was satisfy with the 
success of his plans. antonia had drank the opiate, was bury in the 
vault of st. clare, and absolutely in his disposal. matilda, who was 
well acquaint with the nature and effects of the soporific medicine, 
had compute that it would not cease to operate till one in the 
morning. for that hour he wait with impatience. the festival of st. 
clare present him with a favourable opportunity of consummate his 
crime. he was certain that the friar and nun would be engaged in the 
procession, and that he had no cause to dread an interruption: from 
appear himself at the head of his monks, he had desire to be 
excused. he doubt not, that being beyond the reach of help, cut off 
from all the world, and total in his power, antonia would comply with 
his desires. the affection which she had ever exprest for him, 
warrant this persuasion: but he resolve that should she prove 
obstinate, no consideration whatever should prevent him from enjoy 
her. secure from a discovery, he shudder not at the idea of 
employ force: if he felt any repugnance, it arose not from a 
principle of shame or compassion, but from his feeling for antonia the 
most sincere and ardent affection, and wish to owe her favours to no 
one but herself. 

the monk quit the abbey at midnight. matilda was among the 
choristers, and led the chaunt. ambrosio was left by himself, and at 
liberty to pursue his own inclinations. convinced that no one remain 
behind to watch his motions, or disturb his pleasures, he now hasten 
to the western aisles. his heart beating with hope not unmingled with 
anxiety, he cross the garden, unlock the door which admitted him 
into the cemetery, and in a few minutes he stood before the vaults. 
here he paused. 

he look round him with suspicion, conscious that his business was 
unfit for any other eye. as he stood in hesitation, he heard the 
melancholy shriek of the screech-owl: the wind rattle loud against 
the window of the adjacent convent, and as the current swept by him, 
bore with it the faint note of the chaunt of choristers. he open 
the door cautiously, as if fear to be overheard: he entered; and 
closed it again after him. guide by his lamp, he thread the long 
passages, in whose winding matilda had instruct him, and reach the 
private vault which contained his sleep mistress. 

its entrance was by no means easy to discover: but this was no 
obstacle to ambrosio, who at the time of antonia's funeral had observe 
it too careful to be deceived. he found the door, which was 
unfastened, pushed it open, and descended into the dungeon. he 
approach the humble tomb in which antonia reposed. he had provided 
himself with an iron crow and a pick-axe; but this precaution was 
unnecessary. the grate was slightly fasten on the outside: he 
raise it, and place the lamp upon its ridge, bent silent over the 
tomb. by the side of three putrid half-corrupted body lay the 
sleep beauty. a lively red, the forerunner of return animation, 
had already spread itself over her cheek; and as wrap in her shroud 
she recline upon her funeral bier, she seem to smile at the image 
of death around her. while he gaze upon their rot bone and 
disgust figures, who perhaps were once as sweet and lovely, ambrosio 
thought upon elvira, by him reduce to the same state. as the memory of 
that horrid act glance upon his mind, it was cloud with a gloomy 
horror. yet it serve but to strengthen his resolution to destroy 
antonia's honour. 

'for your sake, fatal beauty!' murmur the monk, while gaze on his 
devoted prey; 'for your sake, have i committed this murder, and sold 
myself to eternal tortures. now you are in my power: the produce of my 
guilt will at least be mine. hope not that your prayer breathe in 
tone of unequalled melody, your bright eyes fill with tears, and 
your hand lift in supplication, as when seek in penitence the 
virgin's pardon; hope not that your moving innocence, your beauteous 
grief, or all your suppliant arts shall ransom you from my embraces. 
before the break of day, mine you must, and mine you shall be!' 

he lift her still motionless from the tomb: he seat himself upon a 
bank of stone, and support her in his arms, watch impatient for 
the symptom of return animation. scarcely could he command his 
passion sufficiently, to restrain himself from enjoy her while yet 
insensible. his natural lust was increase in ardour by the 
difficulty which had oppose his satisfying it: as also by his long 
abstinence from woman, since from the moment of resign her claim to 
his love, matilda had exile him from her arms for ever. 

'i am no prostitute, ambrosio;' had she told him, when in the full 
of his lust he demand her favours with more than usual earnestness; 
'i am now no more than your friend, and will not be your mistress. 
cease then to solicit my comply with desires, which insult me. 
while your heart was mine, i glory in your embraces: those happy 
times are past: my person is become indifferent to you, and 'tis 
necessity, not love, which make you seek my enjoyment. i cannot yield 
to a request so humiliate to my pride.' 

sudden deprived of pleasures, the use of which had made them an 
absolute want, the monk felt this restraint severely. naturally 
addict to the gratification of the senses, in the full vigour of 
manhood, and heat of blood, he had suffer his temperament to acquire 
such ascendency that his lust was become madness. of his fond for 
antonia, none but the gross particle remained: he long for the 
possession of her person; and even the gloom of the vault, the 
surrounding silence, and the resistance which he expect from her, 
seem to give a fresh edge to his fierce and unbridled desires. 

gradual he felt the bosom which rest against his, glow with 
return warmth. her heart throb again; her blood flow swifter, 
and her lip moved. at length she open her eyes, but still opprest 
and bewilder by the effects of the strong opiate, she closed them 
again immediately. ambrosio watch her narrowly, nor permit a 
movement to escape him. perceive that she was fully restore to 
existence, he caught her in rapture to his bosom, and close pressed 
his lip to hers. the sudden of his action suffice to dissipate 
the fumes which obscure antonia's reason. she hasty raise herself, 
and cast a wild look round her. the strange image which present 
themselves on every side contribute to confuse her. she put her hand 
to her head, as if to settle her disorder imagination. at length she 
took it away, and threw her eyes through the dungeon a second time. 
they fixed upon the abbot's face. 

'where am i?' she said abruptly. 'how came i here? where is my 
mother? methought, i saw her! oh! a dream, a dreadful dreadful dream 
told me ...... but where am i? let me go! i cannot stay here!' 

she attempt to rise, but the monk prevent her. 

'be calm, lovely antonia!' he replied; 'no danger is near you: confide 
in my protection. why do you gaze on me so earnestly? do you not know 
me? not know your friend? ambrosio?' 

'ambrosio? my friend? oh! yes, yes; i remember ...... but why 
am i here? who has brought me? why are you with me? oh! flora bad me 
beware .....! here are nothing but graves, and tombs, and 
skeletons! this place frighten me! good ambrosio take me away from 
it, for it recall my fearful dream! methought i was dead, and laid in 
my grave! good ambrosio, take me from hence. will you not? oh! will 
you not? do not look on me thus! 

your flaming eyes terrify me! spare me, father! oh! spare me for god's 
sake!' 

'why these terrors, antonia?' rejoin the abbot, fold her in his 
arms, and covering her bosom with kiss which she in vain struggle to 
avoid: 'what fear you from me, from one who adore you? what matter 
it where you are? this sepulchre seem to me love's bower; this gloom 
is the friendly night of mystery which he spread over our delights! 
such do i think it, and such must my antonia. yes, my sweet girl! 
yes! your vein shall glow with fire which circle in mine, and my 
transport shall be double by your share them!' 

while he spoke thus, he repeated his embraces, and permit himself 
the most indecent liberties. even antonia's ignorance was not proof 
against the freedom of his behaviour. she was sensible of her danger, 
forced herself from his arms, and her shroud being her only garment, 
she wrap it close round her. 

'unhand me, father!' she cried, her honest indignation temper by 
alarm at her unprotected position; 'why have you brought me to this 
place? its appearance freeze me with horror! convey me from hence, 
if you have the least sense of pity and humanity! let me return to the 
house which i have quit i know not how; but stay here one moment 
longer, i neither will, or ought.' 

though the monk was somewhat startle by the resolute tone in which 
this speech was delivered, it produce upon him no other effect than 
surprize. he caught her hand, forced her upon his knee, and gaze 
upon her with glote eyes, he thus reply to her. 

'compose yourself, antonia. resistance is unavailing, and i need 
disavow my passion for you no longer. you are imagine dead: society 
is for ever lost to you. i possess you here alone; you are absolutely 
in my power, and i burn with desire which i must either gratify or 
die: but i would owe my happiness to yourself. my lovely girl! my 
adorable antonia! let me instruct you in joy to which you are still a 
stranger, and teach you to feel those pleasure in my arms which i must 
soon enjoy in yours. nay, this struggle is childish,' he continued, 
seeing her repell his caresses, and endeavour to escape from his grasp; 
'no aid is near: neither heaven or earth shall save you from my 
embraces. yet why reject pleasure so sweet, so rapturous? no one 
observe us: our love will be a secret to all the world: love and 
opportunity invite your give loose to your passions. yield to them, 
my antonia! yield to them, my lovely girl! throw your arms thus 
fondly round me; join your lip thus close to mine! amidst all her 
gifts, has nature deny her most precious, the sensibility of 
pleasure? oh! impossible! every feature, look, and motion declare 
you form to bless, and to be blessed yourself! turn not on me those 
supplicate eyes: consult your own charms; they will tell you that i 
am proof against entreaty. can i relinquish these limb so white, so 
soft, so delicate; these swelling breasts, round, full, and elastic! 
these lip fraught with such inexhaustible sweetness? can i relinquish 
these treasures, and leave them to another's enjoyment? no, antonia; 
never, never! i swear it by this kiss, and this! and this!' 

with every moment the friar's passion became more ardent, and antonia's 
terror more intense. she struggle to disengage herself from his arms: 
her exertion were unsuccessful; and finding that ambrosio's conduct 
became still freer, she shriek for assistance with all her strength. 
the aspect of the vault, the pale glimmer of the lamp, the 
surrounding obscurity, the sight of the tomb, and the object of 
mortality which met her eyes on either side, were ill-calculated to 
inspire her with those emotion by which the friar was agitated. even 
his caress terrify her from their fury, and create no other 
sentiment than fear. on the contrary, her alarm, her evident disgust, 
and incessant opposition, seem only to inflame the monk's desires, 
and supply his brutality with additional strength. antonia's shriek 
were unheard: yet she continue them, nor abandoned her endeavour to 
escape, till exhaust and out of breath she sank from his arms upon 
her knees, and once more had recourse to prayer and supplications. 
this attempt had no better success than the former. on the contrary, 
taking advantage of her situation, the ravish threw himself by her 
side: he clasp her to his bosom almost lifeless with terror, and 
faint with struggling. he stifle her cries with kisses, treat her 
with the rude of an unprincipled barbarian, proceed from freedom 
to freedom, and in the violence of his lustful delirium, wound and 
bruise her tender limbs. heedless of her tears, cries and entreaties, 
he gradual made himself master of her person, and desist not from 
his prey, till he had accomplished his crime and the dishonour of 
antonia. 

scarcely had he succeed in his design than he shudder at himself 
and the means by which it was effected. the very excess of his former 
eager to possess antonia now contribute to inspire him with 
disgust; and a secret impulse made him feel how base and unman was 
the crime which he had just committed. he start hasty from her 
arms. she, who so lately had been the object of his adoration, now 
raise no other sentiment in his heart than aversion and rage. he 
turn away from her; or if his eyes rest upon her figure 
involuntarily, it was only to dart upon her looks of hate. the 
unfortunate had faint ere the completion of her disgrace: she only 
recover life to be sensible of her misfortune. she remain stretch 
upon the earth in silent despair: the tear chase each other slow 
down her cheeks, and her bosom heave with frequent sobs. oppress 
with grief, she continue for some time in this state of torpidity. at 
length she rose with difficulty, and drag her feeble steps towards 
the door, prepared to quit the dungeon. 

the sound of her footstep rouze the monk from his sullen apathy. 
start from the tomb against which he reclined, while his eyes 
wander over the image of corruption contained in it, he pursue the 
victim of his brutality, and soon overtook her. he seize her by the 
arm, and violent forced her back into the dungeon. 

'whither go you?' he cry in a stern voice; 'return this instant!' 

antonia tremble at the fury of his countenance. 

'what, would you more?' she said with timidity: 'is not my ruin 
compleated? am i not undone, undone for ever? is not your cruelty 
contented, or have i yet more to suffer? let me depart. let me return 
to my home, and weep unrestrained my shame and my affliction!' 

'return to your home?' repeated the monk, with bitter and contemptuous 
mockery; then sudden his eyes flaming with passion, 'what? that you 
may denounce me to the world? that you may proclaim me an hypocrite, a 
ravisher, a betrayer, a monster of cruelty, lust, and ingratitude? no, 
no, no! i know well the whole weight of my offences; well that your 
complaint would be too just, and my crime too notorious! you shall 
not from hence to tell madrid that i am a villain; that my conscience 
is loaded with sin which make me despair of heaven's pardon. wretched 
girl, you must stay here with me! here amidst these lonely tombs, 
these image of death, these rot loathsome corrupt bodies! here 
shall you stay, and witness my sufferings; witness what it is to die in 
the horrors of despondency, and breathe the last groan in blasphemy and 
curses! and who am i to thank for this? what seduce me into crimes, 
whose bare remembrance make me shudder? fatal witch! was it not thy 
beauty? have you not plunge my soul into infamy? have you not made 
me a perjure hypocrite, a ravisher, an assassin! nay, at this moment, 
do not that angel look bid me despair of god's forgiveness? oh! when 
i stand before his judgment-throne, that look will suffice to damn me! 
you will tell my judge that you were happy, till i saw you; that you 
were innocent, till i pollute you! you will come with those tearful 
eyes, those cheek pale and ghastly, those hand lift in 
supplication, as when you sought from me that mercy which i gave not! 
then will my perdition be certain! then will come your mother's ghost, 
and hurl me down into the dwelling of fiends, and flames, and furies, 
and everlasting torments! and 'tis you, who will accuse me! 'tis you, 
who will cause my eternal anguish! you, wretched girl! you! you!' 

as he thunder out these words, he violent grasp antonia's arm, 
and spurn the earth with delirious fury. 

supposing his brain to be turned, antonia sank in terror upon her 
knees: she lift up her hands, and her voice almost die away, ere 
she could give it utterance. 

'spare me! spare me!' she murmur with difficulty. 

'silence!' cry the friar madly, and dashed her upon the ground---- 

he quit her, and pace the dungeon with a wild and disorder air. 
his eyes roll fearfully: antonia tremble whenever she met their 
gaze. he seem to meditate on something horrible, and she gave up all 
hope of escape from the sepulchre with life. yet in harbour this 
idea, she did him injustice. amidst the horror and disgust to which 
his soul was a prey, pity for his victim still held a place in it. the 
storm of passion once over, he would have given world had he possest 
them, to have restore to her that innocence of which his unbridled 
lust had deprived her. of the desire which had urge him to the 
crime, no trace was left in his bosom: the wealth of india would not 
have tempt him to a second enjoyment of her person. his nature 
seem to revolt at the very idea, and fain would he have wipe from 
his memory the scene which had just past. as his gloomy rage abated, 
in proportion did his compassion augment for antonia. he stopped, and 
would have spoken to her words of comfort; but he knew not from whence 
to draw them, and remain gaze upon her with mournful wildness. her 
situation seem so hopeless, so woebegone, as to baffle mortal power 
to relieve her. what could he do for her? her peace of mind was lost, 
her honour irreparable ruined. she was cut off for ever from society, 
nor dare he give her back to it. he was conscious that were she to 
appear in the world again, his guilt would be revealed, and his 
punishment inevitable. to one so laden with crimes, death came armed 
with double terrors. yet should he restore antonia to light, and stand 
the chance of her betray him, how miserable a prospect would present 
itself before her. she could never hope to be creditable established; 
she would be marked with infamy, and condemn to sorrow and solitude 
for the remainder of her existence. what was the alternative? a 
resolution far more terrible for antonia, but which at least would 
insure the abbot's safety. he determined to leave the world persuade 
of her death, and to retain her a captive in this gloomy prison: there 
he propose to visit her every night, to bring her food, to profess his 
penitence, and mingle his tear with hers. the monk felt that this 
resolution was unjust and cruel; but it was his only means to prevent 
antonia from publishing his guilt and her own infamy. should he 
release her, he could not depend upon her silence: his offence was too 
flagrant to permit his hope for her forgiveness. besides, her 
reappear would excite universal curiosity, and the violence of her 
affliction would prevent her from conceal its cause. he determined 
therefore, that antonia should remain a prisoner in the dungeon. 

he approach her with confusion paint on his countenance. he raise 
her from the ground. her hand trembled, as he took it, and he drop 
it again as if he had touched a serpent. nature seem to recoil at 
the touch. he felt himself at once repulse from and attract towards 
her, yet could account for neither sentiment. there was something in 
her look which penetrate him with horror; and though his understanding 
was still ignorant of it, conscience pointed out to him the whole 
extent of his crime. in hurried accent yet the gentlest he could find, 
while his eye was averted, and his voice scarcely audible, he strove to 
console her under a misfortune which now could not be avoided. he 
declared himself sincerely penitent, and that he would gladly shed a 
drop of his blood, for every tear which his barbarous had forced from 
her. wretched and hopeless, antonia listen to him in silent grief: 
but when he announce her confinement in the sepulchre, that dreadful 
doom to which even death seem preferable rouse her from her 
insensibility at once. to linger out a life of misery in a narrow 
loathsome cell, known to exist by no human being save her ravisher, 
surround by moulder corses, breathing the pestilent air of 
corruption, never more to behold the light, or drink the pure gale of 
heaven, the idea was more terrible than she could support. it conquer 
even her abhorrence of the friar. again she sank upon her knees: she 
besought his compassion in terms the most pathetic and urgent. she 
promised, would he but restore her to liberty, to conceal her injury 
from the world; to assign any reason for her reappear which he 
might judge proper; and in order to prevent the least suspicion from 
fall upon him, she offer to quit madrid immediately. her 
entreaty were so urgent as to make a considerable impression upon the 
monk. he reflect that as her person no long excited his desires, 
he had no interest in keeping her conceal as he had at first 
intended; that he was add a fresh injury to those which she had 
already suffered; and that if she adhere to her promises, whether she 
was confine or at liberty, his life and reputation were equally 
secure. on the other hand, he tremble lest in her affliction antonia 
should unintentional break her engagement; or that her excessive 
simplicity and ignorance of deceit should permit some one more artful 
to surprize her secret. however well-founded were these apprehensions, 
compassion, and a sincere wish to repair his fault as much as possible 
solicit his comply with the prayer of his suppliant. the 
difficulty of colouring antonia's unexpected return to life, after her 
supposed death and public interment, was the only point which kept him 
irresolute. he was still ponder on the means of remove this 
obstacle, when he heard the sound of feet approach with 
precipitation. the door of the vault was thrown open, and matilda 
rush in, evidently much confuse and terrified. 

on seeing a stranger enter, antonia utter a cry of joy: but her 
hope of receiving succour from him were soon dissipated. the supposed 
novice, without express the least surprize at finding a woman alone 
with the monk, in so strange a place, and at so late an hour, address 
him thus without lose a moment. 

'what is to be done, ambrosio? we are lost, unless some speedy means 
is found of dispel the rioters. ambrosio, the convent of st. clare 
is on fire; the prioress has fallen a victim to the fury of the mob. 
already is the abbey menace with a similar fate. alarm at the 
threat of the people, the monk seek for you everywhere. they imagine 
that your authority alone will suffice to calm this disturbance. no 
one know what is become of you, and your absence create universal 
astonishment and despair. i profit by the confusion, and flee hither 
to warn you of the danger.' 

'this will soon be remedied,' answer the abbot; 'i will hasten back 
to my cell: a trivial reason will account for my have been missed.' 

'impossible!' rejoin matilda: 'the sepulchre is fill with archers. 
lorenzo de medina, with several officer of the inquisition, search 
through the vaults, and pervade every passage. you will be 
intercept in your flight; your reason for being at this late hour in 
the sepulchre will be examined; antonia will be found, and then you are 
undone for ever!' 

'lorenzo de medina? officer of the inquisition? what bring them 
here? seek they for me? am i then suspected? oh! speak, matilda! 
answer me, in pity!' 

'as yet they do not think of you, but i fear that they will ere long. 
your only chance of escape their notice rest upon the difficulty of 
explore this vault. the door is artful hidden: 

haply it may not be observed, and we may remain conceal till the 
search is over.' 

'but antonia ..... should the inquisitor draw near, and her cries 
be heard ....' 

'thus i remove that danger!' interrupt matilda. 

at the same time drawing a poignard, she rush upon her devoted prey. 

'hold! hold!' cry ambrosio, seize her hand, and wrest from it 
the already lift weapon. 'what would you do, cruel woman? the 
unfortunate has already suffer but too much, thanks to your 
pernicious consels! would to god that i had never follow them! 
would to god that i had never seen your face!' 

matilda dart upon him a look of scorn. 

'absurd!' she exclaim with an air of passion and majesty which 
impress the monk with awe. 'after rob her of all that made it 
dear, can you fear to deprive her of a life so miserable? but 'tis 
well! let her live to convince you of your folly. i abandon you to 
your evil destiny! i disclaim your alliance! who tremble to commit 
so insignificant a crime, deserve not my protection. hark! hark! 
ambrosio; hear you not the archers? they come, and your destruction is 
inevitable!' 

at this moment the abbot heard the sound of distant voices. he flew to 
close the door on whose concealment his safety depended, and which 
matilda had neglect to fasten. ere he could reach it, he saw antonia 
glide sudden by him, rush through the door, and fly towards the noise 
with the swift of an arrow. she had listen attentive to 
matilda: she heard lorenzo's name mentioned, and resolve to risque 
every thing to throw herself under his protection. the door was open. 
the sound convinced her that the archer could be at no great 
distance. she muster up her little remain strength, rush by the 
monk ere he perceive her design, and bent her course rapid towards 
the voices. as soon as he recover from his first surprize, the abbot 
fail not to pursue her. in vain did antonia redouble her speed, and 
stretch every nerve to the utmost. her enemy gain upon her every 
moment: she heard his steps close after her, and felt the heat of his 
breath glow upon her neck. he overtook her; he twist his hand in the 
ringlet of her stream hair, and attempt to drag her back with him 
to the dungeon. antonia resist with all her strength: she fold 
her arms round a pillar which support the roof, and shriek loud 
for assistance. in vain did the monk strive to threaten her to silence. 

'help!' she continue to exclaim; 'help! help! for god's sake!' 

quicken by her cries, the sound of footstep was heard approaching. 
the abbot expect every moment to see the inquisitor arrive. antonia 
still resisted, and he now enforce her silence by means the most 
horrible and inhuman. he still grasp matilda's dagger: without 
allow himself a moment's reflection, he raise it, and plunge it 
twice in the bosom of antonia! she shrieked, and sank upon the ground. 
the monk endeavour to bear her away with him, but she still embrace 
the pillar firmly. at that instant the light of approach torch 
flash upon the walls. dread a discovery, ambrosio was compel 
to abandon his victim, and hasty flee back to the vault, where he had 
left matilda. 

he flee not unobserved. don ramirez happening to arrive the first, 
perceive a female bleeding upon the ground, and a man flying from the 
spot, whose confusion betray him for the murderer. he instantly 
pursue the fugitive with some part of the archers, while the other 
remain with lorenzo to protect the wound stranger. they raise her, 
and support her in their arms. she had faint from excess of pain, 
but soon gave sign of return life. she open her eyes, and on 
lift up her head, the quantity of fair hair fell back which till 
then had obscure her features. 

'god almighty! it is antonia!' 

such was lorenzo's exclamation, while he snatch her from the 
attendant's arms, and clasp her in his own. 

though aim by an uncertain hand, the poignard had answer but too 
well the purpose of its employer. the wound were mortal, and antonia 
was conscious that she never could recover. yet the few moments which 
remain for her were moments of happiness. the concern exprest upon 
lorenzo's countenance, the frantic fond of his complaints, and his 
earnest enquiry respecting her wounds, convinced her beyond a doubt 
that his affection were her own. she would not be remove from the 
vaults, fear lest motion should only hasten her death; and she was 
unwill to lose those moments which she past in receiving proof of 
lorenzo's love, and assure him of her own. she told him that had she 
still been undefiled she might have lament the loss of life; but that 
deprived of honour and brand with shame, death was to her a blessing: 
she could not have been his wife, and that hope being deny her, she 
resigned herself to the grave without one sigh of regret. she bad him 
take courage, conjure him not to abandon himself to fruitless sorrow, 
and declared that she mourn to leave nothing in the whole world but 
him. while every sweet accent increase rather than lighten 
lorenzo's grief, she continue to converse with him till the moment of 
dissolution. her voice grew faint and scarcely audible; a thick cloud 
spread itself over her eyes; her heart beat slow and irregular, and 
every instant seem to announce that her fate was near at hand. 

she lay, her head recline upon lorenzo's bosom, and her lip still 
murmur to him words of comfort. she was interrupt by the convent 
bell, as toll at a distance, it struck the hour. sudden antonia's 
eyes sparkle with celestial brightness: her frame seem to have 
received new strength and animation. she start from her lover's arms. 

'three o'clock!' she cried; 'mother, i come!' 

she clasp her hands, and sank lifeless upon the ground. lorenzo in 
agony threw himself beside her: he tore his hair, beat his breast, and 
refuse to be separate from the corse. at length his force being 
exhausted, he suffer himself to be led from the vault, and was 
convey to the palace de medina scarcely more alive than the 
unfortunate antonia. 

in the meanwhile, though close pursued, ambrosio succeed in 
regain the vault. the door was already fasten when don ramirez 
arrived, and much time elapsed, ere the fugitive's retreat was 
discovered. but nothing can resist perseverance. though so artful 
concealed, the door could not escape the vigilance of the archers. 
they forced it open, and enter the vault to the infinite dismay of 
ambrosio and his companion. the monk's confusion, his attempt to hide 
himself, his rapid flight, and the blood sprinkle upon his cloaths, 
left no room to doubt his being antonia's murderer. but when he was 
recognize for the immaculate ambrosio, 'the man of holiness,' the idol 
of madrid, the faculty of the spectator were chain up in surprize, 
and scarcely could they persuade themselves that what they saw was no 
vision. the abbot strove not to vindicate himself, but preserve a 
sullen silence. he was secure and bound. the same precaution was 
taken with matilda: her cowl being removed, the delicacy of her 
features and profusion of her golden hair betray her sex, and this 
incident create fresh amazement. the dagger was also found in the 
tomb, where the monk had thrown it; and the dungeon have undergone a 
thorough search, the two culprit were convey to the prison of the 
inquisition. 

don ramirez took care that the populace should remain ignorant both of 
the crime and profession of the captives. he fear a repetition of 
the riot which had follow the apprehend the prioress of st. 
clare. he contented himself with state to the capuchin the guilt of 
their superior. to avoid the shame of a public accusation, and 
dread the popular fury from which they had already save their abbey 
with much difficulty, the monk readily permit the inquisitor to 
search their mansion without noise. no fresh discovery were made. 
the effects found in the abbot's and matilda's cell were seized, and 
carry to the inquisition to be produce in evidence. every thing 
else remain in its former position, and order and tranquill once 
more prevail through madrid. 

st. clare's convent was completely ruin by the united ravages of the 
mob and conflagration. nothing remain of it but the principal walls, 
whose thickness and solidity had preserve them from the flames. the 
nun who had belong to it were oblige in consequence to disperse 
themselves into other societies: but the prejudice against them ran 
high, and the superior were very unwill to admit them. however, 
most of them being related to family the most distinguished for their 
riches, birth and power, the several convent were compel to receive 
them, though they did it with a very ill grace. this prejudice was 
extremely false and unjustifiable: after a close investigation, it was 
prove that all in the convent were persuade of the death of agnes, 
except the four nun whom st. ursula had pointed out. these had fallen 
victim to the popular fury; as had also several who were perfectly 
innocent and unconscious of the whole affair. blind by resentment, 
the mob had sacrifice every nun who fell into their hands: they who 
escape were entire indebted to the duke de medina's prudence and 
moderation. of this they were conscious, and felt for that nobleman a 
proper sense of gratitude. 

virginia was not the most sparing of her thanks: she wish equally to 
make a proper return for his attentions, and to obtain the good graces 
of lorenzo's uncle. in this she easily succeeded. 

the duke beheld her beauty with wonder and admiration; and while his 
eyes were enchant with her form, the sweet of her manners and her 
tender concern for the suffering nun prepossessed his heart in her 
favour. this virginia had discernment enough to perceive, and she 
redouble her attention to the invalid. when he part from her at the 
door of her father's palace, the duke entreat permission to enquire 
occasional after her health. his request was readily granted: 
virginia assured him that the marquis de villa-franca would be proud of 
an opportunity to thank him in person for the protection afford to 
her. they now separated, he enchant with her beauty and gentleness, 
and she much pleased with him and more with his nephew. 

on enter the palace, virginia's first care was to summon the family 
physician, and take care of her unknown charge. her mother hasten to 
share with her the charitable office. alarm by the riots, and 
tremble for his daughter's safety, who was his only child, the 
marquis had flown to st. clare's convent, and was still employ in 
seek her. messenger were now dispatch on all side to inform him 
that he would find her safe at his hotel, and desire him to hasten 
thither immediately. his absence gave virginia liberty to bestow her 
whole attention upon her patient; and though much disorder herself by 
the adventure of the night, no persuasion could induce her to quit the 
bedside of the sufferer. her constitution being much enfeeble by want 
and sorrow, it was some time before the stranger was restore to her 
senses. she found great difficulty in swallow the medicine 
prescribed to her: but this obstacle being removed, she easily 
conquer her disease which proceed from nothing but weakness. the 
attention which was paid her, the wholesome food to which she had been 
long a stranger, and her joy at being restore to liberty, to society, 
and, as she dare to hope, to love, all this combine to her speedy 
re-establishment. 

from the first moment of knowing her, her melancholy situation, her 
suffering almost unparalleled had engaged the affection of her 
amiable hostess: virginia felt for her the most lively interest; but 
how was she delighted, when her guest being sufficient recover to 
relate her history, she recognize in the captive nun the sister of 
lorenzo! 

this victim of monastic cruelty was indeed no other than the 
unfortunate agnes. during her abode in the convent, she had been well 
known to virginia: but her emaciate form, her features alter by 
affliction, her death universally credited, and her overgrown and 
matt hair which hung over her face and bosom in disorder at first had 
prevent her being recollected. the prioress had put every artifice 
in practice to induce virginia to take the veil; for the heiress of 
villa-franca would have been no despicable acquisition. her seeming 
kindness and unremitt attention so far succeed that her young 
relation began to think seriously upon compliance. better instruct 
in the disgust and ennui of a monastic life, agnes had penetrate the 
designs of the domina: she tremble for the innocent girl, and 
endeavour to make her sensible of her error. she paint in their 
true colours the numerous inconvenient attach to a convent, the 
continue restraint, the low jealousies, the petty intrigues, the 
servile court and gross flattery expect by the superior. she then 
bad virginia reflect on the brilliant prospect which present itself 
before her: the idol of her parents, the admiration of madrid, endow 
by nature and education with every perfection of person and mind, she 
might look forward to an establishment the most fortunate. her riches 
furnish her with the means of exercise in their fullest extent, 
charity and benevolence, those virtue so dear to her; and her stay in 
the world would enable her discover object worthy her protection, 
which could not be done in the seclusion of a convent. 

her persuasion induce virginia to lay aside all thought of the veil: 
but another argument, not use by agnes, had more weight with her than 
all the other put together. she had seen lorenzo, when he visit his 
sister at the grate. his person pleased her, and her conversation 
with agnes generally use to terminate in some question about her 
brother. she, who dote upon lorenzo, wish for no better than an 
opportunity to trumpet out his praise. she spoke of him in terms of 
rapture; and to convince her auditor how just were his sentiments, how 
cultivated his mind, and elegant his expressions, she show her at 
different times the letters which she received from him. she soon 
perceive that from these communications the heart of her young friend 
had imbibe impressions, which she was far from intend to give, but 
was truly happy to discover. she could not have wish her brother a 
more desirable union: heiress of villa-franca, virtuous, affectionate, 
beautiful, and accomplished, virginia seem calculate to make him 
happy. she sound her brother upon the subject, though without 
mention name or circumstances. he assured her in his answer that 
his heart and hand were total disengaged, and she thought that upon 
these grounds she might proceed without danger. she in consequence 
endeavour to strengthen the dawn passion of her friend. lorenzo 
was made the constant topic of her discourse; and the avid with 
which her auditor listened, the sigh which frequent escape from her 
bosom, and the eager with which upon any digression she brought 
back the conversation to the subject whence it had wandered, suffice 
to convince agnes that her brother's address would be far from 
disagreeable. she at length venture to mention her wish to the 
duke: though a stranger to the lady herself, he knew enough of her 
situation to think her worthy his nephew's hand. it was agree between 
him and his niece, that she should insinuate the idea to lorenzo, and 
she only wait his return to madrid to propose her friend to him as 
his bride. the unfortunate event which took place in the interim, 
prevent her from execute her design. virginia wept her loss 
sincerely, both as a companion, and as the only person to whom she 
could speak of lorenzo. her passion continue to prey upon her heart 
in secret, and she had almost determined to confess her sentiment to 
her mother, when accident once more threw their object in her way. the 
sight of him so near her, his politeness, his compassion, his 
intrepidity, had combine to give new ardour to her affection. when 
she now found her friend and advocate restore to her, she look upon 
her as a gift from heaven; she venture to cherish the hope of being 
united to lorenzo, and resolve to use with him his sister's influence. 

supposing that before her death agnes might possibly have made the 
proposal, the duke had placed all his nephew's hint of marriage to 
virginia's account: consequently, he gave them the most favourable 
reception. on return to his hotel, the relation given him of 
antonia's death, and lorenzo's behaviour on the occasion, made evident 
his mistake. he lament the circumstances; but the unhappy girl being 
effectually out of the way, he trust that his designs would yet be 
executed. 'tis true that lorenzo's situation just then ill-suited him 
for a bridegroom. his hope disappointed at the moment when he 
expect to realize them, and the dreadful and sudden death of his 
mistress had affected him very severely. the duke found him upon the 
bed of sickness. his attendant express serious apprehension for 
his life; but the uncle entertain not the same fears. he was of 
opinion, and not unwisely, that 'men have died, and worm have eat 
them; but not for love!' he therefore flatter himself that however 
deep might be the impression made upon his nephew's heart, time and 
virginia would be able to efface it. he now hasten to the afflict 
youth, and endeavour to console him: he sympathise in his distress, 
but encourage him to resist the encroachment of despair. he allow 
that he could not but feel shock at an event so terrible, nor could 
he blame his sensibility; but he besought him not to torment himself 
with vain regrets, and rather to struggle with affliction, and preserve 
his life, if not for his own sake, at least for the sake of those who 
were fondly attach to him. while he labour thus to make lorenzo 
forget antonia's loss, the duke paid his court assiduous to virginia, 
and seize every opportunity to advance his nephew's interest in her 
heart. 

it may easily be expect that agnes was not long without enquiring 
after don raymond. she was shock to hear the wretched situation to 
which grief had reduce him; yet she could not help exult secretly, 
when she reflected, that his illness prove the sincerity of his love. 
the duke undertook the office himself, of announce to the invalid the 
happiness which await him. though he omit no precaution to 
prepare him for such an event, at this sudden change from despair to 
happiness raymond's transport were so violent, as nearly to have 
prove fatal to him. these once passed, the tranquill of his mind, 
the assurance of felicity, and above all the presence of agnes, (who 
was no soon reestablishe by the care of virginia and the 
marchioness, than she hasten to attend her lover) soon enable him to 
overcome the effects of his late dreadful malady. the calm of his soul 
communicate itself to his body, and he recover with such rapid as 
to create universal surprize. 

no so lorenzo. antonia's death accompany with such terrible 
circumstances weigh upon his mind heavily. he was worn down to a 
shadow. nothing could give him pleasure. he was persuade with 
difficulty to swallow nourishment sufficient for the support of life, 
and a consumption was apprehended. the society of agnes form his 
only comfort. though accident had never permit their being much 
together, he entertain for her a sincere friendship and attachment. 
perceive how necessary she was to him, she seldom quit his 
chamber. she listen to his complaint with unweary attention, and 
soothe him by the gentle of her manners, and by sympathise with 
his distress. she still inhabit the palace de villa-franca, the 
possessor of which treat her with marked affection. the duke had 
intimate to the marquis his wish respecting virginia. the match was 
unexceptionable: lorenzo was heir to his uncle's immense property, and 
was distinguished in madrid for his agreeable person, extensive 
knowledge, and propriety of conduct: add to this, that the marchioness 
had discover how strong was her daughter's prepossession in his 
favour. 

in consequence the duke's proposal was accept without hesitation: 
every precaution was taken to induce lorenzo's seeing the lady with 
those sentiment which she so well merit to excite. in her visit to 
her brother agnes was frequent accompany by the marchioness; and as 
soon as he was able to move into his antichamber, virginia under her 
mother's protection was sometimes permit to express her wish for 
his recovery. this she did with such delicacy, the manner in which she 
mention antonia was so tender and soothing, and when she lament her 
rival's melancholy fate, her bright eyes shone so beautiful through her 
tears, that lorenzo could not behold, or listen to her without emotion. 
his relations, as well as the lady, perceive that with every day her 
society seem to give him fresh pleasure, and that he spoke of her in 
terms of strong admiration. however, they prudent kept their 
observations to themselves. no word was drop which might lead him 
to suspect their designs. they continue their former conduct and 
attention, and left time to ripen into a warm sentiment the 
friendship which he already felt for virginia. 

in the mean while, her visit became more frequent; and latterly there 
was scarce a day, of which she did not pass some part by the side of 
lorenzo's couch. he gradual regain his strength, but the progress 
of his recovery was slow and doubtful. one evening he seem to be in 
better spirits than usual: agnes and her lover, the duke, virginia, 
and her parent were sitting round him. he now for the first time 
entreat his sister to inform him how she had escape the effects of 
the poison which st. ursula had seen her swallow. fearful of recall 
those scene to his mind in which antonia had perished, she had 
hitherto conceal from him the history of her sufferings. as he now 
start the subject himself, and thinking that perhaps the narrative of 
her sorrow might draw him from the contemplation of those on which he 
dwelt too constantly, she immediately comply with his request. the 
rest of the company had already heard her story; but the interest which 
all present felt for its heroine made them anxious to hear it repeated. 
the whole society second lorenzo's entreaties, agnes obeyed. she 
first recount the discovery which had taken place in the abbey 
chapel, the domina's resentment, and the midnight scene of which st. 
ursula had been a conceal witness. though the nun had already 
describe this latter event, agnes now related it more circumstantial 
and at large: after which she proceed in her narrative as follows. 

conclusion of the history of agnes de medina 

my supposed death was attend with the greatest agonies. those 
moments which i believe my last, were embitter by the domina's 
assurance that i could not escape perdition; and as my eyes closed, i 
heard her rage exhale itself in curse on my offence. the horror of 
this situation, of a death-bed from which hope was banished, of a sleep 
from which i was only to wake to find myself the prey of flame and 
furies, was more dreadful than i can describe. when animation revive 
in me, my soul was still impress with these terrible ideas: i look 
round with fear, expect to behold the minister of divine vengeance. 
for the first hour, my senses were so bewildered, and my brain so 
dizzy, that i strove in vain to arrange the strange image which 
float in wild confusion before me. if i endeavour to raise myself 
from the ground, the wandering of my head deceive me. every thing 
around me seem to rock, and i sank once more upon the earth. my weak 
and dazzle eyes were unable to bear a near approach to a gleam of 
light which i saw tremble above me. i was compel to close them 
again, and remain motionless in the same posture. 

a full hour elapsed, before i was sufficient myself to examine the 
surrounding objects. when i did examine them, what terror fill my 
bosom i found myself extend upon a sort of wicker couch: it had six 
handle to it, which doubtless had serve the nun to convey me to my 
grave. i was cover with a linen cloth: 

several fade flower were strown over me: on one side lay a small 
wooden crucifix; on the other, a rosary of large beads. four low narrow 
wall confine me. the top was also covered, and in it was practised a 
small grate door: through this was admitted the little air which 
circulate in this miserable place. a faint glimmer of light which 
stream through the bars, permit me to distinguish the surrounding 
horrors. i was opprest by a noisome suffocate smell; and perceive 
that the grate door was unfastened, i thought that i might possibly 
effect my escape. as i raise myself with this design, my hand rest 
upon something soft: i grasp it, and advanced it towards the light. 
almighty god! what was my disgust, my consternation! in spite of its 
putridity, and the worm which prey upon it, i perceive a corrupt 
human head, and recognise the features of a nun who had die some 
month before! 

i threw it from me, and sank almost lifeless upon my bier. 

when my strength returned, this circumstance, and the consciousness of 
being surround by the loathsome and moulder body of my 
companions, increase my desire to escape from my fearful prison. i 
again move towards the light. the grate door was within my reach: i 
lift it without difficulty; probably it had been left unclosed to 
facilitate my quit the dungeon. aid myself by the irregularity 
of the wall some of whose stone project beyond the rest, i 
contrived to ascend them, and drag myself out of my prison. i now 
found myself in a vault tolerably spacious. several tombs, similar in 
appearance to that whence i had just escaped, were range along the 
side in order, and seem to be considerably sunk within the earth. a 
sepulchral lamp was suspend from the roof by an iron chain, and shed 
a gloomy light through the dungeon. emblem of death were seen on 
every side: skulls, shoulder-blades, thigh-bones, and other leavings 
of mortality were scattered upon the dewy ground. each tomb was 
ornament with a large crucifix, and in one corner stood a wooden 
statue of st. clare. to these object i at first paid no attention: a 
door, the only outlet from the vault, had attract my eyes. i 
hasten towards it, have wrap my winding-sheet close round me. 
i pushed against the door, and to my inexpressible terror found that it 
was fasten on the outside. 

i guess immediately that the prioress, mistake the nature of the 
liquor which she had compel me to drink, instead of poison had 
administer a strong opiate. from this i conclude that being to all 
appearance dead i had received the rite of burial; and that deprived 
of the power of making my existence known, it would be my fate to 
expire of hunger. this idea penetrate me with horror, not merely for 
my own sake, but that of the innocent creature, who still live within 
my bosom. i again endeavour to open the door, but it resist all my 
efforts. i stretch my voice to the extent of its compass, and 
shriek for aid: i was remote from the hearing of every one: no 
friendly voice reply to mine. a profound and melancholy silence 
prevail through the vault, and i despair of liberty. my long 
abstinence from food now began to torment me. the torture which 
hunger inflict on me, were the most painful and insupportable: yet 
they seem to increase with every hour which past over my head. 
sometimes i threw myself upon the ground, and roll upon it wild and 
desperate: sometimes start up, i return to the door, again strove 
to force it open, and repeated my fruitless cries for succour. often 
was i on the point of striking my temple against the sharp corner of 
some monument, dashing out my brains, and thus terminate my woe at 
once; but still the remembrance of my baby vanquish my resolution: i 
tremble at a deed which equally endanger my child's existence and my 
own. then would i vent my anguish in loud exclamation and passionate 
complaints; and then again my strength failing me, silent and hopeless 
i would sit me down upon the base of st. clare's statue, fold my arms, 
and abandon myself to sullen despair. thus pass several wretched 
hours. death advanced towards me with rapid strides, and i expect 
that every succeed moment would be that of my dissolution. sudden 
a neighbouring tomb caught my eye: a basket stood upon it, which till 
then i had not observed. i start from my seat: i made towards it as 
swift as my exhaust frame would permit. how eager did i seize 
the basket, on finding it to contain a loaf of coarse bread and a small 
bottle of water. 

i threw myself with avid upon these humble aliments. they had to all 
appearance been placed in the vault for several days; the bread was 
hard, and the water tainted; yet never did i taste food to me so 
delicious. when the craving of appetite were satisfied, i busy 
myself with conjecture upon this new circumstance: i debate whether 
the basket had been placed there with a view to my necessity. hope 
answer my doubt in the affirmative. yet who could guess me to be in 
need of such assistance? if my existence was known, why was i detain 
in this gloomy vault? if i was kept a prisoner, what meant the 
ceremony of commit me to the tomb? or if i was doom to perish 
with hunger, to whose pity was i indebted for provisions placed within 
my reach? a friend would not have kept my dreadful punishment a 
secret; neither did it seem probable that an enemy would have taken 
pains to supply me with the means of existence. upon the whole i was 
inclined to think that the domina's designs upon my life had been 
discover by some one of my partizan in the convent, who had found 
means to substitute an opiate for poison: that she had furnish me 
with food to support me, till she could effect my delivery: and that 
she was then employ in give intelligence to my relations of my 
danger, and point out a way to release me from captivity. yet why 
then was the quality of my provisions so coarse? how could my friend 
have enter the vault without the domina's knowledge? and if she had 
entered, why was the door fasten so carefully? these reflection 
stagger me: yet still this idea was the most favourable to my hopes, 
and i dwelt upon it in preference. 

my meditation were interrupt by the sound of distant footsteps. 
they approached, but slowly. ray of light now dart through the 
crevice of the door. uncertain whether the person who advanced came 
to relieve me, or were conduct by some other motive to the vault, i 
fail not to attract their notice by loud cries for help. still the 
sound drew near: the light grew stronger: at length with 
inexpressible pleasure i heard the key turning in the lock. persuade 
that my deliverance was at hand, i flew towards the door with a shriek 
of joy. it opened: but all my hope of escape die away, when the 
prioress appear follow by the same four nuns, who had been 
witness of my supposed death. they bore torch in their hands, and 
gaze upon me in fearful silence. 

i start back in terror. the domina descended into the vault, as did 
also her companions. she bent upon me a stern resentful eye, but 
express no surprize at finding me still living. she took the seat 
which i had just quitted: the door was again closed, and the nun 
range themselves behind their superior, while the glare of their 
torches, dim by the vapours and damp of the vault, gilded with 
cold beam the surrounding monuments. for some moments all preserve a 
dead and solemn silence. i stood at some distance from the prioress. 
at length she beckon me to advance. tremble at the severity of her 
aspect my strength scarce suffice me to obey her. i drew near, but my 
limb were unable to support their burthen. i sank upon my knees; i 
clasp my hands, and lift them up to her for mercy, but had no power 
to articulate a syllable. 

she gaze upon me with angry eyes. 

'do i see a penitent, or a criminal?' she said at length; 'are those 
hand raise in contrition for your crimes, or in fear of meeting their 
punishment? do those tear acknowledge the justice of your doom, or 
only solicit mitigate of your sufferings? i fear me, 'tis the 
latter!' 

she paused, but kept her eye still fixt upon mine. 

'take courage;' she continued: 'i wish not for your death, but your 
repentance. the draught which i administered, was no poison, but an 
opiate. my intention in deceive you was to make you feel the agony 
of a guilty conscience, had death overtaken you sudden while your 
crime were still unrepented. you have suffer those agonies: i have 
brought you to be familiar with the sharp of death, and i trust 
that your momentary anguish will prove to you an eternal benefit. it 
is not my design to destroy your immortal soul; or bid you seek the 
grave, burthen with the weight of sin unexpiated. no, daughter, far 
from it: i will purify you with wholesome chastisement, and furnish 
you with full leisure for contrition and remorse. hear then my 
sentence; the ill-judged zeal of your friends delay its execution, 
but cannot now prevent it. all madrid believe you to be no more; your 
relations are thorough persuade of your death, and the nun your 
partizan have assist at your funeral. your existence can never be 
suspected; i have taken such precautions, as must render it an 
impenetrable mystery. then abandon all thought of a world from which 
you are eternal separated, and employ the few hour which are allow 
you, in prepare for the next.' 

this exordium led me to expect something terrible. i trembled, and 
would have spoken to deprecate her wrath: but a motion of the domina 
command me to be silent. she proceeded. 

'though of late years unjust neglected, and now oppose by many of 
our misguided sisters, (whom heaven convert!) it is my intention to 
revive the law of our order in their full force. that against 
incontinence is severe, but no more than so monstrous an offence 
demands: submit to it, daughter, without resistance; you will find the 
benefit of patience and resignation in a better life than this. listen 
then to the sentence of st. clare. beneath these vault there exist 
prisons, intended to receive such criminal as yourself: artful is 
their entrance concealed, and she who enter them, must resign all 
hope of liberty. thither must you now be conveyed. food shall be 
supply you, but not sufficient for the indulgence of appetite: you 
shall have just enough to keep together body and soul, and its quality 
shall be the simplest and coarsest. weep, daughter, weep, and moisten 
your bread with your tears: god know that you have ample cause for 
sorrow! chain down in one of these secret dungeons, shut out from 
the world and light for ever, with no comfort but religion, no society 
but repentance, thus must you groan away the remainder of your days. 
such are st. clare's orders; submit to them without repining. follow 
me!' 

thunderstruck at this barbarous decree, my little remain strength 
abandoned me. i answer only by fall at her feet, and bathing them 
with tears. the domina, unmoved by my affliction, rose from her seat 
with a stately air. she repeated her command in an absolute tone: 
but my excessive faint made me unable to obey her. mariana and 
alix raise me from the ground, and carry me forward in their arms. 
the prioress move on, leaning upon violante, and camilla precede her 
with a torch. thus pass our sad procession along the passages, in 
silence only broken by my sigh and groans. we stop before the 
principal shrine of st. clare. the statue was remove from its 
pedestal, though how i knew not. the nun afterwards raise an iron 
grate till then conceal by the image, and let it fall on the other 
side with a loud crash. the awful sound, repeated by the vault above, 
and cavern below me, rouze me from the despondent apathy in which i 
had been plunged. i look before me: an abyss present itself to my 
affrighte eyes, and a steep and narrow staircase, whither my 
conductor were leading me. i shrieked, and start back. i implore 
compassion, rent the air with my cries, and summon both heaven and 
earth to my assistance. in vain! i was hurried down the staircase, and 
forced into one of the cell which line the cavern's sides. 

my blood ran cold, as i gaze upon this melancholy abode. the cold 
vapours hover in the air, the wall green with damp, the bed of 
straw so forlorn and comfortless, the chain destined to bind me for 
ever to my prison, and the reptile of every description which as the 
torch advanced towards them, i descry hurry to their retreats, 
struck my heart with terror almost too exquisite for nature to bear. 
driven by despair to madness, i burst sudden from the nun who held 
me: i threw myself upon my knee before the prioress, and besought her 
mercy in the most passionate and frantic terms. 

'if not on me,' said i, 'look at least with pity on that innocent 
being, whose life is attach to mine! great is my crime, but let not 
my child suffer for it! my baby has committed no fault: oh! spare me 
for the sake of my unborn offspring, whom ere it taste life your 
severity doom to destruction!' 

the prioress drew back haughtily: she forced her habit from my grasp, 
as if my touch had been contagious. 

'what?' she exclaim with an exasperate air; 'what? dare you plead 
for the produce of your shame? shall a creature be permit to live, 
conceive in guilt so monstrous? abandoned woman, speak for him no 
more! better that the wretch should perish than live: begotten in 
perjury, incontinence, and pollution, it cannot fail to prove a prodigy 
of vice. hear me, thou guilty! expect no mercy from me either for 
yourself, or brat. rather pray that death may seize you before you 
produce it; or if it must see the light, that its eyes may immediately 
be closed again for ever! no aid shall be given you in your labour; 
bring your offspring into the world yourself, feed it yourself, nurse 
it yourself, bury it yourself: god grant that the latter may happen 
soon, lest you receive comfort from the fruit of your iniquity!' 

this inhuman speech, the threat which it contained, the dreadful 
suffering foretold to me by the domina, and her prayer for my 
infant's death, on whom though unborn i already doated, were more than 
my exhaust frame could support. utter a deep groan, i fell 
senseless at the feet of my unrelenting enemy. i know not how long i 
remain in this situation; but i imagine that some time must have 
elapse before my recovery, since it suffice the prioress and her nun 
to quit the cavern. when my senses returned, i found myself in silence 
and solitude. i heard not even the retiring footstep of my 
persecutors. all was hushed, and all was dreadful! i had been thrown 
upon the bed of straw: the heavy chain which i had already eye with 
terror, was wound around my waist, and fasten me to the wall. a lamp 
glimmer with dull, melancholy ray through my dungeon, permit my 
distinguish all its horrors: it was separate from the cavern by a 
low and irregular wall of stone: a large chasm was left open in it 
which form the entrance, for door there was none. a leaden crucifix 
was in front of my straw couch. a tattered rug lay near me, as did 
also a chaplet of beads; and not far from me stood a pitcher of water, 
and a wicker basket contain a small loaf, and a bottle of oil to 
supply my lamp. 

with a despondent eye did i examine this scene of suffering: when i 
reflect that i was doom to pass in it the remainder of my days, my 
heart was rent with bitter anguish. i had once been taught to look 
forward to a lot so different! at one time my prospects had appear 
so bright, so flattering! now all was lost to me. friends, comfort, 
society, happiness, in one moment i was deprived of all! dead to the 
world, dead to pleasure, i live to nothing but the sense of misery. 
how fair did that world seem to me, from which i was for ever excluded! 
how many love object did it contain, whom i never should behold 
again! as i threw a look of terror round my prison, as i shrunk from 
the cutting wind which howl through my subterraneous dwelling, the 
change seem so striking, so abrupt, that i doubt its reality. 

that the duke de medina's niece, that the destined bride of the marquis 
de las cisternas, one bred up in affluence, related to the noblest 
family in spain, and rich in a multitude of affectionate friends, 
that she should in one moment become a captive, separate from the 
world for ever, weigh down with chains, and reduce to support life 
with the coarsest aliments, appear a change so sudden and incredible, 
that i believe myself the sport of some frightful vision. its 
continuance convinced me of my mistake with but too much certainty. 
every morning my hope were disappointed. at length i abandoned all 
idea of escaping: i resigned myself to my fate, and only expect 
liberty when she came the companion of death. 

my mental anguish, and the dreadful scene in which i had been an 
actress, advanced the period of my labour. in solitude and misery, 
abandoned by all, unassisted by art, uncomforted by friendship, with 
pang which if witness would have touched the hardest heart, was i 
deliver of my wretched burthen. it came alive into the world; but i 
knew not how to treat it, or by what means to preserve its existence. 
i could only bathe it with tears, warm it in my bosom, and offer up 
prayer for its safety. i was soon deprived of this mournful 
employment: the want of proper attendance, my ignorance how to nurse 
it, the bitter cold of the dungeon, and the unwholesome air which 
inflated its lungs, terminate my sweet babe's short and painful 
existence. it expire in a few hour after its birth, and i witness 
its death with agony which beggar all description. 

but my grief was unavailing. my infant was no more; nor could all my 
sigh impart to its little tender frame the breath of a moment. i rent 
my winding-sheet, and wrap in it my lovely child. i placed it on my 
bosom, its soft arm fold round my neck, and its pale cold cheek 
rest upon mine. thus did its lifeless limb repose, while i cover 
it with kisses, talk to it, wept, and moan over it without 
remission, day or night. camilla enter my prison regularly once every 
twenty-four hours, to bring me food. in spite of her flinty nature, 
she could not behold this spectacle unmoved. she fear that grief so 
excessive would at length turn my brain, and in truth i was not always 
in my proper senses. from a principle of compassion she urge me to 
permit the corse to be buried: but to this i never would consent. i 
vow not to part with it while i had life: its presence was my only 
comfort, and no persuasion could induce me to give it up. it soon 
became a mass of putridity, and to every eye was a loathsome and 
disgust object; to every eye but a mother's. in vain did human 
feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality with repugnance: 
i withstood, and vanquish that repugnance. i persist in holding my 
infant to my bosom, in lament it, loving it, adore it! hour after 
hour have i pass upon my sorry couch, contemplate what had once 
been my child: i endeavour to retrace its features through the livid 
corruption, with which they were overspread: during my confinement this 
sad occupation was my only delight; and at that time world should not 
have bribe me to give it up. even when release from my prison, i 
brought away my child in my arms. the representations of my two kind 
friends,"--(here she took the hand of the marchioness and virginia, 
and pressed them alternate to her lips)--"at length persuade me to 
resign my unhappy infant to the grave. yet i part from it with 
reluctance: however, reason at length prevailed; i suffer it to be 
taken from me, and it now repose in consecrate ground. 

i before mention that regularly once a day camilla brought me food. 
she sought not to embitter my sorrow with reproach: she bad me, 'tis 
true, resign all hope of liberty and worldly happiness; but she 
encourage me to bear with patience my temporary distress, and advise 
me to draw comfort from religion. 

my situation evidently affected her more than she venture to express: 
but she believe that to extenuate my fault would make me less anxious 
to repent it. often while her lip paint the enormity of my guilt in 
glaring colours, her eyes betrayed, how sensible she was to my 
sufferings. in fact i am certain that none of my tormentors, (for the 
three other nun enter my prison occasionally) were so much actuate 
by the spirit of oppressive cruelty as by the idea that to afflict my 
body was the only way to preserve my soul. nay, even this persuasion 
might not have had such weight with them, and they might have thought 
my punishment too severe, had not their good disposition been represt 
by blind obedience to their superior. her resentment exist in full 
force. my project of elope have been discover by the abbot of 
the capuchins, she supposed herself lower in his opinion by my 
disgrace, and in consequence her hate was inveterate. she told the 
nun to whose custody i was committed that my fault was of the most 
heinous nature, that no suffering could equal the offence, and that 
nothing could save me from eternal perdition but punishing my guilt 
with the utmost severity. the superior's word is an oracle to but too 
many of a convent's inhabitants. the nun believe whatever the 
prioress chose to assert: though contradict by reason and charity, 
they hesitate not to admit the truth of her arguments. they follow 
her injunction to the very letter, and were fully persuade that to 
treat me with lenity, or to show the least pity for my woes, would be a 
direct means to destroy my chance for salvation. 

camilla, being most employ about me, was particularly charged by the 
prioress to treat me with harshness. in compliance with these orders, 
she frequent strove to convince me, how just was my punishment, and 
how enormous was my crime: she bad me think myself too happy in saving 
my soul by mortify my body, and even threaten me sometimes with 
eternal perdition. yet as i before observed, she always conclude by 
words of encouragement and comfort; and though utter by camilla's 
lips, i easily recognise the domina's expressions. once, and once 
only, the prioress visit me in my dungeon. she then treat me with 
the most unrelenting cruelty: she loaded me with reproaches, taunt 
me with my frailty, and when i implore her mercy, told me to ask it of 
heaven, since i deserve none on earth. she even gaze upon my 
lifeless infant without emotion; and when she left me, i heard her 
charge camilla to increase the hardship of my captivity. unfeeling 
woman! but let me check my resentment: she has expiate her error by 
her sad and unexpected death. peace be with her; and may her crime be 
forgiven in heaven, as i forgive her my suffering on earth! 

thus did i drag on a miserable existence. far from grow familiar 
with my prison, i beheld it every moment with new horror. the cold 
seem more piercing and bitter, the air more thick and pestilential. 
my frame became weak, feverish, and emaciated. i was unable to rise 
from the bed of straw, and exercise my limb in the narrow limits, to 
which the length of my chain permit me to move. though exhausted, 
faint, and weary, i tremble to profit by the approach of sleep: my 
slumber were constant interrupt by some obnoxious insect crawl 
over me. 

sometimes i felt the bloated toad, hideous and pamper with the 
poisonous vapours of the dungeon, drag his loathsome length along 
my bosom: sometimes the quick cold lizard rouze me leave his slimy 
track upon my face, and entangle itself in the tresses of my wild and 
matt hair: often have i at waking found my finger ring with the 
long worm which bred in the corrupt flesh of my infant. at such 
times i shriek with terror and disgust, and while i shook off the 
reptile, tremble with all a woman's weakness. 

such was my situation, when camilla was sudden taken ill. a 
dangerous fever, supposed to be infectious, confine her to her bed. 
every one except the lay-sister appoint to nurse her, avoid her 
with caution, and fear to catch the disease. she was perfectly 
delirious, and by no means capable of attend to me. the domina and 
the nun admitted to the mystery, had latterly given me over entire 
to camilla's care: in consequence, they busy themselves no more 
about me; and occupy by prepare for the approach festival, it is 
more than probable that i never once enter into their thoughts. of 
the reason of camilla's negligence, i have been informed since my 
release by the mother st. ursula; at that time i was very far from 
suspect its cause. on the contrary, i wait for my gaoler's 
appearance at first with impatience, and afterwards with despair. one 
day pass away; another follow it; the third arrived. still no 
camilla! still no food! i knew the lapse of time by the waste of my 
lamp, to supply which fortunately a week's supply of oil had been left 
me. i supposed, either that the nun had forgotten me, or that the 
domina had ordered them to let me perish. the latter idea seem the 
most probable; yet so natural is the love of life, that i tremble to 
find it true. though embitter by every species of misery, my 
existence was still dear to me, and i dread to lose it. every 
succeed minute prove to me that i must abandon all hope of relief. 
i was become an absolute skeleton: my eyes already fail me, and my 
limb were beginning to stiffen. i could only express my anguish, and 
the pang of that hunger which gnaw my heart-strings, by frequent 
groans, whose melancholy sound the vaulted roof of the dungeon 
re-echoed. i resigned myself to my fate: i already expect the 
moment of dissolution, when my guardian angel, when my beloved brother 
arrive in time to save me. my sight grown dim and feeble at first 
refuse to recognize him; and when i did distinguish his features, the 
sudden burst of rapture was too much for me to bear. i was overpower 
by the swell of joy at once more behold a friend, and that a friend 
so dear to me. nature could not support my emotions, and took her 
refuge in insensibility. 

you already know, what are my obligation to the family of 
villa-franca: but what you cannot know is the extent of my gratitude, 
boundless as the excellence of my benefactors. lorenzo! raymond! 
name so dear to me! teach me to bear with fortitude this sudden 
transition from misery to bliss. so lately a captive, opprest with 
chains, perishing with hunger, suffering every inconvenience of cold 
and want, hidden from the light, exclude from society, hopeless, 
neglected, and as i feared, forgotten; now restore to life and 
liberty, enjoy all the comfort of affluence and ease, surround by 
those who are most love by me, and on the point of becoming his bride 
who has long been wedded to my heart, my happiness is so exquisite, so 
perfect, that scarcely can my brain sustain the weight. one only wish 
remains ungratified: it is to see my brother in his former health, and 
to know that antonia's memory is bury in her grave. 

grant this prayer, i have nothing more to desire. i trust, that my 
past suffering have purchase from heaven the pardon of my momentary 
weakness. that i have offended, offend greatly and grievously, i am 
fully conscious; but let not my husband, because he once conquer my 
virtue, doubt the propriety of my future conduct. i have been frail 
and full of error: but i yield not to the warmth of constitution; 
raymond, affection for you betray me. i was too confident of my 
strength; but i depend no less on your honour than my own. i had 
vow never to see you more: had it not been for the consequence of 
that unguarded moment, my resolution had been kept. fate will it 
otherwise, and i cannot but rejoice at its decree. still my conduct 
has been highly blameable, and while i attempt to justify myself, i 
blush at recollect my imprudence. let me then dismiss the 
ungrateful subject; first assure you, raymond, that you shall have no 
cause to repent our union, and that the more culpable have been the 
error of your mistress, the more exemplary shall be the conduct of 
your wife. 

here agnes ceased, and the marquis reply to her address in terms 
equally sincere and affectionate. lorenzo express his satisfaction at 
the prospect of being so close connected with a man for whom he had 
ever entertain the highest esteem. the pope's bull had fully and 
effectually release agnes from her religious engagements: the 
marriage was therefore celebrated as soon as the needful preparation 
had been made, for the marquis wish to have the ceremony perform 
with all possible splendour and publicity. this being over, and the 
bride have received the compliments of madrid, she departed with don 
raymond for his castle in andalusia: lorenzo accompany them, as did 
also the marchioness de villa-franca and her lovely daughter. it is 
needless to say that theodore was of the party, and would be impossible 
to describe his joy at his master's marriage. previous to his 
departure, the marquis, to atone in some measure for his past neglect, 
made some enquiry relative to elvira. finding that she as well as her 
daughter had received many service from leonella and jacintha, he 
show his respect to the memory of his sister-in-law by making the two 
women handsome presents. lorenzo follow his example--leonella was 
highly flatter by the attention of noblemen so distinguished, and 
jacintha blessed the hour on which her house was bewitched. 

on her side, agnes fail not to reward her convent friends. the worthy 
mother st. ursula, to whom she owe her liberty, was name at her 
request superintendent of 'the ladies of charity:' this was one of the 
best and most opulent society throughout spain. bertha and cornelia 
not choose to quit their friend, were appoint to principal charge 
in the same establishment. as to the nun who had aid the domina in 
persecute agnes, camilla being confine by illness to her bed, had 
perish in the flame which consume st. clare's convent. mariana, 
alix, and violante, as well as two more, had fallen victim to the 
popular rage. the three other who in council had support the 
domina's sentence, were severe reprimanded, and banish to religious 
house in obscure and distant provinces: here they languish away a 
few years, ashamed of their former weakness, and shun by their 
companion with aversion and contempt. 

nor was the fidelity of flora permit to go unrewarded. her wish 
being consulted, she declared herself impatient to revisit her native 
land. in consequence, a passage was procure for her to cuba, where 
she arrive in safety, loaded with the presents of raymond and lorenzo. 

the debt of gratitude discharged, agnes was at liberty to pursue her 
favourite plan. lodge in the same house, lorenzo and virginia were 
eternal together. the more he saw of her, the more was he convinced 
of her merit. on her part, she laid herself out to please, and not to 
succeed was for her impossible. 

lorenzo witness with admiration her beautiful person, elegant 
manners, innumerable talents, and sweet disposition: he was also much 
flatter by her prejudice in his favour, which she had not sufficient 
art to conceal. however, his sentiment partook not of that ardent 
character which had marked his affection for antonia. the image of 
that lovely and unfortunate girl still live in his heart, and baffle 
all virginia's effort to displace it. still when the duke propose to 
him the match, which he wish to earnest to take place, his nephew 
did not reject the offer. the urgent supplicate of his friends, and 
the lady's merit conquer his repugnance to enter into new 
engagements. he propose himself to the marquis de villa-franca, and 
was accept with joy and gratitude. virginia became his wife, nor did 
she ever give him cause to repent his choice. his esteem increase for 
her daily. her unremitt endeavour to please him could not but 
succeed. his affection assume strong and warm colours. antonia's 
image was gradual efface from his bosom; and virginia became sole 
mistress of that heart, which she well deserve to possess without a 
partner. 

the remain years of raymond and agnes, of lorenzo and virginia, were 
happy as can be those allot to mortals, born to be the prey of 
grief, and sport of disappointment. the exquisite sorrow with which 
they had been afflicted, made them think lightly of every succeed 
woe. they had felt the sharpest darts in misfortune's quiver; those 
which remain appear blunt in comparison. have weather fate's 
heaviest storms, they look calm upon its terrors: or if ever they 
felt affliction's casual gales, they seem to them gentle as zephyr 
which breathe over summer-seas. 



chapter v 

----he was a fell despightful fiend: 
hell hold none worse in baleful bower below: 
by pride, and wit, and rage, and rancor keened; 
of man alike, if good or bad the foe. 
thomson. 

on the day following antonia's death, all madrid was a scene of 
consternation and amazement. an archer who had witness the adventure 
in the sepulchre had indiscreet related the circumstances of the 
murder: he had also name the perpetrator. the confusion was without 
example which this intelligence raise among the devotees. most of 
them disbelieve it, and went themselves to the abbey to ascertain the 
fact. anxious to avoid the shame to which their superior's ill-conduct 
expose the whole brotherhood, the monk assured the visitor that 
ambrosio was prevent from receiving them as usual by nothing but 
illness. this attempt was unsuccessful: the same excuse being repeated 
day after day, the archer's story gradual obtain confidence. his 
partizan abandoned him: no one entertain a doubt of his guilt; and 
they who before had been the warmest in his praise were now the most 
vociferous in his condemnation. 

while his innocence or guilt was debate in madrid with the utmost 
acrimony, ambrosio was a prey to the pang of conscious villainy, and 
the terror of punishment impending over him. when he look back to 
the eminence on which he had lately stood, universally honour and 
respected, at peace with the world and with himself, scarcely could he 
believe that he was indeed the culprit whose crime and whose fate he 
tremble to envisage. but a few week had elapsed, since he was pure 
and virtuous, court by the wisest and noblest in madrid, and regard 
by the people with a reverence that approach idolatry: he now saw 
himself stain with the most loathe and monstrous sins, the object of 
universal execration, a prisoner of the holy office, and probably 
doom to perish in torture the most severe. he could not hope to 
deceive his judges: the proof of his guilt were too strong. his 
being in the sepulchre at so late an hour, his confusion at the 
discovery, the dagger which in his first alarm he own had been 
conceal by him, and the blood which had spirt upon his habit from 
antonia's wound, sufficient marked him out for the assassin. he 
wait with agony for the day of examination: he had no resource to 
comfort him in his distress. religion could not inspire him with 
fortitude: if he read the books of morality which were put into his 
hands, he saw in them nothing but the enormity of his offences; if he 
attempt to pray, he recollect that he deserve not heaven's 
protection, and believe his crime so monstrous as to baffle even 
god's infinite goodness. for every other sinner he thought there might 
be hope, but for him there could be none. shudder at the past, 
anguished by the present, and dread the future, thus pass he the 
few days preceding that which was marked for his trial. 

that day arrived. at nine in the morning his prison door was unlocked, 
and his gaoler entering, command him to follow him. he obey with 
trembling. he was conduct into a spacious hall, hung with black 
cloth. at the table sat three grave, stern-looking men, also habit in 
black: one was the grand inquisitor, whom the importance of this cause 
had induce to examine into it himself. at a small table at a little 
distance sat the secretary, provided with all necessary implement for 
writing. ambrosio was beckon to advance, and take his station at the 
lower end of the table. as his eye glance downwards, he perceive 
various iron instrument lie scattered upon the floor. their form 
were unknown to him, but apprehension immediately guess them to be 
engine of torture. he turn pale, and with difficulty prevent 
himself from sink upon the ground. 

profound silence prevailed, except when the inquisitor whisper a few 
words among themselves mysteriously. near an hour past away, and with 
every second of it ambrosio's fear grew more poignant. at length a 
small door, opposite to that by which he had enter the hall, grate 
heavy upon its hinges. an officer appeared, and was immediately 
follow by the beautiful matilda. her hair hung about her face wildly; 
her cheek were pale, and her eyes sunk and hollow. she threw a 
melancholy look upon ambrosio: he reply by one of aversion and 
reproach. she was placed opposite to him. a bell then sound thrice. 
it was the signal for opening the court, and the inquisitor enter 
upon their office. 

in these trial neither the accusation is mentioned, or the name of the 
accuser. the prisoner are only asked, whether they will confess: if 
they reply that have no crime they can make no confession, they are 
put to the torture without delay. this is repeated at intervals, 
either till the suspect avow themselves culpable, or the perseverance 
of the examinant is worn out and exhausted: but without a direct 
acknowledgment of their guilt, the inquisition never pronounce the 
final doom of its prisoners. 

in general much time is suffer to elapse without their being 
questioned: but ambrosio's trial had been hastened, on account of a 
solemn auto da fe which would take place in a few days, and in which 
the inquisitor meant this distinguished culprit to perform a part, and 
give a striking testimony of their vigilance. 

the abbot was not merely accused of rape and murder: the crime of 
sorcery was laid to his charge, as well as to matilda's. she had been 
seize as an accomplice in antonia's assassination. on searching her 
cell, various suspicious books and instrument were found which 
justified the accusation brought against her. to criminate the monk, 
the constellate mirror was produced, which matilda had accidental 
left in his chamber. the strange figures engrave upon it caught the 
attention of don ramirez, while searching the abbot's cell: in 
consequence, he carry it away with him. it was shown to the grand 
inquisitor, who have considered it for some time, took off a small 
golden cross which hung at his girdle, and laid it upon the mirror. 
instantly a loud noise was heard, resemble a clap of thunder, and the 
steel shiver into a thousand pieces. this circumstance confirmed the 
suspicion of the monk's have dealt in magic: it was even supposed 
that his former influence over the mind of the people was entire to 
be ascribe to witchcraft. 

determined to make him confess not only the crime which he had 
committed, but those also of which he was innocent, the inquisitor 
began their examination. though dread the tortures, as he dread 
death still more which would consign him to eternal torments, the abbot 
assert his purity in a voice bold and resolute. matilda follow his 
example, but spoke with fear and trembling. have in vain exhort 
him to confess, the inquisitor ordered the monk to be put to the 
question. the decree was immediately executed. ambrosio suffer the 
most excruciating pang that ever were invent by human cruelty: yet 
so dreadful is death when guilt accompany it, that he had sufficient 
fortitude to persist in his disavowal. his agony were redouble in 
consequence: nor was he release till faint from excess of pain, 
insensibility rescue him from the hand of his tormentors. 

matilda was next ordered to the torture: but terrify by the sight of 
the friar's sufferings, her courage total desert her. she sank 
upon her knees, acknowledge her corresponding with infernal spirits, 
and that she had witness the monk's assassinate of antonia: but as 
to the crime of sorcery, she declared herself the sole criminal, and 
ambrosio perfectly innocent. the latter assertion met with no credit. 
the abbot had recover his senses in time to hear the confession of 
his accomplice: but he was too much enfeeble by what he had already 
undergone to be capable at that time of sustain new torments. 

he was command back to his cell, but first informed that as soon as 
he had gain strength sufficient, he must prepare himself for a second 
examination. the inquisitor hope that he would then be less harden 
and obstinate. to matilda it was announce that she must expiate her 
crime in fire on the approach auto da fe. all her tear and 
entreaty could procure no mitigate of her doom, and she was drag 
by force from the hall of trial. 

return to his dungeon, the suffering of ambrosio's body were far 
more supportable than those of his mind. his dislocate limbs, the 
nail torn from his hand and feet, and his finger mash and broken 
by the pressure of screws, were far surpass in anguish by the 
agitation of his soul and vehemence of his terrors. he saw that, 
guilty or innocent, his judge were bent upon condemn him: the 
remembrance of what his denial had already cost him terrify him at 
the idea of being again applied to the question, and almost engaged him 
to confess his crimes. then again the consequence of his confession 
flash before him, and render him once more irresolute. his death 
would be inevitable, and that a death the most dreadful: he had 
listen to matilda's doom, and doubt not that a similar was reserved 
for him. he shudder at the approach auto da fe, at the idea of 
perishing in flames, and only escape from indurable torment to pass 
into other more subtile and ever-lasting! with affright did he bend 
his mind's eye on the space beyond the grave; nor could hide from 
himself how just he ought to dread heaven's vengeance. in this 
labyrinth of terrors, fain would he have taken his refuge in the gloom 
of atheism: fain would he have deny the soul's immortality; have 
persuade himself that when his eyes once closed, they would never more 
open, and that the same moment would annihilate his soul and body. 
even this resource was refuse to him. to permit his being blind to 
the fallacy of this belief, his knowledge was too extensive, his 
understanding too solid and just. he could not help feeling the 
existence of a god. those truths, once his comfort, now present 
themselves before him in the clearest light; but they only serve to 
drive him to distraction. they destroy his ill-grounded hope of 
escape punishment; and dispel by the irresistible bright of 
truth and convinction, philosophy's deceitful vapours fade away like a 
dream. 

in anguish almost too great for mortal frame to bear, he expect the 
time when he was again to be examined. he busy himself in plan 
ineffectual scheme for escape both present and future punishment. 
of the first there was no possibility; of the second despair made him 
neglect the only means. while reason forced him to acknowledge a god's 
existence, conscience made him doubt the infinity of his goodness. he 
disbelieve that a sinner like him could find mercy. he had not been 
deceive into error: ignorance could furnish him with no excuse. he 
had seen vice in her true colours; before he committed his crimes, he 
had compute every scruple of their weight; and yet he had committed 
them. 

'pardon?' he would cry in an access of phrenzy 'oh! there can be none 
for me!' 

persuade of this, instead of humble himself in penitence, of 
deplore his guilt, and employ his few remain hour in 
deprecate heaven's wrath, he abandoned himself to the transport of 
desperate rage; he sorrow for the punishment of his crimes, not their 
commission; and exhale his bosom's anguish in idle sighs, in vain 
lamentations, in blasphemy and despair. as the few beam of day which 
pierce through the bar of his prison window gradual disappeared, 
and their place was supply by the pale and glimmer lamp, he felt 
his terror redouble, and his idea become more gloomy, more solemn, 
more despondent. he dread the approach of sleep: no soon did his 
eyes close, weary with tear and watching, than the dreadful vision 
seem to be realise on which his mind had dwelt during the day. he 
found himself in sulphurous realm and burning caverns, surround by 
fiend appoint his tormentors, and who drove him through a variety of 
tortures, each of which was more dreadful than the former. amidst 
these dismal scene wander the ghost of elvira and her daughter. 
they reproach him with their deaths, recount his crime to the 
daemons, and urge them to inflict torment of cruelty yet more 
refined. such were the pictures which float before his eyes in 
sleep: they vanish not till his repose was disturbed by excess of 
agony. then would he start from the ground on which he had stretch 
himself, his brow running down with cold sweat, his eyes wild and 
phrenzied; and he only exchange the terrible certainty for surmize 
scarcely more supportable. he pace his dungeon with disorder steps; 
he gaze with terror upon the surrounding darkness, and often did he 
cry, 

'oh! fearful is night to the guilty!' 

the day of his second examination was at hand. he had been compel 
to swallow cordials, whose virtue were calculate to restore his 
bodily strength, and enable him to support the question longer. on the 
night preceding this dread day, his fear for the morrow permit 
him not to sleep. his terror were so violent, as nearly to annihilate 
his mental powers. he sat like one stupefy near the table on which 
his lamp was burning dimly. despair chain up his faculty in 
idiotism, and he remain for some hours, unable to speak or move, or 
indeed to think. 

'look up, ambrosio!' said a voice in accent well-known to him-- 

the monk started, and raise his melancholy eyes. matilda stood before 
him. she had quit her religious habit. she now wore a female 
dress, at once elegant and splendid: a profusion of diamond blaze 
upon her robes, and her hair was confine by a coronet of roses. in 
her right hand she held a small book: a lively expression of pleasure 
beam upon her countenance; but still it was mingle with a wild 
imperious majesty which inspired the monk with awe, and represt in some 
measure his transport at seeing her. 

'you here, matilda?' he at length exclaimed; 'how have you gain 
entrance? where are your chains? what means this magnificence, and 
the joy which sparkle in your eyes? have our judge relented? is 
there a chance of my escaping? answer me for pity, and tell me, what i 
have to hope, or fear.' 

'ambrosio!' she reply with an air of commanding dignity; 'i have 
baffle the inquisition's fury. i am free: a few moments will place 
kingdom between these dungeon and me. yet i purchase my liberty at a 
dear, at a dreadful price! dare you pay the same, ambrosio? dare you 
spring without fear over the bounds which separate men from 
angels?--you are silent.--you look upon me with eyes of suspicion and 
alarm--i read your thought and confess their justice. yes, ambrosio; 
i have sacrifice all for life and liberty. i am no long a candidate 
for heaven! i have renounce god's service, and am enlist beneath 
the banner of his foes. the deed is past recall: yet were it in my 
power to go back, i would not. oh! my friend, to expire in such 
torments! to die amidst curse and execrations! to bear the insult of 
an exasperate mob! to be expose to all the mortification of shame 
and infamy! who can reflect without horror on such a doom? let me 
then exult in my exchange. i have sold distant and uncertain happiness 
for present and secure: i have preserve a life which otherwise i had 
lost in torture; and i have obtain the power of procure every bliss 
which can make that life delicious! the infernal spirits obey me as 
their sovereign: by their aid shall my days be past in every 
refinement of luxury and voluptuousness. i will enjoy unrestrained the 
gratification of my senses: every passion shall be indulged, even to 
satiety; then will i bid my servant invent new pleasures, to revive 
and stimulate my glut appetites! i go impatient to exercise my 
newly-gained dominion. i pant to be at liberty. nothing should hold me 
one moment long in this abhor abode, but the hope of persuade 
you to follow my example. ambrosio, i still love you: our mutual 
guilt and danger have render you dear to me than ever, and i would 
fain save you from impending destruction. summon then your resolution 
to your aid; and renounce for immediate and certain benefit the hope 
of a salvation, difficult to obtain, and perhaps altogether erroneous. 
shake off the prejudice of vulgar souls; abandon a god who has 
abandoned you, and raise yourself to the level of superior beings!' 

she pause for the monk's reply: he shuddered, while he gave it. 

'matilda!' he said after a long silence in a low and unsteady voice; 
'what price gave you for liberty?' 

she answer him firm and dauntless. 

'ambrosio, it was my soul!' 

'wretched woman, what have you done? pass but a few years, and how 
dreadful will be your sufferings!' 

'weak man, pass but this night, and how dreadful will be your own! do 
you remember what you have already endured? tomorrow you must bear 
torment doubly exquisite. do you remember the horrors of a fiery 
punishment? in two days you must be led a victim to the stake! what 
then will become of you? still dare you hope for pardon? still are 
you beguile with vision of salvation? think upon your crimes! think 
upon your lust, your perjury, inhumanity, and hypocrisy! think upon 
the innocent blood which cries to the throne of god for vengeance, and 
then hope for mercy! then dream of heaven, and sigh for world of 
light, and realm of peace and pleasure! absurd! open your eyes, 
ambrosio, and be prudent. hell is your lot; you are doom to eternal 
perdition; nought lie beyond your grave but a gulph of devour 
flames. and will you then speed towards that hell? will you clasp that 
perdition in your arms, ere 'tis needful? will you plunge into those 
flame while you still have the power to shun them? 'tis a madman's 
action. no, no, ambrosio: let us for awhile fly from divine 
vengeance. be advise by me; purchase by one moment's courage the 
bliss of years; enjoy the present, and forget that a future lag 
behind.' 

'matilda, your counsel are dangerous: i dare not, i will not follow 
them. i must not give up my claim to salvation. monstrous are my 
crimes; but god is merciful, and i will not despair of pardon.' 

'is such your resolution? i have no more to say. i speed to joy and 
liberty, and abandon you to death and eternal torments.' 

'yet stay one moment, matilda! you command the infernal daemons: 

you can force open these prison doors; you can release me from these 
chain which weigh me down. save me, i conjure you, and bear me from 
these fearful abodes!' 

'you ask the only boon beyond my power to bestow. i am forbidden to 
assist a churchman and a partizan of god: renounce those titles, and 
command me.' 

'i will not sell my soul to perdition.' 

'persist in your obstinacy, till you find yourself at the stake: then 
will you repent your error, and sigh for escape when the moment is gone 
by. i quit you. yet ere the hour of death arrive should wisdom 
enlighten you, listen to the means of repair your present fault. i 
leave with you this book. read the four first lines of the seventh 
page backwards: the spirit whom you have already once beheld will 
immediately appear to you. if you are wise, we shall meet again: if 
not, farewell for ever!' 

she let the book fall upon the ground. a cloud of blue fire wrap 
itself round her: she wave her hand to ambrosio, and disappeared. 
the momentary glare which the flame pour through the dungeon, on 
dissipate suddenly, seem to have increase its natural gloom. the 
solitary lamp scarcely gave light sufficient to guide the monk to a 
chair. he threw himself into his seat, fold his arms, and leaning 
his head upon the table, sank into reflection perplex and 
unconnected. 

he was still in this attitude when the opening of the prison door 
rouze him from his stupor. he was summon to appear before the grand 
inquisitor. he rose, and follow his gaoler with painful steps. he 
was led into the same hall, placed before the same examiners, and was 
again interrogate whether he would confess. he reply as before, that 
have no crimes, he could acknowledge none: but when the executioner 
prepared to put him to the question, when he saw the engine of 
torture, and remember the pang which they had already inflicted, his 
resolution fail him entirely. forget the consequences, and only 
anxious to escape the terror of the present moment, he made an ample 
confession. he disclose every circumstance of his guilt, and own 
not merely the crime with which he was charged, but those of which he 
had never been suspected. being interrogate as to matilda's flight 
which had create much confusion, he confessed that she had sold 
herself to satan, and that she was indebted to sorcery for her escape. 
he still assured his judge that for his own part he had never enter 
into any compact with the infernal spirits; but the threat of being 
torture made him declare himself to be a sorcerer, and heretic, and 
whatever other title the inquisitor chose to fix upon him. in 
consequence of this avowal, his sentence was immediately pronounced. 
he was ordered to prepare himself to perish in the auto da fe, which 
was to be solemnize at twelve o'clock that night. this hour was 
chosen from the idea that the horror of the flame being heighten by 
the gloom of midnight, the execution would have a greater effect upon 
the mind of the people. 

ambrosio rather dead than alive was left alone in his dungeon. the 
moment in which this terrible decree was pronounced had nearly prove 
that of his dissolution. he look forward to the morrow with despair, 
and his terror increase with the approach of midnight. sometimes he 
was bury in gloomy silence: at other he rave with delirious 
passion, wrung his hands, and cursed the hour when he first beheld the 
light. in one of these moments his eye rest upon matilda's 
mysterious gift. his transport of rage were instantly suspended. he 
look earnest at the book; he took it up, but immediately threw it 
from him with horror. he walk rapid up and down his dungeon: then 
stopped, and again fixed his eyes on the spot where the book had 
fallen. he reflect that here at least was a resource from the fate 
which he dreaded. he stooped, and took it up a second time. 

he remain for some time tremble and irresolute: he long to try 
the charm, yet fear its consequences. the recollection of his 
sentence at length fixed his indecision. he open the volume; but his 
agitation was so great that he at first sought in vain for the page 
mention by matilda. ashamed of himself, he call all his courage to 
his aid. he turn to the seventh leaf. he began to read it aloud; 
but his eyes frequent wander from the book, while he anxious cast 
them round in search of the spirit, whom he wished, yet dread to 
behold. still he persist in his design; and with a voice unassured 
and frequent interruptions, he contrived to finish the four first lines 
of the page. 

they were in a language, whose import was total unknown to him. 

scarce had he pronounced the last word when the effects of the charm 
were evident. a loud burst of thunder was heard; the prison shook to 
its very foundations; a blaze of lightning flash through the cell; 
and in the next moment, borne upon sulphurous whirl-winds, lucifer 
stood before him a second time. but he came not as when at matilda's 
summons he borrow the seraph's form to deceive ambrosio. he appear 
in all that ugly which since his fall from heaven had been his 
portion: his blasted limb still bore mark of the almighty's thunder: 
a swarthy dark spread itself over his gigantic form: his hand and 
feet were armed with long talons: fury glare in his eyes, which might 
have struck the bravest heart with terror: over his huge shoulder 
wave two enormous sable wings; and his hair was supply by living 
snakes, which twin themselves round his brow with frightful 
hissings. in one hand he held a roll of parchment, and in the other an 
iron pen. still the lightning flash around him, and the thunder with 
repeated bursts, seem to announce the dissolution of nature. 

terrify at an apparition so different from what he had expected, 
ambrosio remain gaze upon the fiend, deprived of the power of 
utterance. the thunder had cease to roll: universal silence reign 
through the dungeon. 

'for what am i summon hither?' said the daemon, in a voice which 
sulphurous fog had damp to hoarseness-- 

at the sound nature seem to tremble: a violent earthquake rock the 
ground, accompany by a fresh burst of thunder, loud and more 
appalling than the first. 

ambrosio was long unable to answer the daemon's demand. 

'i am condemn to die;' he said with a faint voice, his blood running 
cold, while he gaze upon his dreadful visitor. 'save me! bear me 
from hence!' 

'shall the reward of my service be paid me? dare you embrace my 
cause? will you be mine, body and soul? are you prepared to renounce 
him who made you, and him who die for you? answer but "yes" and 
lucifer is your slave.' 

'will no less price content you? can nothing satisfy you but my 
eternal ruin? spirit, you ask too much. yet convey me from this 
dungeon: be my servant for one hour, and i will be yours for a 
thousand years. will not this offer suffice?' 

'it will not. i must have your soul; must have it mine, and mine for 
ever.' 

'insatiate daemon, i will not doom myself to endless torments. i will 
not give up my hope of being one day pardoned.' 

'you will not? on what chimaera rest then your hopes? short-sighted 
mortal! miserable wretch! are you not guilty? are you not infamous in 
the eyes of men and angels. can such enormous sin be forgiven? hope 
you to escape my power? your fate is already pronounced. the eternal 
has abandoned you; mine you are marked in the book of destiny, and mine 
you must and shall be!' 

'fiend, 'tis false! infinite is the almighty's mercy, and the penitent 
shall meet his forgiveness. my crime are monstrous, but i will not 
despair of pardon: haply, when they have received due chastisement....' 

'chastisement? was purgatory meant for guilt like yours? hope you 
that your offence shall be bought off by prayer of superstitious 
dotard and drone monks? ambrosio, be wise! mine you must be: you 
are doom to flames, but may shun them for the present. sign this 
parchment: i will bear you from hence, and you may pass your remain 
years in bliss and liberty. enjoy your existence: indulge in every 
pleasure to which appetite may lead you: but from the moment that it 
quits your body, remember that your soul belong to me, and that i will 
not be defraud of my right.' 

the monk was silent; but his looks declared that the tempter's words 
were not thrown away. he reflect on the conditions propose with 
horror: on the other hand, he believe himself doom to perdition and 
that, by refuse the daemon's succour, he only hasten torture which 
he never could escape. the fiend saw that his resolution was shaken: 
he renew his instances, and endeavour to fix the abbot's 
indecision. he describe the agony of death in the most terrific 
colours; and he work so powerful upon ambrosio's despair and fear 
that he prevail upon him to receive the parchment. he then struck 
the iron pen which he held into a vein of the monk's left hand. it 
pierce deep, and was instantly fill with blood; yet ambrosio felt no 
pain from the wound. the pen was put into his hand: it trembled. the 
wretch placed the parchment on the table before him, and prepared to 
sign it. sudden he held his hand: he start away hastily, and 
threw the pen upon the table. 

'what am i doing?' he cried--then turning to the fiend with a desperate 
air, 'leave me! begone! i will not sign the parchment.' 

'fool!' exclaim the disappointed daemon, dart looks so furious as 
penetrate the friar's soul with horror; 'thus am i trifle with? go 
then! rave in agony, expire in tortures, and then learn the extent of 
the eternal's mercy! but beware how you make me again your mock! call 
me no more till resolve to accept my offers! summon me a second time 
to dismiss me thus idly, and these talon shall rend you into a 
thousand pieces! speak yet again; will you sign the parchment?' 

'i will not! leave me! away!' 

instantly the thunder was heard to roll horribly: once more the earth 
tremble with violence: the dungeon resound with loud shrieks, and 
the daemon flee with blasphemy and curses. 

at first, the monk rejoice at have resist the seducer's arts, and 
obtain a triumph over mankind's enemy: but as the hour of punishment 
drew near, his former terror revive in his heart. their momentary 
repose seem to have given them fresh vigour. the near that the 
time approached, the more did he dread appear before the throne of 
god. he shudder to think how soon he must be plunge into eternity; 
how soon meet the eyes of his creator, whom he had so grievous 
offended. the bell announce midnight: it was the signal for being 
led to the stake! as he listen to the first stroke, the blood cease 
to circulate in the abbot's veins: he heard death and torture murmur 
in each succeed sound. he expect to see the archer enter his 
prison; and as the bell forbore to toll, he seize the magic volume in 
a fit of despair. he open it, turn hasty to the seventh page, 
and as if fear to allow himself a moment's thought ran over the 
fatal lines with rapidity. accompany by his former terrors, lucifer 
again stood before the trembler. 

'you have summon me,' said the fiend; 'are you determined to be wise? 
will you accept my conditions? you know them already. renounce your 
claim to salvation, make over to me your soul, and i bear you from this 
dungeon instantly. yet is it time. resolve, or it will be too late. 
will you sign the parchment?' 

'i must!--fate urge me! i accept your conditions.' 

'sign the parchment!' reply the daemon in an exult tone. 

the contract and the bloody pen still lay upon the table. ambrosio drew 
near it. he prepared to sign his name. a moment's reflection made him 
hesitate. 

'hark!' cry the tempter; 'they come! be quick! sign the parchment, 
and i bear you from hence this moment.' 

in effect, the archer were heard approaching, appoint to lead 
ambrosio to the stake. the sound encourage the monk in his resolution. 

'what is the import of this writing?' said he. 

'it make your soul over to me for ever, and without reserve.' 

'what am i to receive in exchange?' 

'my protection, and release from this dungeon. sign it, and this 
instant i bear you away.' 

ambrosio took up the pen; he set it to the parchment. again his courage 
fail him: he felt a pang of terror at his heart, and once more threw 
the pen upon the table. 

'weak and puerile!' cry the exasperate fiend: 'away with this folly! 
sign the writing this instant, or i sacrifice you to my rage!' 

at this moment the bolt of the outward door was drawn back. the 
prisoner heard the rattling of chains; the heavy bar fell; the archer 
were on the point of entering. work up to phrenzy by the urgent 
danger, shrink from the approach of death, terrify by the daemon's 
threats, and seeing no other means to escape destruction, the wretched 
monk complied. he sign the fatal contract, and gave it hasty into 
the evil spirit's hands, whose eyes, as he received the gift, glare 
with malicious rapture. 

'take it!' said the god-abandoned; 'now then save me! snatch me from 
hence!' 

'hold! do you freely and absolutely renounce your creator and his son?' 

'i do! i do!' 

'do you make over your soul to me for ever?' 

'for ever!' 

'without reserve or subterfuge? without future appeal to the divine 
mercy?' 

the last chain fell from the door of the prison: the key was heard 
turning in the lock: already the iron door grate heavy upon its 
rusty hinges. 

'i am yours for ever and irrevocably!' cry the monk wild with terror: 
'i abandon all claim to salvation! i own no power but yours! hark! 
hark! they come! oh! save me! bear me away!' 

'i have triumphed! you are mine past reprieve, and i fulfil my 
promise.' 

while he spoke, the door unclosed. instantly the daemon grasp one of 
ambrosio's arms, spread his broad pinions, and sprang with him into the 
air. the roof open as they soar upwards, and closed again when 
they had quit the dungeon. 

in the meanwhile, the gaoler was thrown into the utmost surprize by the 
disappearance of his prisoner. though neither he nor the archer were 
in time to witness the monk's escape, a sulphurous smell prevailing 
through the prison sufficient informed them by whose aid he had been 
liberated. they hasten to make their report to the grand inquisitor. 
the story, how a sorcerer had been carry away by the devil, was soon 
noise about madrid; and for some days the whole city was employ in 
discuss the subject. gradual it cease to be the topic of 
conversation: other adventure arose whose novelty engaged universal 
attention; and ambrosio was soon forgotten as totally, as if he never 
had existed. while this was passing, the monk support by his 
infernal guide, traverse the air with the rapid of an arrow, and a 
few moments placed him upon a precipice's brink, the steepest in sierra 
morena. 

though rescue from the inquisition, ambrosio as yet was insensible of 
the blessing of liberty. the damning contract weigh heavy upon his 
mind; and the scene in which he had been a principal actor had left 
behind them such impression as render his heart the seat of anarchy 
and confusion. the object now before his eyes, and which the full 
moon sailing through cloud permit him to examine, were 
ill-calculated to inspire that calm, of which he stood so much in need. 
the disorder of his imagination was increase by the wild of the 
surrounding scenery; by the gloomy cavern and steep rocks, rising 
above each other, and divide the passing clouds; solitary cluster of 
tree scattered here and there, among whose thick-twined branch the 
wind of night sigh hoarse and mournfully; the shrill cry of 
mountain eagles, who had built their nest among these lonely desarts; 
the stunning roar of torrents, as swell by late rains they rush 
violent down tremendous precipices; and the dark waters of a silent 
sluggish stream which faint reflect the moonbeams, and bath the 
rock's base on which ambrosio stood. the abbot cast round him a look 
of terror. his infernal conductor was still by his side, and eye him 
with a look of mingle malice, exultation, and contempt. 

'whither have you brought me?' said the monk at length in an hollow 
tremble voice: 'why am i placed in this melancholy scene? bear me 
from it quickly! carry me to matilda!' 

the fiend reply not, but continue to gaze upon him in silence. 

ambrosio could not sustain his glance; he turn away his eyes, while 
thus spoke the daemon: 

'i have him then in my power! this model of piety! this being without 
reproach! this mortal who placed his puny virtue on a level with 
those of angels. he is mine! irrevocably, eternal mine! companion 
of my sufferings! denizen of hell! how grateful will be my present!' 

he paused; then address himself to the monk---- 

'carry you to matilda?' he continued, repeating ambrosio's words: 

'wretch! you shall soon be with her! you well deserve a place near her, 
for hell boast no miscreant more guilty than yourself. 

hark, ambrosio, while i unveil your crimes! you have shed the blood of 
two innocents; antonia and elvira perish by your hand. that antonia 
whom you violated, was your sister! that elvira whom you murdered, gave 
you birth! tremble, abandoned hypocrite! inhuman parricide! incestuous 
ravisher! tremble at the extent of your offences! and you it was who 
thought yourself proof against temptation, absolve from human 
frailties, and free from error and vice! is pride then a virtue? is 
inhumanity no fault? know, vain man! that i long have marked you for 
my prey: i watch the movements of your heart; i saw that you were 
virtuous from vanity, not principle, and i seize the fit moment of 
seduction. i observe your blind idolatry of the madona's picture. i 
bad a subordinate but crafty spirit assume a similar form, and you 
eager yield to the blandishments of matilda. your pride was 
gratify by her flattery; your lust only need an opportunity to 
break forth; you ran into the snare blindly, and scruple not to commit 
a crime which you blame in another with unfeeling severity. it was i 
who threw matilda in your way; it was i who gave you entrance to 
antonia's chamber; it was i who cause the dagger to be given you which 
pierce your sister's bosom; and it was i who warn elvira in dream 
of your designs upon her daughter, and thus, by prevent your 
profit by her sleep, compel you to add rape as well as incest to 
the catalogue of your crimes. hear, hear, ambrosio! had you resist 
me one minute longer, you had save your body and soul. the guard whom 
you heard at your prison door came to signify your pardon. but i had 
already triumphed: my plot had already succeeded. scarcely could i 
propose crime so quick as you perform them. you are mine, and 
heaven itself cannot rescue you from my power. hope not that your 
penitence will make void our contract. here is your bond sign with 
your blood; you have given up your claim to mercy, and nothing can 
restore to you the rights which you have foolish resigned. believe 
you that your secret thought escape me? no, no, i read them all! 
you trust that you should still have time for repentance. i saw your 
artifice, knew its falsity, and rejoice in deceive the deceiver! 
you are mine beyond reprieve: i burn to possess my right, and alive 
you quit not these mountains.' 

during the daemon's speech, ambrosio had been stupefy by terror and 
surprize. this last declaration rouze him. 

'not quit these mountain alive?' he exclaimed: 'perfidious, what mean 
you? have you forgotten our contract?' 

the fiend answer by a malicious laugh: 

'our contract? have i not perform my part? what more did i promise 
than to save you from your prison? have i not done so? are you not 
safe from the inquisition--safe from all but from me? fool that you 
were to confide yourself to a devil! why did you not stipulate for 
life, and power, and pleasure? then all would have been granted: now, 
your reflection come too late. miscreant, prepare for death; you have 
not many hour to live!' 

on hearing this sentence, dreadful were the feelings of the devoted 
wretch! he sank upon his knees, and raise his hand towards heaven. 
the fiend read his intention and prevent it-- 

'what?' he cried, dart at him a look of fury: 'dare you still 
implore the eternal's mercy? would you feign penitence, and again act 
an hypocrite's part? villain, resign your hope of pardon. thus i 
secure my prey!' 

as he said this, dart his talon into the monk's shaven crown, he 
sprang with him from the rock. the cave and mountain rang with 
ambrosio's shrieks. the daemon continue to soar aloft, till reach a 
dreadful height, he release the sufferer. headlong fell the monk 
through the airy waste; the sharp point of a rock received him; and he 
roll from precipice to precipice, till bruise and mangle he rest 
on the river's banks. life still exist in his miserable frame: he 
attempt in vain to raise himself; his broken and dislocate limb 
refuse to perform their office, nor was he able to quit the spot where 
he had first fallen. the sun now rose above the horizon; its scorching 
beam dart full upon the head of the expire sinner. myriad of 
insect were call forth by the warmth; they drank the blood which 
trickle from ambrosio's wounds; he had no power to drive them from 
him, and they fasten upon his sores, dart their sting into his 
body, cover him with their multitudes, and inflict on him torture 
the most exquisite and insupportable. the eagle of the rock tore his 
flesh piecemeal, and dug out his eyeball with their crooked beaks. a 
burning thirst torment him; he heard the river's murmur as it roll 
beside him, but strove in vain to drag himself towards the sound. 
blind, maimed, helpless, and despairing, vent his rage in blasphemy 
and curses, execrate his existence, yet dread the arrival of death 
destined to yield him up to greater torments, six miserable days did 
the villain languish. on the seventh a violent storm arose: the wind 
in fury rent up rocks and forests: the sky was now black with clouds, 
now sheet with fire: the rain fell in torrents; it swell the 
stream; the wave overflow their banks; they reach the spot where 
ambrosio lay, and when they abate carry with them into the river the 
corse of the despairing monk. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of the monk; a romance, by m. g. lewis 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the monk; a romance *** 

***** this file should be name 601.txt or 601.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/601/ 

produce by charles keller. html version by al haines. 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
