project gutenberg's the house on the borderland, by william hope hodgson 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the house on the borderland 

author: william hope hodgson 

release date: november 10, 2003 [ebook #10002] 
last updated: january 19, 2009 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the house on the borderland *** 




produce by suzanne shell, sjaani and pg distribute proofread 




the house on the borderland 

william hope hodgson 


_from the manuscript discover in 1877 by messrs. tonnison and 
berreggnog in the ruins that lie to the south of the village of 
kraighten, in the west of ireland. set out here, with notes_. 


to my father 
_(whose feet tread the lost aeons)_ 

open the door, 
and listen! 
only the wind's muffle roar, 
and the glisten 
of tear 'round the moon. 
and, in fancy, the tread 
of vanish shoon-- 
out in the night with the dead. 

"hush! and hark 
to the sorrowful cry 
of the wind in the dark. 
hush and hark, without murmur or sigh, 
to shoon that tread the lost aeons: 
to the sound that bid you to die. 
hush and hark! hush and hark!" 
_shoon of the dead_ 




author's introduction to the manuscript 

many are the hour in which i have ponder upon the story that is set 
forth in the following pages. i trust that my instinct are not awry 
when they prompt me to leave the account, in simplicity, as it was 
hand to me. 

and the ms. itself--you must picture me, when first it was given into my 
care, turning it over, curiously, and making a swift, jerky examination. 
a small book it is; but thick, and all, save the last few pages, fill 
with a quaint but legible handwriting, and writ very close. i have the 
queer, faint, pit-water smell of it in my nostril now as i write, and 
my finger have subconscious memory of the soft, "cloggy" feel of the 
long-damp pages. 

i read, and, in reading, lift the curtains of the impossible that 
blind the mind, and look out into the unknown. amid stiff, abrupt 
sentence i wandered; and, presently, i had no fault to charge against 
their abrupt tellings; for, better far than my own ambitious phrasing, 
is this mutilate story capable of bring home all that the old 
recluse, of the vanish house, had striven to tell. 

of the simple, stiff given account of weird and extraordinary matters, 
i will say little. it lie before you. the inner story must be uncovered, 
personally, by each reader, according to ability and desire. and even 
should any fail to see, as now i see, the shadow picture and conception 
of that to which one may well give the accept title of heaven and hell; 
yet can i promise certain thrills, merely taking the story as a story. 

william hope hodgson december 17, 1907 



_i_ 

the finding of the manuscript 

right away in the west of ireland lie a tiny hamlet call kraighten. 
it is situated, alone, at the base of a low hill. far around there 
spread a waste of bleak and total inhospitable country; where, here 
and there at great intervals, one may come upon the ruins of some long 
desolate cottage--unthatched and stark. the whole land is bare and 
unpeopled, the very earth scarcely covering the rock that lie beneath 
it, and with which the country abounds, in place rising out of the soil 
in wave-shaped ridges. 

yet, in spite of its desolation, my friend tonnison and i had elect to 
spend our vacation there. he had stumble on the place by mere chance 
the year previously, during the course of a long walking tour, and 
discover the possibility for the angle in a small and unnamed river 
that runs past the outskirts of the little village. 

i have said that the river is without name; i may add that no map that i 
have hitherto consult has shown either village or stream. they seem 
to have entire escape observation: indeed, they might never exist for 
all that the average guide tell one. possibly this can be partly 
account for by the fact that the nearest railway station (ardrahan) is 
some forty mile distant. 

it was early one warm evening when my friend and i arrive in kraighten. 
we had reach ardrahan the previous night, sleep there in rooms 
hire at the village post office, and leave in good time on the 
following morning, clinging insecure to one of the typical 
jaunt cars. 

it had taken us all day to accomplish our journey over some of the 
roughest track imaginable, with the result that we were thorough 
tired and somewhat bad tempered. however, the tent had to be erect and 
our goods stow away before we could think of food or rest. and so we 
set to work, with the aid of our driver, and soon had the tent up upon a 
small patch of ground just outside the little village, and quite near to 
the river. 

then, have store all our belongings, we dismiss the driver, as he 
had to make his way back as speedy as possible, and told him to come 
across to us at the end of a fortnight. we had brought sufficient 
provisions to last us for that space of time, and water we could get 
from the stream. fuel we did not need, as we had included a small 
oil-stove among our outfit, and the weather was fine and warm. 

it was tonnison's idea to camp out instead of get lodgings in one of 
the cottages. as he put it, there was no joke in sleep in a room with 
a numerous family of healthy ireland in one corner and the pigsty in the 
other, while overhead a ragged colony of roost fowl distribute 
their blessing impartially, and the whole place so full of peat smoke 
that it made a fellow sneeze his head off just to put it inside 
the doorway. 

tonnison had got the stove lit now and was busy cutting slice of bacon 
into the fry pan; so i took the kettle and walk down to the river 
for water. on the way, i had to pass close to a little group of the 
village people, who eye me curiously, but not in any unfriend manner, 
though none of them venture a word. 

as i return with my kettle filled, i went up to them and, after a 
friendly nod, to which they reply in like manner, i ask them 
casual about the fishing; but, instead of answering, they just shook 
their head silently, and stare at me. i repeated the question, 
address more particularly a great, gaunt fellow at my elbow; yet 
again i received no answer. then the man turn to a comrade and said 
something rapid in a language that i did not understand; and, at once, 
the whole crowd of them fell to jabber in what, after a few moments, 
i guess to be pure irish. at the same time they cast many glance in 
my direction. for a minute, perhaps, they spoke among themselves thus; 
then the man i had address face 'round at me and said something. by 
the expression of his face i guess that he, in turn, was questioning 
me; but now i had to shake my head, and indicate that i did not 
comprehend what it was they want to know; and so we stood look at 
one another, until i heard tonnison calling to me to hurry up with the 
kettle. then, with a smile and a nod, i left them, and all in the little 
crowd smile and nod in return, though their face still betray 
their puzzlement. 

it was evident, i reflect as i went toward the tent, that the 
inhabitant of these few hut in the wilderness did not know a word of 
english; and when i told tonnison, he remark that he was aware of the 
fact, and, more, that it was not at all uncommon in that part of the 
country, where the people often live and die in their isolated hamlet 
without ever coming in contact with the outside world. 

"i wish we had got the driver to interpret for us before he left," i 
remarked, as we sat down to our meal. "it seem so strange for the 
people of this place not even to know what we've come for." 

tonnison grunt an assent, and thereafter was silent for a while. 

later, have satisfy our appetite somewhat, we began to talk, lay 
our plan for the morrow; then, after a smoke, we closed the flap of the 
tent, and prepared to turn in. 

"i suppose there's no chance of those fellow outside taking anything?" 
i asked, as we roll ourselves in our blankets. 

tonnison said that he did not think so, at least while we were about; 
and, as he went on to explain, we could lock up everything, except the 
tent, in the big chest that we had brought to hold our provisions. i 
agree to this, and soon we were both asleep. 

next morning, early, we rose and went for a swim in the river; after 
which we dress and had breakfast. then we rouse out our fishing 
tackle and overhaul it, by which time, our breakfast have settled 
somewhat, we made all secure within the tent and strode off in the 
direction my friend had explore on his previous visit. 

during the day we fish happily, working steady upstream, and by 
evening we had one of the prettiest creel of fish that i had seen for a 
long while. return to the village, we made a good feed off our day's 
spoil, after which, have select a few of the fine fish for our 
breakfast, we present the remainder to the group of villager who had 
assemble at a respectful distance to watch our doings. they seem 
wonderful grateful, and heap mountain of what i presume to be 
ireland blessing upon our heads. 

thus we spent several days, have splendid sport, and first-rate 
appetite to do justice upon our prey. we were pleased to find how 
friendly the villager were inclined to be, and that there was no 
evidence of their have venture to meddle with our belongings during 
our absences. 

it was on a tuesday that we arrive in kraighten, and it would be on the 
sunday following that we made a great discovery. hitherto we had always 
gone up-stream; on that day, however, we laid aside our rods, and, 
taking some provisions, set off for a long ramble in the opposite 
direction. the day was warm, and we trudge along leisurely enough, 
stopping about mid-day to eat our lunch upon a great flat rock near the 
riverbank. afterward we sat and smoke awhile, resume our walk only 
when we were tired of inaction. 

for perhaps another hour we wander onward, chat quiet and 
comfortable on this and that matter, and on several occasion stopping 
while my companion--who is something of an artist--made rough sketch 
of striking bit of the wild scenery. 

and then, without any warning whatsoever, the river we had follow so 
confidently, came to an abrupt end--vanishing into the earth. 

"good lord!" i said, "who ever would have thought of this?" 

and i stare in amazement; then i turn to tonnison. he was looking, 
with a blank expression upon his face, at the place where the river 
disappeared. 

in a moment he spoke. 

"let us go on a bit; it may reappear again--anyhow, it is worth 
investigating." 

i agreed, and we went forward once more, though rather aimlessly; for we 
were not at all certain in which direction to prosecute our search. for 
perhaps a mile we move onward; then tonnison, who had been gaze about 
curiously, stop and shade his eyes. 

"see!" he said, after a moment, "isn't that mist or something, over 
there to the right--away in a line with that great piece of rock?" and 
he indicate with his hand. 

i stared, and, after a minute, seem to see something, but could not be 
certain, and said so. 

"anyway," my friend replied, "we'll just go across and have a glance." 
and he start off in the direction he had suggested, i following. 
presently, we came among bushes, and, after a time, out upon the top of 
a high, boulder-strewn bank, from which we look down into a wilderness 
of bush and trees. 

"seems as though we had come upon an oasis in this desert of stone," 
mutter tonnison, as he gaze interestedly. then he was silent, his 
eyes fixed; and i look also; for up from somewhere about the center of 
the wooded lowland there rose high into the quiet air a great column of 
hazelike spray, upon which the sun shone, cause innumerable rainbows. 

"how beautiful!" i exclaimed. 

"yes," answer tonnison, thoughtfully. "there must be a waterfall, or 
something, over there. perhaps it's our river come to light again. let's 
go and see." 

down the slope bank we made our way, and enter among the tree and 
shrubberies. the bush were matted, and the tree overhung us, so that 
the place was disagreeable gloomy; though not dark enough to hide from 
me the fact that many of the tree were fruit trees, and that, here and 
there, one could trace indistinctly, sign of a long departed 
cultivation. thus it came to me that we were making our way through the 
riot of a great and ancient garden. i said as much to tonnison, and he 
agree that there certainly seem reasonable grounds for my belief. 

what a wild place it was, so dismal and somber! somehow, as we went 
forward, a sense of the silent lonely and desertion of the old 
garden grew upon me, and i felt shivery. one could imagine things 
lurk among the tangle bushes; while, in the very air of the place, 
there seem something uncanny. i think tonnison was conscious of this 
also, though he said nothing. 

suddenly, we came to a halt. through the tree there had grown upon our 
ear a distant sound. tonnison bent forward, listening. i could hear it 
more plainly now; it was continuous and harsh--a sort of drone roar, 
seeming to come from far away. i experienced a queer, indescribable, 
little feeling of nervousness. what sort of place was it into which we 
had got? i look at my companion, to see what he thought of the matter; 
and noted that there was only puzzlement in his face; and then, as i 
watch his features, an expression of comprehension crept over them, 
and he nod his head. 

"that's a waterfall," he exclaimed, with conviction. "i know the sound 
now." and he began to push vigorous through the bushes, in the 
direction of the noise. 

as we went forward, the sound became plain continually, showing that 
we were heading straight toward it. steadily, the roaring grew loud 
and nearer, until it appeared, as i remark to tonnison, almost to come 
from under our feet--and still we were surround by the tree 
and shrubs. 

"take care!" tonnison call to me. "look where you're going." and then, 
suddenly, we came out from among the trees, on to a great open space, 
where, not six pace in front of us, yawn the mouth of a tremendous 
chasm, from the depths of which the noise appear to rise, along with 
the continuous, mistlike spray that we had witness from the top of the 
distant bank. 

for quite a minute we stood in silence, staring in bewilder at the 
sight; then my friend went forward cautious to the edge of the abyss. 
i followed, and, together, we look down through a boil of spray at a 
monster cataract of froth water that burst, spouting, from the side 
of the chasm, nearly a hundred feet below. 

"good lord!" said tonnison. 

i was silent, and rather awed. the sight was so unexpected grand and 
eerie; though this latter quality came more upon me later. 

presently, i look up and across to the further side of the chasm. 
there, i saw something towering up among the spray: it look like a 
fragment of a great ruin, and i touched tonnison on the shoulder. he 
glance 'round, with a start, and i pointed toward the thing. his gaze 
follow my finger, and his eyes light up with a sudden flash of 
excitement, as the object came within his field of view. 

"come along," he shout above the uproar. "we'll have a look at it. 
there's something queer about this place; i feel it in my bones." and he 
start off, 'round the edge of the craterlike abyss. as we near this 
new thing, i saw that i had not been mistaken in my first impression. it 
was undoubted a portion of some ruin building; yet now i made out 
that it was not built upon the edge of the chasm itself, as i had at 
first supposed; but perch almost at the extreme end of a huge spur of 
rock that jut out some fifty or sixty feet over the abyss. in fact, 
the jagged mass of ruin was literally suspend in midair. 

arrive opposite it, we walk out on to the project arm of rock, 
and i must confess to have felt an intolerable sense of terror as i 
look down from that dizzy perch into the unknown depths below us--into 
the deep from which there rose ever the thunder of the fall water 
and the shroud of rising spray. 

reach the ruin, we clamber 'round it cautiously, and, on the 
further side, came upon a mass of fallen stone and rubble. the ruin 
itself seem to me, as i proceed now to examine it minutely, to be a 
portion of the outer wall of some prodigious structure, it was so thick 
and substantially built; yet what it was do in such a position i 
could by no means conjecture. where was the rest of the house, or 
castle, or whatever there had been? 

i went back to the outer side of the wall, and thence to the edge of the 
chasm, leave tonnison root systematic among the heap of stone 
and rubbish on the outer side. then i commence to examine the surface 
of the ground, near the edge of the abyss, to see whether there were not 
left other remnant of the building to which the fragment of ruin 
evidently belonged. but though i scrutinize the earth with the greatest 
care, i could see no sign of anything to show that there had ever been 
a building erect on the spot, and i grew more puzzle than ever. 

then, i heard a cry from tonnison; he was shouting my name, excitedly, 
and without delay i hurried along the rocky promontory to the ruin. i 
wonder whether he had hurt himself, and then the thought came, that 
perhaps he had found something. 

i reach the crumble wall and climb 'round. there i found tonnison 
standing within a small excavation that he had made among the _débris_: 
he was brush the dirt from something that look like a book, much 
crumple and dilapidated; and opening his mouth, every second or two, to 
bellow my name. as soon as he saw that i had come, he hand his prize 
to me, telling me to put it into my satchel so as to protect it from the 
damp, while he continue his explorations. this i did, first, however, 
running the page through my fingers, and note that they were close 
fill with neat, old-fashioned writing which was quite legible, save in 
one portion, where many of the page were almost destroyed, being 
muddy and crumpled, as though the book had been double back at that 
part. this, i found out from tonnison, was actually as he had discover 
it, and the damage was due, probably, to the fall of masonry upon the 
open part. curious enough, the book was fairly dry, which i 
attribute to its have been so secure bury among the ruins. 

have put the volume away safely, i turned-to and gave tonnison a hand 
with his self-imposed task of excavating; yet, though we put in over an 
hour's hard work, turning over the whole of the upheape stone and 
rubbish, we came upon nothing more than some fragment of broken wood, 
that might have been parts of a desk or table; and so we gave up 
searching, and went back along the rock, once more to the safety of 
the land. 

the next thing we did was to make a complete tour of the tremendous 
chasm, which we were able to observe was in the form of an almost 
perfect circle, save for where the ruin-crowned spur of rock jut out, 
spoil its symmetry. 

the abyss was, as tonnison put it, like nothing so much as a gigantic 
well or pit go sheer down into the bowels of the earth. 

for some time longer, we continue to stare about us, and then, notice 
that there was a clear space away to the north of the chasm, we bent our 
steps in that direction. 

here, distant from the mouth of the mighty pit by some hundred of 
yards, we came upon a great lake of silent water--silent, that is, save 
in one place where there was a continuous bubble and gurgling. 

now, being away from the noise of the spout cataract, we were able to 
hear one another speak, without have to shout at the tops of our 
voices, and i ask tonnison what he thought of the place--i told him 
that i didn't like it, and that the soon we were out of it the better 
i should be pleased. 

he nod in reply, and glance at the wood behind furtively. i ask 
him if he had seen or heard anything. he made no answer; but stood 
silent, as though listening, and i kept quiet also. 

suddenly, he spoke. 

"hark!" he said, sharply. i look at him, and then away among the tree 
and bushes, holding my breath involuntarily. a minute came and went in 
strained silence; yet i could hear nothing, and i turn to tonnison to 
say as much; and then, even as i open my lip to speak, there came a 
strange wail noise out of the wood on our left.... it appear to 
float through the trees, and there was a rustle of stirring leaves, and 
then silence. 

all at once, tonnison spoke, and put his hand on my shoulder. "let us 
get out of here," he said, and began to move slow toward where the 
surrounding tree and bush seem thinnest. as i follow him, it came 
to me sudden that the sun was low, and that there was a raw sense of 
chilly in the air. 

tonnison said nothing further, but kept on steadily. we were among the 
tree now, and i glance around, nervously; but saw nothing, save the 
quiet branch and trunks and the tangle bushes. onward we went, and no 
sound broke the silence, except the occasional snap of a twig under 
our feet, as we move forward. yet, in spite of the quietness, i had a 
horrible feeling that we were not alone; and i kept so close to tonnison 
that twice i kick his heel clumsily, though he said nothing. a 
minute, and then another, and we reach the confines of the wood coming 
out at last upon the bare rocky of the countryside. only then was i 
able to shake off the haunting dread that had follow me among 
the trees. 

once, as we move away, there seem to come again a distant sound of 
wailing, and i said to myself that it was the wind--yet the evening was 
breathless. 

presently, tonnison began to talk. 

"look you," he said with decision, "i would not spend the night in 
_that_ place for all the wealth that the world holds. there is something 
unholy--diabolical--about it. it came to me all in a moment, just after 
you spoke. it seem to me that the wood were full of vile 
things--you know!" 

"yes," i answered, and look back toward the place; but it was hidden 
from us by a rise in the ground. 

"there's the book," i said, and i put my hand into the satchel. 

"you've got it safely?" he questioned, with a sudden access of anxiety. 

"yes," i replied. 

"perhaps," he continued, "we shall learn something from it when we get 
back to the tent. we had better hurry, too; we're a long way off still, 
and i don't fancy, now, being caught out here in the dark." 

it was two hour later when we reach the tent; and, without delay, we 
set to work to prepare a meal; for we had eaten nothing since our lunch 
at midday. 

supper over, we clear the things out of the way, and lit our pipes. 
then tonnison ask me to get the manuscript out of my satchel. this i 
did, and then, as we could not both read from it at the same time, he 
suggest that i should read the thing out loud. "and mind," he 
cautioned, knowing my propensities, "don't go skip half the book." 

yet, had he but known what it contained, he would have realize how 
needless such advice was, for once at least. and there seat in the 
opening of our little tent, i began the strange tale of _the house on 
the borderland_ (for such was the title of the ms.); this is told in the 
following pages. 



_ii_ 

the plain of silence 

i am an old man. i live here in this ancient house, surround by huge, 
unkempt gardens. 

the peasantry, who inhabit the wilderness beyond, say that i am mad. 
that is because i will have nothing to do with them. i live here alone 
with my old sister, who is also my housekeeper. we keep no servants--i 
hate them. i have one friend, a dog; yes, i would soon have old pepper 
than the rest of creation together. he, at least, understand me--and 
has sense enough to leave me alone when i am in my dark moods. 

i have decided to start a kind of diary; it may enable me to record 
some of the thought and feelings that i cannot express to anyone; but, 
beyond this, i am anxious to make some record of the strange things that 
i have heard and seen, during many years of loneliness, in this weird 
old building. 

for a couple of centuries, this house has had a reputation, a bad one, 
and, until i bought it, for more than eighty years no one had live 
here; consequently, i got the old place at a ridiculous low figure. 

i am not superstitious; but i have cease to deny that things happen 
in this old house--things that i cannot explain; and, therefore, i must 
needs ease my mind, by writing down an account of them, to the best of 
my ability; though, should this, my diary, ever be read when i am gone, 
the reader will but shake their heads, and be the more convinced that 
i was mad. 

this house, how ancient it is! though its age strike one less, 
perhaps, than the quaint of its structure, which is curious and 
fantastic to the last degree. little curve tower and pinnacles, with 
outline suggestive of leap flames, predominate; while the body of 
the building is in the form of a circle. 

i have heard that there is an old story, told amongst the country 
people, to the effect that the devil built the place. however, that is 
as may be. true or not, i neither know nor care, save as it may have 
help to cheapen it, ere i came. 

i must have been here some ten years before i saw sufficient to warrant 
any belief in the stories, current in the neighborhood, about this 
house. it is true that i had, on at least a dozen occasions, seen, 
vaguely, things that puzzle me, and, perhaps, had felt more than i had 
seen. then, as the years passed, bring age upon me, i became often 
aware of something unseen, yet unmistakable present, in the empty rooms 
and corridors. still, it was as i have said many years before i saw any 
real manifestation of the so-called supernatural. 

it was not halloween. if i were telling a story for amusement's sake, i 
should probably place it on that night of nights; but this is a true 
record of my own experiences, and i would not put pen to paper to amuse 
anyone. no. it was after midnight on the morning of the twenty-first day 
of january. i was sitting reading, as is often my custom, in my study. 
pepper lay, sleeping, near my chair. 

without warning, the flame of the two candle went low, and then 
shone with a ghastly green effulgence. i look up, quickly, and as i 
did so i saw the lights sink into a dull, ruddy tint; so that the room 
glow with a strange, heavy, crimson twilight that gave the shadow 
behind the chair and table a double depth of blackness; and wherever 
the light struck, it was as though luminous blood had been splash 
over the room. 

down on the floor, i heard a faint, frightened whimper, and something 
pressed itself in between my two feet. it was pepper, cower under my 
dressing gown. pepper, usually as brave as a lion! 

it was this movement of the dog's, i think, that gave me the first 
twinge of _real_ fear. i had been considerably startle when the lights 
burnt first green and then red; but had been momentarily under the 
impression that the change was due to some influx of noxious gas into 
the room. now, however, i saw that it was not so; for the candle burn 
with a steady flame, and show no sign of go out, as would have 
been the case had the change been due to fumes in the atmosphere. 

i did not move. i felt distinct frightened; but could think of 
nothing better to do than wait. for perhaps a minute, i kept my glance 
about the room, nervously. then i notice that the lights had commence 
to sink, very slowly; until presently they show minute speck of red 
fire, like the gleam of ruby in the darkness. still, i sat 
watching; while a sort of dreamy indifference seem to steal over me; 
banish altogether the fear that had begun to grip me. 

away in the far end of the huge old-fashioned room, i became conscious 
of a faint glow. steady it grew, filling the room with gleam of 
quiver green light; then they sank quickly, and changed--even as the 
candle flame had done--into a deep, somber crimson that strengthened, 
and lit up the room with a flood of awful glory. 

the light came from the end wall, and grew ever bright until its 
intolerable glare cause my eyes acute pain, and involuntary i closed 
them. it may have been a few seconds before i was able to open them. the 
first thing i notice was that the light had decreased, greatly; so that 
it no long try my eyes. then, as it grew still duller, i was aware, 
all at once, that, instead of look at the redness, i was staring 
through it, and through the wall beyond. 

gradually, as i became more accustomed to the idea, i realize that i 
was look out on to a vast plain, lit with the same gloomy twilight 
that pervade the room. the immensity of this plain scarcely can be 
conceived. in no part could i perceive its confines. it seem to 
broaden and spread out, so that the eye fail to perceive any 
limitations. slowly, the detail of the near portion began to grow 
clear; then, in a moment almost, the light die away, and the vision--if 
vision it were--faded and was gone. 

suddenly, i became conscious that i was no long in the chair. 
instead, i seem to be hover above it, and look down at a dim 
something, huddle and silent. in a little while, a cold blast struck 
me, and i was outside in the night, floating, like a bubble, up through 
the darkness. as i moved, an icy cold seem to enfold me, so that 
i shivered. 

after a time, i look to right and left, and saw the intolerable 
black of the night, pierce by remote gleam of fire. onward, 
outward, i drove. once, i glance behind, and saw the earth, a small 
crescent of blue light, recede away to my left. further off, the sun, 
a splash of white flame, burn vivid against the dark. 

an indefinite period passed. then, for the last time, i saw the 
earth--an enduring globule of radiant blue, swimming in an eternity of 
ether. and there i, a fragile flake of soul dust, flicker silent 
across the void, from the distant blue, into the expanse of the unknown. 

a great while seem to pass over me, and now i could nowhere see 
anything. i had pass beyond the fixed stars and plunge into the huge 
black that waits beyond. all this time i had experienced little, 
save a sense of lightness and cold discomfort. now however the atrocious 
dark seem to creep into my soul, and i became fill with fear and 
despair. what was go to become of me? where was i going? even as the 
thought were formed, there grew against the impalpable black that 
wrap me a faint tinge of blood. it seem extraordinarily remote, and 
mistlike; yet, at once, the feeling of oppression was lightened, and i 
no long despaired. 

slowly, the distant red became plain and larger; until, as i drew 
nearer, it spread out into a great, somber glare--dull and tremendous. 
still, i flee onward, and, presently, i had come so close, that it 
seem to stretch beneath me, like a great ocean of somber red. i could 
see little, save that it appear to spread out interminable in all 
directions. 

in a further space, i found that i was descend upon it; and, soon, i 
sank into a great sea of sullen, red-hued clouds. slowly, i emerge from 
these, and there, below me, i saw the stupendous plain that i had seen 
from my room in this house that stand upon the border of the silences. 

presently, i landed, and stood, surround by a great waste of 
loneliness. the place was lit with a gloomy twilight that gave an 
impression of indescribable desolation. 

afar to my right, within the sky, there burnt a gigantic ring of 
dull-red fire, from the outer edge of which were project huge, 
writhe flames, dart and jagged. the interior of this ring was 
black, black as the gloom of the outer night. i comprehended, at once, 
that it was from this extraordinary sun that the place derive its 
doleful light. 

from that strange source of light, i glance down again to my 
surroundings. everywhere i looked, i saw nothing but the same flat 
weary of interminable plain. nowhere could i descry any sign of 
life; not even the ruins of some ancient habitation. 

gradually, i found that i was being borne forward, floating across the 
flat waste. for what seem an eternity, i move onward. i was unaware 
of any great sense of impatience; though some curiosity and a vast 
wonder were with me continually. always, i saw around me the breadth of 
that enormous plain; and, always, i search for some new thing to break 
its monotony; but there was no change--only loneliness, silence, 
and desert. 

presently, in a half-conscious manner, i notice that there was a faint 
mistiness, ruddy in hue, lie over its surface. still, when i look 
more intently, i was unable to say that it was really mist; for it 
appear to blend with the plain, give it a peculiar unrealness, and 
convey to the senses the idea of unsubstantiality. 

gradually, i began to weary with the sameness of the thing. yet, it was 
a great time before i perceive any sign of the place, toward which i 
was being conveyed. 

"at first, i saw it, far ahead, like a long hillock on the surface of 
the plain. then, as i drew nearer, i perceive that i had been mistaken; 
for, instead of a low hill, i made out, now, a chain of great mountains, 
whose distant peak tower up into the red gloom, until they were 
almost lost to sight." 



_iii_ 

the house in the arena 

and so, after a time, i came to the mountains. then, the course of my 
journey was altered, and i began to move along their bases, until, all 
at once, i saw that i had come opposite to a vast rift, opening into the 
mountains. through this, i was borne, moving at no great speed. on 
either side of me, huge, scarp wall of rocklike substance rose sheer. 
far overhead, i discern a thin ribbon of red, where the mouth of the 
chasm opened, among inaccessible peaks. within, was gloom, deep and 
somber, and chilly silence. for a while, i went onward steadily, and 
then, at last, i saw, ahead, a deep, red glow, that told me i was near 
upon the further opening of the gorge. 

a minute came and went, and i was at the exit of the chasm, staring out 
upon an enormous amphitheatre of mountains. yet, of the mountains, and 
the terrible grandeur of the place, i reck nothing; for i was 
confounded with amaze to behold, at a distance of several mile and 
occupy the center of the arena, a stupendous structure built 
apparently of green jade. yet, in itself, it was not the discovery of 
the building that had so astonish me; but the fact, which became every 
moment more apparent, that in no particular, save in color and its 
enormous size, did the lonely structure vary from this house in which 
i live. 

for a while, i continue to stare, fixedly. even then, i could scarcely 
believe that i saw aright. in my mind, a question formed, reiterate 
incessantly: 'what do it mean?' 'what do it mean?' and i was unable 
to make answer, even out of the depths of my imagination. i seem 
capable only of wonder and fear. for a time longer, i gazed, note 
continual some fresh point of resemblance that attract me. at last, 
weary and sorely puzzled, i turn from it, to view the rest of the 
strange place on to which i had intruded. 

hitherto, i had been so engross in my scrutiny of the house, that i 
had given only a cursory glance 'round. now, as i looked, i began to 
realize upon what sort of a place i had come. the arena, for so i have 
term it, appear a perfect circle of about ten to twelve mile in 
diameter, the house, as i have mention before, standing in the center. 
the surface of the place, like to that of the plain, had a peculiar, 
misty appearance, that was yet not mist. 

from a rapid survey, my glance pass quick upward along the slope 
of the circle mountains. how silent they were. i think that this same 
abominable still was more try to me than anything that i had so 
far seen or imagined. i was look up, now, at the great crags, 
towering so loftily. up there, the impalpable red gave a blur 
appearance to everything. 

and then, as i peered, curiously, a new terror came to me; for away up 
among the dim peak to my right, i had descry a vast shape of 
blackness, giantlike. it grew upon my sight. it had an enormous equine 
head, with gigantic ears, and seem to peer steadfast down into the 
arena. there was that about the pose that gave me the impression of an 
eternal watchfulness--of have ward that dismal place, through 
unknown eternities. slowly, the monster became plain to me; and then, 
suddenly, my gaze sprang from it to something further off and higher 
among the crags. for a long minute, i gazed, fearfully. i was strange 
conscious of something not altogether unfamiliar--as though something 
stir in the back of my mind. the thing was black, and had four 
grotesque arms. the features show indistinctly, 'round the neck, i 
made out several light-colored objects. slowly, the detail came to me, 
and i realized, coldly, that they were skulls. further down the body was 
another circle belt, showing less dark against the black trunk. then, 
even as i puzzle to know what the thing was, a memory slid into my 
mind, and straightway, i knew that i was look at a monstrous 
representation of kali, the hindu goddess of death. 

other remembrance of my old student days drift into my thoughts. my 
glance fell back upon the huge beast-headed thing. simultaneously, i 
recognize it for the ancient egypt god set, or seth, the destroyer 
of souls. with the knowledge, there came a great sweep of 
questioning--'two of the--!' i stopped, and endeavor to think. things 
beyond my imagination peer into my frightened mind. i saw, obscurely. 
'the old gods of mythology!' i try to comprehend to what it was all 
pointing. my gaze dwelt, flickeringly, between the two. 'if--' 

an idea came swiftly, and i turned, and glance rapid upward, 
searching the gloomy crags, away to my left. something loom out under 
a great peak, a shape of greyness. i wonder i had not seen it earlier, 
and then remember i had not yet view that portion. i saw it more 
plainly now. it was, as i have said, grey. it had a tremendous head; but 
no eyes. that part of its face was blank. 

now, i saw that there were other things up among the mountains. further 
off, recline on a lofty ledge, i made out a livid mass, irregular and 
ghoulish. it seem without form, save for an unclean, half-animal face, 
that look out, vilely, from somewhere about its middle. and then i saw 
others--there were hundred of them. they seem to grow out of the 
shadows. several i recognize almost immediately as mythological 
deities; other were strange to me, utterly strange, beyond the power of 
a human mind to conceive. 

on each side, i looked, and saw more, continually. the mountain were 
full of strange things--beast-gods, and horrors so atrocious and bestial 
that possibility and decency deny any further attempt to describe them. 
and i--i was fill with a terrible sense of overwhelming horror and 
fear and repugnance; yet, spite of these, i wonder exceedingly. was 
there then, after all, something in the old heathen worship, something 
more than the mere deify of men, animals, and elements? the thought 
grip me--was there? 

later, a question repeated itself. what were they, those beast-gods, 
and the others? at first, they had appear to me just sculpture 
monster placed indiscriminate among the inaccessible peak and 
precipice of the surrounding mountains. now, as i scrutinize them with 
greater intentness, my mind began to reach out to fresh conclusions. 
there was something about them, an indescribable sort of silent vitality 
that suggested, to my broaden consciousness, a state of 
life-in-death--a something that was by no means life, as we understand 
it; but rather an inhuman form of existence, that well might be liken 
to a deathless trance--a condition in which it was possible to imagine 
their continuing, eternally. 'immortal!' the word rose in my thought 
unbidden; and, straightway, i grew to wonder whether this might be 
the immortality of the gods. 

and then, in the midst of my wonder and musing, something happened. 
until then, i had been stay just within the shadow of the exit of the 
great rift. now, without volition on my part, i drift out of the 
semi-darkness and began to move slow across the arena--toward the 
house. at this, i gave up all thought of those prodigious shape above 
me--and could only stare, frightenedly, at the tremendous structure 
toward which i was being convey so remorselessly. yet, though i 
search earnestly, i could discover nothing that i had not already 
seen, and so became gradual calmer. 

presently, i had reach a point more than halfway between the house 
and the gorge. all around was spread the stark lonely of the place, 
and the unbroken silence. steadily, i near the great building. then, 
all at once, something caught my vision, something that came 'round one 
of the huge buttress of the house, and so into full view. it was a 
gigantic thing, and move with a curious lope, go almost upright, 
after the manner of a man. it was quite unclothed, and had a remarkable 
luminous appearance. yet it was the face that attract and frightened 
me the most. it was the face of a swine. 

silently, intently, i watch this horrible creature, and forgot my 
fear, momentarily, in my interest in its movements. it was making its 
way, cumbrous 'round the building, stopping as it came to each window 
to peer in and shake at the bars, with which--as in this house--they 
were protected; and whenever it came to a door, it would push at it, 
fingering the fastening stealthily. evidently, it was searching for an 
ingress into the house. 

i had come now to within less than a quarter of a mile of the great 
structure, and still i was compel forward. abruptly, the thing turn 
and gaze hideous in my direction. it open its mouth, and, for the 
first time, the still of that abominable place was broken, by a 
deep, boom note that sent an add thrill of apprehension through me. 
then, immediately, i became aware that it was coming toward me, swift 
and silently. in an instant, it had cover half the distance that lay 
between. and still, i was borne helpless to meet it. only a hundred 
yards, and the brutish ferocity of the giant face numb me with a 
feeling of unmitigated horror. i could have screamed, in the supreme 
of my fear; and then, in the very moment of my extremity and despair, i 
became conscious that i was look down upon the arena, from a rapid 
increase height. i was rising, rising. in an inconceivable short 
while, i had reach an altitude of many hundred feet. beneath me, the 
spot that i had just left, was occupy by the foul swine-creature. it 
had gone down on all fours and was snuff and rooting, like a 
veritable hog, at the surface of the arena. a moment and it rose to its 
feet, clutch upward, with an expression of desire upon its face such 
as i have never seen in this world. 

continually, i mount higher. a few minutes, it seemed, and i had 
risen above the great mountains--floating, alone, afar in the redness. 
at a tremendous distance below, the arena showed, dimly; with the mighty 
house look no large than a tiny spot of green. the swine-thing was 
no long visible. 

presently, i pass over the mountains, out above the huge breadth of 
the plain. far away, on its surface, in the direction of the ring-shaped 
sun, there show a confuse blur. i look toward it, indifferently. it 
remind me, somewhat, of the first glimpse i had caught of the 
mountain-amphitheatre. 

with a sense of weariness, i glance upward at the immense ring of 
fire. what a strange thing it was! then, as i stared, out from the dark 
center, there spurt a sudden flare of extraordinary vivid fire. 
compare with the size of the black center, it was as naught; yet, in 
itself, stupendous. with awaken interest, i watch it carefully, 
note its strange boil and glowing. then, in a moment, the whole 
thing grew dim and unreal, and so pass out of sight. much amazed, i 
glance down to the plain from which i was still rising. thus, i 
received a fresh surprise. the plain--everything had vanished, and only 
a sea of red mist was spread far below me. gradual as i stare this 
grew remote, and die away into a dim far mystery of red against an 
unfathomable night. a while, and even this had gone, and i was wrap 
in an impalpable, lightless gloom. 



_iv_ 

the earth 

thus i was, and only the memory that i had live through the dark, once 
before, serve to sustain my thoughts. a great time passed--ages. and 
then a single star broke its way through the darkness. it was the first 
of one of the outlying cluster of this universe. presently, it was far 
behind, and all about me shone the splendor of the countless stars. 
later, years it seemed, i saw the sun, a clot of flame. around it, i 
made out presently several remote speck of light--the planet of the 
solar system. and so i saw the earth again, blue and unbelievable 
minute. it grew larger, and became defined. 

a long space of time came and went, and then at last i enter into the 
shadow of the world--plunging headlong into the dim and holy earth 
night. overhead were the old constellations, and there was a crescent 
moon. then, as i near the earth's surface, a dim swept over me, 
and i appear to sink into a black mist. 

for a while, i knew nothing. i was unconscious. gradually, i became 
aware of a faint, distant whining. it became plainer. a desperate 
feeling of agony possessed me. i struggle madly for breath, and try 
to shout. a moment, and i got my breath more easily. i was conscious 
that something was licking my hand. something damp swept across my face. 
i heard a panting, and then again the whining. it seem to come to my 
ears, now, with a sense of familiarity, and i open my eyes. all was 
dark; but the feeling of oppression had left me. i was seated, and 
something was whine piteously, and licking me. i felt strange 
confused, and, instinctively, try to ward off the thing that licked. 
my head was curious vacant, and, for the moment, i seem incapable of 
action or thought. then, things came back to me, and i call 'pepper,' 
faintly. i was answer by a joyful bark, and renew and 
frantic caresses. 

in a little while, i felt stronger, and put out my hand for the 
matches. i grope about, for a few moments, blindly; then my hand lit 
upon them, and i struck a light, and look confused around. all about 
me, i saw the old, familiar things. and there i sat, full of daze 
wonders, until the flame of the match burnt my finger, and i drop it; 
while a hasty expression of pain and anger, escape my lips, surprising 
me with the sound of my own voice. 

after a moment, i struck another match, and, stumble across the room, 
lit the candles. as i did so, i observe that they had not burn away, 
but had been put out. 

as the flame shot up, i turned, and stare about the study; yet there 
was nothing unusual to see; and, suddenly, a gust of irritation took me. 
what had happened? i held my head, with both hands, and try to 
remember. ah! the great, silent plain, and the ring-shaped sun of red 
fire. where were they? where had i seen them? how long ago? i felt daze 
and muddled. once or twice, i walk up and down the room, unsteadily. 
my memory seem dulled, and, already, the thing i had witness came 
back to me with an effort. 

i have a remembrance of cursing, peevishly, in my bewilderment. 
suddenly, i turn faint and giddy, and had to grasp at the table for 
support. during a few moments, i held on, weakly; and then manage to 
totter sideways into a chair. after a little time, i felt somewhat 
better, and succeed in reach the cupboard where, usually, i keep 
brandy and biscuits. i pour myself out a little of the stimulant, and 
drank it off. then, taking a handful of biscuits, i return to my 
chair, and began to devour them, ravenously. i was vague surprise at 
my hunger. i felt as though i had eaten nothing for an uncountable 
long while. 

as i ate, my glance rove about the room, taking in its various 
details, and still searching, though almost unconsciously, for something 
tangible upon which to take hold, among the invisible mystery that 
encompass me. 'surely,' i thought, 'there must be something--' and, in 
the same instant, my gaze dwelt upon the face of the clock in the 
opposite corner. therewith, i stop eating, and just stared. for, 
though its ticking indicate most certainly that it was still going, the 
hand were point to a little _before_ the hour of midnight; whereas 
it was, as well i knew, considerably _after_ that time when i had 
witness the first of the strange happening i have just described. 

for perhaps a moment i was astound and puzzled. had the hour been the 
same as when i had last seen the clock, i should have conclude that the 
hand had stuck in one place, while the internal mechanism went on as 
usual; but that would, in no way, account for the hand have traveled 
backward. then, even as i turn the matter over in my weary brain, 
the thought flash upon me that it was now close upon the morning of 
the twenty-second, and that i had been unconscious to the visible world 
through the greater portion of the last twenty-four hours. the thought 
occupy my attention for a full minute; then i commence to eat again. 
i was still very hungry. 

during breakfast, next morning, i inquire casual of my sister 
regarding the date, and found my surmise correct. i had, indeed, been 
absent--at least in spirit--for nearly a day and a night. 

my sister ask me no questions; for it is not by any means the first 
time that i have kept to my study for a whole day, and sometimes a 
couple of days at a time, when i have been particularly engross in my 
books or work. 

and so the days pass on, and i am still fill with a wonder to know 
the meaning of all that i saw on that memorable night. yet, well i know 
that my curiosity is little likely to be satisfied. 



_v_ 

the thing in the pit 

this house is, as i have said before, surround by a huge estate, and 
wild and uncultivated gardens. 

away at the back, distant some three hundred yards, is a dark, deep 
ravine--spoken of as the 'pit,' by the peasantry. at the bottom runs a 
sluggish stream so overhung by tree as scarcely to be seen from above. 

in passing, i must explain that this river has a subterranean origin, 
emerge sudden at the east end of the ravine, and disappearing, as 
abruptly, beneath the cliff that form its western extremity. 

it was some month after my vision (if vision it were) of the great 
plain that my attention was particularly attract to the pit. 

i happened, one day, to be walking along its southern edge, when, 
suddenly, several pieces of rock and shale were dislodge from the face 
of the cliff immediately beneath me, and fell with a sullen crash 
through the trees. i heard them splash in the river at the bottom; and 
then silence. i should not have given this incident more than a passing 
thought, had not pepper at once begun to bark savagely; nor would he be 
silent when i bade him, which is most unusual behavior on his part. 

feeling that there must be someone or something in the pit, i went back 
to the house, quickly, for a stick. when i returned, pepper had cease 
his bark and was growl and smelling, uneasily, along the top. 

whistle to him to follow me, i start to descend cautiously. the 
depth to the bottom of the pit must be about a hundred and fifty feet, 
and some time as well as considerable care was expend before we 
reach the bottom in safety. 

once down, pepper and i start to explore along the bank of the 
river. it was very dark there due to the overhang trees, and i move 
warily, keeping my glance about me and my stick ready. 

pepper was quiet now and kept close to me all the time. thus, we 
search right up one side of the river, without hearing or seeing 
anything. then, we cross over--by the simple method of jumping--and 
commence to beat our way back through the underbrush. 

we had accomplished perhaps half the distance, when i heard again the 
sound of fall stone on the other side--the side from which we had 
just come. one large rock came thundering down through the treetops, 
struck the opposite bank, and bound into the river, driving a great 
jet of water right over us. at this, pepper gave out a deep growl; then 
stopped, and prick up his ears. i listened, also. 

a second later, a loud, half-human, half-piglike squeal sound from 
among the trees, apparently about halfway up the south cliff. it was 
answer by a similar note from the bottom of the pit. at this, pepper 
gave a short, sharp bark, and, spring across the little river, 
disappear into the bushes. 

immediately afterward, i heard his bark increase in depth and number, 
and in between there sound a noise of confuse jabbering. this ceased, 
and, in the succeed silence, there rose a semi-human yell of agony. 
almost immediately, pepper gave a long-drawn howl of pain, and then the 
shrub were violent agitated, and he came running out with his tail 
down, and glancing as he ran over his shoulder. as he reach me, i saw 
that he was bleeding from what appear to be a great claw wound in the 
side that had almost laid bare his ribs. 

seeing pepper thus mutilated, a furious feeling of anger seize me, 
and, whirl my staff, i sprang across, and into the bush from which 
pepper had emerged. as i forced my way through, i thought i heard a 
sound of breathing. next instant, i had burst into a little clear space, 
just in time to see something, livid white in color, disappear among the 
bush on the opposite side. with a shout, i ran toward it; but, though 
i struck and probe among the bush with my stick, i neither saw nor 
heard anything further; and so return to pepper. there, after bathing 
his wound in the river, i bound my wet handkerchief 'round his body; 
have done which, we retreat up the ravine and into the 
daylight again. 

on reach the house, my sister inquire what had happen to pepper, 
and i told her he had been fight with a wildcat, of which i had heard 
there were several about. 

i felt it would be better not to tell her how it had really happened; 
though, to be sure, i scarcely knew myself; but this i did know, that 
the thing i had seen run into the bush was no wildcat. it was much too 
big, and had, so far as i had observed, a skin like a hog's, only of a 
dead, unhealthy white color. and then--it had run upright, or nearly so, 
upon its hind feet, with a motion somewhat resemble that of a human 
being. this much i had notice in my brief glimpse, and, truth to tell, 
i felt a good deal of uneasiness, besides curiosity as i turn the 
matter over in my mind. 

it was in the morning that the above incident had occurred. 

then, it would be after dinner, as i sat reading, that, happening to 
look up suddenly, i saw something peer in over the window ledge the 
eyes and ear alone showing. 

'a pig, by jove!' i said, and rose to my feet. thus, i saw the thing 
more completely; but it was no pig--god alone know what it was. it 
remind me, vaguely, of the hideous thing that had haunt the great 
arena. it had a grotesque human mouth and jaw; but with no chin of 
which to speak. the nose was prolonged into a snout; thus it was that 
with the little eyes and queer ears, gave it such an extraordinarily 
swinelike appearance. of forehead there was little, and the whole face 
was of an unwholesome white color. 

for perhaps a minute, i stood look at the thing with an ever grow 
feeling of disgust, and some fear. the mouth kept jabbering, inanely, 
and once emit a half-swinish grunt. i think it was the eyes that 
attract me the most; they seem to glow, at times, with a horrible 
human intelligence, and kept flicker away from my face, over the 
detail of the room, as though my stare disturbed it. 

it appear to be support itself by two clawlike hand upon the 
windowsill. these claws, unlike the face, were of a clayey brown hue, 
and bore an indistinct resemblance to human hands, in that they had four 
finger and a thumb; though these were webbed up to the first joint, 
much as are a duck's. nail it had also, but so long and powerful that 
they were more like the talon of an eagle than aught else. 

as i have said, before, i felt some fear; though almost of an 
impersonal kind. i may explain my feeling better by saying that it was 
more a sensation of abhorrence; such as one might expect to feel, if 
brought in contact with something superhuman foul; something 
unholy--belonging to some hitherto undreamt of state of existence. 

i cannot say that i grasp these various detail of the brute at the 
time. i think they seem to come back to me, afterward, as though 
imprint upon my brain. i imagine more than i saw as i look at the 
thing, and the material detail grew upon me later. 

for perhaps a minute i stare at the creature; then as my nerves 
steady a little i shook off the vague alarm that held me, and took a 
step toward the window. even as i did so, the thing duck and vanished. 
i rush to the door and look 'round hurriedly; but only the tangle 
bush and shrub met my gaze. 

i ran back into the house, and, get my gun, sally out to search 
through the gardens. as i went, i ask myself whether the thing i had 
just seen was likely to be the same of which i had caught a glimpse in 
the morning. i inclined to think it was. 

i would have taken pepper with me; but judge it better to give his 
wound a chance to heal. besides, if the creature i had just seen was, as 
i imagined, his antagonist of the morning, it was not likely that he 
would be of much use. 

i began my search, systematically. i was determined, if it were 
possible, to find and put an end to that swine-thing. this was, at 
least, a material horror! 

at first, i searched, cautiously; with the thought of pepper's wound in 
my mind; but, as the hour passed, and not a sign of anything living, 
show in the great, lonely gardens, i became less apprehensive. i felt 
almost as though i would welcome the sight of it. anything seem better 
than this silence, with the ever-present feeling that the creature might 
be lurk in every bush i passed. later, i grew careless of danger, to 
the extent of plunge right through the bushes, probe with my gun 
barrel as i went. 

at times, i shouted; but only the echo answer back. i thought thus 
perhaps to frighten or stir the creature to showing itself; but only 
succeed in bring my sister mary out, to know what was the matter. i 
told her, that i had seen the wildcat that had wound pepper, and that 
i was try to hunt it out of the bushes. she seem only half 
satisfied, and went back into the house, with an expression of doubt 
upon her face. i wonder whether she had seen or guess anything. for 
the rest of the afternoon, i prosecute the search anxiously. i felt 
that i should be unable to sleep, with that bestial thing haunting the 
shrubberies, and yet, when evening fell, i had seen nothing. then, as i 
turn homeward, i heard a short, unintelligible noise, among the bush 
to my right. instantly, i turned, and, aim quickly, fire in the 
direction of the sound. immediately afterward, i heard something 
scuttle away among the bushes. it move rapidly, and in a minute had 
gone out of hearing. after a few steps i cease my pursuit, realize 
how futile it must be in the fast gathering gloom; and so, with a 
curious feeling of depression, i enter the house. 

that night, after my sister had gone to bed, i went 'round to all the 
window and door on the ground floor; and saw to it that they were 
secure fastened. this precaution was scarcely necessary as regards the 
windows, as all of those on the lower storey are strong barred; but 
with the doors--of which there are five--it was wise thought, as not 
one was locked. 

have secure these, i went to my study, yet, somehow, for once, the 
place jar upon me; it seem so huge and echoey. for some time i 
try to read; but at last finding it impossible i carry my book down 
to the kitchen where a large fire was burning, and sat there. 

i dare say, i had read for a couple of hours, when, suddenly, i heard a 
sound that made me lower my book, and listen, intently. it was a noise 
of something rubbing and fumble against the back door. once the door 
creaked, loudly; as though force were being applied to it. during those 
few, short moments, i experienced an indescribable feeling of terror, 
such as i should have believe impossible. my hand shook; a cold sweat 
broke out on me, and i shiver violently. 

gradually, i calmed. the stealthy movements outside had ceased. 

then for an hour i sat silent and watchful. all at once the feeling of 
fear took me again. i felt as i imagine an animal must, under the eye of 
a snake. yet now i could hear nothing. still, there was no doubt that 
some unexplained influence was at work. 

gradually, imperceptible almost, something stole on my ear--a sound 
that resolve itself into a faint murmur. quick it develop and grew 
into a muffle but hideous chorus of bestial shrieks. it appear to 
rise from the bowels of the earth. 

i heard a thud, and realize in a dull, half comprehend way that i 
had drop my book. after that, i just sat; and thus the daylight found 
me, when it crept wan in through the barred, high window of the 
great kitchen. 

with the dawn light, the feeling of stupor and fear left me; and i 
came more into possession of my senses. 

thereupon i picked up my book, and crept to the door to listen. not a 
sound broke the chilly silence. for some minutes i stood there; then, 
very gradual and cautiously, i drew back the bolt and opening the door 
peep out. 

my caution was unneeded. nothing was to be seen, save the grey vista of 
dreary, tangle bush and trees, extend to the distant plantation. 

with a shiver, i closed the door, and made my way, quietly, up to bed. 



_vi_ 

the swine-things 

it was evening, a week later. my sister sat in the garden, knitting. i 
was walking up and down, reading. my gun leant up against the wall of 
the house; for, since the advent of that strange thing in the gardens, i 
had deem it wise to take precautions. yet, through the whole week, 
there had been nothing to alarm me, either by sight or sound; so that i 
was able to look back, calmly, to the incident; though still with a 
sense of unmitigated wonder and curiosity. 

i was, as i have just said, walking up and down, and somewhat engross 
in my book. suddenly, i heard a crash, away in the direction of the pit. 
with a quick movement, i turn and saw a tremendous column of dust 
rising high into the evening air. 

my sister had risen to her feet, with a sharp exclamation of surprise 
and fright. 

telling her to stay where she was, i snatch up my gun, and ran toward 
the pit. as i near it, i heard a dull, rumbling sound, that grew 
quick into a roar, split with deep crashes, and up from the pit 
drove a fresh volume of dust. 

the noise ceased, though the dust still rose, tumultuously. 

i reach the edge, and look down; but could see nothing save a boil 
of dust cloud swirl hither and thither. the air was so full of the 
small particles, that they blind and choke me; and, finally, i had to 
run out from the smother, to breathe. 

gradually, the suspend matter sank, and hung in a panoply over the 
mouth of the pit. 

i could only guess at what had happened. 

that there had been a land-slip of some kind, i had little doubt; but 
the cause was beyond my knowledge; and yet, even then, i had half 
imaginings; for, already, the thought had come to me, of those fall 
rocks, and that thing in the bottom of the pit; but, in the first 
minutes of confusion, i fail to reach the natural conclusion, to which 
the catastrophe pointed. 

slowly, the dust subsided, until, presently, i was able to approach the 
edge, and look down. 

for a while, i peer impotently, try to see through the reek. at 
first, it was impossible to make out anything. then, as i stared, i saw 
something below, to my left, that moved. i look intent toward it, 
and, presently, made out another, and then another--three dim shape 
that appear to be climb up the side of the pit. i could see them 
only indistinctly. even as i stare and wondered, i heard a rattle of 
stones, somewhere to my right. i glance across; but could see nothing. 
i leant forward, and peer over, and down into the pit, just beneath 
where i stood; and saw no further than a hideous, white swine-face, that 
had risen to within a couple of yard of my feet. below it, i could make 
out several others. as the thing saw me, it gave a sudden, uncouth 
squeal, which was answer from all parts of the pit. at that, a gust of 
horror and fear took me, and, bend down, i discharge my gun right 
into its face. straightway, the creature disappeared, with a clatter of 
loose earth and stones. 

there was a momentary silence, to which, probably, i owe my life; for, 
during it, i heard a quick patter of many feet, and, turning sharply, 
saw a troop of the creature coming toward me, at a run. instantly, i 
raise my gun and fire at the foremost, who plunge head-long, with a 
hideous howling. then, i turn to run. more than halfway from the house 
to the pit, i saw my sister--she was coming toward me. i could not see 
her face, distinctly, as the dusk had fallen; but there was fear in her 
voice as she call to know why i was shooting. 

'run!' i shout in reply. 'run for your life!' 

without more ado, she turn and fled--picking up her skirt with both 
hands. as i followed, i gave a glance behind. the brute were running on 
their hind legs--at times drop on all fours. 

i think it must have been the terror in my voice, that spur mary to 
run so; for i feel convinced that she had not, as yet, seen those hell 
creature that pursued. 

on we went, my sister leading. 

each moment, the near sound of the footsteps, told me that the 
brute were gain on us, rapidly. fortunately, i am accustomed to 
live, in some ways, an active life. as it was, the strain of the race 
was beginning to tell severe upon me. 

ahead, i could see the back door--luckily it was open. i was some 
half-dozen yard behind mary, now, and my breath was sob in my 
throat. then, something touched my shoulder. i wrench my head 'round, 
quickly, and saw one of those monstrous, pallid face close to mine. one 
of the creatures, have outrun its companions, had almost overtaken me. 
even as i turned, it made a fresh grab. with a sudden effort, i sprang 
to one side, and, swinging my gun by the barrel, brought it crashing 
down upon the foul creature's head. the thing dropped, with an almost 
human groan. 

even this short delay had been nearly sufficient to bring the rest of 
the brute down upon me; so that, without an instant's waste of time, i 
turn and ran for the door. 

reach it, i burst into the passage; then, turning quickly, slam 
and bolt the door, just as the first of the creature rush against 
it, with a sudden shock. 

my sister sat, gasping, in a chair. she seem in a faint condition; 
but i had no time then to spend on her. i had to make sure that all the 
door were fastened. fortunately, they were. the one leading from my 
study into the gardens, was the last to which i went. i had just had 
time to note that it was secured, when i thought i heard a noise 
outside. i stood perfectly silent, and listened. yes! now i could 
distinct hear a sound of whispering, and something slither over the 
panels, with a rasping, scratchy noise. evidently, some of the brute 
were feeling with their claw-hands, about the door, to discover whether 
there were any means of ingress. 

that the creature should so soon have found the door was--to me--a 
proof of their reasoning capabilities. it assured me that they must not 
be regarded, by any means, as mere animals. i had felt something of this 
before, when that first thing peer in through my window. then i had 
applied the term superhuman to it, with an almost instinctive knowledge 
that the creature was something different from the brute-beast. 
something beyond human; yet in no good sense; but rather as something 
foul and hostile to the _great_ and _good_ in humanity. in a word, as 
something intelligent, and yet inhuman. the very thought of the 
creature fill me with revulsion. 

now, i bethought me of my sister, and, go to the cupboard, i got 
out a flask of brandy, and a wine-glass. taking these, i went down to 
the kitchen, carry a light candle with me. she was not sitting in 
the chair, but had fallen out, and was lie upon the floor, 
face downward. 

very gently, i turn her over, and raise her head somewhat. then, i 
pour a little of the brandy between her lips. after a while, she 
shiver slightly. a little later, she gave several gasps, and open 
her eyes. in a dreamy, unreal way, she look at me. then her eyes 
closed, slowly, and i gave her a little more of the brandy. for, perhaps 
a minute longer, she lay silent, breathing quickly. all at once, her 
eyes open again, and it seem to me, as i looked, that the pupil 
were dilated, as though fear had come with return consciousness. 
then, with a movement so unexpected that i start backward, she sat up. 
notice that she seem giddy, i put out my hand to steady her. at 
that, she gave a loud scream, and, scramble to her feet, ran from 
the room. 

for a moment, i stay there--kneeling and holding the brandy flask. i 
was utterly puzzle and astonished. 

could she be afraid of me? but no! why should she? i could only 
conclude that her nerves were badly shaken, and that she was temporary 
unhinged. upstairs, i heard a door bang, loudly, and i knew that she had 
taken refuge in her room. i put the flask down on the table. my 
attention was distracted by a noise in the direction of the back door. i 
went toward it, and listened. it appear to be shaken, as though some 
of the creature struggle with it, silently; but it was far too 
strong construct and hung to be easily moved. 

out in the garden rose a continuous sound. it might have been 
mistaken, by a casual listener, for the grunt and squeal of a herd 
of pigs. but, as i stood there, it came to me that there was sense and 
meaning to all those swinish noises. gradually, i seem able to trace 
a semblance in it to human speech--glutinous and sticky, as though each 
articulation were made with difficulty: yet, nevertheless, i was 
becoming convinced that it was no mere medley of sounds; but a rapid 
interchange of ideas. 

by this time, it had grown quite dark in the passages, and from these 
came all the varied cries and groan of which an old house is so full 
after nightfall. it is, no doubt, because things are then quieter, and 
one has more leisure to hear. also, there may be something in the theory 
that the sudden change of temperature, at sundown, affect the structure 
of the house, somewhat--causing it to contract and settle, as it were, 
for the night. however, this is as may be; but, on that night in 
particular, i would gladly have been quit of so many eerie noises. it 
seem to me, that each crack and creak was the coming of one of those 
things along the dark corridors; though i knew in my heart that this 
could not be, for i had seen, myself, that all the door were secure. 

gradually, however, these sound grew on my nerves to such an extent 
that, were it only to punish my cowardice, i felt i must make the 'round 
of the basement again, and, if anything were there, face it. and then, i 
would go up to my study, for i knew sleep was out of the question, with 
the house surround by creatures, half beasts, half something else, and 
entire unholy. 

taking the kitchen lamp down from its hook, i made my way from cellar 
to cellar, and room to room; through pantry and coal-hole--along 
passages, and into the hundred-and-one little blind alley and hidden 
nook that form the basement of the old house. then, when i knew i had 
been in every corner and cranny large enough to conceal aught of any 
size, i made my way to the stairs. 

with my foot on the first step, i paused. it seem to me, i heard a 
movement, apparently from the buttery, which is to the left of the 
staircase. it had been one of the first place i searched, and yet, i 
felt certain my ear had not deceive me. my nerves were strung now, 
and, with hardly any hesitation, i step up to the door, holding the 
lamp above my head. in a glance, i saw that the place was empty, save 
for the heavy, stone slabs, support by brick pillars; and i was about 
to leave it, convinced that i had been mistaken; when, in turning, my 
light was flash back from two bright spot outside the window, and 
high up. for a few moments, i stood there, staring. then they 
moved--revolving slowly, and throw out alternate scintillate of 
green and red; at least, so it appear to me. i knew then that they 
were eyes. 

slowly, i trace the shadowy outline of one of the things. it appear 
to be holding on to the bar of the window, and its attitude suggest 
climbing. i went near to the window, and held the light higher. there 
was no need to be afraid of the creature; the bar were strong, and 
there was little danger of its being able to move them. and then, 
suddenly, in spite of the knowledge that the brute could not reach to 
harm me, i had a return of the horrible sensation of fear, that had 
assail me on that night, a week previously. it was the same feeling of 
helpless, shudder fright. i realized, dimly, that the creature's eyes 
were look into mine with a steady, compel stare. i try to turn 
away; but could not. i seemed, now, to see the window through a mist. 
then, i thought other eyes came and peered, and yet others; until a 
whole galaxy of malignant, staring orb seem to hold me in thrall. 

my head began to swim, and throb violently. then, i was aware of a 
feeling of acute physical pain in my left hand. it grew more severe, and 
forced, literally forced, my attention. with a tremendous effort, i 
glance down; and, with that, the spell that had held me was broken. i 
realized, then, that i had, in my agitation, unconscious caught hold 
of the hot lamp-glass, and burnt my hand, badly. i look up to the 
window, again. the misty appearance had gone, and, now, i saw that it 
was crowded with dozen of bestial faces. with a sudden access of rage, 
i raise the lamp, and hurl it, full at the window. it struck the 
glass (smashing a pane), and pass between two of the bars, out into 
the garden, scatter burning oil as it went. i heard several loud 
cries of pain, and, as my sight became accustomed to the dark, i 
discover that the creature had left the window. 

pull myself together, i grope for the door, and, have found it, 
made my way upstairs, stumble at each step. i felt dazed, as though i 
had received a blow on the head. at the same time, my hand smart 
badly, and i was full of a nervous, dull rage against those things. 

reach my study, i lit the candles. as they burnt up, their ray were 
reflect from the rack of firearm on the sidewall. at the sight, i 
remember that i had there a power, which, as i had prove earlier, 
seem as fatal to those monster as to more ordinary animals; and i 
determined i would take the offensive. 

first of all, i bound up my hand; for the pain was fast becoming 
intolerable. after that, it seem easier, and i cross the room, to 
the rifle stand. there, i select a heavy rifle--an old and try 
weapon; and, have procure ammunition, i made my way up into one of 
the small towers, with which the house is crowned. 

from there, i found that i could see nothing. the garden present a 
dim blur of shadows--a little blacker, perhaps, where the tree stood. 
that was all, and i knew that it was useless to shoot down into all that 
darkness. the only thing to be done, was to wait for the moon to rise; 
then, i might be able to do a little execution. 

in the meantime, i sat still, and kept my ear open. the garden were 
comparatively quiet now, and only an occasional grunt or squeal came up 
to me. i did not like this silence; it made me wonder on what devilry 
the creature were bent. twice, i left the tower, and took a walk 
through the house; but everything was silent. 

once, i heard a noise, from the direction of the pit, as though more 
earth had fallen. following this, and lasting for some fifteen minutes, 
there was a commotion among the denizen of the gardens. this die away, 
and, after that all was again quiet. 

about an hour later, the moon's light show above the distant horizon. 
from where i sat, i could see it over the trees; but it was not until it 
rose clear of them, that i could make out any of the detail in the 
garden below. even then, i could see none of the brutes; until, 
happening to crane forward, i saw several of them lie prone, up 
against the wall of the house. what they were doing, i could not make 
out. it was, however, a chance too good to be ignored; and, taking aim, 
i fire at the one directly beneath. there was a shrill scream, and, as 
the smoke clear away, i saw that it had turn on its back, and was 
writhing, feebly. then, it was quiet. the other had disappeared. 

immediately after this, i heard a loud squeal, in the direction of the 
pit. it was answered, a hundred times, from every part of the garden. 
this gave me some notion of the number of the creatures, and i began to 
feel that the whole affair was becoming even more serious than i 
had imagined. 

as i sat there, silent and watchful, the thought came to me--why was 
all this? what were these things? what did it mean? then my thought 
flew back to that vision (though, even now, i doubt whether it was a 
vision) of the plain of silence. what did that mean? i wondered--and 
that thing in the arena? ugh! lastly, i thought of the house i had seen 
in that far-away place. that house, so like this in every detail of 
external structure, that it might have been model from it; or this 
from that. i had never thought of that-- 

at this moment, there came another long squeal, from the pit, followed, 
a second later, by a couple of short ones. at once, the garden was 
fill with answer cries. i stood up, quickly, and look over the 
parapet. in the moonlight, it seem as though the shrubbery were 
alive. they toss hither and thither, as though shaken by a strong, 
irregular wind; while a continuous rustling, and a noise of scamper 
feet, rose up to me. several times, i saw the moonlight gleam on 
running, white figures among the bushes, and, twice, i fired. the second 
time, my shot was answer by a short squeal of pain. 

a minute later, the garden lay silent. from the pit, came a deep, 
hoarse babel of swine-talk. at times, angry cries smote the air, and 
they would be answer by multitudinous gruntings. it occur to me, 
that they were holding some kind of a council, perhaps to discuss the 
problem of enter the house. also, i thought that they seem much 
enraged, probably by my successful shots. 

it occur to me, that now would be a good time to make a final survey 
of our defenses. this, i proceed to do at once; visiting the whole of 
the basement again, and examine each of the doors. luckily, they are 
all, like the back one, built of solid, iron-studded oak. then, i went 
upstairs to the study. i was more anxious about this door. it is, 
palpably, of a more modern make than the others, and, though a stout 
piece of work, it has little of their ponderous strength. 

i must explain here, that there is a small, raise lawn on this side of 
the house, upon which this door opens--the window of the study being 
barred on this account. all the other entrances--excepting the great 
gateway which is never opened--are in the lower storey. 



_vii_ 

the attack 

i spent some time, puzzle how to strengthen the study door. finally, 
i went down to the kitchen, and with some trouble, brought up several 
heavy pieces of timber. these, i wedged up, slantwise, against it, from 
the floor, nail them top and bottom. for half-an-hour, i work hard, 
and, at last, got it shore to my mind. 

then, feeling easier, i resume my coat, which i had laid aside, and 
proceed to attend to one or two matter before return to the tower. 
it was whilst thus employed, that i heard a fumble at the door, and 
the latch was tried. keeping silence, i waited. soon, i heard several of 
the creature outside. they were grunt to one another, softly. then, 
for a minute, there was quietness. suddenly, there sound a quick, low 
grunt, and the door creak under a tremendous pressure. it would have 
burst inward; but for the support i had placed. the strain ceased, as 
quick as it had begun, and there was more talk. 

presently, one of the things squealed, softly, and i heard the sound 
of other approaching. there was a short confabulation; then again, 
silence; and i realize that they had call several more to assist. 
feeling that now was the supreme moment, i stood ready, with my rifle 
presented. if the door gave, i would, at least, slay as many 
as possible. 

again came the low signal; and, once more, the door cracked, under a 
huge force. for, a minute perhaps, the pressure was kept up; and i 
waited, nervously; expect each moment to see the door come down with 
a crash. but no; the strut held, and the attempt prove abortive. then 
follow more of their horrible, grunt talk, and, whilst it lasted, i 
thought i distinguished the noise of fresh arrivals. 

after a long discussion, during which the door was several times 
shaken, they became quiet once more, and i knew that they were go to 
make a third attempt to break it down. i was almost in despair. the 
prop had been severe try in the two previous attacks, and i was 
sorely afraid that this would prove too much for them. 

at that moment, like an inspiration, a thought flash into my trouble 
brain. instantly, for it was no time to hesitate, i ran from the room, 
and up stair after stair. this time, it was not to one of the towers, 
that i went; but out on to the flat, lead roof itself. once there, i 
race across to the parapet, that wall it 'round, and look down. as i 
did so, i heard the short, grunt signal, and, even up there, caught 
the crying of the door under the assault. 

there was not a moment to lose, and, leaning over, i aimed, quickly, 
and fired. the report rang sharply, and, almost blend with it, came 
the loud splud of the bullet striking its mark. from below, rose a 
shrill wail; and the door cease its groaning. then, as i took my weight 
from off the parapet, a huge piece of the stone coping slid from under 
me, and fell with a crash among the disorganize throng beneath. 
several horrible shriek quaver through the night air, and then i 
heard a sound of scamper feet. cautiously, i look over. in the 
moonlight, i could see the great copingstone, lie right across the 
threshold of the door. i thought i saw something under it--several 
things, white; but i could not be sure. 

and so a few minutes passed. 

as i stared, i saw something come 'round, out of the shadow of the 
house. it was one of the things. it went up to the stone, silently, and 
bent down. i was unable to see what it did. in a minute it stood up. it 
had something in its talons, which it put to its mouth and tore at.... 

for the moment, i did not realize. then, slowly, i comprehended. the 
thing was stoop again. it was horrible. i start to load my rifle. 
when i look again, the monster was tug at the stone--moving it to 
one side. i leant the rifle on the coping, and pull the trigger. the 
brute collapsed, on its face, and kicked, slightly. 

simultaneously, almost, with the report, i heard another sound--that of 
break glass. waiting, only to recharge my weapon, i ran from the 
roof, and down the first two flight of stairs. 

here, i pause to listen. as i did so, there came another tinkle of 
fall glass. it appear to come from the floor below. excitedly, i 
sprang down the steps, and, guide by the rattle of the window-sash, 
reach the door of one of the empty bedrooms, at the back of the house. 
i thrust it open. the room was but dim illuminate by the moonlight; 
most of the light being blot out by moving figures at the window. 
even as i stood, one crawl through, into the room. level my weapon, 
i fire point-blank at it--filling the room with a deafen bang. when 
the smoke cleared, i saw that the room was empty, and the window free. 
the room was much lighter. the night air blew in, coldly, through the 
shatter panes. down below, in the night, i could hear a soft moaning, 
and a confuse murmur of swine-voices. 

step to one side of the window, i reloaded, and then stood there, 
waiting. presently, i heard a scuffle noise. from where i stood in the 
shadow, i could see, without being seen. 

near came the sounds, and then i saw something come up above the 
sill, and clutch at the broken window-frame. it caught a piece of the 
woodwork; and, now, i could make out that it was a hand and arm. a 
moment later, the face of one of the swine-creatures rose into view. 
then, before i could use my rifle, or do anything, there came a sharp 
crack--cr-ac-k; and the window-frame gave way under the weight of the 
thing. next instant, a squash thud, and a loud outcry, told me that 
it had fallen to the ground. with a savage hope that it had been killed, 
i went to the window. the moon had gone behind a cloud, so that i could 
see nothing; though a steady hum of jabbering, just beneath where i 
stood, indicate that there were several more of the brute close 
at hand. 

as i stood there, look down, i marvel how it had been possible for 
the creature to climb so far; for the wall is comparatively smooth, 
while the distance to the ground must be, at least, eighty feet. 

all at once, as i bent, peering, i saw something, indistinctly, that 
cut the grey shadow of the house-side, with a black line. it pass the 
window, to the left, at a distance of about two feet. then, i remember 
that it was a gutter-pipe, that had been put there some years ago, to 
carry off the rainwater. i had forgotten about it. i could see, now, how 
the creature had manage to reach the window. even as the solution came 
to me, i heard a faint slithering, scratch noise, and knew that 
another of the brute was coming. i wait some odd moments; then leant 
out of the window and felt the pipe. to my delight, i found that it was 
quite loose, and i managed, use the rifle-barrel as a crowbar, to 
lever it out from the wall. i work quickly. then, taking hold with 
both bands, i wrench the whole concern away, and hurl it down--with 
the thing still clinging to it--into the garden. 

for a few minutes longer, i wait there, listening; but, after the 
first general outcry, i heard nothing. i knew, now, that there was no 
more reason to fear an attack from this quarter. i had remove the only 
means of reach the window, and, as none of the other window had any 
adjacent water pipes, to tempt the climb powers of the monsters, i 
began to feel more confident of escape their clutches. 

leave the room, i made my way down to the study. i was anxious to see 
how the door had withstood the test of that last assault. entering, i 
lit two of the candles, and then turn to the door. one of the large 
prop had been displaced, and, on that side, the door had been forced 
inward some six inches. 

it was providential that i had manage to drive the brute away just 
when i did! and that copingstone! i wondered, vaguely, how i had manage 
to dislodge it. i had not notice it loose, as i took my shot; and then, 
as i stood up, it had slip away from beneath me ... i felt that i 
owe the dismissal of the attack force, more to its timely fall than 
to my rifle. then the thought came, that i had better seize this chance 
to shore up the door, again. it was evident that the creature had not 
return since the fall of the copingstone; but who was to say how long 
they would keep away? 

there and then, i set-to, at repair the door--working hard and 
anxiously. first, i went down to the basement, and, rummage 'round, 
found several pieces of heavy oak planking. with these, i return to 
the study, and, have remove the props, placed the plank up against 
the door. then, i nail the head of the strut to these, and, driving 
them well home at the bottoms, nail them again there. 

thus, i made the door strong than ever; for now it was solid with the 
backing of boards, and would, i felt convinced, stand a heavy pressure 
than hitherto, without give way. 

after that, i lit the lamp which i had brought from the kitchen, and 
went down to have a look at the lower windows. 

now that i had seen an instance of the strength the creature 
possessed, i felt considerable anxiety about the window on the ground 
floor--in spite of the fact that they were so strong barred. 

i went first to the buttery, have a vivid remembrance of my late 
adventure there. the place was chilly, and the wind, sough in through 
the broken glass, produce an eerie note. apart from the general air of 
dismalness, the place was as i had left it the night before. go up to 
the window, i examine the bars, closely; noting, as i did so, their 
comfortable thickness. still, as i look more intently, it seem to 
me, that the middle bar was bent slightly from the straight; yet it was 
but trifling, and it might have been so for years. i had never, before, 
notice them particularly. 

i put my hand through the broken window, and shook the bar. it was as 
firm as a rock. perhaps the creature had try to 'start' it, and, 
finding it beyond their power, cease from the effort. after that, i 
went 'round to each of the windows, in turn; examine them with careful 
attention; but nowhere else could i trace anything to show that there 
had been any tampering. have finished my survey, i went back to the 
study, and pour myself out a little brandy. then to the tower 
to watch. 



_viii_ 

after the attack 

it was now about three a.m., and, presently, the eastern sky began to 
pale with the coming of dawn. gradually, the day came, and, by its 
light, i scan the gardens, earnestly; but nowhere could i see any 
sign of the brutes. i leant over, and glance down to the foot of the 
wall, to see whether the body of the thing i had shot the night before 
was still there. it was gone. i supposed that other of the monster had 
remove it during the night. 

then, i went down on to the roof, and cross over to the gap from 
which the coping stone had fallen. reach it, i look over. yes, 
there was the stone, as i had seen it last; but there was no appearance 
of anything beneath it; nor could i see the creature i had killed, 
after its fall. evidently, they also had been taken away. i turned, and 
went down to my study. there, i sat down, wearily. i was thorough 
tired. it was quite light now; though the sun's ray were not, as yet, 
perceptible hot. a clock chime the hour of four. 

i awoke, with a start, and look 'round, hurriedly. the clock in the 
corner, indicate that it was three o'clock. it was already afternoon. i 
must have slept for nearly eleven hours. 

with a jerky movement, i sat forward in the chair, and listened. the 
house was perfectly silent. slowly, i stood up, and yawned. i felt 
desperate tired, still, and sat down again; wonder what it was that 
had wake me. 

it must have been the clock striking, i concluded, presently; and was 
commence to doze off, when a sudden noise brought me back, once more, 
to life. it was the sound of a step, as of a person moving cautious 
down the corridor, toward my study. in an instant, i was on my feet, and 
grasping my rifle. noiselessly, i waited. had the creature broken in, 
whilst i slept? even as i questioned, the steps reach my door, halt 
momentarily, and then continue down the passage. silently, i tiptoe to 
the doorway, and peep out. then, i experienced such a feeling of 
relief, as must a reprieve criminal--it was my sister. she was go 
toward the stairs. 

i step into the hall, and was about to call to her, when it occur 
to me, that it was very queer she should have crept past my door, in 
that stealthy manner. i was puzzled, and, for one brief moment, the 
thought occupy my mind, that it was not she, but some fresh mystery of 
the house. then, as i caught a glimpse of her old petticoat, the thought 
pass as quick as it had come, and i half laughed. there could be no 
mistake that ancient garment. yet, i wonder what she was doing; and, 
remember her condition of mind, on the previous day, i felt that it 
might be best to follow, quietly--taking care not to alarm her--and see 
what she was go to do. if she behave rationally, well and good; if 
not, i should have to take steps to restrain her. i could run no 
unnecessary risks, under the danger that threaten us. 

quickly, i reach the head of the stairs, and pause a moment. then, 
i heard a sound that sent me leap down, at a mad rate--it was the 
rattle of bolt being unshot. that foolish sister of mine was actually 
unbar the back door. 

just as her hand was on the last bolt, i reach her. she had not seen 
me, and, the first thing she knew, i had hold of her arm. she glance up 
quickly, like a frightened animal, and scream aloud. 

'come, mary!' i said, sternly, 'what's the meaning of this nonsense? do 
you mean to tell me you don't understand the danger, that you try to 
throw our two lives away in this fashion!' 

to this, she reply nothing; only trembled, violently, gasp and 
sobbing, as though in the last extremity of fear. 

through some minutes, i reasoned with her; point out the need for 
caution, and ask her to be brave. there was little to be afraid of 
now, i explained--and, i try to believe that i spoke the truth--but 
she must be sensible, and not attempt to leave the house for a few days. 

at last, i ceased, in despair. it was no use talk to her; she was, 
obviously, not quite herself for the time being. finally, i told her she 
had better go to her room, if she could not behave rationally. 

still, she took not any notice. so, without more ado, i picked her up 
in my arms, and carry her there. at first, she screamed, wildly; but 
had relapse into silent trembling, by the time i reach the stairs. 

arrive at her room, i laid her upon the bed. she lay there quiet 
enough, neither speak nor sobbing--just shake in a very ague of 
fear. i took a rug from a chair near by, and spread it over her. i could 
do nothing more for her, and so, cross to where pepper lay in a big 
basket. my sister had taken charge of him since his wound, to nurse him, 
for it had prove more severe than i had thought, and i was pleased to 
note that, in spite of her state of mind, she had look after the old 
dog, carefully. stooping, i spoke to him, and, in reply, he lick my 
hand, feebly. he was too ill to do more. 

then, go to the bed, i bent over my sister, and ask her how she 
felt; but she only shook the more, and, much as it pained me, i had to 
admit that my presence seem to make her worse. 

and so, i left her--locking the door, and pocket the key. it seem 
to be the only course to take. 

the rest of the day, i spent between the tower and my study. for food, 
i brought up a loaf from the pantry, and on this, and some claret, i 
live for that day. 

what a long, weary day it was. if only i could have gone out into the 
gardens, as is my wont, i should have been content enough; but to be 
coop in this silent house, with no companion, save a mad woman and a 
sick dog, was enough to prey upon the nerves of the hardiest. and out in 
the tangle shrubbery that surround the house, lurked--for all i 
could tell--those infernal swine-creatures wait their chance. was 
ever a man in such straits? 

once, in the afternoon, and again, later, i went to visit my sister. 
the second time, i found her tend pepper; but, at my approach, she 
slid over, unobtrusively, to the far corner, with a gesture that 
sadden me beyond belief. poor girl! her fear cut me intolerably, and i 
would not intrude on her, unnecessarily. she would be better, i trusted, 
in a few days; meanwhile, i could do nothing; and i judge it still 
needful--hard as it seemed--to keep her confine to her room. one thing 
there was that i took for encouragement: she had eaten some of the food 
i had taken to her, on my first visit. 

and so the day passed. 

as the evening drew on, the air grew chilly, and i began to make 
preparation for passing a second night in the tower--taking up two 
additional rifles, and a heavy ulster. the rifles i loaded, and laid 
alongside my other; as i intended to make things warm for any of the 
creature who might show, during the night. i had plenty of ammunition, 
and i thought to give the brute such a lesson, as should show them the 
useless of attempt to force an entrance. 

after that, i made the 'round of the house again; pay particular 
attention to the prop that support the study door. then, feeling that 
i had done all that lay in my power to insure our safety, i return to 
the tower; calling in on my sister and pepper, for a final visit, on the 
way. pepper was asleep; but woke, as i entered, and wag his tail, in 
recognition. i thought he seem slightly better. my sister was lie on 
the bed; though whether asleep or not, i was unable to tell; and thus i 
left them. 

reach the tower, i made myself as comfortable as circumstances would 
permit, and settled down to watch through the night. gradually, dark 
fell, and soon the detail of the garden were merge into shadows. 
during the first few hours, i sat, alert, listen for any sound that 
might help to tell me if anything were stirring down below. it was far 
too dark for my eyes to be of much use. 

slowly, the hour passed; without anything unusual happening. and the 
moon rose, showing the gardens, apparently empty, and silent. and so, 
through the night, without disturbance or sound. 

toward morning, i began to grow stiff and cold, with my long vigil; 
also, i was get very uneasy, concerning the continue quiet on 
the part of the creatures. i mistrust it, and would sooner, far, have 
had them attack the house, openly. then, at least, i should have known 
my danger, and been able to meet it; but to wait like this, through a 
whole night, picture all kind of unknown devilment, was to jeopardize 
one's sanity. once or twice, the thought came to me, that, perhaps, they 
had gone; but, in my heart, i found it impossible to believe that it 
was so. 



_ix_ 

in the cellar 

at last, what with being tired and cold, and the uneasy that 
possessed me, i resolve to take a walk through the house; first calling 
in at the study, for a glass of brandy to warm me. this, i did, and, 
while there, i examine the door, carefully; but found all as i had left 
it the night before. 

the day was just breaking, as i left the tower; though it was still too 
dark in the house to be able to see without a light, and i took one of 
the study candle with me on my 'round. by the time i had finished the 
ground floor, the daylight was creep in, wanly, through the barred 
windows. my search had shown me nothing fresh. everything appear to be 
in order, and i was on the point of extinguish my candle, when the 
thought suggest itself to me to have another glance 'round the 
cellars. i had not, if i remember rightly, been into them since my hasty 
search on the evening of the attack. 

for, perhaps, the half of a minute, i hesitated. i would have been very 
willing to forego the task--as, indeed, i am inclined to think any man 
well might--for of all the great, awe-inspiring rooms in this house, the 
cellar are the hugest and weirdest. great, gloomy cavern of places, 
unlit by any ray of daylight. yet, i would not shirk the work. i felt 
that to do so would smack of sheer cowardice. besides, as i reassure 
myself, the cellar were really the most unlikely place in which to 
come across anything dangerous; considering that they can be entered, 
only through a heavy oaken door, the key of which, i carry always on 
my person. 

it is in the smallest of these place that i keep my wine; a gloomy 
hole close to the foot of the cellar stairs; and beyond which, i have 
seldom proceeded. indeed, save for the rummage 'round, already 
mentioned, i doubt whether i had ever, before, been right through 
the cellars. 

as i unlock the great door, at the top of the steps, i paused, 
nervously, a moment, at the strange, desolate smell that assail my 
nostrils. then, throw the barrel of my weapon forward, i descended, 
slowly, into the dark of the underground regions. 

reach the bottom of the stairs, i stood for a minute, and listened. 
all was silent, save for a faint drip, drip of water, falling, 
drop-by-drop, somewhere to my left. as i stood, i notice how quiet 
the candle burnt; never a flicker nor flare, so utterly windless was 
the place. 

quietly, i move from cellar to cellar. i had but a very dim memory of 
their arrangement. the impression left by my first search were blurred. 
i had recollection of a succession of great cellars, and of one, 
greater than the rest, the roof of which was upheld by pillars; beyond 
that my mind was hazy, and predominate by a sense of cold and dark 
and shadows. now, however, it was different; for, although nervous, i 
was sufficient collected to be able to look about me, and note the 
structure and size of the different vault i entered. 

of course, with the amount of light given by my candle, it was not 
possible to examine each place, minutely, but i was enable to notice, 
as i went along, that the wall appear to be built with wonderful 
precision and finish; while here and there, an occasional, massive 
pillar shot up to support the vaulted roof. 

thus, i came, at last, to the great cellar that i remembered. it is 
reached, through a huge, arch entrance, on which i observe strange, 
fantastic carvings, which threw queer shadow under the light of my 
candle. as i stood, and examine these, thoughtfully, it occur to me 
how strange it was, that i should be so little acquaint with my own 
house. yet, this may be easily understood, when one realize the size of 
this ancient pile, and the fact that only my old sister and i live in 
it, occupy a few of the rooms, such as our wants decide. 

holding the light high, i pass on into the cellar, and, keeping to 
the right, pace slow up, until i reach the further end. i walk 
quietly, and look cautious about, as i went. but, so far as the 
light showed, i saw nothing unusual. 

at the top, i turn to the left, still keeping to the wall, and so 
continued, until i had traverse the whole of the vast chamber. as i 
move along, i notice that the floor was compose of solid rock, in 
place cover with a damp mould, in other bare, or almost so, save for 
a thin coating of light-grey dust. 

i had halt at the doorway. now, however, i turned, and made my way up 
the center of the place; passing among the pillars, and glancing to 
right and left, as i moved. about halfway up the cellar, i stub my 
foot against something that gave out a metallic sound. stoop quickly, 
i held the candle, and saw that the object i had kicked, was a large, 
metal ring. bend lower, i clear the dust from around it, and, 
presently, discover that it was attach to a ponderous trap door, 
black with age. 

feeling excited, and wonder to where it could lead, i laid my gun on 
the floor, and, stick the candle in the trigger guard, took the ring 
in both hands, and pulled. the trap creak loudly--the sound echoing, 
vaguely, through the huge place--and opened, heavily. 

prop the edge on my knee, i reach for the candle, and held it in 
the opening, moving it to right and left; but could see nothing. i was 
puzzle and surprised. there were no sign of steps, nor even the 
appearance of there ever have been any. nothing; save an empty 
blackness. i might have been look down into a bottomless, sideless 
well. then, even as i stared, full of perplexity, i seem to hear, far 
down, as though from untold depths, a faint whisper of sound. i bent my 
head, quickly, more into the opening, and listened, intently. it may 
have been fancy; but i could have sworn to hearing a soft titter, that 
grew into a hideous, chuckling, faint and distant. startled, i leapt 
backward, letting the trap fall, with a hollow clang, that fill the 
place with echoes. even then, i seem to hear that mocking, suggestive 
laughter; but this, i knew, must be my imagination. the sound, i had 
heard, was far too slight to penetrate through the cumbrous trap. 

for a full minute, i stood there, quivering--glancing, nervously, 
behind and before; but the great cellar was silent as a grave, and, 
gradually, i shook off the frightened sensation. with a calm mind, i 
became again curious to know into what that trap opened; but could not, 
then, summon sufficient courage to make a further investigation. one 
thing i felt, however, was that the trap ought to be secured. this, i 
accomplished by place upon it several large pieces of 'dressed' 
stone, which i had notice in my tour along the east wall. 

then, after a final scrutiny of the rest of the place, i retrace my 
way through the cellars, to the stairs, and so reach the daylight, 
with an infinite feeling of relief, that the uncomfortable task was 
accomplished. 



_x_ 

the time of wait 

the sun was now warm, and shining brightly, form a wondrous contrast 
to the dark and dismal cellars; and it was with comparatively light 
feelings, that i made my way up to the tower, to survey the gardens. 
there, i found everything quiet, and, after a few minutes, went down to 
mary's room. 

here, have knocked, and received a reply, i unlock the door. my 
sister was sitting, quietly, on the bed; as though waiting. she seem 
quite herself again, and made no attempt to move away, as i approached; 
yet, i observe that she scan my face, anxiously, as though in doubt, 
and but half assured in her mind that there was nothing to fear from me. 

to my questions, as to how she felt, she replied, sane enough, that 
she was hungry, and would like to go down to prepare breakfast, if i did 
not mind. for a minute, i meditate whether it would be safe to let her 
out. finally, i told her she might go, on condition that she promise 
not to attempt to leave the house, or meddle with any of the outer 
doors. at my mention of the doors, a sudden look of fright cross her 
face; but she said nothing, save to give the require promise, and then 
left the room, silently. 

crossing the floor, i approach pepper. he had wake as i entered; 
but, beyond a slight yelp of pleasure, and a soft rap with his tail, 
had kept quiet. now, as i pat him, he made an attempt to stand up, 
and succeeded, only to fall back on his side, with a little yowl 
of pain. 

i spoke to him, and bade him lie still. i was greatly delight with 
his improvement, and also with the natural kindness of my sister's 
heart, in taking such good care of him, in spite of her condition of 
mind. after a while, i left him, and went downstairs, to my study. 

in a little time, mary appeared, carry a tray on which smoke a hot 
breakfast. as she enter the room, i saw her gaze fasten on the prop 
that support the study door; her lip tightened, and i thought she 
paled, slightly; but that was all. putt the tray down at my elbow, 
she was leave the room, quietly, when i call her back. she came, it 
seemed, a little timidly, as though startled; and i noted that her hand 
clutch at her apron, nervously. 

'come, mary,' i said. 'cheer up! things look brighter. i've seen none 
of the creature since yesterday morning, early.' 

she look at me, in a curious puzzle manner; as though not 
comprehending. then, intelligence swept into her eyes, and fear; but she 
said nothing, beyond an unintelligible murmur of acquiescence. after 
that, i kept silence; it was evident that any reference to the 
swine-things, was more than her shaken nerves could bear. 

breakfast over, i went up to the tower. here, during the greater part 
of the day, i maintain a strict watch over the gardens. once or twice, 
i went down to the basement, to see how my sister was get along. 
each time, i found her quiet, and curious submissive. indeed, on the 
last occasion, she even venture to address me, on her own account, with 
regard to some household matter that need attention. though this was 
done with an almost extraordinary timidity, i hail it with happiness, 
as being the first word, voluntary spoken, since the critical moment, 
when i had caught her unbar the back door, to go out among those 
wait brutes. i wonder whether she was aware of her attempt, and how 
near a thing it had been; but refrain from questioning her, thinking 
it best to let well alone. 

that night, i slept in a bed; the first time for two nights. in the 
morning, i rose early, and took a walk through the house. all was as it 
should be, and i went up to the tower, to have a look at the gardens. 
here, again, i found perfect quietness. 

at breakfast, when i met mary, i was greatly pleased to see that she 
had sufficient regain command over herself, to be able to greet me 
in a perfectly natural manner. she talk sensible and quietly; only 
keeping careful from any mention of the past couple of days. in this, 
i humor her, to the extent of not attempt to lead the conversation 
in that direction. 

early in the morning, i had been to see pepper. he was mending, 
rapidly; and bade fair to be on his legs, in earnest, in another day or 
two. before leave the breakfast table, i made some reference to his 
improvement. in the short discussion that followed, i was surprise to 
gather, from my sister's remarks, that she was still under the 
impression that his wound had been given by the wildcat, of my 
invention. it made me feel almost ashamed of myself for deceive her. 
yet, the lie had been told to prevent her from being frightened. and 
then, i had been sure that she must have known the truth, later, when 
those brute had attack the house. 

during the day, i kept on the alert; spend much of my time, as on 
the previous day, in the tower; but not a sign could i see of the 
swine-creatures, nor hear any sound. several times, the thought had come 
to me, that the things had, at last, left us; but, up to this time, i 
had refuse to entertain the idea, seriously; now, however, i began to 
feel that there was reason for hope. it would soon be three days since i 
had seen any of the things; but still, i intended to use the utmost 
caution. for all that i could tell, this protract silence might be a 
ruse to tempt me from the house--perhaps right into their arms. the 
thought of such a contingency, was, alone, sufficient to make me 
circumspect. 

so it was, that the fourth, fifth and sixth days went by, quietly, 
without my making any attempt to leave the house. 

on the sixth day, i had the pleasure of seeing pepper, once more, upon 
his feet; and, though still very weak, he manage to keep me company 
during the whole of that day. 



_xi_ 

the searching of the garden 

how slow the time went; and never a thing to indicate that any of the 
brute still infest the gardens. 

it was on the ninth day that, finally, i decided to run the risk, if 
any there were, and sally out. with this purpose in view, i loaded one 
of the shotguns, carefully--choosing it, as being more deadly than a 
rifle, at close quarters; and then, after a final scrutiny of the 
grounds, from the tower, i call pepper to follow me, and made my way 
down to the basement. 

at the door, i must confess to hesitate a moment. the thought of what 
might be await me among the dark shrubberies, was by no means 
calculate to encourage my resolution. it was but a second, though, and 
then i had drawn the bolts, and was standing on the path outside 
the door. 

pepper followed, stopping at the doorstep to sniff, suspiciously; and 
carry his nose up and down the jambs, as though following a scent. 
then, suddenly, he turned, sharply, and start to run here and there, 
in semicircle and circles, all around the door; finally return to 
the threshold. here, he began again to nose about. 

hitherto, i had stood, watch the dog; yet, all the time, with half 
my gaze on the wild tangle of gardens, stretch 'round me. now, i went 
toward him, and, bend down, examine the surface of the door, where 
he was smelling. i found that the wood was cover with a network of 
scratches, crossing and recross one another, in inextricable 
confusion. in addition to this, i notice that the doorposts, 
themselves, were gnaw in places. beyond these, i could find nothing; 
and so, standing up, i began to make the tour of the house wall. 

pepper, as soon as i walk away, left the door, and ran ahead, still 
nose and sniff as he went along. at times, he stop to 
investigate. here, it would be a bullet-hole in the pathway, or, 
perhaps, a powder stain wad. anon, it might be a piece of torn sod, or 
a disturbed patch of weedy path; but, save for such trifles, he found 
nothing. i observe him, critically, as he went along, and could 
discover nothing of uneasiness, in his demeanor, to indicate that he 
felt the near of any of the creatures. by this, i was assured that 
the garden were empty, at least for the present, of those hateful 
things. pepper could not be easily deceived, and it was a relief to feel 
that he would know, and give me timely warning, if there were 
any danger. 

reach the place where i had shot that first creature, i stopped, and 
made a careful scrutiny; but could see nothing. from there, i went on to 
where the great copingstone had fallen. it lay on its side, apparently 
just as it had been left when i shot the brute that was moving it. a 
couple of feet to the right of the near end, was a great dent in the 
ground; showing where it had struck. the other end was still within the 
indentation--half in, and half out. go nearer, i look at the stone, 
more closely. what a huge piece of masonry it was! and that creature had 
move it, single-handed, in its attempt to reach what lay below. 

i went 'round to the further end of the stone. here, i found that it 
was possible to see under it, for a distance of nearly a couple of feet. 
still, i could see nothing of the stricken creatures, and i felt much 
surprised. i had, as i have before said, guess that the remains had 
been removed; yet, i could not conceive that it had been done so 
thorough as not to leave some certain sign, beneath the stone, 
indicative of their fate. i had seen several of the brute struck down 
beneath it, with such force that they must have been literally driven 
into the earth; and now, not a vestige of them was to be seen--not even 
a bloodstain. 

i felt more puzzled, than ever, as i turn the matter over in my mind; 
but could think of no plausible explanation; and so, finally, gave it 
up, as one of the many things that were unexplainable. 

from there, i transfer my attention to the study door. i could see, 
now, even more plainly, the effects of the tremendous strain, to which 
it had been subjected; and i marvel how, even with the support 
afford by the props, it had withstood the attacks, so well. there were 
no mark of blows--indeed, none had been given--but the door had been 
literally riven from its hinges, by the application of enormous, silent 
force. one thing that i observe affected me profoundly--the head of one 
of the prop had been driven right through a panel. this was, of itself, 
sufficient to show how huge an effort the creature had made to break 
down the door, and how nearly they had succeeded. 

leaving, i continue my tour 'round the house, finding little else of 
interest; save at the back, where i came across the piece of piping i 
had torn from the wall, lie among the long grass underneath the 
broken window. 

then, i return to the house, and, have re-bolted the back door, 
went up to the tower. here, i spent the afternoon, reading, and 
occasional glancing down into the gardens. i had determined, if the 
night pass quietly, to go as far as the pit, on the morrow. perhaps, i 
should be able to learn, then, something of what had happened. the day 
slip away, and the night came, and went much as the last few 
nights had gone. 

when i rose the morning had broken, fine and clear; and i determined to 
put my project into action. during breakfast, i considered the matter, 
carefully; after which, i went to the study for my shotgun. in addition, 
i loaded, and slip into my pocket, a small, but heavy, pistol. i 
quite understood that, if there were any danger, it lay in the direction 
of the pit and i intended to be prepared. 

leave the study, i went down to the back door, follow by pepper. 
once outside, i took a quick survey of the surrounding gardens, and then 
set off toward the pit. on the way, i kept a sharp outlook, holding my 
gun, handily. pepper was running ahead, i noticed, without any apparent 
hesitation. from this, i augur that there was no imminent danger to be 
apprehended, and i step out more quick in his wake. he had reach 
the top of the pit, now, and was nose his way along the edge. 

a minute later, i was beside him, look down into the pit. for a 
moment, i could scarcely believe that it was the same place, so greatly 
was it changed. the dark, wooded ravine of a fortnight ago, with a 
foliage-hidden stream, running sluggishly, at the bottom, exist no 
longer. instead, my eyes show me a ragged chasm, partly fill with a 
gloomy lake of turbid water. all one side of the ravine was strip of 
underwood, showing the bare rock. 

a little to my left, the side of the pit appear to have collapse 
altogether, form a deep v-shaped cleft in the face of the rocky 
cliff. this rift ran, from the upper edge of the ravine, nearly down to 
the water, and penetrate into the pit side, to a distance of some forty 
feet. its opening was, at least, six yard across; and, from this, it 
seem to taper into about two. but, what attract my attention, more 
than even the stupendous split itself, was a great hole, some distance 
down the cleft, and right in the angle of the v. it was clearly defined, 
and not unlike an arch doorway in shape; though, lie as it did in 
the shadow, i could not see it very distinctly. 

the opposite side of the pit, still retain its verdure; but so torn 
in places, and everywhere cover with dust and rubbish, that it was 
hardly distinguishable as such. 

my first impression, that there had been a land slip, was, i began to 
see, not sufficient, of itself, to account for all the change i 
witnessed. and the water--? i turned, suddenly; for i had become aware 
that, somewhere to my right, there was a noise of running water. i could 
see nothing; but, now that my attention had been caught, i 
distinguished, easily, that it came from somewhere at the east end 
of the pit. 

slowly, i made my way in that direction; the sound grow plain as i 
advanced, until in a little, i stood right above it. even then, i could 
not perceive the cause, until i knelt down, and thrust my head over the 
cliff. here, the noise came up to me, plainly; and i saw, below me, a 
torrent of clear water, issue from a small fissure in the pit side, 
and rush down the rocks, into the lake beneath. a little further 
along the cliff, i saw another, and, beyond that again, two small 
ones. these, then, would help to account for the quantity of water in 
the pit; and, if the fall of rock and earth had block the outlet of 
the stream at the bottom, there was little doubt but that it was 
contribute a very large share. 

yet, i puzzle my head to account for the generally _shaken_ appearance 
of the place--these streamlets, and that huge cleft, further up the 
ravine! it seem to me, that more than the landslip was necessary to 
account for these. i could imagine an earthquake, or a great 
_explosion_, create some such condition of affair as existed; but, of 
these, there had been neither. then, i stood up, quickly, remember 
that crash, and the cloud of dust that had followed, directly, rush 
high into the air. but i shook my head, unbelievingly. no! it must have 
been the noise of the fall rocks and earth, i had heard; of course, 
the dust would fly, naturally. still, in spite of my reasoning, i had an 
uneasy feeling, that this theory did not satisfy my sense of the 
probable; and yet, was any other, that i could suggest, likely to be 
half so plausible? pepper had been sitting on the grass, while i 
conduct my examination. now, as i turn up the north side of the 
ravine, he rose and followed. 

slowly, and keeping a careful watch in all directions, i made the 
circuit of the pit; but found little else, that i had not already seen. 
from the west end, i could see the four waterfalls, uninterruptedly. 
they were some considerable distance up from the surface of the 
lake--about fifty feet, i calculated. 

for a little while longer, i loiter about; keeping my eyes and ear 
open, but still, without seeing or hearing anything suspicious. the 
whole place was wonderful quiet; indeed, save for the continuous 
murmur of the water, at the top end, no sound, of any description, broke 
the silence. 

all this while, pepper had shown no sign of uneasiness. this seemed, 
to me, to indicate that, for the time being, at least, there was none of 
the swine-creatures in the vicinity. so far as i could see, his 
attention appear to have been taken, chiefly, with scratch and 
sniff among the grass at the edge of the pit. at times, he would 
leave the edge, and run along toward the house, as though following 
invisible tracks; but, in all cases, return after a few minutes. i 
had little doubt but that he was really tracing out the footstep of the 
swine-things; and the very fact that each one seem to lead him back to 
the pit, appear to me, a proof that the brute had all return whence 
they came. 

at noon, i went home, for dinner. during the afternoon, i made a 
partial search of the gardens, accompany by pepper; but, without 
coming upon anything to indicate the presence of the creatures. 

once, as we made our way through the shrubberies, pepper rush in 
among some bushes, with a fierce yelp. at that, i jump back, in sudden 
fright, and threw my gun forward, in readiness; only to laugh, 
nervously, as pepper reappeared, chase an unfortunate cat. toward 
evening, i gave up the search, and return to the house. all at once, 
as we were passing a great clump of bushes, on our right, pepper 
disappeared, and i could hear him sniff and growl among them, in a 
suspicious manner. with my gun barrel, i part the intervene 
shrubbery, and look inside. there was nothing to be seen, save that 
many of the branch were bent down, and broken; as though some animal 
had made a lair there, at no very previous date. it was probably, i 
thought, one of the place occupy by some of the swine-creatures, on 
the night of the attack. 

next day, i resume my search through the gardens; but without result. 
by evening, i had been right through them, and now, i knew, beyond the 
possibility of doubt, that there were no long any of the things 
conceal about the place. indeed, i have often thought since, that i 
was correct in my early surmise, that they had left soon after 
the attack. 



_xii_ 

the subterranean pit 

another week came and went, during which i spent a great deal of my time 
about the pit mouth. i had come to the conclusion a few days earlier, 
that the arch hole, in the angle of the great rift, was the place 
through which the swine-things had made their exit, from some unholy 
place in the bowels of the world. how near the probable truth this went, 
i was to learn later. 

it may be easily understood, that i was tremendous curious, though in 
a frightened way, to know to what infernal place that hole led; though, 
so far, the idea had not struck me, seriously, of making an 
investigation. i was far too much imbue with a sense of horror of the 
swine-creatures, to think of venturing, willingly, where there was any 
chance of coming into contact with them. 

gradually, however, as time passed, this feeling grew insensible less; 
so that when, a few days later, the thought occur to me that it might 
be possible to clamber down and have a look into the hole, i was not so 
exceedingly averse to it, as might have been imagined. still, i do not 
think, even then, that i really intended to try any such foolhardy 
adventure. for all that i could tell, it might be certain death, to 
enter that doleful look opening. and yet, such is the pertinac of 
human curiosity, that, at last, my chief desire was but to discover what 
lay beyond that gloomy entrance. 

slowly, as the days slid by, my fear of the swine-things became an 
emotion of the past--more an unpleasant, incredible memory, than 
aught else. 

thus, a day came, when, throw thought and fancies adrift, i 
procure a rope from the house, and, have made it fast to a stout 
tree, at the top of the rift, and some little distance back from the pit 
edge, let the other end down into the cleft, until it dangle right 
across the mouth of the dark hole. 

then, cautiously, and with many misgiving as to whether it was not a 
mad act that i was attempting, i climb slow down, use the rope as 
a support, until i reach the hole. here, still holding on to the rope, 
i stood, and peer in. all was perfectly dark, and not a sound came to 
me. yet, a moment later, it seem that i could hear something. i held 
my breath, and listened; but all was silent as the grave, and i breathe 
freely once more. at the same instant, i heard the sound again. it was 
like a noise of labor breathing--deep and sharp-drawn. for a short 
second, i stood, petrified; not able to move. but now the sound had 
cease again, and i could hear nothing. 

as i stood there, anxiously, my foot dislodge a pebble, which fell 
inward, into the dark, with a hollow chink. at once, the noise was taken 
up and repeated a score of times; each succeed echo being fainter, 
and seeming to travel away from me, as though into remote distance. 
then, as the silence fell again, i heard that stealthy breathing. for 
each respiration i made, i could hear an answer breath. the sound 
appear to be coming nearer; and then, i heard several others; but 
faint and more distant. why i did not grip the rope, and spring up out 
of danger, i cannot say. it was as though i had been paralyzed. i broke 
out into a profuse sweat, and try to moisten my lip with my tongue. 
my throat had gone sudden dry, and i coughed, huskily. it came back to 
me, in a dozen, horrible, throaty tones, mockingly. i peered, 
helplessly, into the gloom; but still nothing showed. i had a strange, 
choky sensation, and again i coughed, dryly. again the echo took it up, 
rising and falling, grotesquely, and die slow into a 
muffle silence. 

then, suddenly, a thought came to me, and i held my breath. the other 
breathing stopped. i breathe again, and, once more, it re-commenced. 
but now, i no long feared. i knew that the strange sound were not 
made by any lurk swine-creature; but were simply the echo of my own 
respirations. 

yet, i had received such a fright, that i was glad to scramble up the 
rift, and haul up the rope. i was far too shaken and nervous to think of 
enter that dark hole then, and so return to the house. i felt more 
myself next morning; but even then, i could not summon up sufficient 
courage to explore the place. 

all this time, the water in the pit had been creep slow up, and 
now stood but a little below the opening. at the rate at which it was 
rising, it would be level with the floor in less than another week; and 
i realize that, unless i carry out my investigate soon, i should 
probably never do so at all; as the water would rise and rise, until the 
opening, itself, was submerged. 

it may have been that this thought stir me to act; but, whatever it 
was, a couple of days later, saw me standing at the top of the cleft, 
fully equip for the task. 

this time, i was resolve to conquer my shirking, and go right through 
with the matter. with this intention, i had brought, in addition to the 
rope, a bundle of candles, meaning to use them as a torch; also my 
double-barreled shotgun. in my belt, i had a heavy horse-pistol, loaded 
with buckshot. 

as before, i fasten the rope to the tree. then, have tie my gun 
across my shoulders, with a piece of stout cord, i lower myself over 
the edge of the pit. at this movement, pepper, who had been eye my 
actions, watchfully, rose to his feet, and ran to me, with a half bark, 
half wail, it seem to me, of warning. but i was resolve on my 
enterprise, and bade him lie down. i would much have like to take him 
with me; but this was next to impossible, in the existing circumstances. 
as my face drop level with the pit edge, he lick me, right across 
the mouth; and then, seize my sleeve between his teeth, began to pull 
back, strongly. it was very evident that he did not want me to go. yet, 
have made up my mind, i had no intention of give up the attempt; 
and, with a sharp word to pepper, to release me, i continue my descent, 
leave the poor old fellow at the top, bark and crying like a 
forsaken pup. 

carefully, i lower myself from projection to projection. i knew that 
a slip might mean a wetting. 

reach the entrance, i let go the rope, and untie the gun from my 
shoulders. then, with a last look at the sky--which i notice was 
cloud over, rapidly--i went forward a couple of paces, so as to be 
shield from the wind, and lit one of the candles. holding it above my 
head, and grasping my gun, firmly, i began to move on, slowly, throw 
my glance in all directions. 

for the first minute, i could hear the melancholy sound of pepper's 
howling, coming down to me. gradually, as i penetrate further into the 
darkness, it grew fainter; until, in a little while, i could hear 
nothing. the path tend downward somewhat, and to the left. thence it 
kept on, still running to the left, until i found that it was leading me 
right in the direction of the house. 

very cautiously, i move onward, stopping, every few steps, to listen. 
i had gone, perhaps, a hundred yards, when, suddenly, it seem to me 
that i caught a faint sound, somewhere along the passage behind. with my 
heart thud heavily, i listened. the noise grew plainer, and appear 
to be approaching, rapidly. i could hear it distinctly, now. it was the 
soft padding of running feet. in the first moments of fright, i stood, 
irresolute; not knowing whether to go forward or backward. then, with a 
sudden realization of the best thing to do, i back up to the rocky 
wall on my right, and, holding the candle above my head, waited--gun in 
hand--cursing my foolhardy curiosity, for bring me into such 
a strait. 

i had not long to wait, but a few seconds, before two eyes reflect 
back from the gloom, the ray of my candle. i raise my gun, use my 
right hand only, and aim quickly. even as i did so, something leapt 
out of the darkness, with a bluster bark of joy that woke the echoes, 
like thunder. it was pepper. how he had contrived to scramble down the 
cleft, i could not conceive. as i brush my hand, nervously, over his 
coat, i notice that he was dripping; and conclude that he must have 
try to follow me, and fallen into the water; from which he would not 
find it very difficult to climb. 

have wait a minute, or so, to steady myself, i proceed along the 
way, pepper following, quietly. i was curious glad to have the old 
fellow with me. he was company, and, somehow, with him at my heels, i 
was less afraid. also, i knew how quick his keen ear would detect the 
presence of any unwelcome creature, should there be such, amid the 
dark that wrap us. 

for some minutes we went slow along; the path still leading straight 
toward the house. soon, i concluded, we should be standing right beneath 
it, did the path but carry far enough. i led the way, cautiously, for 
another fifty yards, or so. then, i stopped, and held the light high; 
and reason enough i had to be thankful that i did so; for there, not 
three pace forward, the path vanished, and, in place, show a hollow 
blackness, that sent sudden fear through me. 

very cautiously, i crept forward, and peer down; but could see 
nothing. then, i cross to the left of the passage, to see whether 
there might be any continuation of the path. here, right against the 
wall, i found that a narrow track, some three feet wide, led onward. 
carefully, i step on to it; but had not gone far, before i regret 
venture thereon. for, after a few paces, the already narrow way, 
resolve itself into a mere ledge, with, on the one side the solid, 
unyield rock, towering up, in a great wall, to the unseen roof, and, 
on the other, that yawn chasm. i could not help reflect how 
helpless i was, should i be attack there, with no room to turn, and 
where even the recoil of my weapon might be sufficient to drive me 
headlong into the depths below. 

to my great relief, a little further on, the track sudden broaden 
out again to its original breadth. gradually, as i went onward, i 
notice that the path trend steady to the right, and so, after some 
minutes, i discover that i was not go forward; but simply circle 
the huge abyss. i had, evidently, come to the end of the great passage. 

five minutes later, i stood on the spot from which i had started; 
have been completely 'round, what i guess now to be a vast pit, the 
mouth of which must be at least a hundred yard across. 

for some little time, i stood there, lost in perplex thought. 'what 
do it all mean?' was the cry that had begun to reiterate through 
my brain. 

a sudden idea struck me, and i search 'round for a piece of stone. 
presently, i found a bit of rock, about the size of a small loaf. 
stick the candle upright in a crevice of the floor, i went back from 
the edge, somewhat, and, taking a short run, launch the stone forward 
into the chasm--my idea being to throw it far enough to keep it clear of 
the sides. then, i stoop forward, and listened; but, though i kept 
perfectly quiet, for at least a full minute, no sound came back to me 
from out of the dark. 

i knew, then, that the depth of the hole must be immense; for the 
stone, had it struck anything, was large enough to have set the echo 
of that weird place, whisper for an indefinite period. even as it 
was, the cavern had given back the sound of my footfalls, 
multitudinously. the place was awesome, and i would willing have 
retrace my steps, and left the mystery of its solitude unsolved; 
only, to do so, meant admit defeat. 

then, a thought came, to try to get a view of the abyss. it occur to 
me that, if i placed my candle 'round the edge of the hole, i should be 
able to get, at least, some dim sight of the place. 

i found, on counting, that i had brought fifteen candles, in the 
bundle--my first intention have been, as i have already said, to make 
a torch of the lot. these, i proceed to place 'round the pit mouth, 
with an interval of about twenty yard between each. 

have complete the circle, i stood in the passage, and endeavor to 
get an idea of how the place looked. but i discovered, immediately, that 
they were total insufficient for my purpose. they did little more than 
make the gloom visible. one thing they did, however, and that was, they 
confirmed my opinion of the size of the opening; and, although they 
show me nothing that i want to see; yet the contrast they afford 
to the heavy darkness, pleased me, curiously. it was as though fifteen 
tiny stars shone through the subterranean night. 

then, even as i stood, pepper gave a sudden howl, that was taken up by 
the echoes, and repeated with ghastly variations, die away, slowly. 
with a quick movement, i held aloft the one candle that i had kept, and 
glance down at the dog; at the same moment, i seem to hear a noise, 
like a diabolical chuckle, rise up from the hitherto, silent depths of 
the pit. i started; then, i recollect that it was, probably, the echo 
of pepper's howl. 

pepper had move away from me, up the passage, a few steps; he was 
nose along the rocky floor; and i thought i heard him lapping. i went 
toward him, holding the candle low. as i moved, i heard my boot go sop, 
sop; and the light was reflect from something that glistened, and 
crept past my feet, swift toward the pit. i bent lower, and looked; 
then gave vent to an expression of surprise. from somewhere, higher up 
the path, a stream of water was running quick in the direction of the 
great opening, and grow in size every second. 

again, pepper gave vent to that deep-drawn howl, and, running at me, 
seize my coat, and attempt to drag me up the path toward the 
entrance. with a nervous gesture, i shook him off, and cross quick 
over to the left-hand wall. if anything were coming, i was go to have 
the wall at my back. 

then, as i stare anxious up the pathway, my candle caught a gleam, 
far up the passage. at the same moment, i became conscious of a 
murmurous roar, that grew louder, and fill the whole cavern with 
deafen sound. from the pit, came a deep, hollow echo, like the sob of 
a giant. then, i had sprung to one side, on to the narrow ledge that ran 
'round the abyss, and, turning, saw a great wall of foam sweep past me, 
and leap tumultuous into the wait chasm. a cloud of spray burst 
over me, extinguish my candle, and wetting me to the skin. i still 
held my gun. the three nearest candle went out; but the further one 
gave only a short flicker. after the first rush, the flow of water ease 
down to a steady stream, maybe a foot in depth; though i could not see 
this, until i had procure one of the light candles, and, with it, 
start to reconnoiter. pepper had, fortunately, follow me as i leapt 
for the ledge, and now, very much subdued, kept close behind. 

a short examination show me that the water reach right across the 
passage, and was running at a tremendous rate. already, even as i stood 
there, it had deepened. i could make only a guess at what had happened. 
evidently, the water in the ravine had broken into the passage, by some 
means. if that were the case, it would go on increase in volume, until 
i should find it impossible to leave the place. the thought was 
frightening. it was evident that i must make my exit as hurried 
as possible. 

taking my gun by the stock, i sound the water. it was a little under 
knee-deep. the noise it made, plunge down into the pit, was deafening. 
then, with a call to pepper, i step out into the flood, use the gun 
as a staff. instantly, the water boil up over my knees, and nearly to 
the tops of my thighs, with the speed at which it was racing. for one 
short moment, i nearly lost my footing; but the thought of what lay 
behind, stimulate me to a fierce endeavor, and, step-by-step, i 
made headway. 

of pepper, i knew nothing at first. i had all i could do to keep on my 
legs; and was overjoyed, when he appear beside me. he was wade 
manful along. he is a big dog, with longish thin legs, and i suppose 
the water had less grasp on them, than upon mine. anyway, he manage a 
great deal better than i did; go ahead of me, like a guide, and 
wittingly--or otherwise--helping, somewhat, to break the force of the 
water. on we went, step by step, struggle and gasping, until somewhere 
about a hundred yard had been safe traversed. then, whether it was 
because i was taking less care, or that there was a slippery place on 
the rocky floor, i cannot say; but, suddenly, i slipped, and fell on my 
face. instantly, the water leapt over me in a cataract, hurling me down, 
toward that bottomless hole, at a frightful speed. frantic i 
struggled; but it was impossible to get a footing. i was helpless, 
gasp and drowning. all at once, something grip my coat, and 
brought me to a standstill. it was pepper. missing me, he must have 
race back, through the dark turmoil, to find me, and then caught, and 
held me, until i was able to get to my feet. 

i have a dim recollection of have seen, momentarily, the gleam of 
several lights; but, of this, i have never been quite sure. if my 
impression are correct, i must have been wash down to the very brink 
of that awful chasm, before pepper manage to bring me to a standstill. 
and the lights, of course, could only have been the distant flame of 
the candles, i had left burning. but, as i have said, i am not by any 
means sure. my eyes were full of water, and i had been badly shaken. 

and there was i, without my helpful gun, without light, and sadly 
confused, with the water deepening; depend solely upon my old friend 
pepper, to help me out of that hellish place. 

i was facing the torrent. naturally, it was the only way in which i 
could have sustain my position a moment; for even old pepper could not 
have held me long against that terrific strain, without assistance, 
however blind, from me. 

perhaps a minute passed, during which it was touch and go with me; 
then, gradual i re-commenced my tortuous way up the passage. and so 
began the grimmest fight with death, from which ever i hope to emerge 
victorious. slowly, furiously, almost hopelessly, i strove; and that 
faithful pepper led me, drag me, upward and onward, until, at last, 
ahead i saw a gleam of blessed light. it was the entrance. only a few 
yard further, and i reach the opening, with the water surge and 
boil hungry around my loins. 

and now i understood the cause of the catastrophe. it was rain 
heavily, literally in torrents. the surface of the lake was level with 
the bottom of the opening--nay! more than level, it was above it. 
evidently, the rain had swollen the lake, and cause this premature 
rise; for, at the rate the ravine had been filling, it would not have 
reach the entrance for a couple more days. 

luckily, the rope by which i had descended, was stream into the 
opening, upon the inrush waters. seize the end, i knot it 
secure 'round pepper's body, then, summon up the last remnant of my 
strength, i commence to swarm up the side of the cliff. i reach the 
pit edge, in the last stage of exhaustion. yet, i had to make one more 
effort, and haul pepper into safety. 

slow and wearily, i haul on the rope. once or twice, it seem that 
i should have to give up; for pepper is a weighty dog, and i was utterly 
done. yet, to let go, would have meant certain death to the old fellow, 
and the thought spur me to greater exertions. i have but a very hazy 
remembrance of the end. i recall pulling, through moments that lag 
strangely. i have also some recollection of seeing pepper's muzzle, 
appear over the pit edge, after what seem an indefinite period of 
time. then, all grew sudden dark. 



_xiii_ 

the trap in the great cellar 

i suppose i must have swooned; for, the next thing i remember, i open 
my eyes, and all was dusk. i was lie on my back, with one leg double 
under the other, and pepper was licking my ears. i felt horrible stiff, 
and my leg was numb, from the knee, downward. for a few minutes, i lay 
thus, in a daze condition; then, slowly, i struggle to a sitting 
position, and look about me. 

it had stop raining, but the tree still dripped, dismally. from the 
pit, came a continuous murmur of running water. i felt cold and shivery. 
my clothes were sodden, and i ache all over. very slowly, the life came 
back into my numb leg, and, after a little, i essay to stand up. 
this, i managed, at the second attempt; but i was very tottery, and 
peculiarly weak. it seem to me, that i was go to be ill, and i made 
shift to stumble my way toward the house. my steps were erratic, and my 
head confused. at each step that i took, sharp pains shot through 
my limbs. 

i had gone, perhaps, some thirty paces, when a cry from pepper, drew 
my attention, and i turned, stiffly, toward him. the old dog was try 
to follow me; but could come no further, owe to the rope, with which i 
had haul him up, being still tie 'round his body, the other end not 
have been unfastened from the tree. for a moment, i fumble with the 
knots, weakly; but they were wet and hard, and i could do nothing. then, 
i remember my knife, and, in a minute, the rope was cut. 

how i reach the house, i scarcely know, and, of the days that 
followed, i remember still less. of one thing, i am certain, that, had 
it not been for my sister's untiring love and nursing, i had not been 
writing at this moment. 

when i recover my senses, it was to find that i had been in bed for 
nearly two weeks. yet another week passed, before i was strong enough to 
totter out into the gardens. even then, i was not able to walk so far as 
the pit. i would have like to ask my sister, how high the water had 
risen; but felt it was wise not to mention the subject to her. indeed, 
since then, i have made a rule never to speak to her about the strange 
things, that happen in this great, old house. 

it was not until a couple of days later, that i manage to get across 
to the pit. there, i found that, in my few weeks' absence, there had 
been wrought a wondrous change. instead of the three-parts fill 
ravine, i look out upon a great lake, whose placid surface, reflect 
the light, coldly. the water had risen to within half a dozen feet of 
the pit edge. only in one part was the lake disturbed, and that was 
above the place where, far down under the silent waters, yawn the 
entrance to the vast, underground pit. here, there was a continuous 
bubbling; and, occasionally, a curious sort of sob gurgle would find 
its way up from the depth. beyond these, there was nothing to tell of 
the things that were hidden beneath. as i stood there, it came to me 
how wonderful things had work out. the entrance to the place whence 
the swine-creatures had come, was seal up, by a power that made me 
feel there was nothing more to fear from them. and yet, with the 
feeling, there was a sensation that, now, i should never learn anything 
further, of the place from which those dreadful things had come. it was 
completely shut off and conceal from human curiosity forever. 

strange--in the knowledge of that underground hell-hole--how apposite 
has been the name of the pit. one wonders how it originated, and when. 
naturally, one conclude that the shape and depth of the ravine would 
suggest the name 'pit.' yet, is it not possible that it has, all along, 
held a deep significance, a hint--could one but have guessed--of the 
greater, more stupendous pit that lie far down in the earth, beneath 
this old house? under this house! even now, the idea is strange and 
terrible to me. for i have proved, beyond doubt, that the pit yawn 
right below the house, which is evidently supported, somewhere above the 
center of it, upon a tremendous, arch roof, of solid rock. 

it happen in this wise, that, have occasion to go down to the 
cellars, the thought occur to me to pay a visit to the great vault, 
where the trap is situated; and see whether everything was as i had 
left it. 

reach the place, i walk slow up the center, until i came to the 
trap. there it was, with the stone pile upon it, just as i had seen it 
last. i had a lantern with me, and the idea came to me, that now would 
be a good time to investigate whatever lay under the great, oak slab. 
place the lantern on the floor, i tumble the stone off the trap, 
and, grasping the ring, pull the door open. as i did so, the cellar 
became fill with the sound of a murmurous thunder, that rose from far 
below. at the same time, a damp wind blew up into my face, bring 
with it a load of fine spray. therewith, i drop the trap, hurriedly, 
with a half frightened feeling of wonder. 

for a moment, i stood puzzled. i was not particularly afraid. the 
haunting fear of the swine-things had left me, long ago; but i was 
certainly nervous and astonished. then, a sudden thought possessed me, 
and i raise the ponderous door, with a feeling of excitement. leave 
it standing upon its end, i seize the lantern, and, kneel down, 
thrust it into the opening. as i did so, the moist wind and spray drove 
in my eyes, making me unable to see, for a few moments. even when my 
eyes were clear, i could distinguish nothing below me, save darkness, 
and whirl spray. 

seeing that it was useless to expect to make out anything, with the 
light so high, i felt in my pocket for a piece of twine, with which to 
lower it further into the opening. even as i fumbled, the lantern 
slip from my fingers, and hurtle down into the darkness. for a brief 
instant, i watch its fall, and saw the light shine on a tumult of 
white foam, some eighty or a hundred feet below me. then it was gone. my 
sudden surmise was correct, and now, i knew the cause of the wet and 
noise. the great cellar was connected with the pit, by means of the 
trap, which open right above it; and the moisture, was the spray, 
rising from the water, fall into the depths. 

in an instant, i had an explanation of certain things, that had 
hitherto puzzle me. now, i could understand why the noises--on the 
first night of the invasion--had seem to rise directly from under my 
feet. and the chuckle that had sound when first i open the trap! 
evidently, some of the swine-things must have been right beneath me. 

another thought struck me. were the creature all drowned? would they 
drown? i remember how unable i had been to find any trace to show 
that my shoot had been really fatal. had they life, as we understand 
life, or were they ghouls? these thought flash through my brain, as i 
stood in the dark, searching my pocket for matches. i had the box in my 
hand now, and, striking a light, i step to the trap door, and closed 
it. then, i pile the stone back upon it; after which, i made my way 
out from the cellars. 

and so, i suppose the water go on, thundering down into that 
bottomless hell-pit. sometimes, i have an inexplicable desire to go down 
to the great cellar, open the trap, and gaze into the impenetrable, 
spray-damp darkness. at times, the desire become almost overpowering, 
in its intensity. it is not mere curiosity, that prompt me; but more as 
though some unexplained influence were at work. still, i never go; and 
intend to fight down the strange longing, and crush it; even as i would 
the unholy thought of self-destruction. 

this idea of some intangible force being exerted, may seem reasonless. 
yet, my instinct warn me, that it is not so. in these things, reason 
seem to me less to be trust than instinct. 

one thought there is, in closing, that impress itself upon me, with 
ever grow insistence. it is, that i live in a very strange house; a 
very awful house. and i have begun to wonder whether i am do wise 
in stay here. yet, if i left, where could i go, and still obtain the 
solitude, and the sense of her presence,[1] that alone make my old 
life bearable? 



_xiv_ 

the sea of sleep 

for a considerable period after the last incident which i have narrate 
in my diary, i had serious thought of leave this house, and might 
have done so; but for the great and wonderful thing, of which i am 
about to write. 

how well i was advised, in my heart, when i stay on here--spite of 
those vision and sight of unknown and unexplainable things; for, had i 
not stayed, then i had not seen again the face of her i loved. yes, 
though few know it, none now save my sister mary, i have love and, 
ah! me--lost. 

i would write down the story of those sweet, old days; but it would be 
like the tear of old wounds; yet, after that which has happened, what 
need have i to care? for she has come to me out of the unknown. 
strangely, she warn me; warn me passionately against this house; 
beg me to leave it; but admitted, when i question her, that she 
could not have come to me, had i been elsewhere. yet, in spite of this, 
still she warn me, earnestly; telling me that it was a place, long 
ago given over to evil, and under the power of grim laws, of which none 
here have knowledge. and i--i just ask her, again, whether she would 
come to me elsewhere, and she could only stand, silent. 

it was thus, that i came to the place of the sea of sleep--so she 
term it, in her dear speech with me. i had stay up, in my study, 
reading; and must have doze over the book. suddenly, i awoke and sat 
upright, with a start. for a moment, i look 'round, with a puzzle 
sense of something unusual. there was a misty look about the room, 
give a curious soft to each table and chair and furnishing. 

gradually, the misty increased; growing, as it were, out of 
nothing. then, slowly, a soft, white light began to glow in the room. 
the flame of the candle shone through it, palely. i look from side 
to side, and found that i could still see each piece of furniture; but 
in a strange unreal way, more as though the ghost of each table and 
chair had taken the place of the solid article. 

gradually, as i looked, i saw them fade and fade; until, slowly, they 
resolve into nothingness. now, i look again at the candles. they 
shone wanly, and, even as i watched, grew more unreal, and so vanished. 
the room was filled, now, with a soft, yet luminous, white twilight, 
like a gentle mist of light. beyond this, i could see nothing. even the 
wall had vanished. 

presently, i became conscious that a faint, continuous sound, pulse 
through the silence that wrap me. i listen intently. it grew more 
distinct, until it appear to me that i hark to the breathing of 
some great sea. i cannot tell how long a space pass thus; but, after a 
while, it seem that i could see through the mistiness; and, slowly, i 
became aware that i was standing upon the shore of an immense and silent 
sea. this shore was smooth and long, vanish to right and left of me, 
in extreme distances. in front, swam a still immensity of sleep 
ocean. at times, it seem to me that i caught a faint glimmer of light, 
under its surface; but of this, i could not be sure. behind me, rose up, 
to an extraordinary height, gaunt, black cliffs. 

overhead, the sky was of a uniform cold grey color--the whole place 
being lit by a stupendous globe of pale fire, that swam a little above 
the far horizon, and shed a foamlike light above the quiet waters. 

beyond the gentle murmur of the sea, an intense still prevailed. 
for a long while, i stay there, look out across its strangeness. 
then, as i stared, it seem that a bubble of white foam float up out 
of the depths, and then, even now i know not how it was, i was look 
upon, nay, look _into_ the face of her--aye! into her face--into her 
soul; and she look back at me, with such a commingl of joy and 
sadness, that i ran toward her, blindly; crying strange to her, in a 
very agony of remembrance, of terror, and of hope, to come to me. yet, 
spite of my crying, she stay out there upon the sea, and only shook 
her head, sorrowfully; but, in her eyes was the old earth-light of 
tenderness, that i had come to know, before all things, ere we 
were parted. 

"at her perverseness, i grew desperate, and essay to wade out to her; 
yet, though i would, i could not. something, some invisible barrier, 
held me back, and i was fain to stay where i was, and cry out to her in 
the full of my soul, 'o, my darling, my darling--' but could say no 
more, for very intensity. and, at that, she came over, swiftly, and 
touched me, and it was as though heaven had opened. yet, when i reach 
out my hand to her, she put me from her with tender stern hands, and 
i was abashed--" 



the fragments[2] 

(_the legible portion of the mutilate leaves_.) 

... through tear ... noise of eternity in my ears, we part ... she 
whom i love. o, my god ...! 

i was a great time dazed, and then i was alone in the black of the 
night. i knew that i journey back, once more, to the known universe. 
presently, i emerge from that enormous darkness. i had come among the 
stars ... vast time ... the sun, far and remote. 

i enter into the gulf that separate our system from the outer suns. 
as i sped across the divide dark, i watched, steadily, the 
ever-growing bright and size of our sun. once, i glance back to the 
stars, and saw them shift, as it were, in my wake, against the mighty 
background of night, so vast was the speed of my passing spirit. 

i drew nigh to our system, and now i could see the shine of jupiter. 
later, i distinguished the cold, blue gleam of the earthlight.... i had 
a moment of bewilderment. all about the sun there seem to be bright, 
objects, moving in rapid orbits. inward, nigh to the savage glory of the 
sun, there circle two dart points of light, and, further off, there 
flew a blue, shining speck, that i knew to be the earth. it circle the 
sun in a space that seem to be no more than an earth-minute. 

... near with great speed. i saw the radiance of jupiter and 
saturn, spinning, with incredible swiftness, in huge orbits. and ever i 
drew more nigh, and look out upon this strange sight--the visible 
circle of the planet about the mother sun. it was as though time had 
been annihilate for me; so that a year was no more to my unfleshed 
spirit, than is a moment to an earth-bound soul. 

the speed of the planets, appear to increase; and, presently, i was 
watch the sun, all ring about with hair-like circle of different 
colored fire--the path of the planets, hurtle at mighty speed, about 
the central flame.... 

"... the sun grew vast, as though it leapt to meet me.... and now i was 
within the circle of the outer planets, and flit swiftly, toward 
the place where the earth, glimmer through the blue splendor of its 
orbit, as though a fiery mist, circle the sun at a monstrous 
speed...." [3] 



_xv_ 

the noise in the night 

and now, i come to the strangest of all the strange happening that 
have befallen me in this house of mysteries. it occur quite 
lately--within the month; and i have little doubt but that what i saw 
was in reality the end of all things. however, to my story. 

i do not know how it is; but, up to the present, i have never been able 
to write these things down, directly they happened. it is as though i 
have to wait a time, recover my just balance, and digesting--as it 
were--the things i have heard or seen. no doubt, this is as it should 
be; for, by waiting, i see the incident more truly, and write of them 
in a calm and more judicial frame of mind. this by the way. 

it is now the end of november. my story relate to what happen in the 
first week of the month. 

it was night, about eleven o'clock. pepper and i kept one another 
company in the study--that great, old room of mine, where i read and 
work. i was reading, curious enough, the bible. i have begun, in these 
later days, to take a grow interest in that great and ancient book. 
suddenly, a distinct tremor shook the house, and there came a faint and 
distant, whirr buzz, that grew rapid into a far, muffle screaming. 
it remind me, in a queer, gigantic way, of the noise that a clock 
makes, when the catch is released, and it is allow to run down. the 
sound appear to come from some remote height--somewhere up in the 
night. there was no repetition of the shock. i look across at pepper. 
he was sleep peacefully. 

gradually, the whirr noise decreased, and there came a long silence. 

all at once, a glow lit up the end window, which protrude far out from 
the side of the house, so that, from it, one may look both east and 
west. i felt puzzled, and, after a moment's hesitation, walk across 
the room, and pull aside the blind. as i did so, i saw the sun rise, 
from behind the horizon. it rose with a steady, perceptible movement. i 
could see it travel upward. in a minute, it seemed, it had reach the 
tops of the trees, through which i had watch it. up, up--it was broad 
daylight now. behind me, i was conscious of a sharp, mosquito-like 
buzzing. i glance 'round, and knew that it came from the clock. even as 
i looked, it marked off an hour. the minute hand was moving 'round the 
dial, fast than an ordinary second-hand. the hour hand move quick 
from space to space. i had a numb sense of astonishment. a moment later, 
so it seemed, the two candle went out, almost together. i turn 
swift back to the window; for i had seen the shadow of the 
window-frames, travel along the floor toward me, as though a great 
lamp had been carry up past the window. 

i saw now, that the sun had risen high into the heavens, and was still 
visibly moving. it pass above the house, with an extraordinary sailing 
kind of motion. as the window came into shadow, i saw another 
extraordinary thing. the fine-weather cloud were not passing, easily, 
across the sky--they were scampering, as though a hundred-mile-an-hour 
wind blew. as they passed, they change their shape a thousand times a 
minute, as though writhe with a strange life; and so were gone. and, 
presently, other came, and whisk away likewise. 

to the west, i saw the sun, drop with an incredible, smooth, swift 
motion. eastward, the shadow of every seen thing crept toward the 
coming greyness. and the movement of the shadow was visible to me--a 
stealthy, writhe creep of the shadow of the wind-stirred trees. it 
was a strange sight. 

quickly, the room began to darken. the sun slid down to the horizon, 
and seemed, as it were, to disappear from my sight, almost with a jerk. 
through the grey of the swift evening, i saw the silver crescent of 
the moon, fall out of the southern sky, toward the west. the evening 
seem to merge into an almost instant night. above me, the many 
constellation pass in a strange, 'noiseless' circling, westward. the 
moon fell through that last thousand fathom of the night-gulf, and 
there was only the starlight.... 

about this time, the buzz in the corner ceased; telling me that the 
clock had run down. a few minutes passed, and i saw the eastward sky 
lighten. a grey, sullen morning spread through all the darkness, and hid 
the march of the stars. overhead, there moved, with a heavy, everlasting 
rolling, a vast, seamless sky of grey clouds--a cloud-sky that would 
have seem motionless, through all the length of an ordinary earth-day. 
the sun was hidden from me; but, from moment to moment, the world would 
brighten and darken, brighten and darken, beneath wave of subtle light 
and shadow.... 

the light shift ever westward, and the night fell upon the earth. a 
vast rain seem to come with it, and a wind of a most extraordinary 
loudness--as though the howling of a nightlong gale, were packed into 
the space of no more than a minute. 

this noise passed, almost immediately, and the cloud broke; so that, 
once more, i could see the sky. the stars were flying westward, with 
astound speed. it came to me now, for the first time, that, though 
the noise of the wind had passed, yet a constant 'blurred' sound was in 
my ears. now that i notice it, i was aware that it had been with me all 
the time. it was the world-noise. 

and then, even as i grasp at so much comprehension, there came the 
eastward light. no more than a few heartbeats, and the sun rose, 
swiftly. through the trees, i saw it, and then it was above the trees. 
up--up, it soar and all the world was light. it passed, with a swift, 
steady swing to its highest altitude, and fell thence, westward. i saw 
the day roll visibly over my head. a few light cloud flittere 
northward, and vanished. the sun went down with one swift, clear plunge, 
and there was about me, for a few seconds, the dark grow grey of 
the gloaming. 

southward and westward, the moon was sink rapidly. the night had 
come, already. a minute it seemed, and the moon fell those remain 
fathom of dark sky. another minute, or so, and the eastward sky glow 
with the coming dawn. the sun leapt upon me with a frighten 
abruptness, and soar ever more swift toward the zenith. then, 
suddenly, a fresh thing came to my sight. a black thundercloud rush up 
out of the south, and seem to leap all the arc of the sky, in a single 
instant. as it came, i saw that its advance edge flapped, like a 
monstrous black cloth in the heaven, twirl and undulate rapidly, 
with a horrid suggestiveness. in an instant, all the air was full of 
rain, and a hundred lightning flash seem to flood downward, as it 
were in one great shower. in the same second of time, the world-noise 
was drown in the roar of the wind, and then my ear ached, under the 
stunning impact of the thunder. 

and, in the midst of this storm, the night came; and then, within the 
space of another minute, the storm had passed, and there was only the 
constant 'blur' of the world-noise on my hearing. overhead, the stars 
were slide quick westward; and something, mayhap the particular 
speed to which they had attained, brought home to me, for the first 
time, a keen realization of the knowledge that it was the world that 
revolved. i seem to see, suddenly, the world--a vast, dark 
mass--revolving visibly against the stars. 

the dawn and the sun seem to come together, so greatly had the speed 
of the world-revolution increased. the sun drove up, in one long, steady 
curve; pass its highest point, and swept down into the western sky, 
and disappeared. i was scarcely conscious of evening, so brief was it. 
then i was watch the flying constellations, and the westward 
hasten moon. in but a space of seconds, so it seemed, it was slide 
swift downward through the night-blue, and then was gone. and, almost 
directly, came the morning. 

and now there seem to come a strange acceleration. the sun made one 
clean, clear sweep through the sky, and disappear behind the westward 
horizon, and the night came and went with a like haste. 

as the succeed day, open and closed upon the world, i was aware of 
a sweat of snow, sudden upon the earth. the night came, and, almost 
immediately, the day. in the brief leap of the sun, i saw that the snow 
had vanished; and then, once more, it was night. 

thus matter were; and, even after the many incredible things that i 
have seen, i experienced all the time a most profound awe. to see the 
sun rise and set, within a space of time to be measured by seconds; to 
watch (after a little) the moon leap--a pale, and ever grow orb--up 
into the night sky, and glide, with a strange swiftness, through the 
vast arc of blue; and, presently, to see the sun follow, spring out 
of the eastern sky, as though in chase; and then again the night, with 
the swift and ghostly passing of starry constellations, was all too much 
to view believingly. yet, so it was--the day slip from dawn to dusk, 
and the night slide swift into day, ever rapid and more rapidly. 

the last three passage of the sun had shown me a snow-covered earth, 
which, at night, had seemed, for a few seconds, incredible weird under 
the fast-shifting light of the soar and fall moon. now, however, 
for a little space, the sky was hidden, by a sea of swaying, 
leaden-white clouds, which lighten and blackened, alternately, with 
the passage of day and night. 

the cloud ripple and vanished, and there was once more before me, the 
vision of the swift leap sun, and nights that came and went 
like shadows. 

fast and faster, spun the world. and now each day and night was 
complete within the space of but a few seconds; and still the speed 
increased. 

it was a little later, that i notice that the sun had begun to have 
the suspicion of a trail of fire behind it. this was due, evidently, to 
the speed at which it, apparently, traverse the heavens. and, as the 
days sped, each one quick than the last, the sun began to assume the 
appearance of a vast, flaming comet[4] flare across the sky at short, 
periodic intervals. at night, the moon presented, with much greater 
truth, a comet-like aspect; a pale, and singularly clear, fast travel 
shape of fire, trail streak of cold flame. the stars show now, 
merely as fine hair of fire against the dark. 

once, i turn from the window, and glance at pepper. in the flash of 
a day, i saw that he slept, quietly, and i move once more to 
my watching. 

the sun was now burst up from the eastern horizon, like a stupendous 
rocket, seeming to occupy no more than a second or two in hurling from 
east to west. i could no long perceive the passage of cloud across 
the sky, which seem to have darken somewhat. the brief nights, 
appear to have lost the proper dark of night; so that the hair-like 
fire of the flying stars, show but dimly. as the speed increased, the 
sun began to sway very slow in the sky, from south to north, and then, 
slow again, from north to south. 

so, amid a strange confusion of mind, the hour passed. 

all this while had pepper slept. presently, feeling lonely and 
distraught, i call to him, softly; but he took no notice. again, i 
called, raise my voice slightly; still he move not. i walk over to 
where he lay, and touched him with my foot, to rouse him. at the action, 
gentle though it was, he fell to pieces. that is what happened; he 
literally and actually crumble into a moulder heap of bone 
and dust. 

for the space of, perhaps a minute, i stare down at the shapeless 
heap, that had once been pepper. i stood, feeling stunned. what can have 
happened? i ask myself; not at once grasping the grim significance of 
that little hill of ash. then, as i stir the heap with my foot, it 
occur to me that this could only happen in a great space of time. 
years--and years. 

outside, the weaving, flutter light held the world. inside, i stood, 
try to understand what it meant--what that little pile of dust and 
dry bones, on the carpet, meant. but i could not think, coherently. 

i glance away, 'round the room, and now, for the first time, notice 
how dusty and old the place looked. dust and dirt everywhere; pile in 
little heap in the corners, and spread about upon the furniture. the 
very carpet, itself, was invisible beneath a coating of the same, all 
pervading, material. as i walked, little cloud of the stuff rose up 
from under my footsteps, and assail my nostrils, with a dry, bitter 
odor that made me wheeze, huskily. 

suddenly, as my glance fell again upon pepper's remains, i stood still, 
and gave voice to my confusion--questioning, aloud, whether the years 
were, indeed, passing; whether this, which i had taken to be a form of 
vision, was, in truth, a reality. i paused. a new thought had struck me. 
quickly, but with steps which, for the first time, i noticed, tottered, 
i went across the room to the great pier-glass, and look in. it was 
too cover with grime, to give back any reflection, and, with tremble 
hands, i began to rub off the dirt. presently, i could see myself. the 
thought that had come to me, was confirmed. instead of the great, hale 
man, who scarcely look fifty, i was look at a bent, decrepit man, 
whose shoulder stooped, and whose face was wrinkle with the years of a 
century. the hair--which a few short hour ago had been nearly coal 
black--was now silvery white. only the eyes were bright. gradually, i 
traced, in that ancient man, a faint resemblance to my self of 
other days. 

i turn away, and totter to the window. i knew, now, that i was old, 
and the knowledge seem to confirm my tremble walk. for a little 
space, i stare moody out into the blur vista of changeful 
landscape. even in that short time, a year passed, and, with a petulant 
gesture, i left the window. as i did so, i notice that my hand shook 
with the palsy of old age; and a short sob choke its way through 
my lips. 

for a little while, i paced, tremulously, between the window and the 
table; my gaze wandering hither and thither, uneasily. how dilapidated 
the room was. everywhere lay the thick dust--thick, sleepy, and black. 
the fender was a shape of rust. the chain that held the brass 
clock-weights, had rust through long ago, and now the weight lay on 
the floor beneath; themselves two cone of verdigris. 

as i glance about, it seem to me that i could see the very furniture 
of the room rot and decay before my eyes. nor was this fancy, on 
my part; for, all at once, the bookshelf, along the sidewall, collapsed, 
with a crack and rend of rotten wood, precipitate its contents 
upon the floor, and filling the room with a smother of dusty atoms. 

how tired i felt. as i walked, it seem that i could hear my dry 
joints, creak and crack at every step. i wonder about my sister. was 
she dead, as well as pepper? all had happen so quick and suddenly. 
this must be, indeed, the beginning of the end of all things! it 
occur to me, to go to look for her; but i felt too weary. and then, 
she had been so queer about these happenings, of late. of late! i 
repeated the words, and laughed, feebly--mirthlessly, as the realization 
was borne in upon me that i spoke of a time, half a century gone. half a 
century! it might have been twice as long! 

i move slow to the window, and look out once more across the 
world. i can best describe the passage of day and night, at this period, 
as a sort of gigantic, ponderous flicker. moment by moment, the 
acceleration of time continued; so that, at nights now, i saw the moon, 
only as a sway trail of palish fire, that varied from a mere line of 
light to a nebulous path, and then dwindle again, disappear 
periodically. 

the flicker of the days and nights quickened. the days had grown 
perceptible darker, and a queer quality of dusk lay, as it were, in the 
atmosphere. the nights were so much lighter, that the stars were 
scarcely to be seen, saving here and there an occasional hair-like line 
of fire, that seem to sway a little, with the moon. 

quicker, and ever quicker, ran the flicker of day and night; and, 
sudden it seemed, i was aware that the flicker had die out, and, 
instead, there reign a comparatively steady light, which was shed upon 
all the world, from an eternal river of flame that swung up and down, 
north and south, in stupendous, mighty swings. 

the sky was now grown very much darker, and there was in the blue of it 
a heavy gloom, as though a vast black peer through it upon the 
earth. yet, there was in it, also, a strange and awful clearness, and 
emptiness. periodically, i had glimpse of a ghostly track of fire that 
sway thin and dark toward the sun-stream; vanish and reappeared. 
it was the scarcely visible moon-stream. 

look out at the landscape, i was conscious again, of a blur sort 
of 'flitter,' that came either from the light of the ponderous-swinging 
sun-stream, or was the result of the incredible rapid change of the 
earth's surface. and every few moments, so it seemed, the snow would lie 
sudden upon the world, and vanish as abruptly, as though an invisible 
giant 'flitted' a white sheet off and on the earth. 

time fled, and the weary that was mine, grew insupportable. i 
turn from the window, and walk once across the room, the heavy dust 
deaden the sound of my footsteps. each step that i took, seem a 
greater effort than the one before. an intolerable ache, knew me in 
every joint and limb, as i trod my way, with a weary uncertainty. 

by the opposite wall, i came to a weak pause, and wondered, dimly, what 
was my intent. i look to my left, and saw my old chair. the thought of 
sitting in it brought a faint sense of comfort to my bewilder 
wretchedness. yet, because i was so weary and old and tired, i would 
scarcely brace my mind to do anything but stand, and wish myself past 
those few yards. i rocked, as i stood. the floor, even, seem a place 
for rest; but the dust lay so thick and sleepy and black. i turned, with 
a great effort of will, and made toward my chair. i reach it, with a 
groan of thankfulness. i sat down. 

everything about me appear to be grow dim. it was all so strange 
and unthought of. last night, i was a comparatively strong, though 
elderly man; and now, only a few hour later--! i look at the little 
dust-heap that had once been pepper. hours! and i laughed, a feeble, 
bitter laugh; a shrill, cackle laugh, that shock my dim senses. 

for a while, i must have dozed. then i open my eyes, with a start. 
somewhere across the room, there had been a muffle noise of something 
falling. i looked, and saw, vaguely, a cloud of dust hover above a 
pile of _débris_. near the door, something else tumbled, with a crash. 
it was one of the cupboards; but i was tired, and took little notice. i 
closed my eyes, and sat there in a state of drowsy, semi-unconsciousness. 
once or twice--as though coming through thick mists--i heard noises, 
faintly. then i must have slept. 



_xvi_ 

the awakening 

i awoke, with a start. for a moment, i wonder where i was. then 
memory came to me.... 

the room was still lit with that strange light--half-sun, half-moon, 
light. i felt refreshed, and the tired, weary ache had left me. i went 
slow across to the window, and look out. overhead, the river of 
flame drove up and down, north and south, in a dance semi-circle of 
fire. as a mighty sleigh in the loom of time it seemed--in a sudden 
fancy of mine--to be beating home the pick of the years. for, so vastly 
had the passage of time been accelerated, that there was no long any 
sense of the sun passing from east to west. the only apparent movement 
was the north and south beat of the sun-stream, that had become so swift 
now, as to be better describe as a _quiver_. 

as i peer out, there came to me a sudden, inconsequent memory of that 
last journey among the outer worlds. i remember the sudden vision that 
had come to me, as i near the solar system, of the fast whirl 
planet about the sun--as though the governing quality of time had been 
held in abeyance, and the machine of a universe allow to run down an 
eternity, in a few moments or hours. the memory passed, along with a, 
but partially comprehended, suggestion that i had been permit a 
glimpse into further time spaces. i stare out again, seemingly, at the 
quake of the sun-stream. the speed seem to increase, even as i looked. 
several lifetime came and went, as i watched. 

suddenly, it struck me, with a sort of grotesque seriousness, that i 
was still alive. i thought of pepper, and wonder how it was that i had 
not follow his fate. he had reach the time of his dying, and had 
passed, probably through sheer length of years. and here was i, alive, 
hundred of thousand of century after my rightful period of years. 

for, a time, i mused, absently. 'yesterday--' i stopped, suddenly. 
yesterday! there was no yesterday. the yesterday of which i spoke had 
been swallow up in the abyss of years, age gone. i grew daze with 
much thinking. 

presently, i turn from the window, and glance 'round the room. it 
seem different--strangely, utterly different. then, i knew what it was 
that made it appear so strange. it was bare: there was not a piece of 
furniture in the room; not even a solitary fitting of any sort. 
gradually, my amaze went, as i remembered, that this was but the 
inevitable end of that process of decay, which i had witness 
commencing, before my sleep. thousand of years! million of years! 

over the floor was spread a deep layer of dust, that reach half way 
up to the window-seat. it had grown immeasurably, whilst i slept; and 
represent the dust of untold ages. undoubtedly, atom of the old, 
decay furniture help to swell its bulk; and, somewhere among it all, 
moulder the long-ago-dead pepper. 

all at once, it occur to me, that i had no recollection of wade 
knee-deep through all that dust, after i awoke. true, an incredible age 
of years had passed, since i approach the window; but that was 
evidently as nothing, compare with the countless space of time that, i 
conceived, had vanish whilst i was sleeping. i remember now, that i 
had fallen asleep, sitting in my old chair. had it gone ...? i glance 
toward where it had stood. of course, there was no chair to be seen. i 
could not satisfy myself, whether it had disappeared, after my waking, 
or before. if it had moulder under me, surely, i should have been 
wake by the collapse. then i remember that the thick dust, which 
cover the floor, would have been sufficient to soften my fall; so that 
it was quite possible, i had slept upon the dust for a million years 
or more. 

as these thought wander through my brain, i glance again, casually, 
to where the chair had stood. then, for the first time, i notice that 
there were no marks, in the dust, of my footprints, between it and the 
window. but then, age of years had passed, since i had awaked--tens of 
thousand of years! 

my look rest thoughtfully, again upon the place where once had stood 
my chair. suddenly, i pass from abstraction to intentness; for there, 
in its standing place, i made out a long undulation, round off with 
the heavy dust. yet it was not so much hidden, but that i could tell 
what had cause it. i knew--and shiver at the knowledge--that it was a 
human body, ages-dead, lie there, beneath the place where i had slept. 
it was lie on its right side, its back turn toward me. i could make 
out and trace each curve and outline, softened, and moulded, as it were, 
in the black dust. in a vague sort of way, i try to account for its 
presence there. slowly, i began to grow bewildered, as the thought came 
to me that it lay just about where i must have fallen when the chair 
collapsed. 

gradually, an idea began to form itself within my brain; a thought that 
shook my spirit. it seem hideous and insupportable; yet it grew upon 
me, steadily, until it became a conviction. the body under that coating, 
that shroud of dust, was neither more nor less than my own dead shell. i 
did not attempt to prove it. i knew it now, and wonder i had not known 
it all along. i was a bodiless thing. 

awhile, i stood, try to adjust my thought to this new problem. in 
time--how many thousand of years, i know not--i attain to some degree 
of quietude--sufficient to enable me to pay attention to what was 
transpire around me. 

now, i saw that the elongate mound had sunk, collapsed, level with the 
rest of the spread dust. and fresh atoms, impalpable, had settled 
above that mixture of grave-powder, which the aeon had ground. a long 
while, i stood, turn from the window. gradually, i grew more 
collected, while the world slip across the century into the future. 

presently, i began a survey of the room. now, i saw that time was 
beginning its destructive work, even on this strange old building. that 
it had stood through all the years was, it seem to me, proof that it 
was something different from any other house. i do not think, somehow, 
that i had thought of its decaying. though, why, i could not have said. 
it was not until i had meditate upon the matter, for some considerable 
time, that i fully realize that the extraordinary space of time through 
which it had stood, was sufficient to have utterly pulverize the very 
stone of which it was built, had they been taken from any earthly 
quarry. yes, it was undoubted moulder now. all the plaster had gone 
from the walls; even as the woodwork of the room had gone, many 
age before. 

while i stood, in contemplation, a piece of glass, from one of the 
small, diamond-shaped panes, dropped, with a dull tap, amid the dust 
upon the sill behind me, and crumble into a little heap of powder. as i 
turn from contemplate it, i saw light between a couple of the stone 
that form the outer wall. evidently, the mortar was fall away.... 

after awhile, i turn once more to the window, and peer out. i 
discovered, now, that the speed of time had become enormous. the lateral 
quiver of the sun-stream, had grown so swift as to cause the dance 
semi-circle of flame to merge into, and disappear in, a sheet of fire 
that cover half the southern sky from east to west. 

from the sky, i glance down to the gardens. they were just a blur of a 
palish, dirty green. i had a feeling that they stood higher, than in the 
old days; a feeling that they were near my window, as though they had 
risen, bodily. yet, they were still a long way below me; for the rock, 
over the mouth of the pit, on which this house stands, arch up to a 
great height. 

it was later, that i notice a change in the constant color of the 
gardens. the pale, dirty green was grow ever pale and paler, toward 
white. at last, after a great space, they became greyish-white, and 
stay thus for a very long time. finally, however, the grey began 
to fade, even as had the green, into a dead white. and this remained, 
constant and unchanged. and by this i knew that, at last, snow lay upon 
all the northern world. 

and so, by million of years, time wing onward through eternity, to 
the end--the end, of which, in the old-earth days, i had thought 
remotely, and in hazy speculative fashion. and now, it was approach 
in a manner of which none had ever dreamed. 

i recollect that, about this time, i began to have a lively, though 
morbid, curiosity, as to what would happen when the end came--but i 
seem strange without imaginings. 

all this while, the steady process of decay was continuing. the few 
remain pieces of glass, had long ago vanished; and, every now and 
then, a soft thud, and a little cloud of rising dust, would tell of some 
fragment of fallen mortar or stone. 

i look up again, to the fiery sheet that quake in the heaven above 
me and far down into the southern sky. as i looked, the impression was 
borne in upon me, that it had lost some of its first brilliancy--that it 
was duller, deep hued. 

i glance down, once more, to the blur white of the worldscape. 
sometimes, my look return to the burning sheet of dull flame, that 
was, and yet hid, the sun. at times, i glance behind me, into the 
grow dusk of the great, silent room, with its aeon-carpet of 
sleep dust.... 

so, i watch through the fleeting ages, lost in soul-wearing thought 
and wonderings, and possessed with a new weariness. 



_xvii_ 

the slow rotation 

it might have been a million years later, that i perceived, beyond 
possibility of doubt, that the fiery sheet that lit the world, was 
indeed darkening. 

another vast space went by, and the whole enormous flame had sunk to a 
deep, copper color. gradually, it darkened, from copper to copper-red, 
and from this, at times, to a deep, heavy, purplish tint, with, in it, a 
strange loom of blood. 

although the light was decreasing, i could perceive no diminish in 
the apparent speed of the sun. it still spread itself in that dazzle 
veil of speed. 

the world, so much of it as i could see, had assume a dreadful shade 
of gloom, as though, in very deed, the last day of the world 
approached. 

the sun was dying; of that there could be little doubt; and still the 
earth whirl onward, through space and all the aeons. at this time, i 
remember, an extraordinary sense of bewilder took me. i found 
myself, later, wandering, mentally, amid an odd chaos of fragmentary 
modern theory and the old biblical story of the world's ending. 

then, for the first time, there flash across me, the memory that the 
sun, with its system of planets, was, and had been, travel through 
space at an incredible speed. abruptly, the question rose--_where?_ for 
a very great time, i ponder this matter; but, finally, with a certain 
sense of the futility of my puzzlings, i let my thought wander to other 
things. i grew to wondering, how much long the house would stand. 
also, i queried, to myself, whether i should be doom to stay, 
bodiless, upon the earth, through the dark-time that i knew was coming. 
from these thoughts, i fell again to speculation upon the possible 
direction of the sun's journey through space.... and so another great 
while passed. 

gradually, as time fled, i began to feel the chill of a great winter. 
then, i remember that, with the sun dying, the cold must be, 
necessarily, extraordinarily intense. slowly, slowly, as the aeon 
slip into eternity, the earth sank into a heavy and red gloom. 
the dull flame in the firmament took on a deep tint, very somber 
and turbid. 

then, at last, it was borne upon me that there was a change. the fiery, 
gloomy curtain of flame that hung quake overhead, and down away into 
the southern sky, began to thin and contract; and, in it, as one see 
the fast vibration of a jar harp-string, i saw once more the 
sun-stream quivering, giddily, north and south. 

slowly, the likeness to a sheet of fire, disappeared, and i saw, 
plainly, the slow beat of the sun-stream. yet, even then, the speed 
of its swing was inconceivable swift. and all the time, the bright 
of the fiery arc grew ever duller. underneath, the world loom 
dimly--an indistinct, ghostly region. 

overhead, the river of flame sway slower, and even slower; until, at 
last, it swung to the north and south in great, ponderous beats, that 
last through seconds. a long space went by, and now each sway of the 
great belt last nigh a minute; so that, after a great while, i cease 
to distinguish it as a visible movement; and the stream fire ran in a 
steady river of dull flame, across the deadly-looking sky. 

an indefinite period passed, and it seem that the arc of fire became 
less sharp defined. it appear to me to grow more attenuated, and i 
thought blackish streak showed, occasionally. presently, as i watched, 
the smooth onward-flow ceased; and i was able to perceive that there 
came a momentary, but regular, darken of the world. this grew until, 
once more, night descended, in short, but periodic, interval upon the 
weary earth. 

long and long became the nights, and the days equal them; so 
that, at last, the day and the night grew to the duration of seconds in 
length, and the sun showed, once more, like an almost invisible, 
coppery-red colored ball, within the glowing misty of its flight. 
corresponding to the dark lines, showing at times in its trail, there 
were now distinct to be seen on the half-visible sun itself, great, 
dark belts. 

year after year flash into the past, and the days and nights spread 
into minutes. the sun had cease to have the appearance of a tail; and 
now rose and set--a tremendous globe of a glowing copper-bronze hue; in 
parts ring with blood-red bands; in others, with the dusky ones, that 
i have already mentioned. these circles--both red and black--were of 
vary thicknesses. for a time, i was at a loss to account for their 
presence. then it occur to me, that it was scarcely likely that the 
sun would cool even all over; and that these marking were due, 
probably, to difference in temperature of the various areas; the red 
represent those parts where the heat was still fervent, and the black 
those portion which were already comparatively cool. 

it struck me, as a peculiar thing, that the sun should cool in even 
define rings; until i remember that, possibly, they were but isolated 
patches, to which the enormous rotatory speed of the sun had impart a 
belt-like appearance. the sun, itself, was very much greater than the sun 
i had known in the old-world days; and, from this, i argue that it was 
considerably nearer. 

at nights, the moon[6] still showed; but small and remote; and the 
light she reflect was so dull and weak that she seem little more 
than the small, dim ghost of the olden moon, that i had known. 

gradually, the days and nights lengthen out, until they equal a 
space somewhat less than one of the old-earth hours; the sun rising and 
setting like a great, ruddy bronze disk, cross with ink-black bars. 
about this time, i found myself, able once more, to see the gardens, 
with clearness. for the world had now grown very still, and changeless. 
yet, i am not correct in saying, 'gardens'; for there were no 
gardens--nothing that i knew or recognized. in place thereof, i look 
out upon a vast plain, stretch away into distance. a little to my 
left, there was a low range of hills. everywhere, there was a uniform, 
white covering of snow, in place rising into hummock and ridges. 

it was only now, that i recognize how really great had been the 
snowfall. in place it was vastly deep, as was witness by a great, 
upleaping, wave-shaped hill, away to my right; though it is not 
impossible, that this was due, in part, to some rise in the surface of 
the ground. strange enough, the range of low hill to my 
left--already mentioned--was not entire cover with the universal 
snow; instead, i could see their bare, dark side showing in several 
places. and everywhere and always there reign an incredible 
death-silence and desolation. the immutable, awful quiet of a 
die world. 

all this time, the days and nights were lengthening, perceptibly. 
already, each day occupied, maybe, some two hour from dawn to dusk. at 
night, i had been surprise to find that there were very few stars 
overhead, and these small, though of an extraordinary brightness; which 
i attribute to the peculiar, but clear, black of the nighttime. 

away to the north, i could discern a nebulous sort of mistiness; not 
unlike, in appearance, a small portion of the milky way. it might have 
been an extremely remote star-cluster; or--the thought came to me 
suddenly--perhaps it was the sidereal universe that i had known, and now 
left far behind, forever--a small, dim glowing mist of stars, far in 
the depths of space. 

still, the days and nights lengthened, slowly. each time, the sun rose 
dull than it had set. and the dark belt increase in breadth. 

about this time, there happen a fresh thing. the sun, earth, and sky 
were sudden darkened, and, apparently, blot out for a brief space. 
i had a sense, a certain aware (i could learn little by sight), that 
the earth was enduring a very great fall of snow. then, in an instant, 
the veil that had obscure everything, vanished, and i look out, once 
more. a marvelous sight met my gaze. the hollow in which this house, 
with its gardens, stands, was brim with snow.[7] it lip over the 
sill of my window. everywhere, it lay, a great level stretch of white, 
which caught and reflected, gloomily, the somber coppery glow of the 
die sun. the world had become a shadowless plain, from horizon 
to horizon. 

i glance up at the sun. it shone with an extraordinary, dull 
clearness. i saw it, now, as one who, until then, had seen it, only 
through a partially obscure medium. all about it, the sky had become 
black, with a clear, deep blackness, frightful in its nearness, and its 
unmeasured deep, and its utter unfriendliness. for a great time, i 
look into it, newly, and shaken and fearful. it was so near. had i 
been a child, i might have express some of my sensation and distress, 
by saying that the sky had lost its roof. 

later, i turned, and peer about me, into the room. everywhere, it was 
cover with a thin shroud of the all-pervading white. i could see it 
but dimly, by reason of the somber light that now lit the world. it 
appear to cling to the ruin walls; and the thick, soft dust of the 
years, that cover the floor knee-deep, was nowhere visible. the snow 
must have blown in through the open framework of the windows. yet, in no 
place had it drifted; but lay everywhere about the great, old room, 
smooth and level. moreover, there had been no wind these many thousand 
years. but there was the snow,[8] as i have told. 

and all the earth was silent. and there was a cold, such as no living 
man can ever have known. 

the earth was now illuminated, by day, with a most doleful light, 
beyond my power to describe. it seem as though i look at the great 
plain, through the medium of a bronze-tinted sea. 

it was evident that the earth's rotatory movement was departing, 
steadily. 

the end came, all at once. the night had been the longest yet; and 
when the die sun showed, at last, above the world's edge, i had grown 
so weary of the dark, that i greet it as a friend. it rose steadily, 
until about twenty degree above the horizon. then, it stop suddenly, 
and, after a strange retrograde movement, hung motionless--a great 
shield in the sky[9]. only the circular rim of the sun show 
bright--only this, and one thin streak of light near the equator. 

gradually, even this thread of light die out; and now, all that was 
left of our great and glorious sun, was a vast dead disk, rim with a 
thin circle of bronze-red light. 



_xviii_ 

the green star 

the world was held in a savage gloom--cold and intolerable. outside, 
all was quiet--quiet! from the dark room behind me, came the occasional, 
soft thud[10] of fall matter--fragments of rot stone. so time 
passed, and night grasp the world, wrapping it in wrapping of 
impenetrable blackness. 

there was no night-sky, as we know it. even the few straggle stars 
had vanished, conclusively. i might have been in a shutter room, 
without a light; for all that i could see. only, in the impalpable 
of gloom, opposite, burnt that vast, encircle hair of dull fire. 
beyond this, there was no ray in all the vastitude of night that 
surround me; save that, far in the north, that soft, mistlike glow 
still shone. 

silently, years move on. what period of time passed, i shall never 
know. it seem to me, wait there, that eternity came and went, 
stealthily; and still i watched. i could see only the glow of the sun's 
edge, at times; for now, it had commence to come and go--lighting up a 
while, and again becoming extinguished. 

all at once, during one of these periods of life, a sudden flame cut 
across the night--a quick glare that lit up the dead earth, shortly; 
give me a glimpse of its flat lonesomeness. the light appear to come 
from the sun--shooting out from somewhere near its center, diagonally. a 
moment, i gazed, startled. then the leap flame sank, and the gloom 
fell again. but now it was not so dark; and the sun was belted by a thin 
line of vivid, white light. i stared, intently. had a volcano broken out 
on the sun? yet, i negative the thought, as soon as formed. i felt that 
the light had been far too intense white, and large, for such a cause. 

another idea there was, that suggest itself to me. it was, that one 
of the inner planet had fallen into the sun--becoming incandescent, 
under that impact. this theory appeal to me, as being more plausible, 
and account more satisfactory for the extraordinary size and 
brilliance of the blaze, that had lit up the dead world, so 
unexpectedly. 

full of interest and emotion, i stared, across the darkness, at that 
line of white fire, cutting the night. one thing it told to me, 
unmistakably: the sun was yet rotate at an enormous speed.[11] thus, i 
knew that the years were still fleeting at an incalculable rate; though 
so far as the earth was concerned, life, and light, and time, were 
things belong to a period lost in the long gone ages. 

after that one burst of flame, the light had shown, only as an 
encircle band of bright fire. now, however, as i watched, it began 
slow to sink into a ruddy tint, and, later, to a dark, copper-red 
color; much as the sun had done. presently, it sank to a deep hue; 
and, in a still further space of time, it began to fluctuate; have 
periods of glowing, and anon, dying. thus, after a great while, it 
disappeared. 

long before this, the smolder edge of the sun had deaden into 
blackness. and so, in that supreme future time, the world, dark and 
intense silent, rode on its gloomy orbit around the ponderous mass of 
the dead sun. 

my thoughts, at this period, can be scarcely described. at first, they 
were chaotic and wanting in coherence. but, later, as the age came and 
went, my soul seem to imbibe the very essence of the oppressive 
solitude and dreariness, that held the earth. 

with this feeling, there came a wonderful clear of thought, and i 
realized, despairingly, that the world might wander for ever, through 
that enormous night. for a while, the unwholesome idea fill me, with a 
sensation of overbearing desolation; so that i could have cry like a 
child. in time, however, this feeling grew, almost insensibly, less, and 
an unreasoning hope possessed me. patiently, i waited. 

from time to time, the noise of drop particles, behind in the room, 
came dul to my ears. once, i heard a loud crash, and turned, 
instinctively, to look; forgetting, for the moment, the impenetrable 
night in which every detail was submerged. in a while, my gaze sought 
the heavens; turning, unconsciously, toward the north. yes, the nebulous 
glow still showed. indeed, i could have almost imagine that it look 
somewhat plainer. for a long time, i kept my gaze fixed upon it; 
feeling, in my lonely soul, that its soft haze was, in some way, a tie 
with the past. strange, the trifle from which one can suck comfort! and 
yet, had i but known--but i shall come to that in its proper time. 

for a very long space, i watched, without experience any of the 
desire for sleep, that would so soon have visit me in the old-earth 
days. how i should have welcome it; if only to have pass the time, 
away from my perplexity and thoughts. 

several times, the comfortless sound of some great piece of masonry 
falling, disturbed my meditations; and, once, it seem i could hear 
whisper in the room, behind me. yet it was utterly useless to try to 
see anything. such blackness, as existed, scarcely can be conceived. it 
was palpable, and hideous brutal to the sense; as though something 
dead, pressed up against me--something soft, and icy cold. 

under all this, there grew up within my mind, a great and overwhelming 
distress of uneasiness, that left me, but to drop me into an 
uncomfortable brooding. i felt that i must fight against it; and, 
presently, hope to distract my thoughts, i turn to the window, and 
look up toward the north, in search of the nebulous whiteness, which, 
still, i believe to be the far and misty glowing of the universe we had 
left. even as i raise my eyes, i was thrill with a feeling of wonder; 
for, now, the hazy light had resolve into a single, great star, of 
vivid green. 

as i stared, astonished, the thought flash into my mind; that the 
earth must be travel toward the star; not away, as i had imagined. 
next, that it could not be the universe the earth had left; but, 
possibly, an outlying star, belong to some vast star-cluster, hidden 
in the enormous depths of space. with a sense of commingle awe and 
curiosity, i watch it, wonder what new thing was to be reveal 
to me. 

for a while, vague thought and speculation occupy me, during which 
my gaze dwelt insatiable upon that one spot of light, in the otherwise 
pitlike darkness. hope grew up within me, banish the oppression of 
despair, that had seem to stifle me. wherever the earth was traveling, 
it was, at least, go once more toward the realm of light. light! one 
must spend an eternity wrap in soundless night, to understand the 
full horror of being without it. 

slowly, but surely, the star grew upon my vision, until, in time, it 
shone as bright as had the planet jupiter, in the old-earth days. with 
increase size, its color became more impressive; remind me of a huge 
emerald, scintillate ray of fire across the world. 

years flee away in silence, and the green star grew into a great splash 
of flame in the sky. a little later, i saw a thing that fill me with 
amazement. it was the ghostly outline of a vast crescent, in the night; 
a gigantic new moon, seeming to be grow out of the surrounding gloom. 
utterly bemused, i stare at it. it appear to be quite 
close--comparatively; and i puzzle to understand how the earth had come 
so near to it, without my have seen it before. 

the light, thrown by the star, grew stronger; and, presently, i was 
aware that it was possible to see the earthscape again; though 
indistinctly. awhile, i stared, try to make out whether i could 
distinguish any detail of the world's surface, but i found the light 
insufficient. in a little, i gave up the attempt, and glance once more 
toward the star. even in the short space, that my attention had been 
diverted, it had increase considerably, and seem now, to my 
bewilder sight, about a quarter of the size of the full moon. the 
light it threw, was extraordinarily powerful; yet its color was so 
abominable unfamiliar, that such of the world as i could see, show 
unreal; more as though i look out upon a landscape of shadow, than 
aught else. 

all this time, the great crescent was increase in brightness, and 
began, now, to shine with a perceptible shade of green. steadily, the 
star increase in size and brilliancy, until it showed, fully as large 
as half a full moon; and, as it grew greater and brighter, so did the 
vast crescent throw out more and more light, though of an ever deepen 
hue of green. under the combine blaze of their radiances, the 
wilderness that stretch before me, became steady more visible. soon, 
i seem able to stare across the whole world, which now appeared, 
beneath the strange light, terrible in its cold and awful, flat 
dreariness. 

it was a little later, that my attention was drawn to the fact, that 
the great star of green flame, was slow sink out of the north, 
toward the east. at first, i could scarcely believe that i saw aright; 
but soon there could be no doubt that it was so. gradually, it sank, 
and, as it fell, the vast crescent of glowing green, began to dwindle 
and dwindle, until it became a mere arc of light, against the livid 
colored sky. later it vanished, disappear in the self-same spot from 
which i had seen it slow emerge. 

by this time, the star had come to within some thirty degree of the 
hidden horizon. in size it could now have rival the moon at its full; 
though, even yet, i could not distinguish its disk. this fact led me to 
conceive that it was, still, an extraordinary distance away; and, this 
being so, i knew that its size must be huge, beyond the conception of 
man to understand or imagine. 

suddenly, as i watched, the lower edge of the star vanished--cut by a 
straight, dark line. a minute--or a century--passed, and it dip 
lower, until the half of it had disappear from sight. far away out on 
the great plain, i saw a monstrous shadow blot it out, and advance 
swiftly. only a third of the star was visible now. then, like a flash, 
the solution of this extraordinary phenomenon reveal itself to me. the 
star was sink behind the enormous mass of the dead sun. or rather, 
the sun--obedient to its attraction--was rising toward it,[12] with the 
earth following in its trail. as these thought expand in my mind, the 
star vanished; being completely hidden by the tremendous bulk of the 
sun. over the earth there fell, once more, the brood night. 

with the darkness, came an intolerable feeling of lonely and dread. 
for the first time, i thought of the pit, and its inmates. after that, 
there rose in my memory the still more terrible thing, that had haunt 
the shore of the sea of sleep, and lurk in the shadow of this old 
building. where were they? i wondered--and shiver with miserable 
thoughts. for a time, fear held me, and i prayed, wildly and 
incoherently, for some ray of light with which to dispel the cold 
black that envelop the world. 

how long i waited, it is impossible to say--certainly for a very great 
period. then, all at once, i saw a loom of light shine out ahead. 
gradually, it became more distinct. suddenly, a ray of vivid green, 
flash across the darkness. at the same moment, i saw a thin line of 
livid flame, far in the night. an instant, it seemed, and it had grown 
into a great clot of fire; beneath which, the world lay bath in a 
blaze of emerald green light. steady it grew, until, presently, the 
whole of the green star had come into sight again. but now, it could be 
scarcely call a star; for it had increase to vast proportions, being 
incomparable greater than the sun had been in the olden time. 

"then, as i stared, i became aware that i could see the edge of the 
lifeless sun, glowing like a great crescent-moon. slowly, its light 
surface, broaden out to me, until half of its diameter was visible; 
and the star began to drop away on my right. time passed, and the earth 
move on, slow traverse the tremendous face of the dead sun." [13] 

gradually, as the earth traveled forward, the star fell still more to 
the right; until, at last, it shone on the back of the house, send a 
flood of broken rays, in through the skeleton-like walls. glancing 
upward, i saw that much of the ceiling had vanished, enabling me to see 
that the upper storey were even more decayed. the roof had, evidently, 
gone entirely; and i could see the green effulgence of the starlight 
shining in, slantingly. 



_xix_ 

the end of the solar system 

from the abutment, where once had been the windows, through which i had 
watch that first, fatal dawn, i could see that the sun was hugely 
greater, than it had been, when first the star lit the world. so great 
was it, that its lower edge seem almost to touch the far horizon. even 
as i watched, i imagine that it drew closer. the radiance of green that 
lit the frozen earth, grew steady brighter. 

thus, for a long space, things were. then, on a sudden, i saw that the 
sun was change shape, and grow smaller, just as the moon would have 
done in past time. in a while, only a third of the illuminate part was 
turn toward the earth. the star bore away on the left. 

gradually, as the world move on, the star shone upon the front of the 
house, once more; while the sun showed, only as a great bow of green 
fire. an instant, it seemed, and the sun had vanished. the star was 
still fully visible. then the earth move into the black shadow of the 
sun, and all was night--night, black, starless, and intolerable. 

fill with tumultuous thoughts, i watch across the night--waiting. 
years, it may have been, and then, in the dark house behind me, the 
clot still of the world was broken. i seem to hear a soft 
padding of many feet, and a faint, inarticulate whisper of sound, grew 
on my sense. i look 'round into the blackness, and saw a multitude of 
eyes. as i stared, they increased, and appear to come toward me. for 
an instant, i stood, unable to move. then a hideous swine-noise[14] rose 
up into the night; and, at that, i leapt from the window, out on to the 
frozen world. i have a confuse notion of have run awhile; and, after 
that, i just waited--waited. several times, i heard shrieks; but always 
as though from a distance. except for these sounds, i had no idea of the 
whereabouts of the house. time move onward. i was conscious of little, 
save a sensation of cold and hopeless and fear. 

an age, it seemed, and there came a glow, that told of the coming 
light. it grew, tardily. then--with a loom of unearthly glory--the first 
ray from the green star, struck over the edge of the dark sun, and lit 
the world. it fell upon a great, ruin structure, some two hundred 
yard away. it was the house. staring, i saw a fearsome sight--over its 
wall crawl a legion of unholy things, almost covering the old 
building, from totter tower to base. i could see them, plainly; they 
were the swine-creatures. 

the world move out into the light of the star, and i saw that, now, it 
seem to stretch across a quarter of the heavens. the glory of its 
livid light was so tremendous, that it appear to fill the sky with 
quiver flames. then, i saw the sun. it was so close that half of its 
diameter lay below the horizon; and, as the world circle across its 
face, it seem to tower right up into the sky, a stupendous dome of 
emerald colored fire. from time to time, i glance toward the house; but 
the swine-things seem unaware of my proximity. 

years appear to pass, slowly. the earth had almost reach the center 
of the sun's disk. the light from the green _sun_--as now it must be 
called--shone through the interstices, that gap the moulder wall 
of the old house, give them the appearance of being wrap in green 
flames. the swine-creatures still crawl about the walls. 

suddenly, there rose a loud roar of swine-voices, and, up from the 
center of the roofless house, shot a vast column of blood-red flame. i 
saw the little, twist tower and turret flash into fire; yet still 
preserve their twist crookedness. the beam of the green sun, beat 
upon the house, and intermingle with its lurid glows; so that it 
appear a blazing furnace of red and green fire. 

fascinated, i watched, until an overwhelming sense of coming danger, 
drew my attention. i glance up, and, at once, it was borne upon me, 
that the sun was closer; so close, in fact, that it seem to overhang 
the world. then--i know not how--i was caught up into strange 
heights--floating like a bubble in the awful effulgence. 

far below me, i saw the earth, with the burning house leap into an 
ever grow mountain of flame, 'round about it, the ground appear to 
be glowing; and, in places, heavy wreath of yellow smoke ascend from 
the earth. it seem as though the world were becoming ignite from that 
one plague-spot of fire. faintly, i could see the swine-things. they 
appear quite unharmed. then the ground seem to cave in, suddenly, 
and the house, with its load of foul creatures, disappear into the 
depths of the earth, send a strange, blood colored cloud into the 
heights. i remember the hell pit under the house. 

in a while, i look 'round. the huge bulk of the sun, rose high above 
me. the distance between it and the earth, grew rapid less. suddenly, 
the earth appear to shoot forward. in a moment, it had traverse the 
space between it and the sun. i heard no sound; but, out from the sun's 
face, gush an ever-growing tongue of dazzle flame. it seem to 
leap, almost to the distant green sun--shearing through the emerald 
light, a very cataract of blind fire. it reach its limit, and sank; 
and, on the sun, glow a vast splash of burning white--the grave of 
the earth. 

the sun was very close to me, now. presently, i found that i was rising 
higher; until, at last, i rode above it, in the emptiness. the green sun 
was now so huge that its breadth seem to fill up all the sky, ahead. i 
look down, and noted that the sun was passing directly beneath me. 

a year may have gone by--or a century--and i was left, suspended, 
alone. the sun show far in front--a black, circular mass, against the 
molten splendor of the great, green orb. near one edge, i observe that 
a lurid glow had appeared, marking the place where the earth had fallen. 
by this, i knew that the long-dead sun was still revolving, though with 
great slowness. 

afar to my right, i seem to catch, at times, a faint glow of whitish 
light. for a great time, i was uncertain whether to put this down to 
fancy or not. thus, for a while, i stared, with fresh wonderings; until, 
at last, i knew that it was no imaginary thing; but a reality. it grew 
brighter; and, presently, there slid out of the green, a pale globe of 
softest white. it came nearer, and i saw that it was apparently 
surround by a robe of gently glowing clouds. time passed.... 

i glance toward the diminish sun. it showed, only as a dark blot on 
the face of the green sun. as i watched, i saw it grow smaller, 
steadily, as though rush toward the superior orb, at an immense 
speed. intently, i stared. what would happen? i was conscious of 
extraordinary emotions, as i realize that it would strike the green 
sun. it grew no big than a pea, and i looked, with my whole soul, to 
witness the final end of our system--that system which had borne the 
world through so many aeons, with its multitudinous sorrow and 
joys; and now-- 

suddenly, something cross my vision, cutting from sight all vestige 
of the spectacle i watch with such soul-interest. what happen to the 
dead sun, i did not see; but i have no reason--in the light of that 
which i saw afterward--to disbelieve that it fell into the strange fire 
of the green sun, and so perished. 

and then, suddenly, an extraordinary question rose in my mind, whether 
this stupendous globe of green fire might not be the vast central 
sun--the great sun, 'round which our universe and countless other 
revolve. i felt confused. i thought of the probable end of the dead sun, 
and another suggestion came, dumbly--do the dead stars make the green 
sun their grave? the idea appeal to me with no sense of grotesqueness; 
but rather as something both possible and probable. 



_xx_ 

the celestial globe 

for a while, many thought crowded my mind, so that i was unable to do 
aught, save stare, blindly, before me. i seem whelme in a sea of 
doubt and wonder and sorrowful remembrance. 

it was later, that i came out of my bewilderment. i look about, 
dazedly. thus, i saw so extraordinary a sight that, for a while, i could 
scarcely believe i was not still wrap in the visionary tumult of my 
own thoughts. out of the reign green, had grown a boundless river of 
soft shimmer globes--each one enfold in a wondrous fleece of pure 
cloud. they reached, both above and below me, to an unknown distance; 
and, not only hid the shining of the green sun; but supplied, in place 
thereof, a tender glow of light, that suffuse itself around me, like 
unto nothing i have ever seen, before or since. 

in a little, i notice that there was about these spheres, a sort of 
transparency, almost as though they were form of cloud crystal, 
within which burn a radiance--gentle and subdued. they move on, past 
me, continually, floating onward at no great speed; but rather as 
though they had eternity before them. a great while, i watched, and 
could perceive no end to them. at times, i seem to distinguish faces, 
amid the cloudiness; but strange indistinct, as though partly real, 
and partly form of the misty through which they showed. 

for a long time, i waited, passively, with a sense of grow content. 
i had no long that feeling of unutterable loneliness; but felt, 
rather, that i was less alone, than i had been for kalpa of years. this 
feeling of contentment, increased, so that i would have been satisfy 
to float in company with those celestial globules, forever. 

age slip by, and i saw the shadowy faces, with increase frequency, 
also with greater plainness. whether this was due to my soul have 
become more attune to its surroundings, i cannot tell--probably it was 
so. but, however this may be, i am assured now, only of the fact that i 
became steady more conscious of a new mystery about me, telling me 
that i had, indeed, penetrate within the borderland of some 
unthought-of region--some subtle, intangible place, or form, of 
existence. 

the enormous stream of luminous sphere continue to pass me, at an 
unvarye rate--countless millions; and still they came, showing no 
sign of ending, nor even diminishing. 

then, as i was borne, silently, upon the unbuoye ether, i felt a 
sudden, irresistible, forward movement, toward one of the passing 
globes. an instant, and i was beside it. then, i slid through, into the 
interior, without experience the least resistance, of any description. 
for a short while, i could see nothing; and waited, curiously. 

all at once, i became aware that a sound broke the inconceivable 
stillness. it was like the murmur of a great sea at calm--a sea 
breathing in its sleep. gradually, the mist that obscure my sight, 
began to thin away; and so, in time, my vision dwelt once again upon the 
silent surface of the sea of sleep. 

for a little, i gazed, and could scarcely believe i saw aright. i 
glance 'round. there was the great globe of pale fire, swimming, as i 
had seen it before, a short distance above the dim horizon. to my left, 
far across the sea, i discovered, presently, a faint line, as of thin 
haze, which i guess to be the shore, where my love and i had met, 
during those wonderful periods of soul-wandering, that had been grant 
to me in the old earth days. 

another, a troubled, memory came to me--of the formless thing that had 
haunt the shore of the sea of sleep. the guardian of that silent, 
echoless place. these, and other, details, i remembered, and knew, 
without doubt that i was look out upon that same sea. with the 
assurance, i was fill with an overwhelming feeling of surprise, and 
joy, and shaken expectancy, conceive it possible that i was about to 
see my love, again. intently, i gaze around; but could catch no sight 
of her. at that, for a little, i felt hopeless. fervently, i prayed, and 
ever peered, anxiously.... how still was the sea! 

down, far beneath me, i could see the many trail of changeful fire, 
that had drawn my attention, formerly. vaguely, i wonder what cause 
them; also, i remember that i had intended to ask my dear one about 
them, as well as many other matters--and i had been forced to leave her, 
before the half that i had wish to say, was said. 

my thought came back with a leap. i was conscious that something had 
touched me. i turn quickly. god, thou wert indeed gracious--it was 
she! she look up into my eyes, with an eager longing, and i look 
down to her, with all my soul. i should like to have held her; but the 
glorious purity of her face, kept me afar. then, out of the winding 
mist, she put her dear arms. her whisper came to me, soft as the rustle 
of a passing cloud. 'dearest!' she said. that was all; but i had heard, 
and, in a moment i held her to me--as i prayed--forever. 

in a little, she spoke of many things, and i listened. willingly, would 
i have done so through all the age that are to come. at times, i 
whisper back, and my whisper brought to her spirit face, once more, 
an indescribable delicate tint--the bloom of love. later, i spoke more 
freely, and to each word she listened, and made answer, delightfully; so 
that, already, i was in paradise. 

she and i; and nothing, save the silent, spacious void to see us; and 
only the quiet waters of the sea of sleep to hear us. 

long before, the floating multitude of cloud-enfolded sphere had 
vanish into nothingness. thus, we look upon the face of the 
slumberous deeps, and were alone. alone, god, i would be thus alone in 
the hereafter, and yet be never lonely! i had her, and, greater than 
this, she had me. aye, aeon-aged me; and on this thought, and some 
others, i hope to exist through the few remain years that may yet lie 
between us. 



_xxi_ 

the dark sun 

how long our soul lay in the arms of joy, i cannot say; but, all at 
once, i was wake from my happiness, by a diminution of the pale and 
gentle light that lit the sea of sleep. i turn toward the huge, white 
orb, with a premonition of coming trouble. one side of it was curve 
inward, as though a convex, black shadow were sweeping across it. my 
memory went back. it was thus, that the dark had come, before our 
last parting. i turn toward my love, inquiringly. with a sudden 
knowledge of woe, i notice how wan and unreal she had grown, even in 
that brief space. her voice seem to come to me from a distance. the 
touch of her hand was no more than the gentle pressure of a summer 
wind, and grew less perceptible. 

already, quite half of the immense globe was shrouded. a feeling of 
desperation seize me. was she about to leave me? would she have to go, 
as she had gone before? i question her, anxiously, frightenedly; and 
she, nestling closer, explained, in that strange, faraway voice, that it 
was imperative she should leave me, before the sun of darkness--as she 
term it--blotted out the light. at this confirmation of my fears, i 
was overcome with despair; and could only look, voicelessly, across the 
quiet plain of the silent sea. 

how swift the dark spread across the face of the white orb. yet, 
in reality, the time must have been long, beyond human comprehension. 

at last, only a crescent of pale fire, lit the, now dim, sea of sleep. 
all this while, she had held me; but, with so soft a caress, that i had 
been scarcely conscious of it. we wait there, together, she and i; 
speechless, for very sorrow. in the dim light, her face showed, 
shadowy--blending into the dusky misty that encircle us. 

then, when a thin, curve line of soft light was all that lit the sea, 
she release me--pushing me from her, tenderly. her voice sound in my 
ears, 'i may not stay longer, dear one.' it end in a sob. 

she seem to float away from me, and became invisible. her voice came 
to me, out of the shadows, faintly; apparently from a great distance:-- 

'a little while--' it die away, remotely. in a breath, the sea of 
sleep darken into night. far to my left, i seem to see, for a brief 
instant, a soft glow. it vanished, and, in the same moment, i became 
aware that i was no long above the still sea; but once more suspend 
in infinite space, with the green sun--now eclipse by a vast, dark 
sphere--before me. 

utterly bewildered, i stared, almost unseeingly, at the ring of green 
flames, leap above the dark edge. even in the chaos of my thoughts, i 
wondered, dully, at their extraordinary shapes. a multitude of question 
assail me. i thought more of her, i had so lately seen, than of the 
sight before me. my grief, and thought of the future, fill me. was i 
doom to be separate from her, always? even in the old earth-days, she 
had been mine, only for a little while; then she had left me, as i 
thought, forever. since then, i had seen her but these times, upon the 
sea of sleep. 

a feeling of fierce resentment fill me, and miserable questionings. 
why could i not have gone with my love? what reason to keep us apart? 
why had i to wait alone, while she slumber through the years, on the 
still bosom of the sea of sleep? the sea of sleep! my thought turned, 
inconsequently, out of their channel of bitterness, to fresh, desperate 
questionings. where was it? where was it? i seem to have but just 
part from my love, upon its quiet surface, and it had gone, utterly. 
it could not be far away! and the white orb which i had seen hidden in 
the shadow of the sun of darkness! my sight dwelt upon the green 
sun--eclipsed. what had eclipse it? was there a vast, dead star 
circle it? was the _central_ sun--as i had come to regard it--a double 
star? the thought had come, almost unbidden; yet why should it not 
be so? 

my thought went back to the white orb. strange, that it should have 
been--i stopped. an idea had come, suddenly. the white orb and the green 
sun! were they one and the same? my imagination wander backward, and i 
remember the luminous globe to which i had been so unaccountable 
attracted. it was curious that i should have forgotten it, even 
momentarily. where were the others? i revert again to the globe i had 
entered. i thought, for a time, and matter became clearer. i conceive 
that, by enter that impalpable globule, i had passed, at once, into 
some further, and, until then, invisible dimension; there, the green sun 
was still visible; but as a stupendous sphere of pale, white 
light--almost as though its ghost showed, and not its material part. 

a long time, i muse on the subject. i remember how, on enter the 
sphere, i had, immediately, lost all sight of the others. for a still 
further period, i continue to revolve the different detail in my mind. 

in a while, my thought turn to other things. i came more into the 
present, and began to look about me, seeingly. for the first time, i 
perceive that innumerable rays, of a subtle, violet hue, pierce the 
strange semi-darkness, in all directions. they radiate from the fiery 
rim of the green sun. they seem to grow upon my vision, so that, in a 
little, i saw that they were countless. the night was fill with 
them--spreading outward from the green sun, fan-wise. i conclude that i 
was enable to see them, by reason of the sun's glory being cut off by 
the eclipse. they reach right out into space, and vanished. 

gradually, as i looked, i became aware that fine points of intense 
brilliant light, traverse the rays. many of them seem to travel from 
the green sun, into distance. other came out of the void, toward the 
sun; but one and all, each kept strict to the ray in which it 
traveled. their speed was inconceivable great; and it was only when they 
near the green sun, or as they left it, that i could see them as 
separate speck of light. further from the sun, they became thin lines 
of vivid fire within the violet. 

the discovery of these rays, and the moving sparks, interested me, 
extraordinarily. to where did they lead, in such countless profusion? i 
thought of the world in space.... and those sparks! messengers! 
possibly, the idea was fantastic; but i was not conscious of its being 
so. messengers! messenger from the central sun! 

an idea evolve itself, slowly. was the green sun the abode of some 
vast intelligence? the thought was bewildering. vision of the unnameable 
rose, vaguely. had i, indeed, come upon the dwelling-place of the 
eternal? for a time, i repel the thought, dumbly. it was too 
stupendous. yet.... 

huge, vague thought had birth within me. i felt, suddenly, terribly 
naked. and an awful nearness, shook me. 

and heaven ...! was that an illusion? 

my thought came and went, erratically. the sea of sleep--and she! 
heaven.... i came back, with a bound, to the present. somewhere, out of 
the void behind me, there rush an immense, dark body--huge and silent. 
it was a dead star, hurling onward to the bury place of the stars. it 
drove between me and the central suns--blotting them out from my vision, 
and plunge me into an impenetrable night. 

an age, and i saw again the violet rays. a great while later--aeons it 
must have been--a circular glow grew in the sky, ahead, and i saw the 
edge of the recede star, show dark against it. thus, i knew that it 
was near the central suns. presently, i saw the bright ring of the 
green sun, show plainly against the night the star had pass into the 
shadow of the dead sun. after that, i just waited. the strange years 
went slowly, and ever, i watched, intently. 

'the thing i had expected, came at last--suddenly, awfully. a vast 
flare of dazzle light. a stream burst of white flame across the 
dark void. for an indefinite while, it soar outward--a gigantic 
mushroom of fire. it cease to grow. then, as time went by, it began to 
sink backward, slowly. i saw, now, that it came from a huge, glowing 
spot near the center of the dark sun. mighty flames, still soar 
outward from this. yet, spite of its size, the grave of the star was no 
more than the shining of jupiter upon the face of an ocean, when 
compare with the inconceivable mass of the dead sun. 

i may remark here, once more, that no words will ever convey to the 
imagination, the enormous bulk of the two central suns. 



_xxii_ 

the dark nebula 

years melt into the past, centuries, aeons. the light of the 
incandescent star, sank to a furious red. 

it was later, that i saw the dark nebula--at first, an impalpable 
cloud, away to my right. it grew, steadily, to a clot of black in 
the night. how long i watched, it is impossible to say; for time, as we 
count it, was a thing of the past. it came closer, a shapeless 
monstrosity of darkness--tremendous. it seem to slip across the night, 
sleepily--a very hell-fog. slowly, it slid nearer, and pass into the 
void, between me and the central suns. it was as though a curtain had 
been drawn before my vision. a strange tremor of fear took me, and a 
fresh sense of wonder. 

the green twilight that had reign for so many million of years, had 
now given place to impenetrable gloom. motionless, i peer about me. a 
century fled, and it seem to me that i detect occasional dull glow 
of red, passing me at intervals. 

earnestly, i gazed, and, presently, seem to see circular masses, that 
show muddy red, within the cloud blackness. they appear to be 
grow out of the nebulous murk. awhile, and they became plain to my 
accustomed vision. i could see them, now, with a fair amount of 
distinctness--ruddy-tinged spheres, similar, in size, to the luminous 
globe that i had seen, so long previously. 

they float past me, continually. gradually, a peculiar uneasy 
seize me. i became aware of a grow feeling of repugnance and dread. 
it was direct against those passing orbs, and seem born of intuitive 
knowledge, rather than of any real cause or reason. 

some of the passing globe were bright than others; and, it was from 
one of these, that a face looked, suddenly. a face, human in its 
outline; but so torture with woe, that i stared, aghast. i had not 
thought there was such sorrow, as i saw there. i was conscious of an 
add sense of pain, on perceive that the eyes, which glare so 
wildly, were sightless. a while longer, i saw it; then it had pass on, 
into the surrounding gloom. after this, i saw others--all wearing that 
look of hopeless sorrow; and blind. 

a long time went by, and i became aware that i was near to the orbs, 
than i had been. at this, i grew uneasy; though i was less in fear of 
those strange globules, than i had been, before seeing their sorrowful 
inhabitants; for sympathy had temper my fear. 

later, there was no doubt but that i was being carry close to the 
red spheres, and, presently, i float among them. in awhile, i 
perceive one bearing down upon me. i was helpless to move from its 
path. in a minute, it seemed, it was upon me, and i was submerge in a 
deep red mist. this cleared, and i stared, confusedly, across the 
immense breadth of the plain of silence. it appear just as i had first 
seen it. i was moving forward, steadily, across its surface. away ahead, 
shone the vast, blood-red ring [15] that lit the place. all around, was 
spread the extraordinary desolate of stillness, that had so impress 
me during my previous wanderings across its starkness. 

presently, i saw, rising up into the ruddy gloom, the distant peak of 
the mighty amphitheatre of mountains, where, untold age before, i had 
been shown my first glimpse of the terror that underlie many things; 
and where, vast and silent, watch by a thousand mute gods, stand the 
replica of this house of mysteries--this house that i had seen swallow 
up in that hell-fire, ere the earth had kiss the sun, and vanish 
for ever. 

though i could see the crest of the mountain-amphitheatre, yet it was 
a great while before their lower portion became visible. possibly, this 
was due to the strange, ruddy haze, that seem to cling to the surface 
of the plain. however, be this as it may, i saw them at last. 

in a still further space of time, i had come so close to the mountains, 
that they appear to overhang me. presently, i saw the great rift, open 
before me, and i drift into it; without volition on my part. 

later, i came out upon the breadth of the enormous arena. there, at an 
apparent distance of some five miles, stood the house, huge, monstrous 
and silent--lying in the very center of that stupendous amphitheatre. so 
far as i could see, it had not alter in any way; but look as though 
it were only yesterday that i had seen it. around, the grim, dark 
mountain frown down upon me from their lofty silences. 

far to my right, away up among inaccessible peaks, loom the enormous 
bulk of the great beast-god. higher, i saw the hideous form of the dread 
goddess, rising up through the red gloom, thousand of fathom above 
me. to the left, i made out the monstrous eyeless-thing, grey and 
inscrutable. further off, recline on its lofty ledge, the livid 
ghoul-shape showed--a splash of sinister color, among the dark 
mountains. 

slowly, i move out across the great arena--floating. as i went, i made 
out the dim form of many of the other lurk horrors that people 
those supreme heights. 

gradually, i near the house, and my thought flash back across the 
abyss of years. i remember the dread specter of the place. a short 
while passed, and i saw that i was being waft directly toward the 
enormous mass of that silent building. 

about this time, i became aware, in an indifferent sort of way, of a 
grow sense of numbness, that rob me of the fear, which i should 
otherwise have felt, on approach that awesome pile. as it was, i 
view it, calmly--much as a man view calamity through the haze of his 
tobacco smoke. 

in a little while, i had come so close to the house, as to be able to 
distinguish many of the detail about it. the long i looked, the more 
was i confirmed in my long-ago impression of its entire similitude to 
this strange house. save in its enormous size, i could find 
nothing unlike. 

suddenly, as i stared, a great feeling of amaze fill me. i had 
come opposite to that part, where the outer door, leading into the 
study, is situated. there, lie right across the threshold, lay a great 
length of coping stone, identical--save in size and color--with the 
piece i had dislodge in my fight with the pit-creatures. 

i float nearer, and my astonishment increased, as i noted that the 
door was broken partly from its hinges, precisely in the manner that my 
study door had been forced inward, by the assault of the swine-things. 
the sight start a train of thoughts, and i began to trace, dimly, 
that the attack on this house, might have a far deep significance than 
i had, hitherto, imagined. i remember how, long ago, in the old 
earth-days, i had half suspect that, in some unexplainable manner, 
this house, in which i live, was _en rapport_--to use a recognize 
term--with that other tremendous structure, away in the midst of that 
incomparable plain. 

now, however, it began to be borne upon me, that i had but vague 
conceive what the realization of my suspicion meant. i began to 
understand, with a more than human clearness, that the attack i had 
repelled, was, in some extraordinary manner, connected with an attack 
upon that strange edifice. 

with a curious inconsequence, my thought abrupt left the matter; to 
dwell, wonderingly, upon the peculiar material, out of which the house 
was constructed. it was--as i have mentioned, earlier--of a deep, green 
color. yet, now that i had come so close to it, i perceive that it 
fluctuate at times, though slightly--glowing and fading, much as do the 
fumes of phosphorus, when rub upon the hand, in the dark. 

presently, my attention was distracted from this, by coming to the 
great entrance. here, for the first time, i was afraid; for, all in a 
moment, the huge door swung back, and i drift in between them, 
helplessly. inside, all was blackness, impalpable. in an instant, i had 
cross the threshold, and the great door closed, silently, shut me 
in that lightless place. 

for a while, i seem to hang, motionless; suspend amid the darkness. 
then, i became conscious that i was moving again; where, i could not 
tell. suddenly, far down beneath me, i seem to hear a murmurous noise 
of swine-laughter. it sank away, and the succeed silence appear 
clog with horror. 

then a door open somewhere ahead; a white haze of light filter 
through, and i float slow into a room, that seem strange 
familiar. all at once, there came a bewildering, scream noise, that 
deafen me. i saw a blur vista of visions, flaming before my sight. 
my senses were dazed, through the space of an eternal moment. then, my 
power of seeing, came back to me. the dizzy, hazy feeling passed, and i 
saw, clearly. 



_xxiii_ 

pepper 

i was seat in my chair, back again in this old study. my glance 
wander 'round the room. for a minute, it had a strange, quivery 
appearance--unreal and unsubstantial. this disappeared, and i saw that 
nothing was alter in any way. i look toward the end window--the 
blind was up. 

i rose to my feet, shakily. as i did so, a slight noise, in the 
direction of the door, attract my attention. i glance toward it. for 
a short instant, it appear to me that it was being closed, gently. i 
stared, and saw that i must have been mistaken--it seem close shut. 

with a succession of efforts, i trod my way to the window, and look 
out. the sun was just rising, lighting up the tangle wilderness of 
gardens. for, perhaps, a minute, i stood, and stared. i pass my hand, 
confusedly, across my forehead. 

presently, amid the chaos of my senses, a sudden thought came to me; i 
turned, quickly, and call to pepper. there was no answer, and i 
stumble across the room, in a quick access of fear. as i went, i try 
to frame his name; but my lip were numb. i reach the table, and 
stoop down to him, with a catching at my heart. he was lie in the 
shadow of the table, and i had not been able to see him, distinctly, 
from the window. now, as i stooped, i took my breath, shortly. there was 
no pepper; instead, i was reach toward an elongated, little heap of 
grey, ashlike dust.... 

i must have remained, in that half-stooped position, for some minutes. 
i was dazed--stunned. pepper had really pass into the land of shadows. 



_xxiv_ 

the footstep in the garden 

pepper is dead! even now, at times, i seem scarcely able to realize 
that this is so. it is many weeks, since i came back from that strange 
and terrible journey through space and time. sometimes, in my sleep, i 
dream about it, and go through, in imagination, the whole of that 
fearsome happening. when i wake, my thought dwell upon it. that 
sun--those suns, were they indeed the great central suns, 'round which 
the whole universe, of the unknown heavens, revolves? who shall say? and 
the bright globules, floating forever in the light of the green sun! and 
the sea of sleep on which they float! how unbelievable it all is. if it 
were not for pepper, i should, even after the many extraordinary things 
that i have witnessed, be inclined to imagine that it was but a gigantic 
dream. then, there is that dreadful, dark nebula (with its multitude of 
red spheres) moving always within the shadow of the dark sun, sweeping 
along on its stupendous orbit, wrap eternal in gloom. and the face 
that peer out at me! god, do they, and do such a thing really 
exist? ... there is still that little heap of grey ash, on my study 
floor. i will not have it touched. 

at times, when i am calmer, i have wonder what became of the outer 
planet of the solar system. it has occur to me, that they may have 
broken loose from the sun's attraction, and whirl away into space. 
this is, of course, only a surmise. there are so many things, about 
which i wonder. 

now that i am writing, let me record that i am certain, there is 
something horrible about to happen. last night, a thing occurred, which 
has fill me with an even greater terror, than did the pit fear. i will 
write it down now, and, if anything more happens, endeavor to make a 
note of it, at once. i have a feeling, that there is more in this last 
affair, than in all those others. i am shaky and nervous, even now, as i 
write. somehow, i think death is not very far away. not that i fear 
death--as death is understood. yet, there is that in the air, which bid 
me fear--an intangible, cold horror. i felt it last night. it 
was thus:-- 

last night, i was sitting here in my study, writing. the door, leading 
into the garden, was half open. at times, the metallic rattle of a dog's 
chain, sound faintly. it belong to the dog i have bought, since 
pepper's death. i will not have him in the house--not after pepper. 
still, i have felt it better to have a dog about the place. they are 
wonderful creatures. 

i was much engross in my work, and the time passed, quickly. 
suddenly, i heard a soft noise on the path, outside in the garden--pad, 
pad, pad, it went, with a stealthy, curious sound. i sat upright, with a 
quick movement, and look out through the open door. again the noise 
came--pad, pad, pad. it appear to be approaching. with a slight 
feeling of nervousness, i stare into the gardens; but the night hid 
everything. 

then the dog gave a long howl, and i started. for a minute, perhaps, i 
peered, intently; but could hear nothing. after a little, i picked up 
the pen, which i had laid down, and recommence my work. the nervous 
feeling had gone; for i imagine that the sound i had heard, was nothing 
more than the dog walking 'round his kennel, at the length of his chain. 

a quarter of an hour may have passed; then, all at once, the dog howl 
again, and with such a plaintive sorrowful note, that i jump to my 
feet, drop my pen, and ink the page on which i was at work. 

'curse that dog!' i muttered, note what i had done. then, even as i 
said the words, there sound again that queer--pad, pad, pad. it was 
horrible close--almost by the door, i thought. i knew, now, that it 
could not be the dog; his chain would not allow him to come so near. 

the dog's growl came again, and i noted, subconsciously, the taint of 
fear in it. 

outside, on the windowsill, i could see tip, my sister's pet cat. as i 
looked, it sprang to its feet, its tail swelling, visibly. for an 
instant it stood thus; seeming to stare, fixedly, at something, in the 
direction of the door. then, quickly, it began to back along the sill; 
until, reach the wall at the end, it could go no further. there it 
stood, rigid, as though frozen in an attitude of extraordinary terror. 

frightened, and puzzled, i seize a stick from the corner, and went 
toward the door, silently; taking one of the candle with me. i had come 
to within a few pace of it, when, suddenly, a peculiar sense of fear 
thrill through me--a fear, palpitant and real; whence, i knew not, nor 
why. so great was the feeling of terror, that i waste no time; but 
retreat straight-way--walking backward, and keeping my gaze, 
fearfully, on the door. i would have given much, to rush at it, fling it 
to, and shoot the bolts; for i have had it repair and strengthened, 
so that, now, it is far strong than ever it has been. like tip, i 
continue my, almost unconscious, progress backward, until the wall 
brought me up. at that, i started, nervously, and glance 'round, 
apprehensively. as i did so, my eyes dwelt, momentarily, on the rack of 
firearms, and i took a step toward them; but stopped, with a curious 
feeling that they would be needless. outside, in the gardens, the dog 
moaned, strangely. 

suddenly, from the cat, there came a fierce, long screech. i glanced, 
jerkily, in its direction--something, luminous and ghostly, encircle 
it, and grew upon my vision. it resolve into a glowing hand, 
transparent, with a lambent, greenish flame flicker over it. the cat 
gave a last, awful caterwaul, and i saw it smoke and blaze. my breath 
came with a gasp, and i leant against the wall. over that part of the 
window there spread a smudge, green and fantastic. it hid the thing from 
me, though the glare of fire shone through, dully. a stench of burning, 
stole into the room. 

pad, pad, pad--something pass down the garden path, and a faint, 
mouldy odor seem to come in through the open door, and mingle with the 
burnt smell. 

the dog had been silent for a few moments. now, i heard him yowl, 
sharply, as though in pain. then, he was quiet, save for an occasional, 
subdued whimper of fear. 

a minute went by; then the gate on the west side of the gardens, 
slammed, distantly. after that, nothing; not even the dog's whine. 

i must have stood there some minutes. then a fragment of courage stole 
into my heart, and i made a frightened rush at the door, dashed it to, 
and bolt it. after that, for a full half-hour, i sat, 
helpless--staring before me, rigidly. 

slowly, my life came back into me, and i made my way, shakily, 
up-stairs to bed. 

that is all. 



_xxv_ 

the thing from the arena 

this morning, early, i went through the gardens; but found everything 
as usual. near the door, i examine the path, for footprints; yet, here 
again, there was nothing to tell me whether, or not, i dream 
last night. 

it was only when i came to speak to the dog, that i discover tangible 
proof, that something did happen. when i went to his kennel, he kept 
inside, crouch up in one corner, and i had to coax him, to get him 
out. when, finally, he consent to come, it was in a strange cow 
and subdued manner. as i pat him, my attention was attract to a 
greenish patch, on his left flank. on examine it, i found, that the 
fur and skin had been apparently, burnt off; for the flesh showed, raw 
and scorched. the shape of the mark was curious, remind me of the 
imprint of a large talon or hand. 

i stood up, thoughtful. my gaze wander toward the study window. the 
ray of the rising sun, shimmer on the smoky patch in the lower 
corner, cause it to fluctuate from green to red, oddly. ah! that was 
undoubted another proof; and, suddenly, the horrible thing i saw last 
night, rose in my mind. i look at the dog, again. i knew the cause, 
now, of that hateful look wound on his side--i knew, also, that, what 
i had seen last night, had been a real happening. and a great discomfort 
fill me. pepper! tip! and now this poor animal ...! i glance at the 
dog again, and notice that he was licking at his wound. 

'poor brute!' i muttered, and bent to pat his head. at that, he got 
upon his feet, nose and licking my hand, wistfully. 

presently, i left him, have other matter to which to attend. 

after dinner, i went to see him, again. he seem quiet, and 
disinclined to leave his kennel. from my sister, i have learnt that he 
has refuse all food today. she appear a little puzzled, when she told 
me; though quite unsuspicious of anything of which to be afraid. 

the day has passed, uneventful enough. after tea, i went, again, to 
have a look at the dog. he seem moody, and somewhat restless; yet 
persist in remain in his kennel. before lock up, for the night, 
i move his kennel out, away from the wall, so that i shall be able to 
watch it from the small window, tonight. the thought came to me, to 
bring him into the house for the night; but consideration has decided 
me, to let him remain out. i cannot say that the house is, in any 
degree, less to be fear than the gardens. pepper was in the house, 
and yet.... 

it is now two o'clock. since eight, i have watch the kennel, from the 
small, side window in my study. yet, nothing has occurred, and i am too 
tired to watch longer. i will go to bed.... 

during the night, i was restless. this is unusual for me; but, toward 
morning, i obtain a few hours' sleep. 

i rose early, and, after breakfast, visit the dog. he was quiet; but 
morose, and refuse to leave his kennel. i wish there was some horse 
doctor near here; i would have the poor brute look to. all day, he has 
taken no food; but has shown an evident desire for water--lapping it up, 
greedily. i was relieved to observe this. 

the evening has come, and i am in my study. i intend to follow my plan 
of last night, and watch the kennel. the door, leading into the garden, 
is bolted, securely. i am conscious glad there are bar to the 
windows.... 

night:--midnight has gone. the dog has been silent, up to the present. 
through the side window, on my left, i can make out, dimly, the outline 
of the kennel. for the first time, the dog moves, and i hear the rattle 
of his chain. i look out, quickly. as i stare, the dog move again, 
restlessly, and i see a small patch of luminous light, shine from the 
interior of the kennel. it vanishes; then the dog stir again, and, once 
more, the gleam comes. i am puzzled. the dog is quiet, and i can see the 
luminous thing, plainly. it show distinctly. there is something 
familiar about the shape of it. for a moment, i wonder; then it come to 
me, that it is not unlike the four finger and thumb of a hand. like a 
hand! and i remember the contour of that fearsome wound on the dog's 
side. it must be the wound i see. it is luminous at night--why? the 
minutes pass. my mind is fill with this fresh thing.... 

suddenly, i hear a sound, out in the gardens. how it thrill through 
me. it is approaching. pad, pad, pad. a prickly sensation traverse my 
spine, and seem to creep across my scalp. the dog move in his kennel, 
and whimpers, frightenedly. he must have turn 'round; for, now, i can 
no long see the outline of his shining wound. 

outside, the garden are silent, once more, and i listen, fearfully. a 
minute passes, and another; then i hear the padding sound, again. it is 
quite close, and appear to be coming down the gravel path. the noise 
is curious measured and deliberate. it cease outside the door; and i 
rise to my feet, and stand motionless. from the door, come a slight 
sound--the latch is being slow raised. a singing noise is in my ears, 
and i have a sense of pressure about the head-- 

the latch drops, with a sharp click, into the catch. the noise startle 
me afresh; jarring, horribly, on my tense nerves. after that, i stand, 
for a long while, amid an ever-growing quietness. all at once, my knee 
begin to tremble, and i have to sit, quickly. 

an uncertain period of time passes, and, gradually, i begin to shake 
off the feeling of terror, that has possessed me. yet, still i sit. i 
seem to have lost the power of movement. i am strange tired, and 
inclined to doze. my eyes open and close, and, presently, i find myself 
fall asleep, and waking, in fit and starts. 

it is some time later, that i am sleepy aware that one of the candle 
is guttering. when i wake again, it has gone out, and the room is very 
dim, under the light of the one remain flame. the semi-darkness 
trouble me little. i have lost that awful sense of dread, and my only 
desire seem to be to sleep--sleep. 

suddenly, although there is no noise, i am awake--wide awake. i am 
acute conscious of the near of some mystery, of some overwhelming 
presence. the very air seem pregnant with terror. i sit huddled, and 
just listen, intently. still, there is no sound. nature, herself, seem 
dead. then, the oppressive still is broken by a little eldritch 
scream of wind, that sweep 'round the house, and die away, remotely. 

i let my gaze wander across the half-lighted room. by the great clock 
in the far corner, is a dark, tall shadow. for a short instant, i stare, 
frightenedly. then, i see that it is nothing, and am, momentarily, 
relieved. 

in the time that follows, the thought flash through my brain, why 
not leave this house--this house of mystery and terror? then, as though 
in answer, there sweep up, across my sight, a vision of the wondrous 
sea of sleep,--the sea of sleep where she and i have been allow to 
meet, after the years of separation and sorrow; and i know that i shall 
stay on here, whatever happens. 

through the side window, i note the somber black of the night. my 
glance wander away, and 'round the room; rest on one shadowy object 
and another. suddenly, i turn, and look at the window on my right; as i 
do so, i breathe quickly, and bend forward, with a frightened gaze at 
something outside the window, but close to the bars. i am look at a 
vast, misty swine-face, over which fluctuate a flamboyant flame, of a 
greenish hue. it is the thing from the arena. the quiver mouth seem 
to drip with a continual, phosphorescent slaver. the eyes are staring 
straight into the room, with an inscrutable expression. thus, i sit 
rigidly--frozen. 

the thing has begun to move. it is turning, slowly, in my direction. 
its face is coming 'round toward me. it see me. two huge, inhuman 
human, eyes are look through the dim at me. i am cold with fear; 
yet, even now, i am keen conscious, and note, in an irrelevant way, 
that the distant stars are blot out by the mass of the giant face. 

a fresh horror has come to me. i am rising from my chair, without the 
least intention. i am on my feet, and something is impel me toward 
the door that leads out into the gardens. i wish to stop; but cannot. 
some immutable power is oppose to my will, and i go slow forward, 
unwill and resistant. my glance flies 'round the room, helplessly, 
and stop at the window. the great swine-face has disappeared, and i 
hear, again, that stealthy pad, pad, pad. it stop outside the 
door--the door toward which i am being compelled.... 

there succeed a short, intense silence; then there come a sound. it 
is the rattle of the latch, being slow lifted. at that, i am fill 
with desperation. i will not go forward another step. i make a vast 
effort to return; but it is, as though i press back, upon an invisible 
wall. i groan out loud, in the agony of my fear, and the sound of my 
voice is frightening. again come that rattle, and i shiver, clammily. i 
try--aye, fight and struggle, to hold back, _back_; but it is no use.... 

i am at the door, and, in a mechanical way, i watch my hand go forward, 
to undo the topmost bolt. it do so, entire without my volition. even 
as i reach up toward the bolt, the door is violent shaken, and i get a 
sickly whiff of mouldy air, which seem to drive in through the 
interstice of the doorway. i draw the bolt back, slowly, fighting, 
dumbly, the while. it come out of its socket, with a click, and i begin 
to shake, aguishly. there are two more; one at the bottom of the door; 
the other, a massive affair, is placed about the middle. 

for, perhaps a minute, i stand, with my arms hanging slackly, by my 
sides. the influence to meddle with the fastening of the door, seem to 
have gone. all at once, there come the sudden rattle of iron, at my 
feet. i glance down, quickly, and realize, with an unspeakable terror, 
that my foot is push back the lower bolt. an awful sense of 
helpless assail me.... the bolt come out of its hold, with a 
slight, ring sound and i stagger on my feet, grasping at the great, 
central bolt, for support. a minute passes, an eternity; then 
another----my god, help me! i am being forced to work upon the last 
fastening. _i will not!_ better to die, than open to the terror, that is 
on the other side of the door. is there no escape ...? god help me, i 
have jerk the bolt half out of its socket! my lip emit a hoarse 
scream of terror, the bolt is three parts drawn, now, and still my 
unconscious hand work toward my doom. only a fraction of steel, between 
my soul and that. twice, i scream out in the supreme agony of my fear; 
then, with a mad effort, i tear my hand away. my eyes seem blinded. a 
great black is fall upon me. nature has come to my rescue. i feel 
my knee giving. there is a loud, quick thud upon the door, and i am 
falling, falling.... 

i must have lain there, at least a couple of hours. as i recover, i am 
aware that the other candle has burnt out, and the room is in an almost 
total darkness. i cannot rise to my feet, for i am cold, and fill with 
a terrible cramp. yet my brain is clear, and there is no long the 
strain of that unholy influence. 

cautiously, i get upon my knees, and feel for the central bolt. i find 
it, and push it secure back into its socket; then the one at the 
bottom of the door. by this time, i am able to rise to my feet, and so 
manage to secure the fastening at the top. after that, i go down upon my 
knees, again, and creep away among the furniture, in the direction of 
the stairs. by do this, i am safe from observation from the window. 

i reach the opposite door, and, as i leave the study, cast one nervous 
glance over my shoulder, toward the window. out in the night, i seem to 
catch a glimpse of something impalpable; but it may be only a fancy. 
then, i am in the passage, and on the stairs. 

reach my bedroom, i clamber into bed, all clothe as i am, and pull 
the bedclothes over me. there, after awhile, i begin to regain a little 
confidence. it is impossible to sleep; but i am grateful for the add 
warmth of the bedclothes. presently, i try to think over the happening 
of the past night; but, though i cannot sleep, i find that it is 
useless, to attempt consecutive thought. my brain seem curious blank. 

toward morning, i begin to toss, uneasily. i cannot rest, and, after 
awhile, i get out of bed, and pace the floor. the wintry dawn is 
beginning to creep through the windows, and show the bare discomfort of 
the old room. strange, that, through all these years, it has never 
occur to me how dismal the place really is. and so a time passes. 

from somewhere down stairs, a sound come up to me. i go to the bedroom 
door, and listen. it is mary, bustle about the great, old kitchen, 
get the breakfast ready. i feel little interest. i am not hungry. my 
thoughts, however; continue to dwell upon her. how little the weird 
happening in this house seem to trouble her. except in the incident of 
the pit creatures, she has seem unconscious of anything unusual 
occurring. she is old, like myself; yet how little we have to do with 
one another. is it because we have nothing in common; or only that, 
being old, we care less for society, than quietness? these and other 
matter pass through my mind, as i meditate; and help to distract my 
attention, for a while, from the oppressive thought of the night. 

after a time, i go to the window, and, opening it, look out. the sun is 
now above the horizon, and the air, though cold, is sweet and crisp. 
gradually, my brain clears, and a sense of security, for the time being, 
come to me. somewhat happier, i go down stairs, and out into the 
garden, to have a look at the dog. 

as i approach the kennel, i am greet by the same mouldy stench that 
assail me at the door last night. shake off a momentary sense of 
fear, i call to the dog; but he take no heed, and, after calling once 
more, i throw a small stone into the kennel. at this, he moves, 
uneasily, and i shout his name, again; but do not go closer. presently, 
my sister come out, and join me, in try to coax him from 
the kennel. 

in a little the poor beast rises, and shambles out lurch queerly. in 
the daylight he stand sway from side to side, and blinking stupidly. 
i look and note that the horrid wound is larger, much larger, and seem 
to have a whitish, fungoid appearance. my sister move to fondle him; 
but i detain her, and explain that i think it will be better not to go 
too near him for a few days; as it is impossible to tell what may be the 
matter with him; and it is well to be cautious. 

a minute later, she leaves me; coming back with a basin of odd scraps 
of food. this she place on the ground, near the dog, and i push it into 
his reach, with the aid of a branch, broken from one of the shrubs. yet, 
though the meat should be tempting, he take no notice of it; but 
retire to his kennel. there is still water in his drink vessel, so, 
after a few moments' talk, we go back to the house. i can see that my 
sister is much puzzle as to what is the matter with the animal; yet it 
would be madness, even to hint the truth to her. 

the day slips away, uneventfully; and night come on. i have determined 
to repeat my experiment of last night. i cannot say that it is wisdom; 
yet my mind is made up. still, however, i have taken precautions; for i 
have driven stout nail in at the back of each of the three bolts, that 
secure the door, opening from the study into the gardens. this will, at 
least, prevent a recurrence of the danger i ran last night. 

from ten to about two-thirty, i watch; but nothing occurs; and, 
finally, i stumble off to bed, where i am soon asleep. 



_xxvi_ 

the luminous speck 

i awake suddenly. it is still dark. i turn over, once or twice, in my 
endeavor to sleep again; but i cannot sleep. my head is aching, 
slightly; and, by turn i am hot and cold. in a little, i give up the 
attempt, and stretch out my hand, for the matches. i will light my 
candle, and read, awhile; perhaps, i shall be able to sleep, after a 
time. for a few moments, i grope; then my hand touch the box; but, as 
i open it, i am startled, to see a phosphorescent speck of fire, shining 
amid the darkness. i put out my other hand, and touch it. it is on my 
wrist. with a feeling of vague alarm, i strike a light, hurriedly, and 
look; but can see nothing, save a tiny scratch. 

'fancy!' i mutter, with a half sigh of relief. then the match burn my 
finger, and i drop it, quickly. as i fumble for another, the thing 
shine out again. i know, now, that it is no fancy. this time, i light 
the candle, and examine the place, more closely. there is a slight, 
greenish discoloration 'round the scratch. i am puzzle and worried. 
then a thought come to me. i remember the morning after the thing 
appeared. i remember that the dog lick my hand. it was this one, with 
the scratch on it; though i have not been even conscious of the 
abasement, until now. a horrible fear has come to me. it creeps into my 
brain--the dog's wound, shine at night. with a daze feeling, i sit 
down on the side of the bed, and try to think; but cannot. my brain 
seem numb with the sheer horror of this new fear. 

time move on, unheeded. once, i rouse up, and try to persuade myself 
that i am mistaken; but it is no use. in my heart, i have no doubt. 

hour after hour, i sit in the dark and silence, and shiver, 
hopelessly.... 

the day has come and gone, and it is night again. 

this morning, early, i shot the dog, and bury it, away among the 
bushes. my sister is startle and frightened; but i am desperate. 
besides, it is better so. the foul growth had almost hidden its left 
side. and i--the place on my wrist has enlarged, perceptibly. several 
times, i have caught myself mutter prayers--little things learnt as a 
child. god, almighty god, help me! i shall go mad. 

six days, and i have eaten nothing. it is night. i am sitting in my 
chair. ah, god! i wonder have any ever felt the horror of life that i 
have come to know? i am swathe in terror. i feel ever the burning of 
this dread growth. it has cover all my right arm and side, and is 
beginning to creep up my neck. tomorrow, it will eat into my face. i 
shall become a terrible mass of living corruption. there is no escape. 
yet, a thought has come to me, born of a sight of the gun-rack, on the 
other side of the room. i have look again--with the strangest of 
feelings. the thought grow upon me. god, thou knowest, thou must know, 
that death is better, aye, better a thousand times than this. this! 
jesus, forgive me, but i cannot live, cannot, cannot! i dare not! i am 
beyond all help--there is nothing else left. it will, at least, spare 
me that final horror.... 

i think i must have been dozing. i am very weak, and oh! so miserable, 
so miserable and tired--tired. the rustle of the paper, try my brain. 
my hearing seem preternatural sharp. i will sit awhile and think.... 

"hush! i hear something, down--down in the cellars. it is a creak 
sound. my god, it is the opening of the great, oak trap. what can be 
do that? the scratch of my pen deafen me ... i must listen.... 
there are steps on the stairs; strange padding steps, that come up and 
nearer.... jesus, be merciful to me, an old man. there is something 
fumble at the door-handle. o god, help me now! jesus--the door is 
opening--slowly. somethi--" 

that is all[16] 



_xxvii_ 

conclusion 

i put down the manuscript, and glance across at tonnison: he was 
sitting, staring out into the dark. i wait a minute; then i spoke. 

"well?" i said. 

he turned, slowly, and look at me. his thought seem to have gone 
out of him into a great distance. 

"was he mad?" i asked, and indicate the ms., with a half nod. 

tonnison stare at me, unseeingly, a moment; then, his wit came back to 
him, and, suddenly, he comprehend my question. 

"no!" he said. 

i open my lips, to offer a contradictory opinion; for my sense of the 
sane of things, would not allow me to take the story literally; then 
i shut them again, without saying anything. somehow, the certainty in 
tonnison's voice affected my doubts. i felt, all at once, less assured; 
though i was by no means convinced as yet. 

after a few moments' silence, tonnison rose, stiffly, and began to 
undress. he seem disinclined to talk; so i said nothing; but follow 
his example. i was weary; though still full of the story i had 
just read. 

somehow, as i roll into my blankets, there crept into my mind a memory 
of the old gardens, as we had seen them. i remember the odd fear that 
the place had conjure up in our hearts; and it grew upon me, with 
conviction, that tonnison was right. 

it was very late when we rose--nearly midday; for the greater part of 
the night had been spent in reading the ms. 

tonnison was grumpy, and i felt out of sorts. it was a somewhat dismal 
day, and there was a touch of chilly in the air. there was no 
mention of go out fishing on either of our parts. we got dinner, and, 
after that, just sat and smoke in silence. 

presently, tonnison ask for the manuscript: i hand it to him, and he 
spent most of the afternoon in reading it through by himself. 

it was while he was thus employed, that a thought came to me:-- 

"what do you say to have another look at--?" i nod my head down 
stream. 

tonnison look up. "nothing!" he said, abruptly; and, somehow, i was 
less annoyed, than relieved, at his answer. 

after that, i left him alone. 

a little before teatime, he look up at me, curiously. 

"sorry, old chap, if i was a bit short with you just now;" (just now, 
indeed! he had not spoken for the last three hours) "but i would not go 
there again," and he indicate with his head, "for anything that you 
could offer me. ugh!" and he put down that history of a man's terror and 
hope and despair. 

the next morning, we rose early, and went for our accustomed swim: we 
had partly shaken off the depression of the previous day; and so, took 
our rod when we had finished breakfast, and spent the day at our 
favorite sport. 

after that day, we enjoy our holiday to the utmost; though both of us 
look forward to the time when our driver should come; for we were 
tremendous anxious to inquire of him, and through him among the people 
of the tiny hamlet, whether any of them could give us information about 
that strange garden, lie away by itself in the heart of an almost 
unknown tract of country. 

at last, the day came, on which we expect the driver to come across 
for us. he arrive early, while we were still abed; and, the first thing 
we knew, he was at the opening of the tent, inquiring whether we had had 
good sport. we reply in the affirmative; and then, both together, 
almost in the same breath, we ask the question that was uppermost in 
our minds:--did he know anything about an old garden, and a great pit, 
and a lake, situated some mile away, down the river; also, had he ever 
heard of a great house thereabouts? 

no, he did not, and had not; yet, stay, he had heard a rumor, once upon 
a time, of a great, old house standing alone out in the wilderness; but, 
if he remember rightly it was a place given over to the fairies; or, 
if that had not been so, he was certain that there had been something 
"quare" about it; and, anyway, he had heard nothing of it for a very 
long while--not since he was quite a gossoon. no, he could not remember 
anything particular about it; indeed, he did not know he remember 
anything "at all, at all" until we question him. 

"look here," said tonnison, finding that this was about all that he 
could tell us, "just take a walk 'round the village, while we dress, and 
find out something, if you can." 

with a nondescript salute, the man departed on his errand; while we made 
haste to get into our clothes; after which, we began to prepare 
breakfast. 

we were just sitting down to it, when he returned. 

"it's all in bed the lazy divvil is, sor," he said, with a repetition 
of the salute, and an appreciative eye to the good things spread out on 
our provision chest, which we utilize as a table. 

"oh, well, sit down," reply my friend, "and have something to eat with 
us." which the man did without delay. 

after breakfast, tonnison sent him off again on the same errand, while 
we sat and smoked. he was away some three-quarters of an hour, and, when 
he returned, it was evident that he had found out something. it appear 
that he had got into conversation with an ancient man of the village, 
who, probably, knew more--though it was little enough--of the strange 
house, than any other person living. 

the substance of this knowledge was, that, in the "ancient man's" 
youth--and goodness know how long back that was--there had stood a 
great house in the center of the gardens, where now was left only that 
fragment of ruin. this house had been empty for a great while; years 
before his--the ancient man's--birth. it was a place shun by the 
people of the village, as it had been shun by their father before 
them. there were many things said about it, and all were of evil. no one 
ever went near it, either by day or night. in the village it was a 
synonym of all that is unholy and dreadful. 

and then, one day, a man, a stranger, had ridden through the village, 
and turn off down the river, in the direction of the house, as it was 
always term by the villagers. some hour afterward, he had ridden 
back, taking the track by which he had come, toward ardrahan. then, for 
three month or so, nothing was heard. at the end of that time, he 
reappeared; but now, he was accompany by an elderly woman, and a large 
number of donkeys, laden with various articles. they had pass through 
the village without stopping, and gone straight down the bank of the 
river, in the direction of the house. 

since that time, no one, save the man whom they had charter to bring 
over monthly supplies of necessaries from ardrahan, had ever seen either 
of them: and him, none had ever induce to talk; evidently, he had been 
well paid for his trouble. 

the years had move onward, uneventful enough, in that little hamlet; 
the man making his monthly journeys, regularly. 

one day, he had appear as usual on his customary errand. he had pass 
through the village without exchange more than a surly nod with the 
inhabitant and gone on toward the house. usually, it was evening before 
he made the return journey. on this occasion, however, he had reappear 
in the village, a few hour later, in an extraordinary state of 
excitement, and with the astound information, that the house had 
disappear bodily, and that a stupendous pit now yawn in the place 
where it had stood. 

this news, it appears, so excited the curiosity of the villagers, that 
they overcame their fears, and march _en masse_ to the place. there, 
they found everything, just as describe by the carrier. 

this was all that we could learn. of the author of the ms., who he was, 
and whence he came, we shall never know. 

his identity is, as he seem to have desired, bury forever. 

that same day, we left the lonely village of kraighten. we have never 
been there since. 

sometimes, in my dreams, i see that enormous pit, surrounded, as it is, 
on all side by wild tree and bushes. and the noise of the water rise 
upward, and blends--in my sleep--with other and lower noises; while, 
over all, hang the eternal shroud of spray. 



grief[17] 

fierce hunger reign within my breast, 
i had not dreamt that this whole world, 
crush in the hand of god, could yield 
such bitter essence of unrest, 
such pain as sorrow now hath hurl 
out of its dreadful heart, unsealed! 

each sob breath is but a cry, 
my heart-strokes knell of agony, 
and my whole brain has but one thought 
that nevermore through life shall i 
(save in the ache of memory) 
touch hand with thee, who now art naught! 

through the whole void of night i search, 
so dumb crying out to thee; 
but thou are _not_; and night's vast throne 
become an all stupendous church 
with star-bells knell unto me 
who in all space am most alone! 

an hungered, to the shore i creep, 
perchance some comfort waits on me 
from the old sea's eternal heart; 
but lo! from all the solemn deep, 
far voice out of mystery 
seem questioning why we are apart! 

"where'er i go i am alone 
who once, through thee, had all the world. 
my breast is one whole rage pain 
for that which _was_, and now is flown 
into the blank where life is hurl 
where all is not, nor is again!" 



footnotes: 

[1] an apparently unmeane interpolation. i can find no previous 
reference in the ms. to this matter. it become clearer, however, in the 
light of succeed incidents.--ed. 

[2] here, the writing become undecipherable, owe to the damage 
condition of this part of the ms. below i print such fragment as are 
legible.--ed. 

[3] note.--the severest scrutiny has not enable me to decipher more of 
the damage portion of the ms. it commence to be legible again with the 
chapter entitle "the noise in the night."--ed. 

[4] the recluse use this as an illustration, evidently in the sense of 
the popular conception of a comet.--ed. 

[5] evidently refer to something set forth in the missing and 
mutilate pages. see _fragments, chapter 14_--ed. 

[6] no further mention is made of the moon. from what is said here, it 
is evident that our satellite had greatly increase its distance from 
the earth. possibly, at a later age it may even have broken loose from 
our attraction. i cannot but regret that no light is shed on this 
point.--ed. 

[7] conceivably, frozen air.--ed. 

[8] see previous footnote. this would explain the snow (?) within the 
room.--ed. 

[9] i am confounded that neither here, nor later on, do the recluse 
make any further mention of the continue north and south movement 
(apparent, of course,) of the sun from solstice to solstice.--ed. 

[10] at this time the sound-carrying atmosphere must have been either 
incredible attenuated, or--more probably--nonexistent. in the light of 
this, it cannot be supposed that these, or any other, noise would have 
been apparent to living ears--to hearing, as we, in the material body, 
understand that sense.--ed. 

[11] i can only suppose that the time of the earth's yearly journey had 
cease to bear its present _relative_ proportion to the period of the 
sun's rotation.--ed. 

[12] a careful reading of the ms. suggest that, either the sun is 
travel on an orbit of great eccentricity, or else that it was 
approach the green star on a lessen orbit. and at this moment, i 
conceive it to be finally torn directly from its oblique course, by the 
gravitation pull of the immense star.--ed. 

[13] it will be notice here that the earth was "_slowly_ traverse the 
tremendous face of the dead sun." no explanation is given of this, and 
we must conclude, either that the speed of time had slowed, or else that 
the earth was actually progress on its orbit at a rate, slow, when 
measured by existing standards. a careful study of the ms. however, 
leads me to conclude that the speed of time had been steady decrease 
for a very considerable period.--ed. 

[14] see _first footnote, chapter 18_. 

[15] without doubt, the flame-edged mass of the dead central sun, seen 
from another dimension.--ed. 

[16] note.--from the unfinished word, it is possible, on the ms., to 
trace a faint line of ink, which suggest that the pen has trail away 
over the paper; possibly, through fright and weakness.--ed. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the house on the borderland 
by william hope hodgson 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the house on the borderland *** 

***** this file should be name 10002-8.txt or 10002-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/0/10002/ 

produce by suzanne shell, sjaani and pg distribute proofread 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is," with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

