the project gutenberg ebook of varney the vampire, by thomas preskett prest 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: varney the vampire 
or the feast of blood 

author: thomas preskett prest 

release date: january 29, 2005 [ebook #14833] 
[last update october 4, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook varney the vampire *** 




produce by charles franks, debra storr, sandra brown and the pg 
online distribute proofread team. 





[transcriber's note: this book was originally publish in "penny 
dreadful" form. this edition do not include the entire 109 
episodes, which were publish in three volumes. authorship has 
also been ascribe to james malcolm rymer. 

the table of contents was add by the transcriber.] 



[illustration: 

no. 1.) nos. 2, 3 and 4 are presented, gratis, with this no. |price 1d. 

varney the vampire 

or the 

feast of blood 

a romance of exciting interest 

by the author of 

"grace rivers, or, the merchant's daughter." 

london e. lloyd, salisbury square, and all booksellers] 




varney, the vampyre: 

or, 

the feast of blood. 

a romance. 

"art thou a spirit of health or goblin damned?" 

london: 

print and publish by e. lloyd, 12, salisbury-square, fleet-street. 




contents 


chapter i.--midnight.--the hail-storm.--the dreadful visitor.--the 
vampyre. 

chapter ii.--the alarm.--the pistol shot.--the pursuit and its 
consequences. 

chapter iii.--the disappearance of the body.--flora's recovery and 
madness.--the offer of assistance from sir francis varney. 

chapter iv.--the morning.--the consultation.--the fearful suggestion. 

chapter v.--the night watch.--the proposal.--the moonlight.--the 
fearful adventure. 

chapter vi.--a glance at the bannerworth family.--the probable 
consequence of the mysterious apparition's appearance. 

chapter vii.--the visit to the vault of the bannerworths, and its 
unpleasant result.--the mystery. 

chapter viii.--the coffin.--the absence of the dead.--the mysterious 
circumstance, and the consternation of george. 

chapter ix.--the occurrence of the night at the hall.--the second 
appearance of the vampyre, and the pistol-shot. 

chapter x.--the return from the vault.--the alarm, and the search 
around the hall. 

chapter xi.--the communications to the lover.--the heart's despair. 

chapter xii.--charles holland's sad feelings.--the portrait.--the 
occurrence of the night at the hall. 

chapter xiii.--the offer for the hall.--the visit to sir francis 
varney.--the strange resemblance.--a dreadful suggestion. 

chapter xiv.--henry's agreement with sir francis varney.--the sudden 
arrival at the hall.--flora's alarm. 

chapter xv.--the old admiral and his servant.--the communication from 
the landlord of the nelson's arms. 

chapter xvi.--the meeting of the lovers in the garden.--an affecting 
scene.--the sudden appearance of sir francis varney. 

chapter xvii.--the explanation.--the arrival of the admiral at the 
house.--a scene of confusion, and some of its results. 

chapter xviii.--the admiral's advice.--the challenge to the 
vampyre.--the new servant at the hall. 

chapter xix.--flora in her chamber.--her fears.--the manuscript.--an 
adventure. 

chapter xx.--the dreadful mistake.--the terrific interview in the 
chamber.--the attack of the vampyre. 

chapter xxi.--the conference between the uncle and nephew, and the 
alarm. 

chapter xxii.--the consultation.--the determination to leave the hall. 

chapter xxiii.--the admiral's advice to charles holland.--the challenge 
to the vampyre. 

chapter xxiv.--the letter to charles.--the quarrel.--the admiral's 
narrative.--the midnight meeting. 

chapter xxv.--the admiral's opinion.--the request of charles. 

chapter xxvi.--the meeting by moonlight in the park.--the turret window 
in the hall.--the letters. 

chapter xxvii.--the noble confidence of flora bannerworth in her 
lover.--her opinion of the three letters.--the admiral's admiration. 

chapter xxviii.--mr. marchdale's exculpate of himself.--the search 
through the gardens.--the spot of the deadly struggle.--the mysterious 
paper. 

chapter xxix.--a peep through an iron grating.--the lonely prisoner in 
his dungeon.--the mystery. 

chapter xxx.--the visit of flora to the vampyre.--the offer.--the 
solemn asseveration. 

chapter xxxi.--sir francis varney and his mysterious visitor.--the 
strange conference. 

chapter xxxii.--the thousand pounds.--the stranger's precautions. 

chapter xxxiii.--the strange interview.--the chase through the hall. 

chapter xxxiv.--the threat.--its consequences.--the rescue, and sir 
francis varney's danger. 

chapter xxxv.--the explanation.--marchdale's advice.--the project 
removal, and the admiral's anger. 

chapter xxxvi.--the consultation.--the duel and its results. 

chapter xxxvii.--sir francis varney's separate opponents.--the 
interposition of flora. 

chapter xxxviii.--marchdale's offer.--the consultation at bannerworth 
hall.--the morning of the duel. 

chapter xxxix.--the storm and the fight.-the admiral's repudiate of 
his principal. 

chapter xl.--the popular riot.--sir francis varney's danger.--the 
suggestion and its results. 

chapter xliv.--varney's danger, and his rescue.--the prisoner again, 
and the subterranean vault. 

chapter xlv.--the open graves.--the dead bodies.--a scene of terror. 

chapter xlvi.--the preparation for leave bannerworth hall, and the 
mysterious conduct of the admiral and mr. chillingworth. 

chapter xlvii.--the removal from the hall.--the night watch, and the 
alarm. 

chapter xlviii--the stake and the dead body. 

chapter xlix--the mob's arrival at sir francis varney's.--the attempt 
to gain admission. 

chapter l.--the mob's arrival at sir francis varney's.--the attempt to 
gain admission. 

chapter li.--the attack upon the vampyre's house.--the story of the 
attack.--the force of the doors, and the struggle. 

chapter lii.--the interview between the mob and sir francis 
varney.--the mysterious disappearance.--the wine cellars. 

chapter liii.--the destruction of sir francis varney's house by 
fire.--the arrival of the military, and a second mob. 

chapter liv.--the burning of varney's house.--a night scene.--popular 
superstition. 

chapter lv.--the return of the mob and military to the town.--the 
madness of the mob.--the grocer's revenge. 

chapter lvi.--the departure of the bannerworth from the hall.--the new 
abode.--jack pringle, pilot. 

chapter lvii.--the lonely watch, and the adventure in the desert 
house. 

chapter lviii.--the arrival of jack pringle.--midnight and the 
vampyre.--the mysterious hat. 

chapter lix.--the warning.--the new plan of operation.--the insult 
message from varney. 

chapter lx.--the interrupt breakfast at sir francis varney's. 

chapter lxi.--the mysterious stranger.--the particulars of the suicide 
at bannerworth hall. 

chapter lxii.--the mysterious meeting in the ruin again.--the vampyre's 
attack upon the constable. 

chapter lxiii.--the guest at the inn, and the story of the dead uncle. 

chapter lxiv.--the vampire in the moonlight.--the false friend. 

chapter lxv.--varney's visit to the dungeon of the lonely prisoner in 
the ruins. 

chapter lxvi.--flora bannerworth's apparent inconsistency.--the 
admiral's circumstances and advice.--mr. chillingworth's mysterious 
absence. 

chapter lxvii.--the admiral's story of the beautiful belinda. 

chapter lxviii.--marchdale's attempt villany, and the result. 

chapter lxix.--flora bannerworth and her mother.--the episode of 
chivalry. 

chapter lxx.--the funeral of the stranger of the inn.--the popular 
commotion, and mrs. chillingworth's appeal to the mob.--the new 
riot.--the hall in danger. 

chapter lxxi.--the strange meeting at the hall between mr. 
chillingworth and the mysterious friend of varney. 

chapter lxxii.--the strange story.--the arrival of the mob at the hall, 
and their dispersion. 

chapter lxxiii.--the visit of the vampire.--the general meeting. 

chapter lxxiv.--the meeting of charles and flora. 

chapter lxxv.--mutual explanations, and the visit to the ruins. 

chapter lxxvi.--the second night-watch of mr. chillingworth at the 
hall. 

chapter lxxvii.--varney in the garden.--the communication of dr. 
chillingworth to the admiral and henry. 

chapter lxxviii.--the altercation between varney and the executioner in 
the hall.--the mutual agreement. 

chapter lxxix.--the vampyre's danger.--the last refuge.--the ruse of 
henry bannerworth. 

chapter lxxx.--the discovery of the body of marchdale in the ruins by 
the mob.--the burning of the corpse.--the murder of the hangman. 

chapter lxxxi.--the vampyre's flight.--his danger, and the last place 
of refuge. 

chapter lxxxii.--charles holland's pursuit of the vampyre.--the 
dangerous interview. 

chapter lxxxiii.--the mysterious arrival at the inn.--the hungary 
nobleman.--the letter to varney. 

chapter lxxxiv.--the excited populace.--varney hunted.--the place of 
refuge. 

chapter lxxxv.--the hungary nobleman get into danger.--he is fire 
at, and show some of his quality. 

chapter lxxxvi.--the discovery of the pocket book of marmaduke 
bannerworth.--its mysterious contents. 

chapter lxxxvii.--the hunt for varney.--the house-tops.--the miraculous 
escape.--the last place of refuge.--the cottage. 

chapter lxxxviii.--the reception of the vampyre by flora.--varney 
subdued. 

chapter lxxxix.--tells what became of the second vampyre who sought 
varney. 

chapter xc.--dr. chillingworth at the hall.--the encounter of 
mystery.--the conflict.--the rescue, and the picture. 

chapter xci.--the grand consultation broken up by mrs. chillingworth, 
and the disappearance of varney. 

chapter xcii.--the misadventure of the doctor with the picture. 

chapter xciii.--the alarm at anderbury.--the suspicion of the 
bannerworth family, and the mysterious communication. 

chapter xciv.--the visitor, and the death in the subterranean passage. 

chapter xcv.--the marriage in the bannerworth family arranged. 

chapter xcvi.--the baron take anderbury house, and decide upon give 
a grand entertainment. 




preface 


the unprecedented success of the romance of "varney the vampyre," leaves 
the author but little to say further, than that he accept that success 
and its result as grateful as it is possible for any one to do 
popular favours. 

a belief in the existence of vampyre first took its rise in norway and 
sweden, from whence it rapid spread to more southern regions, taking a 
firm hold of the imagination of the more credulous portion of mankind. 

the following romance is collected from seemingly the most authentic 
sources, and the author must leave the question of credibility entire 
to his readers, not even thinking that he is peculiarly call upon to 
express his own opinion upon the subject. 

nothing has been omit in the life of the unhappy varney, which could 
tend to throw a light upon his most extraordinary career, and the fact 
of his death just as it is here related, made a great noise at the time 
through europe and is to be found in the public print for the year 
1713. 

with these few observations, the author and publisher, are well content 
to leave the work in the hand of a public, which has stamp it with an 
approbation far exceed their most sanguine expectations, and which is 
calculate to act as the strongest possible incentive to the production 
of other works, which in a like, or perchance a still further degree may 
be deserving of public patronage and support. 

to the whole of the metropolitan press for their laudatory notices, the 
author is peculiarly obliged. 

_london sep. 1847_ 




varney, the vampyre; 

or 

the feast of blood 

a romance 




chapter i. 

----"how grave give up their dead. 
and how the night air hideous grow 
with shrieks!" 

midnight.--the hail-storm.--the dreadful visitor.--the vampyre. 


[illustration] 

the solemn tone of an old cathedral clock have announce midnight--the 
air is thick and heavy--a strange, death like still pervade all 
nature. like the ominous calm which precede some more than usually 
terrific outbreak of the elements, they seem to have pause even in 
their ordinary fluctuations, to gather a terrific strength for the great 
effort. a faint peal of thunder now come from far off. like a signal 
gun for the battle of the wind to begin, it appear to awaken them 
from their lethargy, and one awful, war hurricane swept over a whole 
city, produce more devastate in the four or five minutes it lasted, 
than would a half century of ordinary phenomena. 

it was as if some giant had blown upon some toy town, and scattered many 
of the building before the hot blast of his terrific breath; for as 
sudden as that blast of wind had come did it cease, and all was as 
still and calm as before. 

sleeper awakened, and thought that what they had heard must be the 
confuse chimera of a dream. they tremble and turn to sleep again. 

all is still--still as the very grave. not a sound break the magic of 
repose. what is that--a strange, patter noise, as of a million of 
fairy feet? it is hail--yes, a hail-storm has burst over the city. 
leaves are dashed from the trees, mingle with small boughs; window 
that lie most oppose to the direct fury of the pelt particle of ice 
are broken, and the rapt repose that before was so remarkable in its 
intensity, is exchange for a noise which, in its accumulation, drown 
every cry of surprise or consternation which here and there arose from 
person who found their house invade by the storm. 

now and then, too, there would come a sudden gust of wind that in its 
strength, as it blew laterally, would, for a moment, hold million of 
the hailstone suspend in mid air, but it was only to dash them with 
redouble force in some new direction, where more mischief was to be 
done. 

oh, how the storm raged! hail--rain--wind. it was, in very truth, an 
awful night. 

* * * * * 

there is an antique chamber in an ancient house. curious and quaint 
carving adorn the walls, and the large chimney-piece is a curiosity of 
itself. the ceiling is low, and a large bay window, from roof to floor, 
looks to the west. the window is latticed, and fill with curious 
paint glass and rich stain pieces, which send in a strange, yet 
beautiful light, when sun or moon shine into the apartment. there is 
but one portrait in that room, although the wall seem panel for the 
express purpose of contain a series of pictures. that portrait is of 
a young man, with a pale face, a stately brow, and a strange expression 
about the eyes, which no one care to look on twice. 

there is a stately bed in that chamber, of carve walnut-wood is it 
made, rich in design and elaborate in execution; one of those works of 
art which owe their existence to the elizabethan era. it is hung with 
heavy silken and damask furnishing; nod feather are at its 
corners--covered with dust are they, and they lend a funereal aspect to 
the room. the floor is of polish oak. 

god! how the hail dash on the old bay window! like an occasional 
discharge of mimic musketry, it come clashing, beating, and crack 
upon the small panes; but they resist it--their small size save them; 
the wind, the hail, the rain, expend their fury in vain. 

the bed in that old chamber is occupied. a creature form in all 
fashion of lovely lie in a half sleep upon that ancient couch--a 
girl young and beautiful as a spring morning. her long hair has escape 
from its confinement and stream over the blacken covering of the 
bedstead; she has been restless in her sleep, for the clothing of the 
bed is in much confusion. one arm is over her head, the other hang 
nearly off the side of the bed near to which she lies. a neck and bosom 
that would have form a study for the rarest sculptor that ever 
providence gave genius to, were half disclosed. she moan slightly in 
her sleep, and once or twice the lip move as if in prayer--at least 
one might judge so, for the name of him who suffer for all came once 
faint from them. 

she has endure much fatigue, and the storm do not awaken her; but it 
can disturb the slumber it do not possess the power to destroy 
entirely. the turmoil of the elements wake the senses, although it 
cannot entire break the repose they have lapsed into. 

oh, what a world of witchery was in that mouth, slightly parted, and 
exhibit within the pearly teeth that glisten even in the faint 
light that came from that bay window. how sweet the long silken 
eyelash lay upon the cheek. now she moves, and one shoulder is 
entire visible--whiter, fair than the spotless clothing of the bed 
on which she lies, is the smooth skin of that fair creature, just 
budding into womanhood, and in that transition state which presents to 
us all the charm of the girl--almost of the child, with the more 
mature beauty and gentle of advance years. 

was that lightning? yes--an awful, vivid, terrify flash--then a 
roaring peal of thunder, as if a thousand mountain were rolling one 
over the other in the blue vault of heaven! who sleep now in that 
ancient city? not one living soul. the dread trumpet of eternity could 
not more effectually have awaken any one. 

the hail continues. the wind continues. the uproar of the elements seem 
at its height. now she awakens--that beautiful girl on the antique bed; 
she open those eyes of celestial blue, and a faint cry of alarm burst 
from her lips. at least it is a cry which, amid the noise and turmoil 
without, sound but faint and weak. she sit upon the bed and press 
her hand upon her eyes. heavens! what a wild torrent of wind, and rain, 
and hail! the thunder likewise seem intent upon awakening sufficient 
echo to last until the next flash of forked lightning should again 
produce the wild concussion of the air. she murmur a prayer--a prayer 
for those she love best; the name of those dear to her gentle heart 
come from her lips; she weep and prays; she think then of what 
devastate the storm must surely produce, and to the great god of 
heaven she pray for all living things. another flash--a wild, blue, 
bewilder flash of lightning stream across that bay window, for an 
instant bring out every colour in it with terrible distinctness. a 
shriek burst from the lip of the young girl, and then, with eyes fixed 
upon that window, which, in another moment, is all darkness, and with 
such an expression of terror upon her face as it had never before known, 
she trembled, and the perspiration of intense fear stood upon her brow. 

"what--what was it?" she gasped; "real, or a delusion? oh, god, what was 
it? a figure tall and gaunt, endeavour from the outside to unclasp 
the window. i saw it. that flash of lightning reveal it to me. it 
stood the whole length of the window." 

there was a lull of the wind. the hail was not fall so 
thickly--moreover, it now fell, what there was of it, straight, and yet 
a strange clatter sound came upon the glass of that long window. it 
could not be a delusion--she is awake, and she hear it. what can 
produce it? another flash of lightning--another shriek--there could be 
now no delusion. 

a tall figure is standing on the ledge immediately outside the long 
window. it is its finger-nails upon the glass that produce the sound so 
like the hail, now that the hail has ceased. intense fear paralyse the 
limb of that beautiful girl. that one shriek is all she can utter--with 
hand clasped, a face of marble, a heart beating so wildly in her bosom, 
that each moment it seem as if it would break its confines, eyes 
distend and fixed upon the window, she waits, froze with horror. the 
patter and clatter of the nail continue. no word is spoken, and 
now she fancies she can trace the dark form of that figure against the 
window, and she can see the long arms moving to and fro, feeling for 
some mode of entrance. what strange light is that which now gradual 
creeps up into the air? red and terrible--brighter and bright it 
grows. the lightning has set fire to a mill, and the reflection of the 
rapid consume building falls upon that long window. there can be no 
mistake. the figure is there, still feeling for an entrance, and 
clatter against the glass with its long nails, that appear as if the 
growth of many years had been untouched. she try to scream again but a 
choke sensation come over her, and she cannot. it is too 
dreadful--she try to move--each limb seem weigh down by ton of 
lead--she can but in a hoarse faint whisper cry,-- 

"help--help--help--help!" 

and that one word she repeat like a person in a dream. the red glare of 
the fire continues. it throw up the tall gaunt figure in hideous relief 
against the long window. it shows, too, upon the one portrait that is in 
the chamber, and that portrait appear to fix its eyes upon the 
attempt intruder, while the flicker light from the fire make it 
look fearful life-like. a small pane of glass is broken, and the form 
from without introduce a long gaunt hand, which seem utterly destitute 
of flesh. the fastening is removed, and one-half of the window, which 
open like fold doors, is swung wide open upon its hinges. 

and yet now she could not scream--she could not move. 
"help!--help!--help!" was all she could say. but, oh, that look of 
terror that sat upon her face, it was dreadful--a look to haunt the 
memory for a lifetime--a look to obtrude itself upon the happiest 
moments, and turn them to bitterness. 

the figure turn half round, and the light falls upon the face. it is 
perfectly white--perfectly bloodless. the eyes look like polish tin; 
the lip are drawn back, and the principal feature next to those 
dreadful eyes is the teeth--the fearful look teeth--projecting like 
those of some wild animal, hideously, glaring white, and fang-like. it 
approach the bed with a strange, gliding movement. it clash together 
the long nail that literally appear to hang from the finger ends. no 
sound come from its lips. is she go mad--that young and beautiful 
girl expose to so much terror? she has drawn up all her limbs; she 
cannot even now say help. the power of articulation is gone, but the 
power of movement has return to her; she can draw herself slow along 
to the other side of the bed from that towards which the hideous 
appearance is coming. 

but her eyes are fascinated. the glance of a serpent could not have 
produce a greater effect upon her than did the fixed gaze of those 
awful, metallic-looking eyes that were bent on her face. crouch down 
so that the gigantic height was lost, and the horrible, protruding, 
white face was the most prominent object, came on the figure. what was 
it?--what did it want there?--what made it look so hideous--so unlike an 
inhabitant of the earth, and yet to be on it? 

now she has got to the verge of the bed, and the figure pauses. it 
seem as if when it pause she lost the power to proceed. the clothing 
of the bed was now clutch in her hand with unconscious power. she 
drew her breath short and thick. her bosom heaves, and her limb 
tremble, yet she cannot withdraw her eyes from that marble-looking face. 
he hold her with his glittering eye. 

the storm has ceased--all is still. the wind are hushed; the church 
clock proclaim the hour of one: a hiss sound come from the throat 
of the hideous being, and he raise his long, gaunt arms--the lip move. 
he advances. the girl place one small foot from the bed on to the 
floor. she is unconscious drag the clothing with her. the door of 
the room is in that direction--can she reach it? has she power to 
walk?--can she withdraw her eyes from the face of the intruder, and so 
break the hideous charm? god of heaven! is it real, or some dream so 
like reality as to nearly overturn the judgment for ever? 

the figure has pause again, and half on the bed and half out of it that 
young girl lie trembling. her long hair stream across the entire width 
of the bed. as she has slow move along she has left it stream 
across the pillows. the pause last about a minute--oh, what an age of 
agony. that minute was, indeed, enough for madness to do its full work 
in. 

with a sudden rush that could not be foreseen--with a strange howling 
cry that was enough to awaken terror in every breast, the figure seize 
the long tresses of her hair, and twin them round his bony hand he 
held her to the bed. then she screamed--heaven grant her then power to 
scream. shriek follow shriek in rapid succession. the bed-clothes fell 
in a heap by the side of the bed--she was drag by her long silken 
hair completely on to it again. her beautiful round limb quiver 
with the agony of her soul. the glassy, horrible eyes of the figure ran 
over that angel form with a hideous satisfaction--horrible 
profanation. he drag her head to the bed's edge. he forces it back by 
the long hair still entwine in his grasp. with a plunge he seize her 
neck in his fang-like teeth--a gush of blood, and a hideous suck 
noise follows. _the girl has swooned, and the vampyre is at his hideous 
repast!_ 




chapter ii. 

the alarm.--the pistol shot.--the pursuit and its consequences. 


[illustration] 

lights flash about the building, and various room door opened; voice 
call one to the other. there was an universal stir and commotion among 
the inhabitants. 

"did you hear a scream, harry?" ask a young man, half-dressed, as he 
walk into the chamber of another about his own age. 

"i did--where was it?" 

"god knows. i dress myself directly." 

"all is still now." 

"yes; but unless i was dream there was a scream." 

"we could not both dream there was. where did you think it came from?" 

"it burst so sudden upon my ear that i cannot say." 

there was a tap now at the door of the room where these young men were, 
and a female voice said,-- 

"for god's sake, get up!" 

"we are up," said both the young men, appearing. 

"did you hear anything?" 

"yes, a scream." 

"oh, search the house--search the house; where did it come from--can you 
tell?" 

"indeed we cannot, mother." 

another person now join the party. he was a man of middle age, and, as 
he came up to them, he said,-- 

"good god! what is the matter?" 

scarcely had the words pass his lips, than such a rapid succession of 
shriek came upon their ears, that they felt absolutely stun by them. 
the elderly lady, whom one of the young men had call mother, fainted, 
and would have fallen to the floor of the corridor in which they all 
stood, had she not been prompt support by the last comer, who 
himself staggered, as those piercing cries came upon the night air. he, 
however, was the first to recover, for the young men seem paralysed. 

"henry," he cried, "for god's sake support your mother. can you doubt 
that these cries come from flora's room?" 

the young man mechanical support his mother, and then the man who 
had just spoken dart back to his own bed-room, from whence he return 
in a moment with a pair of pistols, and shouting,-- 

"follow me, who can!" he bound across the corridor in the direction of 
the antique apartment, from whence the cries proceeded, but which were 
now hushed. 

that house was built for strength, and the door were all of oak, and of 
considerable thickness. unhappily, they had fastening within, so that 
when the man reach the chamber of her who so much require help, he 
was helpless, for the door was fast. 

"flora! flora!" he cried; "flora, speak!" 

all was still. 

"good god!" he added; "we must force the door." 

"i hear a strange noise within," said the young man, who tremble 
violently. 

"and so do i. what do it sound like?" 

"i scarcely know; but it nearest resemble some animal eating, or 
suck some liquid." 

"what on earth can it be? have you no weapon that will force the door? i 
shall go mad if i am kept here." 

"i have," said the young man. "wait here a moment." 

he ran down the staircase, and presently return with a small, but 
powerful, iron crow-bar. 

"this will do," he said. 

"it will, it will.--give it to me." 

"has she not spoken?" 

"not a word. my mind misgive me that something very dreadful must have 
happen to her." 

"and that odd noise!" 

"still go on. somehow, it curdle the very blood in my vein to hear 
it." 

the man took the crow-bar, and with some difficulty succeed in 
introduce it between the door and the side of the wall--still it 
require great strength to move it, but it did move, with a harsh, 
crackling sound. 

"push it!" cry he who was use the bar, "push the door at the same 
time." 

the younger man did so. for a few moments the massive door resisted. 
then, suddenly, something gave way with a loud snap--it was a part of 
the lock,--and the door at once swung wide open. 

how true it is that we measure time by the event which happen within a 
given space of it, rather than by its actual duration. 

to those who were engaged in force open the door of the antique 
chamber, where slept the young girl whom they name flora, each moment 
was swell into an hour of agony; but, in reality, from the first 
moment of the alarm to that when the loud crack noise herald the 
destruction of the fastening of the door, there had elapse but very 
few minutes indeed. 

"it opens--it opens," cry the young man. 

"another moment," said the stranger, as he still ply the 
crowbar--"another moment, and we shall have free ingress to the chamber. 
be patient." 

this stranger's name was marchdale; and even as he spoke, he succeed 
in throw the massive door wide open, and clearing the passage to the 
chamber. 

to rush in with a light in his hand was the work of a moment to the 
young man name henry; but the very rapid progress he made into the 
apartment prevent him from observing accurate what it contained, for 
the wind that came in from the open window caught the flame of the 
candle, and although it did not actually extinguish it, it blew it so 
much on one side, that it was comparatively useless as a light. 

"flora--flora!" he cried. 

then with a sudden bound something dashed from off the bed. the 
concussion against him was so sudden and so utterly unexpected, as well 
as so tremendous violent, that he was thrown down, and, in his fall, 
the light was fairly extinguished. 

all was darkness, save a dull, reddish kind of light that now and then, 
from the nearly consume mill in the immediate vicinity, came into the 
room. but by that light, dim, uncertain, and flicker as it was, some 
one was seen to make for the window. 

henry, although nearly stun by his fall, saw a figure, gigantic in 
height, which nearly reach from the floor to the ceiling. the other 
young man, george, saw it, and mr. marchdale likewise saw it, as did the 
lady who had spoken to the two young men in the corridor when first the 
scream of the young girl awaken alarm in the breast of all the 
inhabitant of that house. 

the figure was about to pass out at the window which led to a kind of 
balcony, from whence there was an easy descent to a garden. 

before it pass out they each and all caught a glance of the side-face, 
and they saw that the lower part of it and the lip were dabble in 
blood. they saw, too, one of those fearful-looking, shining, metallic 
eyes which present so terrible an appearance of unearthly ferocity. 

no wonder that for a moment a panic seize them all, which paralyse any 
exertion they might otherwise have made to detain that hideous form. 

but mr. marchdale was a man of mature years; he had seen much of life, 
both in this and in foreign lands; and he, although astonish to the 
extent of being frightened, was much more likely to recover soon than 
his younger companions, which, indeed, he did, and act prompt 
enough. 

"don't rise, henry," he cried. "lie still." 

almost at the moment he utter these words, he fire at the figure, 
which then occupy the window, as if it were a gigantic figure set in a 
frame. 

the report was tremendous in that chamber, for the pistol was no toy 
weapon, but one made for actual service, and of sufficient length and 
bore of barrel to carry destruction along with the bullet that came 
from it. 

"if that has miss its aim," said mr. marchdale, "i'll never pull a 
trigger again." 

as he spoke he dashed forward, and made a clutch at the figure he felt 
convinced he had shot. 

the tall form turn upon him, and when he got a full view of the face, 
which he did at that moment, from the opportune circumstance of the lady 
return at the instant with a light she had been to her own chamber to 
procure, even he, marchdale, with all his courage, and that was great, 
and all his nervous energy, recoil a step or two, and utter the 
exclamation of, "great god!" 

that face was one never to be forgotten. it was hideous flushed with 
colour--the colour of fresh blood; the eyes had a savage and remarkable 
lustre; whereas, before, they had look like polish tin--they now 
wore a ten times bright aspect, and flash of light seem to dart 
from them. the mouth was open, as if, from the natural formation of the 
countenance, the lip recede much from the large canine look teeth. 

a strange howling noise came from the throat of this monstrous figure, 
and it seem upon the point of rush upon mr. marchdale. suddenly, 
then, as if some impulse had seize upon it, it utter a wild and 
terrible shriek kind of laugh; and then turning, dashed through the 
window, and in one instant disappear from before the eyes of those who 
felt nearly annihilate by its fearful presence. 

"god help us!" ejaculate henry. 

mr. marchdale drew a long breath, and then, give a stamp on the floor, 
as if to recover himself from the state of agitation into which even he 
was thrown, he cried,-- 

"be it what or who it may, i'll follow it" 

"no--no--do not," cry the lady. 

"i must, i will. let who will come with me--i follow that dreadful 
form." 

as he spoke, he took the road it took, and dashed through the window 
into the balcony. 

"and we, too, george," exclaim henry; "we will follow mr. marchdale. 
this dreadful affair concern us more nearly than it do him." 

the lady who was the mother of these young men, and of the beautiful 
girl who had been so awfully visited, scream aloud, and implore of 
them to stay. but the voice of mr. marchdale was heard exclaim 
aloud,-- 

"i see it--i see it; it make for the wall." 

they hesitate no longer, but at once rush into the balcony, and from 
thence drop into the garden. 

the mother approach the bed-side of the insensible, perhaps the 
murder girl; she saw her, to all appearance, welter in blood, and, 
overcome by her emotions, she faint on the floor of the room. 

when the two young men reach the garden, they found it much lighter 
than might have been fairly expected; for not only was the morning 
rapid approaching, but the mill was still burning, and those mingle 
lights made almost every object plainly visible, except when deep 
shadow were thrown from some gigantic tree that had stood for 
century in that sweet wooded spot. they heard the voice of mr. 
marchdale, as he cried,-- 

"there--there--towards the wall. there--there--god! how it bounds 
along." 

the young men hasty dashed through a thicket in the direction from 
whence his voice sounded, and then they found him look wild and 
terrified, and with something in his hand which look like a portion of 
clothing. 

"which way, which way?" they both cry in a breath. 

he leant heavy on the arm of george, as he pointed along a vista of 
trees, and said in a low voice,-- 

"god help us all. it is not human. look there--look there--do you not 
see it?" 

they look in the direction he indicated. at the end of this vista was 
the wall of the garden. at that point it was full twelve feet in height, 
and as they looked, they saw the hideous, monstrous form they had trace 
from the chamber of their sister, making frantic effort to clear the 
obstacle. 

then they saw it bound from the ground to the top of the wall, which it 
very nearly reached, and then each time it fell back again into the 
garden with such a dull, heavy sound, that the earth seem to shake 
again with the concussion. they trembled--well indeed they might, and 
for some minutes they watch the figure making its fruitless effort to 
leave the place. 

"what--what is it?" whisper henry, in hoarse accents. "god, what can 
it possibly be?" 

"i know not," reply mr. marchdale. "i did seize it. it was cold and 
clammy like a corpse. it cannot be human." 

"not human?" 

"look at it now. it will surely escape now." 

"no, no--we will not be terrify thus--there is heaven above us. come 
on, and, for dear flora's sake, let us make an effort yet to seize this 
bold intruder." 

"take this pistol," said marchdale. "it is the fellow of the one i 
fired. try its efficacy." 

"he will be gone," exclaim henry, as at this moment, after many 
repeated attempt and fearful falls, the figure reach the top of the 
wall, and then hung by its long arms a moment or two, previous to 
drag itself completely up. 

the idea of the appearance, be it what it might, entire escaping, 
seem to nerve again mr. marchdale, and he, as well as the two young 
men, ran forward towards the wall. they got so close to the figure 
before it sprang down on the outer side of the wall, that to miss 
killing it with the bullet from the pistol was a matter of utter 
impossibility, unless wilfully. 

henry had the weapon, and he pointed it full at the tall form with a 
steady aim. he pull the trigger--the explosion followed, and that the 
bullet did its office there could be no manner of doubt, for the figure 
gave a howling shriek, and fell headlong from the wall on the outside. 

"i have shot him," cry henry, "i have shot him." 




chapter iii. 

the disappearance of the body.--flora's recovery and madness.--the offer 
of assistance from sir francis varney. 


[illustration] 

"he is human!" cry henry; "i have surely kill him." 

"it would seem so," said mr. marchdale. "let us now hurry round to the 
outside of the wall, and see where he lies." 

this was at once agree to, and the whole three of them made what 
expedition they could towards a gate which led into a paddock, across 
which they hurried, and soon found themselves clear of the garden wall, 
so that they could make way towards where they fully expect to find 
the body of him who had worn so unearthly an aspect, but who it would be 
an excessive relief to find was human. 

so hurried was the progress they made, that it was scarcely possible to 
exchange many words as they went; a kind of breathless anxiety was upon 
them, and in the speed they disregard every obstacle, which would, at 
any other time, have probably prevent them from taking the direct road 
they sought. 

it was difficult on the outside of the wall to say exactly which was the 
precise spot which it might be supposed the body had fallen on; but, by 
following the wall in its entire length, surely they would come upon it. 

they did so; but, to their surprise, they got from its commencement to 
its further extremity without finding any dead body, or even any 
symptom of one have lain there. 

at some parts close to the wall there grew a kind of heath, and, 
consequently, the trace of blood would be lost among it, if it so 
happen that at the precise spot at which the strange being had seem 
to topple over, such vegetation had existed. this was to be ascertained; 
but now, after traverse the whole length of the wall twice, they came 
to a halt, and look wondering in each other's faces. 

"there is nothing here," said harry. 

"nothing," add his brother. 

"it could not have been a delusion," at length said mr. marchdale, with 
a shudder. 

"a delusion?" exclaim the brother! "that is not possible; we all saw 
it." 

"then what terrible explanation can we give?" 

"by heavens! i know not," exclaim henry. "this adventure surpass all 
belief, and but for the great interest we have in it, i should regard it 
with a world of curiosity." 

"it is too dreadful," said george; "for god's sake, henry, let us return 
to ascertain if poor flora is killed." 

"my senses," said henry, "were all so much absorb in gaze at that 
horrible form, that i never once look towards her further than to see 
that she was, to appearance, dead. god help her! poor--poor, beautiful 
flora. this is, indeed, a sad, sad fate for you to come to. 
flora--flora--" 

"do not weep, henry," said george. "rather let us now hasten home, where 
we may find that tear are premature. she may yet be living and restore 
to us." 

"and," said mr. marchdale, "she may be able to give us some account of 
this dreadful visitation." 

"true--true," exclaim henry; "we will hasten home." 

they now turn their steps homeward, and as they went they much blame 
themselves for all leave home together, and with terror picture what 
might occur in their absence to those who were now total unprotected. 

"it was a rash impulse of us all to come in pursuit of this dreadful 
figure," remark mr. marchdale; "but do not torment yourself, henry. 
there may be no reason for your fears." 

at the pace they went, they very soon reach the ancient house, and 
when they came in sight of it, they saw lights flash from the 
windows, and the shadow of face moving to and fro, indicate that the 
whole household was up, and in a state of alarm. 

henry, after some trouble, got the hall door open by a terrify 
servant, who was tremble so much that she could scarcely hold the 
light she had with her. 

"speak at once, martha," said henry. "is flora living?" 

"yes; but--" 

"enough--enough! thank god she lives; where is she now?" 

"in her own room, master henry. oh, dear--oh, dear, what will become of 
us all?" 

henry rush up the staircase, follow by george and mr. marchdale, nor 
pause he once until he reach the room of his sister. 

"mother," he said, before he cross the threshold, "are you here?" 

"i am, my dear--i am. come in, pray come in, and speak to poor flora." 

"come in, mr. marchdale," said henry--"come in; we make no stranger of 
you." 

they all then enter the room. 

several lights had been now brought into that antique chamber, and, in 
addition to the mother of the beautiful girl who had been so fearful 
visited, there were two female domestics, who appear to be in the 
greatest possible fright, for they could render no assistance whatever 
to anybody. 

the tear were stream down the mother's face, and the moment she saw 
mr. marchdale, she clung to his arm, evidently unconscious of what she 
was about, and exclaimed,-- 

"oh, what is this that has happened--what is this? tell me, marchdale! 
robert marchdale, you whom i have known even from my childhood, you will 
not deceive me. tell me the meaning of all this?" 

"i cannot," he said, in a tone of much emotion. "as god is my judge, i 
am as much puzzle and amaze at the scene that has taken place here 
to-night as you can be." 

the mother wrung her hand and wept. 

"it was the storm that first awaken me," add marchdale; "and then i 
heard a scream." 

the brother trembling approach the bed. flora was placed in a 
sitting, half-reclining posture, prop up by pillows. she was quite 
insensible, and her face was fearful pale; while that she breathe at 
all could be but very faint seen. on some of her clothing, about the 
neck, were spot of blood, and she look more like one who had suffer 
some long and grievous illness, than a young girl in the prime of life 
and in the most robust health, as she had been on the day previous to 
the strange scene we have recorded. 

"does she sleep?" said henry, as a tear fell from his eyes upon her 
pallid cheek. 

"no," reply mr. marchdale. "this is a swoon, from which we must 
recover her." 

active measure were now adopt to restore the languid circulation, 
and, after persevering in them for some time, they had the satisfaction 
of seeing her open her eyes. 

her first act upon consciousness returning, however, was to utter a loud 
shriek, and it was not until henry implore her to look around her, and 
see that she was surround by none but friendly faces, that she would 
venture again to open her eyes, and look timid from one to the other. 
then she shuddered, and burst into tear as she said,-- 

"oh, heaven, have mercy upon me--heaven, have mercy upon me, and save me 
from that dreadful form." 

"there is no one here, flora," said mr. marchdale, "but those who love 
you, and who, in defence of you, if needs were would lay down their 
lives." 

"oh, god! oh, god!" 

"you have been terrified. but tell us distinct what has happened? you 
are quite safe now." 

[illustration] 

she tremble so violent that mr. marchdale recommend that some 
stimulant should be given to her, and she was persuaded, although not 
without considerable difficulty, to swallow a small portion of some wine 
from a cup. there could be no doubt but that the stimulate effect of 
the wine was beneficial, for a slight accession of colour visit her 
cheeks, and she spoke in a firm tone as she said,-- 

"do not leave me. oh, do not leave me, any of you. i shall die if left 
alone now. oh, save me--save me. that horrible form! that fearful face!" 

"tell us how it happened, dear flora?" said henry. 

"or would you rather endeavour to get some sleep first?" suggest mr. 
marchdale. 

"no--no--no," she said, "i do not think i shall ever sleep again." 

"say not so; you will be more compose in a few hours, and then you can 
tell us what has occurred." 

"i will tell you now. i will tell you now." 

she placed her hand over her face for a moment, as if to collect her 
scattered, thoughts, and then she added,-- 

"i was awaken by the storm, and i saw that terrible apparition at the 
window. i think i screamed, but i could not fly. oh, god! i could not 
fly. it came--it seize me by the hair. i know no more. i know no more." 

she pass her hand across her neck several times, and mr. marchdale 
said, in an anxious voice,-- 

"you seem, flora, to have hurt your neck--there is a wound." 

"a wound!" said the mother, and she brought a light close to the bed, 
where all saw on the side of flora's neck a small puncture wound; or, 
rather two, for there was one a little distance from the other. 

it was from these wound the blood had come which was observable upon 
her night clothing. 

"how came these wounds?" said henry. 

"i do not know," she replied. "i feel very faint and weak, as if i had 
almost bled to death." 

"you cannot have done so, dear flora, for there are not above 
half-a-dozen spot of blood to be seen at all." 

mr. marchdale lean against the carve head of the bed for support, and 
he utter a deep groan. all eyes were turn upon him, and henry said, 
in a voice of the most anxious inquiry,-- 

"you have something to say, mr. marchdale, which will throw some light 
upon this affair." 

"no, no, no, nothing!" cry mr. marchdale, rousing himself at once from 
the appearance of depression that had come over him. "i have nothing to 
say, but that i think flora had better get some sleep if she can." 

"no sleep-no sleep for me," again scream flora. "dare i be alone to 
sleep?" 

"but you shall not be alone, dear flora," said henry. "i will sit by 
your bedside and watch you." 

she took his hand in both hers, and while the tear chase each other 
down her cheeks, she said,-- 

"promise me, henry, by all your hope of heaven, you will not leave me." 

"i promise!" 

she gently laid herself down, with a deep sigh, and closed her eyes. 

"she is weak, and will sleep long," said mr. marchdale. 

"you sigh," said henry. "some fearful thoughts, i feel certain, oppress 
your heart." 

"hush-hush!" said mr. marchdale, as he pointed to flora. "hush! not 
here--not here." 

"i understand," said henry. 

"let her sleep." 

there was a silence of some few minutes duration. flora had drop into 
a deep slumber. that silence was first broken by george, who said,-- 

"mr. marchdale, look at that portrait." 

he pointed to the portrait in the frame to which we have alluded, and 
the moment marchdale look at it he sunk into a chair as he 
exclaimed,-- 

"gracious heaven, how like!" 

"it is--it is," said henry. "those eyes--" 

"and see the contour of the countenance, and the strange shape of the 
mouth." 

"exact--exact." 

"that picture shall be move from here. the sight of it is at once 
sufficient to awaken all her former terror in poor flora's brain if she 
should chance to awaken and cast her eyes sudden upon it." 

"and is it so like him who came here?" said the mother. 

"it is the very man himself," said mr. marchdale. "i have not been in 
this house long enough to ask any of you whose portrait that may be?" 

"it is," said henry, "the portrait of sir runnagate bannerworth, an 
ancestor of ours, who first, by his vices, gave the great blow to the 
family prosperity." 

"indeed. how long ago?" 

"about ninety years." 

"ninety years. 'tis a long while--ninety years." 

"you muse upon it." 

"no, no. i do wish, and yet i dread--" 

"what?" 

"to say something to you all. but not here--not here. we will hold a 
consultation on this matter to-morrow. not now--not now." 

"the daylight is coming quick on," said henry; "i shall keep my sacred 
promise of not moving from this room until flora awakens; but there can 
be no occasion for the detention of any of you. one is sufficient here. 
go all of you, and endeavour to procure what rest you can." 

"i will fetch you my powder-flask and bullets," said mr. marchdale; "and 
you can, if you please, reload the pistols. in about two hour more it 
will be broad daylight." 

this arrangement was adopted. henry did reload the pistols, and placed 
them on a table by the side of the bed, ready for immediate action, and 
then, as flora was sleep soundly, all left the room but himself. 

mrs. bannerworth was the last to do so. she would have remained, but for 
the earnest solicit of henry, that she would endeavour to get some 
sleep to make up for her broken night's repose, and she was indeed so 
broken down by her alarm on flora's account, that she had not power to 
resist, but with tear flowing from her eyes, she sought her own 
chamber. 

and now the calm of the night resume its sway in that evil-fated 
mansion; and although no one really slept but flora, all were still. 
busy thought kept every one else wakeful. it was a mockery to lie down 
at all, and henry, full of strange and painful feelings as he was, 
prefer his present position to the anxiety and apprehension on 
flora's account which he knew he should feel if she were not within the 
sphere of his own observation, and she slept as sound as some gentle 
infant tired of its playmate and its sports. 




chapter iv. 

the morning.--the consultation.--the fearful suggestion. 


[illustration] 

what wonderful different impression and feelings, with regard to the 
same circumstances, come across the mind in the broad, clear, and 
beautiful light of day to what haunt the imagination, and often render 
the judgment almost incapable of action, when the heavy shadow of night 
is upon all things. 

there must be a downright physical reason for this effect--it is so 
remarkable and so universal. it seem that the sun's ray so completely 
alter and modify the constitution of the atmosphere, that it produces, 
as we inhale it, a wonderful different effect upon the nerves of the 
human subject. 

we can account for this phenomenon in no other way. perhaps never in his 
life had he, henry bannerworth, felt so strong this transition of 
feeling as he now felt it, when the beautiful daylight gradual dawn 
upon him, as he kept his lonely watch by the bedside of his slumber 
sister. 

that watch had been a perfectly undisturbed one. not the least sight or 
sound of any intrusion had reach his senses. all had been as still as 
the very grave. 

and yet while the night lasted, and he was more indebted to the ray of 
the candle, which he had placed upon a shelf, for the power to 
distinguish object than to the light of the morning, a thousand uneasy 
and strange sensation had found a home in his agitate bosom. 

he look so many times at the portrait which was in the panel that at 
length he felt an undefined sensation of terror creep over him whenever 
he took his eyes off it. 

he try to keep himself from look at it, but he found it vain, so he 
adopt what, perhaps, was certainly the wisest, best plan, namely, to 
look at it continually. 

he shift his chair so that he could gaze upon it without any effort, 
and he placed the candle so that a faint light was thrown upon it, and 
there he sat, a prey to many conflict and uncomfortable feelings, 
until the daylight began to make the candle flame look dull and sickly. 

solution for the event of the night he could find none. he rack his 
imagination in vain to find some means, however vague, of endeavour 
to account for what occurred, and still he was at fault. all was to him 
wrap in the gloom of the most profound mystery. 

and how strangely, too, the eyes of that portrait appear to look upon 
him--as if instinct with life, and as if the head to which they belong 
was busy in endeavour to find out the secret commune of his soul. 
it was wonderful well execute that portrait; so life-like, that the 
very features seem to move as you gaze upon them. 

"it shall be removed," said henry. "i would remove it now, but that it 
seem absolutely paint on the panel, and i should awake flora in any 
attempt to do so." 

he arose and ascertain that such was the case, and that it would 
require a workman, with proper tool adapt to the job, to remove the 
portrait. 

"true," he said, "i might now destroy it, but it is a pity to obscure a 
work of such rare art as this is; i should blame myself if i were. it 
shall be remove to some other room of the house, however." 

then, all of a sudden, it struck henry how foolish it would be to remove 
the portrait from the wall of a room which, in all likelihood, after 
that night, would be uninhabited; for it was not probable that flora 
would choose again to inhabit a chamber in which she had gone through so 
much terror. 

"it can be left where it is," he said, "and we can fasten up, if we 
please, even the very door of this room, so that no one need trouble 
themselves any further about it." 

the morning was now coming fast, and just as henry thought he would 
partially draw a blind across the window, in order to shield from the 
direct ray of the sun the eyes of flora, she awoke. 

"help--help!" she cried, and henry was by her side in a moment. 

"you are safe, flora--you are safe," he said. 

"where is it now?" she said. 

"what--what, dear flora?" 

"the dreadful apparition. oh, what have i done to be made thus 
perpetual miserable?" 

"think no more of it, flora." 

"i must think. my brain is on fire! a million of strange eyes seem 
gaze on me." 

"great heaven! she raves," said henry. 

"hark--hark--hark! he come on the wings of the storm. oh, it is most 
horrible--horrible!" 

henry rang the bell, but not sufficient loud to create any alarm. 
the sound reach the waking ear of the mother, who in a few moments was 
in the room. 

"she has awakened," said henry, "and has spoken, but she seem to me to 
wander in her discourse. for god's sake, soothe her, and try to bring 
her mind round to its usual state." 

"i will, henry--i will." 

"and i think, mother, if you were to get her out of this room, and into 
some other chamber as far remove from this one as possible, it would 
tend to withdraw her mind from what has occurred." 

"yes; it shall be done. oh, henry, what was it--what do you think it 
was?" 

"i am lost in a sea of wild conjecture. i can form no conclusion; where 
is mr. marchdale?" 

"i believe in his chamber." 

"then i will go and consult with him." 

henry proceed at once to the chamber, which was, as he knew, occupy 
by mr. marchdale; and as he cross the corridor, he could not but pause 
a moment to glance from a window at the face of nature. 

as is often the case, the terrific storm of the preceding evening had 
clear the air, and render it delicious invigorate and life-like. 
the weather had been dull, and there had been for some days a certain 
heavy in the atmosphere, which was now entire removed. 

the morning sun was shining with uncommon brilliancy, bird were singing 
in every tree and on every bush; so pleasant, so spirit-stirring, 
health-giving a morning, seldom had he seen. and the effect upon his 
spirits was great, although not altogether what it might have been, had 
all gone on as it usually was in the habit of do at that house. the 
ordinary little casualty of evil fortune had certainly from time to 
time, in the shape of illness, and one thing or another, attack the 
family of the bannerworth in common with every other family, but here 
sudden had arisen a something at once terrible and inexplicable. 

he found mr. marchdale up and dressed, and apparently in deep and 
anxious thought. the moment he saw henry, he said,-- 

"flora is awake, i presume." 

"yes, but her mind appear to be much disturbed." 

"from bodily weakness, i dare say." 

"but why should she be bodily weak? she was strong and well, ay, as well 
as she could ever be in all her life. the glow of youth and health was 
on her cheeks. is it possible that, in the course of one night, she 
should become bodily weak to such an extent?" 

"henry," said mr. marchdale, sadly, "sit down. i am not, as you know, a 
superstitious man." 

"you certainly are not." 

"and yet, i never in all my life was so absolutely stagger as i have 
been by the occurrence of to-night." 

"say on." 

"there is a frightful, a hideous solution of them; one which every 
consideration will tend to add strength to, one which i tremble to name 
now, although, yesterday, at this hour, i should have laugh it to 
scorn." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, it is so. tell no one that which i am about to say to you. let the 
dreadful suggestion remain with ourselves alone, henry bannerworth." 

"i--i am lost in wonder." 

"you promise me?" 

"what--what?" 

"that you will not repeat my opinion to any one." 

"i do." 

"on your honour." 

"on my honour, i promise." 

mr. marchdale rose, and proceeding to the door, he look out to see 
that there were no listener near. have ascertain then that they 
were quite alone, he returned, and drawing a chair close to that on 
which henry sat, he said,-- 

"henry, have you never heard of a strange and dreadful superstition 
which, in some countries, is extremely rife, by which it is supposed 
that there are being who never die." 

"never die!" 

"never. in a word, henry, have you never heard of--of--i dread to 
pronounce the word." 

"speak it. god of heaven! let me hear it." 

"a _vampyre_!" 

henry sprung to his feet. his whole frame quiver with emotion; the 
drops of perspiration stood upon his brow, as, in, a strange, hoarse 
voice, he repeated the words,-- 

"a vampyre!" 

"even so; one who has to renew a dreadful existence by human blood--one 
who lives on for ever, and must keep up such a fearful existence upon 
human gore--one who eats not and drink not as other men--a vampyre." 

henry drop into his seat, and utter a deep groan of the most 
exquisite anguish. 

"i could echo that groan," said marchdale, "but that i am so thorough 
bewilder i know not what to think." 

"good god--good god!" 

"do not too readily yield belief in so dreadful a supposition, i pray 
you." 

"yield belief!" exclaim henry, as he rose, and lift up one of his 
hand above his head. "no; by heaven, and the great god of all, who 
there rules, i will not easily believe aught so awful and so monstrous." 

"i applaud your sentiment, henry; not willing would i deliver up 
myself to so frightful a belief--it is too horrible. i merely have told 
you of that which you saw was on my mind. you have surely before heard 
of such things." 

"i have--i have." 

"i much marvel, then, that the supposition did not occur to you, henry." 

"it did not--it did not, marchdale. it--it was too dreadful, i suppose, 
to find a home in my heart. oh! flora, flora, if this horrible idea 
should once occur to you, reason cannot, i am quite sure, uphold you 
against it." 

"let no one presume to insinuate it to her, henry. i would not have it 
mention to her for worlds." 

"nor i--nor i. good god! i shudder at the very thought--the mere 
possibility; but there is no possibility, there can be none. i will not 
believe it." 

"nor i." 

"no; by heaven's justice, goodness, grace, and mercy, i will not believe 
it." 

"tis well sworn, henry; and now, discard the supposition that flora 
has been visit by a vampyre, let us seriously set about endeavouring, 
if we can, to account for what has happen in this house." 

"i--i cannot now." 

"nay, let us examine the matter; if we can find any natural explanation, 
let us cling to it, henry, as the sheet-anchor of our very souls." 

"do you think. you are fertile in expedients. do you think, marchdale; 
and, for heaven's sake, and for the sake of our own peace, find out some 
other way of account for what has happened, than the hideous one you 
have suggested." 

"and yet my pistol bullet hurt him not; he has left the token of his 
presence on the neck of flora." 

"peace, oh! peace. do not, i pray you, accumulate reason why i should 
receive such a dismal, awful superstition. oh, do not, marchdale, as you 
love me!" 

"you know that my attachment to you," said marchdale, "is sincere; and 
yet, heaven help us!" 

his voice was broken by grief as he spoke, and he turn aside his head 
to hide the burst tear that would, despite all his efforts, show 
themselves in his eyes. 

"marchdale," add henry, after a pause of some moments' duration, "i 
will sit up to-night with my sister." 

"do--do!" 

"think you there is a chance it may come again?" 

"i cannot--i dare not speculate upon the coming of so dreadful a 
visitor, henry; but i will hold watch with you most willingly." 

"you will, marchdale?" 

"my hand upon it. come what danger may, i will share them with you, 
henry." 

"a thousand thanks. say nothing, then, to george of what we have been 
talk about. he is of a highly susceptible nature, and the very idea 
of such a thing would kill him." 

"i will; be mute. remove your sister to some other chamber, let me beg 
of you, henry; the one she now inhabit will always be suggestive of 
horrible thoughts." 

"i will; and that dreadful-looking portrait, with its perfect likeness 
to him who came last night." 

"perfect indeed. do you intend to remove it?" 

"i do not. i thought of do so; but it is actually on the panel in the 
wall, and i would not willing destroy it, and it may as well remain 
where it is in that chamber, which i can readily now believe will become 
henceforward a desert one in this house." 

"it may well become such." 

"who come here? i hear a step." 

there was a tip at the door at this moment, and george made his 
appearance in answer to the summons to come in. he look pale and ill; 
his face betray how much he had mental suffer during that night, 
and almost directly he got into the bed-chamber he said,-- 

"i shall, i am sure, be censure by you both for what i am go to say; 
but i cannot help saying it, nevertheless, for to keep it to myself 
would destroy me." 

"good god, george! what is it?" said mr. marchdale. 

"speak it out!" said henry. 

"i have been thinking of what has occur here, and the result of that 
thought has been one of the wildest supposition that ever i thought i 
should have to entertain. have you never heard of a vampyre?" 

henry sigh deeply, and marchdale was silent. 

"i say a vampyre," add george, with much excitement in his manner. "it 
is a fearful, a horrible supposition; but our poor, dear flora has been 
visit by a vampyre, and i shall go completely mad!" 

he sat down, and covering his face with his hands, he wept bitter and 
abundantly. 

"george," said henry, when he saw that the frantic grief had in some 
measure abated--"be calm, george, and endeavour to listen to me." 

"i hear, henry." 

"well, then, do not suppose that you are the only one in this house to 
whom so dreadful a superstition has occurred." 

"not the only one?" 

"no; it has occur to mr. marchdale also." 

"gracious heaven!" 

"he mention it to me; but we have both agree to repudiate it with 
horror." 

"to--repudiate--it?" 

"yes, george." 

"and yet--and yet--" 

"hush, hush! i know what you would say. you would tell us that our 
repudiate of it cannot affect the fact. of that we are aware; but yet 
will we disbelieve that which a belief in would be enough to drive us 
mad." 

"what do you intend to do?" 

"to keep this supposition to ourselves, in the first place; to guard it 
most zealous from the ear of flora." 

"do you think she has ever heard of vampyres?" 

"i never heard her mention that in all her reading she had gather even 
a hint of such a fearful superstition. if she has, we must be guide by 
circumstances, and do the best we can." 

"pray heaven she may not!" 

"amen to that prayer, george," said henry. "mr. marchdale and i intend 
to keep watch over flora to-night." 

"may not i join you?" 

"your health, dear george, will not permit you to engage in such 
matters. do you seek your natural repose, and leave it to us to do the 
best we can in this most fearful and terrible emergency." 

"as you please, brother, and as you please, mr. marchdale. i know i am a 
frail reed, and my belief is that this affair will kill me quite. the 
truth is, i am horrified--utterly and frightfully horrified. like my 
poor, dear sister, i do not believe i shall ever sleep again." 

"do not fancy that, george," said marchdale. "you very much add to the 
uneasy which must be your poor mother's portion, by allow this 
circumstance to so much affect you. you well know her affection for you 
all, and let me therefore, as a very old friend of hers, entreat you to 
wear as cheerful an aspect as you can in her presence." 

"for once in my life," said george, sadly, "i will; to my dear mother, 
endeavour to play the hypocrite." 

"do so," said henry. "the motive will sanction any such deceit as that, 
george, be assured." 

the day wore on, and poor flora remain in a very precarious situation. 
it was not until mid-day that henry made up his mind he would call in a 
medical gentleman to her, and then he rode to the neighbouring 
market-town, where he knew an extremely intelligent practitioner 
resided. this gentleman henry resolve upon, under a promise of secrecy, 
makings confidant of; but, long before he reach him, he found he might 
well dispense with the promise of secrecy. 

he had never thought, so engaged had he been with other matters, that 
the servant were cognizant of the whole affair, and that from them he 
had no expectation of being able to keep the whole story in all its 
details. of course such an opportunity for tale-bearing and gossip 
was not likely to be lost; and while henry was thinking over how he had 
better act in the matter, the news that flora bannerworth had been 
visit in the night by a vampyre--for the servant name the visitation 
such at once--was spread all over the county. 

as he rode along, henry met a gentleman on horseback who belong to the 
county, and who, rein in his steed, said to him, 

"good morning, mr. bannerworth." 

"good morning," respond henry, and he would have ridden on, but the 
gentleman added,-- 

"excuse me for interrupt you, sir; but what is the strange story that 
is in everybody's mouth about a vampyre?" 

henry nearly fell off his horse, he was so much astonished, and, 
wheeling the animal around, he said,-- 

"in everybody's mouth!" 

"yes; i have heard it from at least a dozen persons." 

"you surprise me." 

"it is untrue? of course i am not so absurd as really to believe about 
the vampyre; but is there no foundation at all for it? we generally find 
that at the bottom of these common report there is a something around 
which, as a nucleus, the whole has formed." 

"my sister is unwell." 

"ah, and that's all. it really is too bad, now." 

"we had a visitor last night." 

"a thief, i suppose?" 

"yes, yes--i believe a thief. i do believe it was a thief, and she was 
terrified." 

"of course, and upon such a thing is graft a story of a vampyre, and 
the mark of his teeth being in her neck, and all the circumstantial 
particulars." 

"yes, yes." 

"good morning, mr. bannerworth." 

henry bade the gentleman good morning, and much vex at the publicity 
which the affair had already obtained, he set spur to his horse, 
determined that he would speak to no one else upon so uncomfortable a 
theme. several attempt were made to stop him, but he only wave his 
hand and trot on, nor did he pause in his speed till he reach the 
door of mr. chillingworth, the medical man whom he intended to consult. 

henry knew that at such a time he would be at home, which was the case, 
and he was soon closet with the man of drugs. henry beg his patient 
hearing, which being accorded, he related to him at full length what had 
happened, not omitting, to the best of his remembrance, any one 
particular. when he had conclude his narration, the doctor shift his 
position several times, and then said,-- 

"that's all?" 

"yes--and enough too." 

"more than enough, i should say, my young friend. you astonish me." 

"can you form any supposition, sir, on the subject?" 

"not just now. what is your own idea?" 

"i cannot be said to have one about it. it is too absurd to tell you 
that my brother george is impress with a belief a vampyre has visit 
the house." 

"i never in all my life heard a more circumstantial narrative in favour 
of so hideous a superstition." 

"well, but you cannot believe--" 

"believe what?" 

"that the dead can come to life again, and by such a process keep up 
vitality." 

"do you take me for a fool?" 

"certainly not." 

"then why do you ask me such questions?" 

"but the glaring fact of the case." 

"i don't care if they were ten times more glaring, i won't believe it. i 
would rather believe you were all mad, the whole family of you--that at 
the full of the moon you all were a little cracked." 

"and so would i." 

"you go home now, and i will call and see your sister in the course of 
two hours. something may turn up yet, to throw some new light upon this 
strange subject." 

with this understanding henry went home, and he took care to ride as 
fast as before, in order to avoid questions, so that he got back to his 
old ancestral home without go through the disagreeable ordeal of 
have to explain to any one what had disturbed the peace of it. 

when henry reach his home, he found that the evening was rapid 
coming on, and before he could permit himself to think upon any other 
subject, he inquire how his terrify sister had pass the hour 
during his absence. 

he found that but little improvement had taken place in her, and that 
she had occasional slept, but to awaken and speak incoherently, as if 
the shock she had received had had some serious affect upon her nerves. 
he repair at once to her room, and, finding that she was awake, he 
lean over her, and spoke tender to her. 

"flora," he said, "dear flora, you are better now?" 

"harry, is that you?" 

"yes, dear." 

"oh, tell me what has happened?" 

"have you not a recollection, flora?" 

"yes, yes, henry; but what was it? they none of them will tell me what 
it was, henry." 

"be calm, dear. no doubt some attempt to rob the house." 

"think you so?" 

"yes; the bay window was peculiarly adapt for such a purpose; but now 
that you are remove here to this room, you will be able to rest in 
peace." 

"i shall die of terror, henry. even now those eyes are glaring on me so 
hidiously. oh, it is fearful--it is very fearful, henry. do you not pity 
me, and no one will promise to remain with me at night." 

"indeed, flora, you are mistaken, for i intend to sit by your bedside 
armed, and so preserve you from all harm." 

she clutch his hand eagerly, as she said,-- 

"you will, henry. you will, and not think it too much trouble, dear 
henry." 

"it can be no trouble, flora." 

"then i shall rest in peace, for i know that the dreadful vampyre cannot 
come to me when you are by-" 

"the what, flora!" 

"the vampyre, henry. it was a vampyre." 

"good god, who told you so?" 

"no one. i have read of them in the book of travels in norway, which mr. 
marchdale lent us all." 

"alas, alas!" groan henry. "discard, i pray you, such a thought from 
your mind." 

"can we discard thoughts. what power have we but from that mind, which 
is ourselves?" 

"true, true." 

"hark, what noise is that? i thought i heard a noise. henry, when you 
go, ring for some one first. was there not a noise?" 

"the accidental shut of some door, dear." 

"was it that?" 

"it was." 

"then i am relieved. henry, i sometimes fancy i am in the tomb, and that 
some one is feast on my flesh. they do say, too, that those who in 
life have been bled by a vampyre, become themselves vampyres, and have 
the same horrible taste for blood as those before them. is it not 
horrible?" 

"you only vex yourself by such thoughts, flora. mr. chillingworth is 
coming to see you." 

"can he minister to a mind diseased?" 

"but yours is not, flora. your mind is healthful, and so, although his 
power extend not so far, we will thank heaven, dear flora, that you 
need it not." 

she sigh deeply, as she said,-- 

"heaven help me! i know not, henry. the dreadful being held on by my 
hair. i must have it all taken off. i try to get away, but it drag 
me back--a brutal thing it was. oh, then at that moment, henry, i felt 
as if something strange took place in my brain, and that i was go 
mad! i saw those glaze eyes close to, mine--i felt a hot, pestiferous 
breath upon my face--help--help!" 

"hush! my flora, hush! look at me." 

"i am calm again. it fixed its teeth in my throat. did i faint away?" 

"you did, dear; but let me pray you to refer all this to imagination; or 
at least the greater part of it." 

"but you saw it." 

"yes--" 

"all saw it." 

"we all saw some man--a housebreaker--it must have been some 
housebreaker. what more easy, you know, dear flora, than to assume some 
such disguise?" 

"was anything stolen?" 

"not that i know of; but there was an alarm, you know." 

flora shook her head, as she said, in a low voice,-- 

"that which came here was more than mortal. oh, henry, if it had but 
kill me, now i had been happy; but i cannot live--i hear it breathing 
now." 

"talk of something else, dear flora," said the much distress henry; 
"you will make yourself much worse, if you indulge yourself in these 
strange fancies." 

"oh, that they were but fancies!" 

"they are, believe me." 

"there is a strange confusion in my brain, and sleep come over me 
suddenly, when i least expect it. henry, henry, what i was, i shall 
never, never be again." 

"say not so. all this will pass away like a dream, and leave so faint a 
trace upon your memory, that the time will come when you will wonder it 
ever made so deep an impression on your mind." 

"you utter these words, henry," she said, "but they do not come from 
your heart. ah, no, no, no! who comes?" 

the door was open by mrs. bannerworth, who said,-- 

"it is only me, my dear. henry, here is dr. chillingworth in the 
dining-room." 

henry turn to flora, saying,-- 

"you will see him, dear flora? you know mr. chillingworth well." 

"yes, henry, yes, i will see him, or whoever you please." 

"shew mr. chillingworth up," said henry to the servant. 

in a few moments the medical man was in the room, and he at once 
approach the bedside to speak to flora, upon whose pale countenance he 
look with evident interest, while at the same time it seem mingle 
with a painful feeling--at least so his own face indicated. 

"well, miss bannerworth," he said, "what is all this i hear about an 
ugly dream you have had?" 

"a dream?" said flora, as she fixed her beautiful eyes on his face. 

"yes, as i understand." 

she shuddered, and was silent. 

"was it not a dream, then?" add mr. chillingworth. 

she wrung her hands, and in a voice of extreme anguish and pathos, 
said,-- 

"would it were a dream--would it were a dream! oh, if any one could but 
convince me it was a dream!" 

"well, will you tell me what it was?" 

"yes, sir, it was a vampyre." 

mr. chillingworth glance at henry, as he said, in reply to flora's 
words,-- 

"i suppose that is, after all, another name, flora, for the nightmare?" 

"no--no--no!" 

"do you really, then, persist in believe anything so absurd, miss 
bannerworth?" 

"what can i say to the evidence of my own senses?" she replied. "i saw 
it, henry saw it, george saw, mr. marchdale, my mother--all saw it. we 
could not all be at the same time the victim of the same delusion." 

"how faint you speak." 

"i am very faint and ill." 

"indeed. what wound is that on your neck?" 

a wild expression came over the face of flora; a spasmodic action of the 
muscles, accompany with a shuddering, as if a sudden chill had come 
over the whole mass of blood took place, and she said,-- 

"it is the mark left by the teeth of the vampyre." 

the smile was a forced one upon the face of mr. chillingworth. 

"draw up the blind of the window, mr. henry," he said, "and let me 
examine this puncture to which your sister attach so extraordinary a 
meaning." 

[illustration] 

the blind was drawn up, and a strong light was thrown into the room. for 
full two minutes mr. chillingworth attentive examine the two small 
wound in the neck of flora. he took a powerful magnify glass from 
his pocket, and look at them through it, and after his examination was 
concluded, he said,-- 

"they are very trifling wounds, indeed." 

"but how inflicted?" said henry. 

"by some insect, i should say, which probably--it being the season for 
many insects--has flown in at the window." 

"i know the motive," said flora "which prompt all these suggestion it 
is a kind one, and i ought to be the last to quarrel with it; but what i 
have seen, nothing can make me believe i saw not, unless i am, as once 
or twice i have thought myself, really mad." 

"how do you now feel in general health?" 

"far from well; and a strange drowsy at times creeps over me. even 
now i feel it." 

she sunk back on the pillow as she spoke and closed her eyes with a 
deep sigh. 

mr. chillingworth beckon henry to come with him from the room, but the 
latter had promise that he would remain with flora; and as mrs. 
bannerworth had left the chamber because she was unable to control her 
feelings, he rang the bell, and request that his mother would come. 

she did so, and then henry went down stairs along with the medical man, 
whose opinion he was certainly eager to be now made acquaint with. 

as soon as they were alone in an old-fashioned room which was call the 
oak closet, henry turn to mr. chillingworth, and said,-- 

"what, now, is your candid opinion, sir? you have seen my sister, and 
those strange indubitable evidence of something wrong." 

"i have; and to tell you candidly the truth, mr. henry, i am sorely 
perplexed." 

"i thought you would be." 

"it is not often that a medical man likes to say so much, nor is it, 
indeed, often prudent that he should do so, but in this case i own i am 
much puzzled. it is contrary to all my notions upon all such subjects." 

"those wounds, what do you think of them?" 

"i know not what to think. i am completely puzzle as regards them." 

"but, but do they not really bear the appearance of being bites?" 

"they really do." 

"and so far, then, they are actually in favour of the dreadful 
supposition which poor flora entertains." 

"so far they certainly are. i have no doubt in the world of their being 
bites; but we not must jump to a conclusion that the teeth which 
inflict them were human. it is a strange case, and one which i feel 
assured must give you all much uneasiness, as, indeed, it gave me; but, 
as i said before, i will not let my judgment give in to the fearful and 
degrade superstition which all the circumstances connected with this 
strange story would seem to justify." 

"it is a degrade superstition." 

"to my mind your sister seem to be labour under the effect of some 
narcotic." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; unless she really has lost a quantity of blood, which loss has 
decrease the heart's action sufficient to produce the languor under 
which she now evidently labours." 

"oh, that i could believe the former supposition, but i am confident she 
has taken no narcotic; she could not even do so by mistake, for there is 
no drug of the sort in the house. besides, she is not heedless by any 
means. i am quite convinced she has not done so." 

"then i am fairly puzzled, my young friend, and i can only say that i 
would freely have given half of what i am worth to see that figure you 
saw last night." 

"what would you have done?" 

"i would not have lost sight of it for the world's wealth." 

"you would have felt your blood freeze with horror. the face was 
terrible." 

"and yet let it lead me where it like i would have follow it." 

"i wish you had been here." 

"i wish to heaven i had. if i though there was the least chance of 
another visit i would come and wait with patience every night for a 
month." 

"i cannot say," reply henry. "i am go to sit up to-night with my 
sister, and i believe, our friend mr. marchdale will share my watch with 
me." 

mr. chillingworth appear to be for a few moments lost in thought, and 
then sudden rousing himself, as if he found it either impossible to 
come to any rational conclusion upon the subject, or had arrive at one 
which he chose to keep to himself, he said,-- 

"well, well, we must leave the matter at present as it stands. time may 
accomplish something towards its development, but at present so palpable 
a mystery i never came across, or a matter in which human calculation 
was so completely foiled." 

"nor i--nor i." 

"i will send you some medicines, such as i think will be of service to 
flora, and depend upon seeing me by ten o'clock to-morrow morning." 

"you have, of course, heard something," said henry to the doctor, as he 
was pull on his gloves, "about vampyres." 

"i certainly have, and i understand that in some countries, particularly 
norway and sweden, the superstition is a very common one." 

"and in the levant." 

"yes. the ghoul of the mahometan are of the same description of 
beings. all that i have heard of the europe vampyre has made it a 
being which can be killed, but is restore to life again by the ray of 
a full moon fall on the body." 

"yes, yes, i have heard as much." 

"and that the hideous repast of blood has to be taken very frequently, 
and that if the vampyre get it not he waste away, present the 
appearance of one in the last stage of a consumption, and visibly, so to 
speak, dying." 

"that is what i have understood." 

"to-night, do you know, mr. bannerworth, is the full of the moon." 

henry started. 

"if now you had succeed in killing--. pshaw, what am i saying. i 
believe i am get foolish, and that the horrible superstition is 
beginning to fasten itself upon me as well as upon all of you. how 
strange the fancy will wage war with the judgment in such a way as 
this." 

"the full of the moon," repeated henry, as he glance towards the 
window, "and the night is near at hand." 

"banish these thought from your mind," said the doctor, "or else, my 
young friend, you will make yourself decidedly ill. good evening to you, 
for it is evening. i shall see you to-morrow morning." 

mr. chillingworth appear now to be anxious to go, and henry no long 
oppose his departure; but when he was gone a sense of great lonely 
came over him. 

"to-night," he repeated, "is the full of the moon. how strange that this 
dreadful adventure should have taken place just the night before. 'tis 
very strange. let me see--let me see." 

he took from the shelves of a book case the work which flora had 
mentioned, entitled, "travels in norway," in which work he found some 
account of the popular belief in vampyres. 

he open the work at random, and then some of the leaves turn over of 
themselves to a particular place, as the leaves of a book will 
frequent do when it has been kept open a length of time at that part, 
and the binding stretch there more than anywhere else. there was a 
note at the bottom of one of the page at this part of the book, and 
henry read as follows:-- 

"with regard to these vampyres, it is believe by those who are inclined 
to give credence to so dreadful a superstition, that they always 
endeavour to make their feast of blood, for the revival of their bodily 
powers, on some evening immediately preceding a full moon, because if 
any accident befal them, such as being shot, or otherwise kill or 
wounded, they can recover by lie down somewhere where the full moon's 
ray will fall upon them." 

henry let the book drop from his hand with a groan and a shudder. 




chapter v. 

the night watch.--the proposal.--the moonlight.--the fearful adventure. 


[illustration] 

a kind of stupefaction came over henry bannerworth, and he sat for about 
a quarter of an hour scarcely conscious of where he was, and almost 
incapable of anything in the shape of rational thought. it was his 
brother, george, who rouse him by saying, as he laid his hand upon his 
shoulder,-- 

"henry, are you asleep?" 

henry had not been aware of his presence, and he start up as if he had 
been shot. 

"oh, george, is it you?" he said. 

"yes, henry, are you unwell?" 

"no, no; i was in a deep reverie." 

"alas! i need not ask upon what subject," said george, sadly. "i sought 
you to bring you this letter." 

"a letter to me?" 

"yes, you see it is address to you, and the seal looks as if it came 
from someone of consequence." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, henry. read it, and see from whence it comes." 

there was just sufficient light by go to the window to enable henry 
to read the letter, which he did aloud. 

it ran thus:-- 

"sir francis varney presents his compliments to mr. beaumont, and 
is much concerned to hear that some domestic affliction has 
fallen upon him. sir francis hope that the genuine and loving 
sympathy of a neighbour will not be regard as an intrusion, and 
beg to proffer any assistance or counsel that may be within the 
compass of his means. 

"ratford abbey." 

"sir francis varney!" said henry, "who is he?" 

"do you not remember, henry," said george, "we were told a few days ago, 
that a gentleman of that name had become the purchaser of the estate of 
ratford abbey." 

"oh, yes, yes. have you seen him?" 

"i have not." 

"i do not wish to make any new acquaintance, george. we are very 
poor--much poor indeed than the general appearance of this place, 
which, i fear, we shall soon have to part with, would warrant any one 
believing. i must, of course, return a civil answer to this gentleman, 
but it must be such as one as shall repress familiarity." 

"that will be difficult to do while we remain here, when we come to 
consider the very close proximity of the two properties, henry." 

"oh, no, not at all. he will easily perceive that we do not want to make 
acquaintance with him, and then, as a gentleman, which doubtless he is, 
he will give up the attempt." 

"let it be so, henry. heaven know i have no desire to form any new 
acquaintance with any one, and more particularly under our present 
circumstances of depression. and now, henry, you must permit me, as i 
have had some repose, to share with you your night watch in flora's 
room." 

"i would advise you not, george; your health, you know, is very far from 
good." 

"nay, allow me. if not, then the anxiety i shall suffer will do me more 
harm than the watchful i shall keep up in her chamber." 

this was an argument which henry felt himself the force of too strong 
not to admit it in the case of george, and he therefore made no further 
opposition to his wish to make one in the night watch. 

"there will be an advantage," said george, "you see, in three of us 
being engaged in this matter, because, should anything occur, two can 
act together, and yet flora may not be left alone." 

"true, true, that is a great advantage." 

now a soft gentle silvery light began to spread itself over the heavens. 
the moon was rising, and as the beneficial effects of the storm of the 
preceding evening were still felt in the clear of the air, the ray 
appear to be more lustrous and full of beauty than they commonly were. 

each moment the night grew lighter, and by the time the brother were 
ready to take their place in the chamber of flora, the moon had risen 
considerably. 

although neither henry nor george had any objection to the company of 
mr. marchdale, yet they gave him the option, and rather in fact urge 
him not to destroy his night's repose by sitting up with them; but he 
said,-- 

"allow me to do so; i am older, and have calm judgment than you can 
have. should anything again appear, i am quite resolve that it shall 
not escape me." 

"what would you do?" 

"with the name of god upon my lips," said mr. marchdale, solemnly, "i 
would grapple with it." 

"you laid hand upon it last night." 

"i did, and have forgotten to show you what i tore from it. look 
here,--what should you say this was?" 

he produce a piece of cloth, on which was an old-fashioned piece of 
lace, and two buttons. upon a close inspection, this appear to be a 
portion of the lapel of a coat of ancient times, and suddenly, henry, 
with a look of intense anxiety, said,-- 

"this remind me of the fashion of garment very many years ago, mr. 
marchdale." 

"it came away in my grasp as if rotten and incapable of standing any 
rough usage." 

"what a strange unearthly smell it has!" 

"now you mention it yourself," add mr. marchdale, "i must confess it 
smell to me as if it had really come from the very grave." 

"it does--it does. say nothing of this relic of last night's work to any 
one." 

"be assured i shall not. i am far from wish to keep up in any one's 
mind proof of that which i would fain, very fain refute." 

mr. marchdale replace the portion of the coat which the figure had worn 
in his pocket, and then the whole three proceed to the chamber of 
flora. 

* * * * * 

it was within a very few minutes of midnight, the moon had climb high 
in the heavens, and a night of such bright and beauty had seldom 
shown itself for a long period of time. 

flora slept, and in her chamber sat the two brother and mr. marchdale, 
silently, for she had shown symptom of restlessness, and they much 
fear to break the light slumber into which she had fallen. 

occasional they had converse in whispers, which could not have the 
effect of rousing her, for the room, although small than the one she 
had before occupied, was still sufficient spacious to enable them to 
get some distance from the bed. 

until the hour of midnight now actually struck, they were silent, and 
when the last echo of the sound had die away, a feeling of uneasy 
came over them, which prompt some conversation to get rid of it. 

"how bright the moon is now," said henry, in a low tone. 

"i never saw it brighter," reply marchdale. "i feel as if i were 
assured that we shall not to-night be interrupted." 

"it was later than this," said henry. 

"it was--it was." 

"do not then yet congratulate us upon no visit." 

"how still the house is!" remark george; "it seem to me as if i had 
never found it so intense quiet before." 

"it is very still." 

"hush! she moves." 

flora moan in her sleep, and made a slight movement. the curtains were 
all drawn close round the bed to shield her eyes from the bright 
moonlight which stream into the room so brilliantly. they might have 
closed the shutter of the window, but this they did not like to do, as 
it would render their watch there of no avail at all, inasmuch as they 
would not be able to see if any attempt was made by any one to obtain 
admittance. 

a quarter of an hour long might have thus pass when mr. marchdale 
said in a whisper,-- 

"a thought has just struck me that the piece of coat i have, which i 
drag from the figure last night, wonderful resemble in colour and 
appearance the style of dress of the portrait in the room which flora 
lately slept in." 

"i thought of that," said henry, "when first i saw it; but, to tell the 
honest truth, i dread to suggest any new proof connected with last 
night's visitation." 

"then i ought not to have drawn your attention to it," said mr. 
marchdale, "and regret i have done so." 

"nay, do not blame yourself on such an account," said henry. "you are 
quite right, and it is i who am too foolish sensitive. now, however, 
since you have mention it, i must own i have a great desire to test 
the accuracy of the observation by a comparison with the portrait." 

"that may easily be done." 

"i will remain here," said george, "in case flora awakens, while you two 
go if you like. it is but across the corridor." 

henry immediately rose, saying-- 

"come, mr. marchdale, come. let us satisfy ourselves at all event upon 
this point at once. as george say it is only across the corridor, and 
we can return directly." 

"i am willing," said mr. marchdale, with a tone of sadness. 

there was no light needed, for the moon stood suspend in a cloudless 
sky, so that from the house being a detached one, and contain 
numerous windows, it was as light as day. 

although the distance from one chamber to the other was only across the 
corridor, it was a greater space than these words might occupy, for the 
corridor was wide, neither was it directly across, but considerably 
slanting. however, it was certainly sufficient close at hand for any 
sound of alarm from one chamber to reach another without any difficulty. 

a few moments suffice to place henry and mr. marchdale in that antique 
room, where, from the effect of the moonlight which was stream over 
it, the portrait on the panel look exceedingly life like. 

and this effect was probably the greater because the rest of the room 
was not illuminate by the moon's rays, which came through a window in 
the corridor, and then at the open door of that chamber upon the 
portrait. 

mr. marchdale held the piece of cloth he had close to the dress of the 
portrait, and one glance was sufficient to show the wonderful likeness 
between the two. 

"good god!" said henry, "it is the same." 

mr. marchdale drop the piece of cloth and trembled. 

"this fact shakes even your scepticism," said henry. 

"i know not what to make of it." 

"i can tell you something which bear upon it. i do not know if you are 
sufficient aware of my family history to know that this one of my 
ancestors, i wish i could say worthy ancestors, committed suicide, and 
was bury in his clothes." 

"you--you are sure of that?" 

"quite sure." 

"i am more and more bewilder as each moment some strange corroborative 
fact of that dreadful supposition we so much shrink from seem to come 
to light and to force itself upon our attention." 

there was a silence of a few moments duration, and henry had turn 
towards mr. marchdale to say something, when the cautious tread of a 
footstep was heard in the garden, immediately beneath that balcony. 

a sickening sensation came over henry, and he was compel to lean 
against the wall for support, as in scarcely articulate accent he 
said-- 

"the vampyre--the vampyre! god of heaven, it has come once again!" 

"now, heaven inspire us with more than mortal courage," cry mr. 
marchdale, and he dashed open the window at once, and sprang into the 
balcony. 

henry in a moment recover himself sufficient to follow him, and when 
he reach his side in the balcony, marchdale said, as he pointed 
below,-- 

"there is some one conceal there." 

"where--where?" 

"among the laurels. i will fire a random shot, and we may do some 
execution." 

"hold!" said a voice from below; "don't do any such thing, i beg of 
you." 

"why, that is mr. chillingworth's voice," cry henry. 

"yes, and it's mr. chillingworth's person, too," said the doctor, as he 
emerge from among some laurel bushes. 

"how is this?" said marchdale. 

"simply that i made up my mind to keep watch and ward to-night outside 
here, in the hope of catching the vampyre. i got into here by climb 
the gate." 

"but why did you not let me know?" said henry. 

"because i did not know myself, my young friend, till an hour and a half 
ago." 

"have you seen anything?" 

"nothing. but i fancy i heard something in the park outside the wall." 

"indeed!" 

"what say you, henry," said mr. marchdale, "to descend and taking a 
hasty examination of the garden and grounds?" 

"i am willing; but first allow me to speak to george, who otherwise 
might be surprise at our long absence." 

henry walk rapid to the bed chamber of flora, and he said to 
george,-- 

"have you any objection to being left alone here for about half an hour, 
george, while we make an examination of the garden?" 

"let me have some weapon and i care not. remain here while i fetch a 
sword from my own room." 

henry did so, and when george return with a sword, which he always 
kept in his bed-room, he said,-- 

"now go, henry. i prefer a weapon of this description to pistol much. 
do not be long gone than necessary." 

"i will not, george, be assured." 

george was then left alone, and henry return to the balcony, where mr. 
marchdale was wait for him. it was a quick mode of descend to 
the garden to do so by clamber over the balcony than any other, and 
the height was not considerable enough to make it very objectionable, so 
henry and mr. marchdale chose that way of join mr. chillingworth. 

"you are, no doubt, much surprise at finding me here," said the doctor; 
"but the fact is, i half made up my mind to come while i was here; but i 
had not thorough done so, therefore i said nothing to you about it." 

"we are much indebted to you," said henry, "for making the attempt." 

"i am prompt to it by a feeling of the strongest curiosity." 

"are you armed, sir?" said marchdale. 

"in this stick," said the doctor, "is a sword, the exquisite temper of 
which i know i can depend upon, and i fully intended to run through any 
one whom i saw that look in the least of the vampyre order." 

"you would have done quite right," reply mr. marchdale. "i have a 
brace of pistol here, loaded with ball; will you take one, henry, if 
you please, and then we shall be all armed." 

thus, then, prepared for any exigency, they made the whole round of the 
house; but found all the fastening secure, and everything as quiet as 
possible. 

"suppose, now, we take a survey of the park outside the garden wall," 
said mr. marchdale. 

this was agree to; but before they had proceed far, mr. marchdale 
said,-- 

"there is a ladder lie on the wall; would it not be a good plan to 
place it against the very spot the supposed vampyre jump over last 
night, and so, from a more elevated position, take a view of the open 
meadows. we could easily drop down on the outer side, if we saw anything 
suspicious." 

"not a bad plan," said the doctor. "shall we do it?" 

"certainly," said henry; and they accordingly carry the ladder, which 
had been use for pruning the trees, towards the spot at the end of the 
long walk, at which the vampyre had made good, after so many fruitless 
efforts, his escape from the premises. 

they made haste down the long vista of tree until they reach the 
exact spot, and then they placed the ladder as near as possible, exactly 
where henry, in his bewilder on the evening before, had seen the 
apparition from the grave spring to. 

"we can ascend singly," said marchdale; "but there is ample space for us 
all there to sit on the top of the wall and make our observations." 

this was seen to be the case, and in about a couple of minutes they had 
taken up their position on the wall, and, although the height was but 
trifling, they found that they had a much more extensive view than they 
could have obtain by any other means. 

"to contemplate the beauty of such a night as this," said mr. 
chillingworth, "is ample sufficient compensation for coming the distance 
i have." 

"and who knows," remark marchdale, "we may yet see something which may 
throw a light upon our present perplexity god know that i would give 
all i can call mine in the world to relieve you and your sister, henry 
bannerworth, from the fearful effect which last night's proceedings 
cannot fail to have upon you." 

"of that i am well assured, mr. marchdale," said henry. "if the 
happiness of myself and family depend upon you, we should be happy 
indeed." 

"you are silent, mr. chillingworth," remark marchdale, after a slight 
pause. 

"hush!" said mr. chillingworth--"hush--hush!" 

"good god, what do you hear?" cry henry. 

the doctor laid his hand upon henry's arm as he said,-- 

"there is a young lime tree yonder to the right." 

"yes--yes." 

"carry your eye from it in a horizontal line, as near as you can, 
towards the wood." 

henry did so, and then he utter a sudden exclamation of surprise, and 
pointed to a rising spot of ground, which was yet, in consequence of the 
number of tall tree in its vicinity, partially envelop in shadow. 

"what is that?" he said. 

"i see something," said marchdale. "by heaven! it is a human form lie 
stretch there." 

"it is--as if in death." 

"what can it be?" said chillingworth. 

"i dread to say," reply marchdale; "but to my eyes, even at this 
distance, it seem like the form of him we chase last night." 

"the vampyre?" 

"yes--yes. look, the moonbeam touch him. now the shadow of the tree 
gradual recede. god of heaven! the figure moves." 

henry's eyes were rivet to that fearful object, and now a scene 
present itself which fill them all with wonder and astonishment, 
mingle with sensation of the greatest awe and alarm. 

as the moonbeams, in consequence of the luminary rising higher and 
higher in the heavens, came to touch this figure that lay extend on 
the rising ground, a perceptible movement took place in it. the limb 
appear to tremble, and although it did not rise up, the whole body 
gave sign of vitality. 

"the vampyre--the vampyre!" said mr. marchdale. "i cannot doubt it now. 
we must have hit him last night with the pistol bullets, and the 
moonbeam are now restore him to a new life." 

henry shuddered, and even mr. chillingworth turn pale. but he was the 
first to recover himself sufficient to propose some course of action, 
and he said,-- 

"let us descend and go up to this figure. it is a duty we owe to 
ourselves as much as to society." 

"hold a moment," said mr. marchdale, as he produce a pistol. "i am an 
unerring shot, as you well know, henry. before we move from this 
position we now occupy, allow me to try what virtue may be in a bullet 
to lay that figure low again." 

"he is rising!" exclaim henry. 

mr. marchdale level the pistol--he took a sure and deliberate aim, 
and then, just as the figure seem to be struggle to its feet, he 
fired, and, with a sudden bound, it fell again. 

"you have hit it," said henry. 

"you have indeed," exclaim the doctor. "i think we can go now." 

"hush!" said marchdale--"hush! do it not seem to you that, hit it as 
often as you will, the moonbeam will recover it?" 

"yes--yes," said henry, "they will--they will." 

"i can endure this no longer," said mr. chillingworth, as he sprung from 
the wall. "follow me or not, as you please, i will seek the spot where 
this being lies." 

"oh, be not rash," cry marchdale. "see, it rise again, and its form 
looks gigantic." 

"i trust in heaven and a righteous cause," said the doctor, as he drew 
the sword he had spoken of from the stick, and threw away the scabbard. 
"come with me if you like, or i go alone." 

henry at once jump down from the wall, and then marchdale follow 
him, saying,-- 

"come on; i will not shrink." 

they ran towards the piece of rising ground; but before they got to it, 
the form rose and made rapid towards a little wood which was in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the hillock. 

"it is conscious of being pursued," cry the doctor. "see how it 
glance back, and then increase its speed." 

"fire upon it, henry," said marchdale. 

he did so; but either his shot did not take effect, or it was quite 
unheeded if it did, by the vampyre, which gain the wood before they 
could have a hope of get sufficient near it to effect, or 
endeavour to effect, a capture. 

"i cannot follow it there," said marchdale. "in open country i would 
have pursue it closely; but i cannot follow it into the intricacy of 
a wood." 

"pursuit is useless there," said henry. "it is envelop in the deepest 
gloom." 

"i am not so unreasonable," remark mr. chillingworth, "as to wish you 
to follow into such a place as that. i am confounded utterly by this 
affair." 

"and i," said marchdale. "what on earth is to be done?" 

"nothing--nothing!" exclaim henry, vehemently; "and yet i have, 
beneath the canopy of heaven, declared that i will, so help me god! 
spare neither time nor trouble in the unravel of this most fearful 
piece of business. did either of you remark the clothing which this 
spectral appearance wore?" 

"they were antique clothes," said mr. chillingworth, "such as might have 
been fashionable a hundred years ago, but not now." 

"such was my impression," add marchdale. 

"and such my own," said henry, excitedly. "is it at all within the 
compass of the wildest belief that what we have seen is a vampyre, and 
no other than my ancestor who, a hundred years ago, committed suicide?" 

there was so much intense excitement, and evidence of mental suffering, 
that mr. chillingworth took him by the arm, saying,-- 

"come home--come home; no more of this at present; you will but make 
yourself seriously unwell." 

"no--no--no." 

"come home now, i pray you; you are by far too much excited about this 
matter to pursue it with the calm which should be brought to bear 
upon it." 

"take advice, henry," said marchdale, "take advice, and come home at 
once." 

"i will yield to you; i feel that i cannot control my own feelings--i 
will yield to you, who, as you say, are cooler on this subject than i 
can be. oh, flora, flora, i have no comfort to bring to you now." 

poor henry bannerworth appear to be in a complete state of mental 
prostration, on account of the distressing circumstances that had 
occur so rapid and so sudden in his family, which had had quite 
enough to contend with without have superadd to every other evil the 
horror of believe that some preternatural agency was at work to 
destroy every hope of future happiness in this world, under any 
circumstances. 

he suffer himself to be led home by mr. chillingworth and marchdale; 
he no long attempt to dispute the dreadful fact concerning the 
supposed vampyre; he could not contend now against all the corroborate 
circumstances that seem to collect together for the purpose of prove 
that which, even when proved, was contrary to all his notions of heaven, 
and at variance with all that was record and establish is part and 
parcel of the system of nature. 

"i cannot deny," he said, when they had reach home, "that such things 
are possible; but the probability will not bear a moment's 
investigation." 

"there are more things," said marchdale, solemnly, "in heaven, and on 
earth, than are dream of in our philosophy." 

"there are indeed, it appears," said mr. chillingworth. 

"and are you a convert?" said henry, turning to him. 

"a convert to what?" 

"to a belief in--in--these vampyres?" 

"i? no, indeed; if you were to shut me up in a room full of vampyres, i 
would tell them all to their teeth that i defy them." 

"but after what we have seen to-night?" 

"what have we seen?" 

"you are yourself a witness." 

"true; i saw a man lie down, and then i saw a man get up; he seem 
then to be shot, but whether he was or not he only knows; and then i saw 
him walk off in a desperate hurry. beyond that, i saw nothing." 

"yes; but, taking such circumstances into combination with others, have 
you not a terrible fear of the truth of the dreadful appearance?" 

"no--no; on my soul, no. i will die in my disbelief of such an outrage 
upon heaven as one of these creature would most assured be." 

"oh! that i could think like you; but the circumstance strike too 
nearly to my heart." 

"be of better cheer, henry--be of better cheer," said marchdale; "there 
is one circumstance which we ought to consider, it is that, from all we 
have seen, there seem to be some things which would favour an opinion, 
henry, that your ancestor, whose portrait hang in the chamber which was 
occupy by flora, is the vampyre." 

"the dress was the same," said henry. 

"i noted it was." 

"and i." 

"do you not, then, think it possible that something might be done to set 
that part of the question at rest?" 

"what--what?" 

"where is your ancestor buried?" 

"ah! i understand you now." 

"and i," said mr. chillingworth; "you would propose a visit to his 
mansion?" 

"i would," add marchdale; "anything that may in any way tend to assist 
in making this affair clearer, and divest it of its mysterious 
circumstances, will be most desirable." 

henry appear to rouse for some moments and then he said,-- 

"he, in common with many other member of the family, no doubt occupy 
place in the vault under the old church in the village." 

"would it be possible," ask marchdale, "to get into that vault without 
exciting general attention?" 

"it would," said henry; "the entrance to the vault is in the flooring of 
the pew which belong to the family in the old church." 

"then it could be done?" ask mr. chillingworth. 

"most undoubtedly." 

"will you under take such an adventure?" said mr. chillingworth. "it may 
ease your mind." 

"he was bury in the vault, and in his clothes," said henry, musingly; 
"i will think of it. about such a proposition i would not decide 
hastily. give me leave to think of it until to-morrow." 

"most certainly." 

[illustration] 

they now made their way to the chamber of flora, and they heard from 
george that nothing of an alarm character had occur to disturb him 
on his lonely watch. the morning was now again dawning, and henry 
earnest entreat mr. marchdale to go to bed, which he did, leave 
the two brother to continue as sentinel by flora's bed side, until the 
morning light should banish all uneasy thoughts. 

henry related to george what had taken place outside the house, and the 
two brother held a long and interesting conversation for some hour 
upon that subject, as well as upon other of great importance to their 
welfare. it was not until the sun's early ray came glaring in at the 
case that they both rose, and thought of awakening flora, who had 
now slept sound for so many hours. 




chapter vi. 

a glance at the bannerworth family.--the probable consequence of the 
mysterious apparition's appearance. 


[illustration] 

have thus far, we hope, interested our reader in the fortune of a 
family which had become subject to so dreadful a visitation, we trust 
that a few words concerning them, and the peculiar circumstances in 
which they are now placed, will not prove altogether out of place, or 
unacceptable. the bannerworth family then were well known in the part of 
the country where they resided. perhaps, if we were to say they were 
better known by name than they were liked, on account of that name, we 
should be near the truth, for it had unfortunately happen that for a 
very considerable time past the head of the family had been the very 
worst specimen of it that could be procured. while the junior branch 
were frequent amiable and most intelligent, and such in mind and 
manner as were calculate to inspire goodwill in all who knew them, he 
who held the family property, and who reside in the house now occupy 
by flora and her brothers, was a very so--so sort of character. 

this state of things, by some strange fatality, had gone on for nearly a 
hundred years, and the consequence was what might have been fairly 
expected, namely--that, what with their vice and what with their 
extravagances, the successive head of the bannerworth family had 
succeed in so far diminish the family property that, when it came 
into the hand of henry bannerworth, it was of little value, on account 
of the numerous encumbrance with which it was saddled. 

the father of henry had not been a very brilliant exception to the 
general rule, as regard the head of the family. if he were not quite 
so bad as many of his ancestors, that gratifying circumstance was to be 
account for by the supposition that he was not quite so bold, and that 
the change in habits, manners, and laws, which had taken place in a 
hundred years, made it not so easy for even a landed proprietor to play 
the petty tyrant. 

he had, to get rid of those animal spirits which had prompt many of 
his predecessor to downright crimes, had recourse to the gaming-table, 
and, after raise whatever sum he could upon the property which 
remained, he naturally, and as might have been fully expected, lost them 
all. 

he was found lie dead in the garden of the house one day, and by his 
side was his pocket-book, on one leaf of which, it was the impression of 
the family, he had endeavour to write something previous to his 
decease, for he held a pencil firm in his grasp. 

the probability was that he had felt himself get ill, and, being 
desirous of making some communication to his family which pressed 
heavy upon his mind, he had attempt to do so, but was stop by the 
too rapid approach of the hand of death. 

for some days previous to his decease, his conduct had been extremely 
mysterious. he had announce an intention of leave england for 
ever--of sell the house and grounds for whatever they would fetch 
over and above the sum for which they were mortgaged, and so clearing 
himself of all encumbrances. 

he had, but a few hour before he was found lie dead, made the 
following singular speech to henry,-- 

"do not regret, henry, that the old house which has been in our family 
so long is about to be part with. be assured that, if it is but for 
the first time in my life, i have good and substantial reason now for 
what i am about to do. we shall be able to go some other country, and 
there live like prince of the land." 

where the means were to come from to live like a prince, unless mr. 
bannerworth had some of the germany prince in his eye, no one knew but 
himself, and his sudden death bury with him that most important 
secret. 

there were some words written on the leaf of his pocket-book, but they 
were of by far too indistinct and ambiguous a nature to lead to 
anything. they were these:-- 

"the money is ----------" 

and then there was a long scrawl of the pencil, which seem to have 
been occasion by his sudden decease. 

of course nothing could be made of these words, except in the way of a 
contradiction as the family lawyer said, rather more facetious than a 
man of law usually speaks, for if he had written "the money is not," he 
would have been somewhere remarkably near the truth. 

however, with all his vice he was regret by his children, who chose 
rather to remember him in his best aspect than to dwell upon his faults. 

for the first time then, within the memory of man, the head of the 
family of the bannerworth was a gentleman, in every sense of the word. 
brave, generous, highly educated, and full of many excellent and noble 
qualities--for such was henry, whom we have introduce to our reader 
under such distressing circumstances. 

and now, people said, that the family property have been all 
dissipated and lost, there would take place a change, and that the 
bannerworth would have to take to some course of honourable industry 
for a livelihood, and that then they would be as much respect as they 
had before been detest and disliked. 

indeed, the position which henry held was now a most precarious one--for 
one of the amazing clever acts of his father had been to encumber the 
property with overwhelming claims, so that when henry administer to 
the estate, it was doubt almost by his attorney if it were at all 
desirable to do so. 

an attachment, however, to the old house of his family, had induce the 
young man to hold possession of it as long as he could, despite any 
adverse circumstance which might eventually be connected with it. 

some weeks, however, only after the decease of his father, and when he 
fairly held possession, a sudden and a most unexpected offer came to him 
from a solicitor in london, of whom he knew nothing, to purchase the 
house and grounds, for a client of his, who had instruct him so to do, 
but whom he did not mention. 

the offer made was a liberal one, and beyond the value of the place. 
the lawyer who had conduct henry's affair for him since his father's 
decease, advise him by all means to take it; but after a consultation 
with his mother and sister, and george, they all resolve to hold by 
their own house as long as they could, and, consequently, he refuse the 
offer. 

he was then ask to let the place, and to name his own price for the 
occupation of it; but that he would not do: so the negotiation went off 
altogether, leave only, in the mind of the family, much surprise at 
the exceed eager of some one, whom they knew not, to get 
possession of the place on any terms. 

there was another circumstance perhaps which material aid in 
produce a strong feeling on the mind of the bannerworths, with regard 
to remain where they were. 

that circumstance occur thus: a relation of the family, who was now 
dead, and with whom had die all his means, had been in the habit, for 
the last half dozen years of his life, of send a hundred pound to 
henry, for the express purpose of enabling him and his brother george 
and his sifter flora to take a little continental or home tour, in the 
autumn of the year. 

a more acceptable present, or for a more delightful purpose, to young 
people, could not be found; and, with the quiet, prudent habit of all 
three of them, they contrived to go far and to see much for the sum 
which was thus handsome placed at their disposal. 

in one of those excursions, when among the mountain of italy, an 
adventure occur which placed the life of flora in imminent hazard. 

they were riding along a narrow mountain path, and, her horse slipping, 
she fell over the ledge of a precipice. 

in an instant, a young man, a stranger to the whole party, who was 
travel in the vicinity, rush to the spot, and by his knowledge and 
exertions, they felt convinced her preservation was effected. 

he told her to lie quiet; he encourage her to hope for immediate 
succour; and then, with much personal exertion, and at immense risk to 
himself, he reach the ledge of rock on which she lay, and then he 
support her until the brother had gone to a neighbouring house, 
which, bye-the-bye, was two good english mile off, and got assistance. 

there came on, while they were gone, a terrific storm, and flora felt 
that but for him who was with her she must have been hurl from the 
rock, and perish in an abyss below, which was almost too deep for 
observation. 

suffice it to say that she was rescued; and he who had, by his 
intrepidity, done so much towards saving her, was loaded with the most 
sincere and heartfelt acknowledgment by the brother as well as by 
herself. 

he frankly told them that his name was holland; that he was travel 
for amusement and instruction, and was by profession an artist. 

he travelled with them for some time; and it was not at all to be 
wonder at, under the circumstances, that an attachment of the 
tenderest nature should spring up between him and the beautiful girl, 
who felt that she owe to him her life. 

mutual glance of affection were exchange between them, and it was 
arrange that when he return to england, he should come at once as an 
honour guest to the house of the family of the bannerworths. 

all this was settled satisfactory with the full knowledge and 
acquiesce of the two brothers, who had taken a strange attachment to 
the young charles holland, who was indeed in every way likely to 
propitiate the good opinion of all who knew him. 

henry explain to him exactly how they were situated, and told him that 
when he came he would find a welcome from all, except possibly his 
father, whose wayward temper he could not answer for. 

young dutch state that he was compel to be away for a term of two 
years, from certain family arrangement he had enter into, and that 
then he would return and hope to meet flora unchanged as he should be. 

it happen that this was the last of the continental excursion of the 
bannerworths, for, before another year roll round, the generous 
relative who had supply them with the means of making such delightful 
trip was no more; and, likewise, the death of the father had occur 
in the manner we have related, so that there was no chance as had been 
anticipate and hope for by flora, of meeting charles dutch on the 
continent again, before his two years of absence from england should be 
expired. 

such, however, being the state of things, flora felt reluctant to give 
up the house, where he would be sure to come to look for her, and her 
happiness was too dear to henry to induce him to make any sacrifice of 
it to expediency. 

therefore was it that bannerworth hall, as it was sometimes called, was 
retained, and fully intended to be retain at all event until after 
charles dutch had made his appearance, and his advice (for he was, by 
the young people, considered as one of the family) taken, with regard to 
what was advisable to be done. 

with one exception this was the state of affair at the hall, and that 
exception relate to mr. marchdale. 

he was a distant relation of mrs. bannerworth, and, in early life, had 
been sincerely and tender attach to her. she, however, with the want 
of steady reflection of a young girl, as she then was, had, as is 
generally the case among several admirers, chosen the very worst: that 
is, the man who treat her with the most indifference, and who paid her 
the least attention, was of course, thought the most of, and she gave 
her hand to him. 

that man was mr. bannerworth. but future experience had made her 
thorough awake to her former error; and, but for the love she bore her 
children, who were certainly all that a mother's heart could wish, she 
would often have deep regret the infatuation which had induce her 
to bestow her hand in the quarter she had done so. 

about a month after the decease of mr. bannerworth, there came one to 
the hall, who desire to see the widow. that one was mr. marchdale. 

it might have been some slight tender towards him which had never 
left her, or it might be the pleasure merely of seeing one whom she had 
known intimate in early life, but, be that as it may, she certainly 
gave him a kindly welcome; and he, after consent to remain for some 
time as a visitor at the hall, won the esteem of the whole family by his 
frank demeanour and cultivated intellect. 

he had travelled much and seen much, and he had turn to good account 
all he had seen, so that not only was mr. marchdale a man of sterling 
sound sense, but he was a most entertaining companion. 

his intimate knowledge of many things concerning which they knew little 
or nothing; his accurate mode of thought, and a quiet, gentlemanly 
demeanour, such as is rarely to be met with, combine to make him 
esteem by the bannerworths. he had a small independence of his own, 
and being completely alone in the world, for he had neither wife nor 
child, marchdale own that he felt a pleasure in reside with the 
bannerworths. 

of course he could not, in decent terms, so far offend them as to offer 
to pay for his subsistence, but he took good care that they should 
really be no loser by have him as an inmate, a matter which he could 
easily arrange by little presents of one kind and another, all of which 
he manage should be such as were not only ornamental, but actually 
spare his kind entertainer some positive expense which otherwise they 
must have gone to. 

whether or not this amiable piece of manoeuvre was seen through by the 
bannerworth it is not our purpose to inquire. if it was seen through, 
it could not lower him in their esteem, for it was probably just what 
they themselves would have felt a pleasure in do under similar 
circumstances, and if they did not observe it, mr. marchdale would, 
probably, be all the better pleased. 

such then may be considered by our reader as a brief outline of the 
state of affair among the bannerworths--a state which was pregnant with 
changes, and which change were now likely to be rapid and conclusive. 

how far the feelings of the family towards the ancient house of their 
race would be alter by the appearance at it of so fearful a visitor as 
a vampyre, we will not stop to inquire, inasmuch as such feelings will 
develop themselves as we proceed. 

that the visitation had produce a serious effect upon all the household 
was sufficient evident, as well among the educated as among the 
ignorant. on the second morning, henry received notice to quit his 
service from the three servant he with difficulty had contrived to keep 
at the hall. the reason why he received such notice he knew well enough, 
and therefore he did not trouble himself to argue about a superstition 
to which he felt now himself almost, compel to give way; for how 
could he say there was no such thing as a vampyre, when he had, with his 
own eyes, had the most abundant evidence of the terrible fact? 

he calm paid the servants, and allow them to leave him at once 
without at all enter into the matter, and, for the time being, some 
men were procured, who, however, came evidently with fear and trembling, 
and probably only took the place, on account of not being able, to 
procure any other. the comfort of the household was likely to be 
completely put an end to, and reason now for leave the hall appear 
to be most rapid accumulating. 




chapter vii. 

the visit to the vault of the bannerworths, and its unpleasant 
result.--the mystery. 


[illustration] 

henry and his brother rouse flora, and after agree together that it 
would be highly imprudent to say anything to her of the proceedings of 
the night, they commence a conversation with her in encourage and 
kindly accents. 

"well, flora," said henry, "you see you have been quite undisturbed 
to-night." 

"i have slept long, dear henry." 

"you have, and pleasant too, i hope." 

"i have not had any dreams, and i feel much refreshed, now, and quite 
well again." 

"thank heaven!" said george. 

"if you will tell dear mother that i am awake, i will get up with her 
assistance." 

the brother left the room, and they spoke to each other of it as a 
favourable sign, that flora did not object to being left alone now, as 
she had done on the preceding morning. 

"she is fast recovering, now, george," said henry. "if we could now but 
persuade ourselves that all this alarm would pass away, and that we 
should hear no more of it, we might return to our old and comparatively 
happy condition." 

"let us believe, henry, that we shall." 

"and yet, george, i shall not be satisfy in my mind, until i have paid 
a visit." 

"a visit? where?" 

"to the family vault." 

"indeed, henry! i thought you had abandoned that idea." 

"i had. i have several times abandoned it; but it come across my mind 
again and again." 

"i much regret it." 

"look you, george; as yet, everything that has happen has tend to 
confirm a belief in this most horrible of all superstition concerning 
vampyres." 

"it has." 

"now, my great object, george, is to endeavour to disturb such a state 
of things, by get something, however slight, or of a negative 
character, for the mind to rest upon on the other side of the question." 

"i comprehend you, henry." 

"you know that at present we are not only led to believe, almost 
irresistible that we have been visit here by a vampyre but that that 
vampyre is our ancestor, whose portrait is on the panel of the wall of 
the chamber into which he contrived to make his way." 

"true, most true." 

"then let us, by an examination of the family vault, george, put an end 
to one of the evidences. if we find, as most surely we shall, the coffin 
of the ancestor of ours, who seems, in dress and appearance, so horrible 
mixed up in this affair, we shall be at rest on that head." 

"but consider how many years have elapsed." 

"yes, a great number." 

"what then, do you suppose, could remain of any corpse placed in a vault 
so long ago?" 

"decomposition must of course have done its work, but still there must 
be a something to show that a corpse has so undergone the process common 
to all nature. double the lapse of time surely could not obliterate all 
trace of that which had been." 

"there is reason in that, henry." 

"besides, the coffin are all of lead, and some of stone, so that they 
cannot have all gone." 

"true, most true." 

"if in the one which, from the inscription and the date, we discover to 
be that of our ancestor whom we seek, we find the evident remains of a 
corpse, we shall be satisfy that he has rest in his tomb in peace." 

"brother, you seem bent on this adventure," said george; "if you go, i 
will accompany you." 

"i will not engage rash in it, george. before i finally decide, i will 
again consult with mr. marchdale. his opinion will weigh much with me." 

"and in good time, here he come across the garden," said george, as he 
look from the window of the room in which they sat. 

it was mr. marchdale, and the brother warm welcome him as he enter 
the apartment. 

"you have been early afoot," said henry. 

"i have," he said. "the fact is, that although at your solicit i 
went to bed, i could not sleep, and i went out once more to search about 
the spot where we had seen the--the i don't know what to call it, for i 
have a great dislike to name it a vampyre." 

"there is not much in a name," said george. 

"in this instance there is," said marchdale. "it is a name suggestive of 
horror." 

"made you any discovery?" said henry. 

"none whatever." 

"you saw no trace of any one?" 

"not the least." 

"well, mr. marchdale, george and i were talk over this project 
visit to the family vault." 

"yes." 

"and we agree to suspend our judgment until we saw you, and learned 
your opinion." 

"which i will tell you frankly," said mr. marchdale, "because i know you 
desire it freely." 

"do so." 

"it is, that you make the visit." 

"indeed." 

"yes, and for this reason. you have now, as you cannot help having, a 
disagreeable feeling, that you may find that one coffin is untenanted. 
now, if you do find it so, you scarcely make matter worse, by an 
additional confirmation of what already amount to a strong supposition, 
and one which is likely to grow strong by time." 

"true, most true." 

"on the contrary, if you find indubitable proof that your ancestor has 
slept sound in the tomb, and gone the way of all flesh, you will find 
yourself much calmer, and that an attack is made upon the train of 
event which at present all run one way." 

"that is precisely the argument i was use to george," said henry, "a 
few moments since." 

"then let us go," said george, "by all means." 

"it is so decided then," said henry. 

"let it be done with caution," reply mr. marchdale. 

"if any one can manage it, of course we can." 

"why should it not be done secret and at night? of course we lose 
nothing by making a night visit to a vault into which daylight, i 
presume, cannot penetrate." 

"certainly not." 

"then let it be at night." 

"but we shall surely require the concurrence of some of the church 
authorities." 

"nay, i do not see that," interpose mr. marchdale. "it is the vault 
actually vest in and belong to yourself you wish to visit, and, 
therefore, you have right to visit it in any manner or at any time that 
may be most suitable to yourself." 

"but detection in a clandestine visit might produce unpleasant 
consequences." 

"the church is old," said george, "and we could easily find means of 
get into it. there is only one objection that i see, just now, and 
that is, that we leave flora unprotected." 

"we do, indeed," said henry. "i did not think of that." 

"it must be put to herself, as a matter for her own consideration," said 
mr. marchdale, "if she will consider herself sufficient safe with the 
company and protection of your mother only." 

"it would be a pity were we not all three present at the examination of 
the coffin," remark henry. 

"it would, indeed. there is ample evidence," said mr. marchdale, "but we 
must not give flora a night of sleepless and uneasy on that 
account, and the more particularly as we cannot well explain to her 
where we are going, or upon what errand." 

"certainly not." 

"let us talk to her, then, about it," said henry. "i confess i am much 
bent upon the plan, and fain would not forego it; neither should i like 
other than that we three should go together." 

"if you determine, then, upon it," said marchdale, "we will go to-night; 
and, from your acquaintance with the place, doubtless you will be able 
to decide what tool are necessary." 

"there is a trap-door at the bottom of the pew," said henry; "it is not 
only secure down, but it is lock likewise, and i have the key in my 
possession." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; immediately beneath is a short flight of stone steps, which 
conduct at once into the vault." 

"is it large?" 

"no; about the size of a moderate chamber, and with no intricacy about 
it." 

"there can be no difficulties, then." 

"none whatever, unless we meet with actual personal interruption, which 
i am inclined to think is very far from likely. all we shall require 
will be a screwdriver, with which to remove the screws, and then 
something with which to wrench open the coffin." 

"those we can easily provide, along with lights," remark mr. 
marchdale. 

"i hope to heaven that this visit to the tomb will have the effect of 
ease your minds, and enabling you to make a successful stand against 
the stream torrent of evidence that has pour in upon us regarding 
this most fearful of apparitions." 

"i do, indeed, hope so," add henry; "and now i will go at once to 
flora, and endeavour to convince her she is safe without us to-night." 

"by-the-bye, i think," said marchdale, "that if we can induce mr. 
chillingworth to come with us, it will be a great point gain in the 
investigation." 

"he would," said henry, "be able to come to an accurate decision with 
respect to the remains--if any--in the coffin, which we could not." 

"then have him, by all means," said george. "he did not seem averse last 
night to go on such an adventure." 

"i will ask him when he make his visit this morning upon flora; and 
should he not feel disposed to join us, i am quite sure he will keep the 
secret of our visit." 

all this being arranged, henry proceed to flora, and told her that he 
and george, and mr. marchdale wish to go out for about a couple of 
hour in the evening after dark, if she felt sufficient well to feel a 
sense of security without them. 

flora change colour, and slightly trembled, and then, as if ashamed of 
her fears, she said,-- 

"go, go; i will not detain you. surely no harm can come to me in 
presence of my mother." 

"we shall not be gone long than the time i mention to you," said 
henry. 

"oh, i shall be quite content. besides, am i to be kept thus in fear all 
my life? surely, surely not. i ought, too, to learn to defend myself." 

henry caught at the idea, as he said,-- 

"if fire-arms were left you, do you think you would have courage to use 
them?" 

"i do, henry." 

"then you shall have them; and let me beg of you to shoot any one 
without the least hesitation who shall come into your chamber." 

"i will, henry. if ever human being was justified in the use of deadly 
weapons, i am now. heaven protect me from a repetition of the visit to 
which i have now been once subjected. rather, oh, much rather would i 
die a hundred death than suffer what i have suffered." 

"do not allow it, dear flora, to press too heavy upon your mind in 
dwelling upon it in conversation. i still entertain a sanguine 
expectation that something may arise to afford a far less dreadful 
explanation of what has occur than what you have put upon it. be of 
good cheer, flora, we shall go one hour after sunset, and return in 
about two hour from the time at which we leave here, you may be 
assured." 

notwithstanding this ready and courageous acquiesce of flora in the 
arrangement, henry was not without his apprehension that when the night 
should come again, her fear would return with it; but he spoke to mr. 
chillingworth upon the subject, and got that gentleman's ready consent 
to accompany them. 

he promise to meet them at the church porch exactly at nine o'clock, 
and matter were all arranged, and henry wait with much eager and 
anxiety now for the coming night, which he hope would dissipate one of 
the fearful deduction which his imagination had drawn from recent 
circumstances. 

he gave to flora a pair of pistol of his own, upon which he knew he 
could depend, and he took good care to load them well, so that there 
could be no likelihood whatever of their missing fire at a critical 
moment. 

"now, flora," he said, "i have seen you use fire-arms when you were much 
younger than you are now, and therefore i need give you no instructions. 
if any intruder do come, and you do fire, be sure you take a good aim, 
and shoot low." 

"i will, henry, i will; and you will be back in two hours?" 

"most assured i will." 

the day wore on, evening came, and then deepen into night. it turn 
out to be a cloudy night, and therefore the moon's brilliance was 
nothing near equal to what it had been on the preceding night still, 
however, it had sufficient power over the vapours that frequent 
cover it for many minutes together, to produce a considerable light 
effect upon the face of nature, and the night was consequently very far, 
indeed, from what might be call a dark one. 

george, henry, and marchdale, met in one of the lower rooms of the 
house, previous to start upon their expedition; and after satisfying 
themselves that they had with them all the tool that were necessary, 
inclusive of the same small, but well-tempered iron crow-bar with which 
marchdale had, on the night of the visit of the vampyre, forced open the 
door of flora's chamber, they left the hall, and proceed at a rapid 
pace towards the church. 

"and flora do not seem much alarmed," said marchdale, "at being left 
alone?" 

"no," reply henry, "she has made up her mind with a strong natural 
courage which i knew was in her disposition to resist as much as 
possible the depress effects of the awful visitation she has 
endured." 

"it would have driven some really mad." 

"it would, indeed; and her own reason totter on its throne, but, thank 
heaven, she has recovered." 

"and i fervent hope that, through her life," add marchdale, "she may 
never have such another trial." 

"we will not for a moment believe that such a thing can occur twice." 

"she is one among a thousand. most young girl would never at all have 
recover the fearful shock to the nerves." 

"not only has she recovered," said henry, "but a spirit, which i am 
rejoice to see, because it is one which will uphold her, of resistance 
now possess her." 

"yes, she actually--i forgot to tell you before--but she actually ask 
me for arms to resist any second visitation." 

"you much surprise me." 

"yes, i was surprised, as well as pleased, myself." 

"i would have left her one of my pistol had i been aware of her have 
made such a request. do you know if she can use fire-arms?" 

"oh, yes; well." 

"what a pity. i have them both with me." 

"oh, she is provided." 

"provided?" 

"yes; i found some pistol which i use to take with me on the 
continent, and she has them both well loaded, so that if the vampyre 
make his appearance, he is likely to meet with rather a warm 
reception." 

"good god! was it not dangerous?" 

"not at all, i think." 

"well, you know best, certainly, of course. i hope the vampyre may come, 
and that we may have the pleasure, when we return, of finding him dead. 
by-the-bye, i--i--. bless me, i have forgot to get the material for 
lights, which i pledge myself to do." 

"how unfortunate." 

"walk on slowly, while i run back and get them." 

"oh, we are too far--" 

"hilloa!" cry a man at this moment, some distance in front of them. 

"it is mr. chillingworth," said henry. 

"hilloa," cry the worthy doctor again. "is that you, my friend, henry 
bannerworth?" 

"it is," cry henry. 

mr. chillingworth now came up to them and said,-- 

"i was before my time, so rather than wait at the church porch, which 
would have expose me to observation perhaps, i thought it better to 
walk on, and chance meeting with you." 

"you guess we should come this way?' 

"yes, and so it turn out, really. it is unquestionable your most direct 
route to the church." 

"i think i will go back," said mr marchdale. 

"back!" exclaim the doctor; "what for?" 

"i forgot the means of get lights. we have candles, but no means of 
lighting them." 

"make yourself easy on that score," said mr. chillingworth. "i am 
never without some chemical match of my own manufacture, so that as 
you have the candles, that can be no bar to our go on a once." 

"that is fortunate," said henry. 

"very," add marchdale; "for it seem a mile's hard walking for me, or 
at least half a mile from the hall. let us now push on." 

they did push on, all four walking at a brisk pace. the church, although 
it belong to the village, was not in it. on the contrary, it was 
situated at the end of a long lane, which was a mile nearly from the 
village, in the direction of the hall, therefore, in go to it from 
the hall, that amount of distance was saved, although it was always 
call and considered the village church. 

it stood alone, with the exception of a glebe house and two cottages, 
that were occupy by person who held situation about the sacred 
edifice, and who were supposed, being on the spot, to keep watch and 
ward over it. 

it was an ancient building of the early english style of architecture, 
or rather norman, with one of those antique, square, short towers, built 
of flint stone firm embed in cement, which, from time, had 
acquire almost the consistency of stone itself. there were numerous 
arch windows, partake something of the more florid gothic style, 
although scarcely ornamental enough to be call such. the edifice stood 
in the centre of a grave-yard, which extend over a space of about half 
an acre, and altogether it was one of the prettiest and most rural old 
church within many mile of the spot. 

many a lover of the antique and of the picturesque, for it was both, 
went out of his way while travel in the neighbourhood to look at it, 
and it had an extensive and well-deserved reputation as a fine specimen 
of its class and style of building. 

in kent, to the present day, are some fine specimen of the old roman 
style of church, building; and, although they are as rapid pull down 
as the abuse of modern architects, and the cupidity of speculators, and 
the vanity of clergymen can possibly encourage, in old to erect 
flimsy, italianise structure in their stead, yet sufficient of them 
remain dot over england to interest the traveller. at walesden there 
is a church of this description which will well repay a visit. this, 
then, was the kind of building into which it was the intention of our 
four friends to penetrate, not on an unholy, or an unjustifiable errand, 
but on one which, proceeding from good and proper motives, it was highly 
desirable to conduct in as secret a manner as possible. 

the moon was more dense cover by cloud than it had yet been that 
evening, when they reach the little wicket-gate which led into the 
churchyard, through which was a regularly use thoroughfare. 

"we have a favourable night," remark henry, "for we are not so likely 
to be disturbed." 

"and now, the question is, how are we to get in?" said mr. 
chillingworth, as he paused, and glance up at the ancient building. 

"the doors," said george, "would effectually resist us." 

"how can it be done, then?" 

"the only way i can think of," said henry, "is to get out one of the 
small diamond-shaped pane of glass from one of the low windows, and 
then we can one of us put in our hands, and undo the fastening, which is 
very simple, when the window open like a door, and it is but a step 
into the church." 

"a good way," said marchdale. "we will lose no time." 

they walk round the church till they came to a very low window indeed, 
near to an angle of the wall, where a huge abutment struck far out into 
the burial-ground. 

"will you do it, henry?" said george. 

"yes. i have often notice the fastenings. just give me a slight hoist 
up, and all will be right." 

george did so, and henry with his knife easily bent back some of the 
leadwork which held in one of the pane of glass, and then got it out 
whole. he hand it down to george, saying,-- 

"take this, george. we can easily replace it when we leave, so that 
there can be no sign left of any one have been here at all." 

george took the piece of thick, dim-coloured glass, and in another 
moment henry had succeed in opening the window, and the mode of 
ingress to the old church was fair and easy before them all, had there 
been ever so many. 

"i wonder," said marchdale, "that a place so inefficient protect has 
never been robbed." 

"no wonder at all," remark mr. chillingworth. "there is nothing to 
take that i am aware of that would repay anybody the trouble of taking." 

"indeed!" 

"not an article. the pulpit, to be sure, is cover with fade velvet; 
but beyond that, and an old box, in which i believe nothing is left but 
some books, i think there is no temptation." 

"and that, heaven knows, is little enough, then." 

"come on," said henry. "be careful; there is nothing beneath the window, 
and the depth is about two feet." 

thus guided, they all got fairly into the sacred edifice, and then henry 
closed the window, and fasten it on the inside as he said,-- 

"we have nothing to do now but to set to work opening a way into the 
vault, and i trust that heaven will pardon me for thus desecrate the 
tomb of my ancestors, from a consideration of the object i have in view 
by so doing." 

"it do seem wrong thus to tamper with the secret of the tomb," 
remark mr. marchdale. 

"the secret of a fiddlestick!" said the doctor. "what secret has the 
tomb i wonder?" 

"well, but, my dear sir--" 

"nay, my dear sir, it is high time that death, which is, then, the 
inevitable fate of us all, should be regard with more philosophical eyes 
than it is. there are no secret in the tomb but such as may well be 
endeavour to be kept secret." 

"what do you mean?" 

"there is one which very probably we shall find unpleasant revealed." 

"which is that?" 

"the not over pleasant odour of decompose animal remains--beyond that i 
know of nothing of a secret nature that the tomb can show us." 

"ah, your profession harden you to such matters." 

"and a very good thing that it does, or else, if all men were to look 
upon a dead body as something almost too dreadful to look upon, and by 
far too horrible to touch, surgery would lose its value, and crime, in 
many instance of the most obnoxious character, would go unpunished." 

"if we have a light here," said henry, "we shall run the greatest chance 
in the world of being seen, for the church has many windows." 

"do not have one, then, by any means," said mr. chillingworth. "a match 
held low down in the pew may enable us to open the vault." 

"that will be the only plan." 

henry led them to the pew which belong to his family, and in the floor 
of which was the trap door. 

"when was it last opened?" inquire marchdale. 

"when my father died," said henry; "some ten month ago now, i should 
think." 

"the screws, then, have had ample time to fix themselves with fresh 
rust." 

"here is one of my chemical matches," said mr. chillingworth, as he 
sudden irradiate the pew with a clear and beautiful flame, that 
last about a minute. 

the head of the screw were easily discernible, and the short time that 
the light last had enable henry to turn the key he had brought with 
him in the lock. 

"i think that without a light now," he said, "i can turn the screw 
well." 

"can you?" 

"yes; there are but four." 

"try it, then." 

henry did so, and from the screw have very large heads, and being 
made purposely, for the convenience of removal when required, with deep 
indentation to receive the screw-driver, he found no difficulty in 
feeling for the proper places, and extract the screw without any 
more light than was afford to him from the general whitish aspect of 
the heavens. 

"now, mr. chillingworth," he said "another of your matches, if you 
please. i have all the screw so loose that i can pick them up with my 
fingers." 

"here," said the doctor. 

in another moment the pew was as light as day, and henry succeed in 
taking out the few screws, which he placed in his pocket for their 
greater security, since, of course, the intention was to replace 
everything exactly as it was found, in order that not the least surmise 
should arise in the mind of any person that the vault had been opened, 
and visit for any purpose whatever, secret or otherwise. 

"let us descend," said henry. "there is no further obstacle, my friends. 
let us descend." 

"if any one," remark george, in a whisper, as they slow descended 
the stairs which conduct into the vault--"if any one had told me that 
i should be descend into a vault for the purpose of ascertain if a 
dead body, which had been nearly a century there, was remove or not, 
and had become a vampyre, i should have denounce the idea as one of the 
most absurd that ever enter the brain of a human being." 

"we are the very slave of circumstances," said marchdale, "and we never 
know what we may do, or what we may not. what appear to us so 
improbable as to border even upon the impossible at one time, is at 
another the only course of action which appear feasible open to us to 
attempt to pursue." 

they had now reach the vault, the floor of which was compose of flat 
red tiles, laid in tolerable order the one beside the other. as henry 
had stated, the vault was by no means of large extent. indeed, several 
of the apartments for the living, at the hall, were much large than was 
that one destined for the dead. 

the atmosphere was dump and noisome, but not by any means so bad as 
might have been expected, considering the number of month which had 
elapse since last the vault was open to receive one of its ghastly 
and still visitants. 

"now for one of your lights. mr. chillingworth. you say you have the 
candles, i think, marchdale, although you forgot the matches." 

"i have. they are here." 

marchdale took from his pocket a parcel which contained several wax 
candles, and when it was opened, a small packet fell to the ground. 

"why, these are instantaneous matches," said mr. chillingworth, as he 
lift the small packet up. 

"they are; and what a fruitless journey i should have had back to the 
hall," said mr. marchdale, "if you had not been so well provided as you 
are with the means of get a light. these matches, which i thought i 
had not with me, have been, in the hurry of departure, enclosed, you 
see, with the candles. truly, i should have hunt for them at home in 
vain." 

mr. chillingworth lit the wax candle which was now hand to him by 
marchdale, and in another moment the vault from one end of it to the 
other was quite clearly discernible. 




chapter viii. 

the coffin.--the absence of the dead.--the mysterious circumstance, and 
the consternation of george. 


[illustration] 

they were all silent for a few moments as they look around them with 
natural feelings of curiosity. two of that party had of course never 
been in that vault at all, and the brothers, although they had descended 
into it upon the occasion, nearly a year before, of their father being 
placed in it, still look upon it with almost as curious eyes as they 
who now had their first sight of it. 

if a man be at all of a thoughtful or imaginative cast of mind, some 
curious sensation are sure to come over him, upon standing in such a 
place, where he know around him lie, in the calm of death, those in 
whose vein have flow kindred blood to him--who bore the same name, 
and who precede him in the brief drama of his existence, influence 
his destiny and his position in life probably largely by their action 
compound of their virtue and their vices. 

henry bannerworth and his brother george were just the kind of person 
to feel strong such sensations. both were reflective, imaginative, 
educated young men, and, as the light from the wax candle flash upon 
their faces, it was evident how deep they felt the situation in which 
they were placed. 

mr. chillingworth and marchdale were silent. they both knew what was 
passing in the mind of the brothers, and they had too much delicacy to 
interrupt a train of thought which, although from have no affinity 
with the dead who lay around, they could not share in, yet they 
respected. henry at length, with a sudden start, seem to recover 
himself from his reverie. 

"this is a time for action, george," he said, "and not for romantic 
thought. let us proceed." 

"yes, yes," said george, and he advanced a step towards the centre of 
the vault. 

"can you find out among all these coffins, for there seem to be nearly 
twenty," said mr. chillingworth, "which is the one we seek?" 

"i think we may," reply henry. "some of the early coffin of our 
race, i know, were made of marble, and other of metal, both of which 
materials, i expect, would withstand the encroach of time for a 
hundred years, at least." 

"let us examine," said george. 

there were shelves or niche built into the wall all round, on which 
the coffin were placed, so that there could not be much difficulty in a 
minute examination of them all, the one after the other. 

when, however, they came to look, they found that "decay's offensive 
fingers" had been more busy than they could have imagined, and that 
whatever they touched of the early coffin crumble into dust before 
their very fingers. 

in some case the inscription were quite illegible, and, in others, the 
plate that had borne them had fallen on to the floor of the vault, so 
that it was impossible to say to which coffin they belonged. 

of course, the more recent and fresh-looking coffin they did not 
examine, because they could not have anything to do with the object of 
that melancholy visit. 

"we shall arrive at no conclusion," said george. "all seem to have 
rot away among those coffin where we might expect to find the one 
belong to marmaduke bannerworth, our ancestor." 

"here is a coffin plate," said marchdale, taking one from the floor. 

he hand it to mr. chillingworth, who, upon an inspection of it, close 
to the light, exclaimed,-- 

"it must have belong to the coffin you seek." 

"what say it?" 

"ye mortale remains of marmaduke bannerworth, yeoman. god reste his 
soule. a.d. 1540." 

"it is the plate belong to his coffin," said henry, "and now our 
search is fruitless." 

"it is so, indeed," exclaim george, "for how can we tell to which of 
the coffin that have lost the plate this one really belongs?" 

"i should not be so hopeless," said marchdale. "i have, from time to 
time, in the pursuit of antiquarian lore, which i was once fond of, 
enter many vaults, and i have always observe that an inner coffin of 
metal was sound and good, while the outer one of wood had rot away, 
and yield at once to the touch of the first hand that was laid upon 
it." 

"but, admit that to be the case," said henry, "how do that assist 
us in the identification of a coffin?" 

"i have always, in my experience, found the name and rank of the 
deceased engrave upon the lid of the inner coffin, as well as being set 
forth in a much more perishable manner on the plate which was secure to 
the outer one." 

"he is right," said mr. chillingworth. "i wonder we never thought of 
that. if your ancestor was bury in a leaden coffin, there will be no 
difficulty in finding which it is." 

henry seize the light, and proceeding to one of the coffins, which 
seem to be a mass of decay, he pull away some of the rot wood 
work, and then sudden exclaimed,-- 

"you are quite right. here is a firm strong leaden coffin within, which, 
although quite black, do not otherwise appear to have suffered." 

"what is the inscription on that?" said george. 

with difficulty the name on the lid was deciphered, but it was found not 
to be the coffin of him whom they sought. 

"we can make short work of this," said marchdale, "by only examine 
those leaden coffin which have lost the plate from off their outer 
cases. there do not appear to be many in such a state." 

he then, with another light, which he light from the one that henry 
now carried, commence active assist in the search, which was 
carry on silent for more than ten minutes. 

sudden mr. marchdale cried, in a tone of excitement,-- 

"i have found it. it is here." 

they all immediately surround the spot where he was, and then he 
pointed to the lid of a coffin, which he had been rubbing with his 
handkerchief, in order to make the inscription more legible, and said,-- 

"see. it is here." 

by the combine light of the candle they saw the words,-- 

"marmaduke bannerworth, yeoman, 1640." 

"yes, there can be no mistake here," said henry. "this is the coffin, 
and it shall be opened." 

"i have the iron crowbar here," said marchdale. "it is an old friend of 
mine, and i am accustomed to the use of it. shall i open the coffin?" 

"do so--do so," said henry. 

they stood around in silence, while mr. marchdale, with much care, 
proceed to open the coffin, which seem of great thickness, and was 
of solid lead. 

it was probably the partial rot of the metal, in consequence of the 
damp of that place, that made it easy to open the coffin than it 
otherwise would have been, but certain it was that the top came away 
remarkably easily. indeed, so easily did it come off, that another 
supposition might have been hazarded, namely, that it had never at all 
been effectually fastened. 

[illustration] 

the few moments that elapse were one of very great suspense to every 
one there present; and it would, indeed, be quite sure to assert, that 
all the world was for the time forgotten in the absorbing interest which 
appertain to the affair which was in progress. 

the candle were now both held by mr. chillingworth, and they were so 
held as to cast a full and clear light upon the coffin. now the lid slid 
off, and henry eager gaze into the interior. 

there lay something certainly there, and an audible "thank god!" escape 
his lips. 

"the body is there!" exclaim george. 

"all right," said marchdale, "here it is. there is something, and what 
else can it be?" 

"hold the lights," said mr. chillingworth; "hold the lights, some of 
you; let us be quite certain." 

george took the lights, and mr. chillingworth, without any hesitation, 
dip his hand at once into the coffin, and took up some fragment of 
rag which were there. they were so rotten, that they fell to pieces in 
his grasp, like so many pieces of tinder. 

there was a death-like pause for some few moments, and then mr. 
chillingworth said, in a low voice,-- 

"there is not the least vestige of a dead body here." 

henry gave a deep groan, as he said,-- 

"mr. chillingworth, can you take upon yourself to say that no corpse has 
undergone the process of decompose in this coffin?" 

"to answer your question exactly, as probably in your hurry you have 
word it," said mr. chillingworth, "i cannot take upon myself to say 
any such thing; but this i can say, namely, that in this coffin there 
are no animal remains, and that it is quite impossible that any corpse 
enclose here could, in any lapse of time, have so utterly and entire 
disappeared." 

"i am answered," said henry. 

"good god!" exclaim george, "and has this but add another damning 
proof, to those we have already on our minds, of one of the must 
dreadful superstition that ever the mind of man conceived?" 

"it would seem so," said marchdale, sadly. 

"oh, that i were dead! this is terrible. god of heaven, why are these 
things? oh, if i were but dead, and so spare the torture of supposing 
such things possible." 

"think again, mr. chillingworth; i pray you think again," cry 
marchdale. 

"if i were to think for the remainder of my existence," he replied, "i 
could come to no other conclusion. it is not a matter of opinion; it is 
a matter of fact." 

"you are positive, then," said henry, "that the dead body of marmaduke 
bannerworth is not rest here?" 

"i am positive. look for yourselves. the lead is but slightly 
discoloured; it looks tolerably clean and fresh; there is not a vestige 
of putrefaction--no bones, no dust even." 

they did all look for themselves, and the most casual glance was 
sufficient to satisfy the most sceptical. 

"all is over," said henry; "let us now leave this place; and all i can 
now ask of you, my friends, is to lock this dreadful secret deep in your 
own hearts." 

"it shall never pass my lips," said marchdale. 

"nor mine, you may depend," said the doctor. "i was much in hope that 
this night's work would have had the effect of dissipating, instead of 
add to, the gloomy fancies that now possess you." 

"good heavens!" cry george, "can you call them fancies, mr. 
chillingworth?" 

"i do, indeed." 

"have you yet a doubt?" 

"my young friend, i told you from the first, that i would not believe in 
your vampyre; and i tell you now, that if one was to come and lay hold 
of me by the throat, as long as i could at all gasp for breath i would 
tell him he was a d----d impostor." 

"this is carry incredulity to the verge of obstinacy." 

"far beyond it, if you please." 

"you will not be convinced?" said marchdale. 

"i most decidedly, on this point, will not." 

"then you are one who would doubt a miracle, if you saw it with your own 
eyes." 

"i would, because i do not believe in miracles. i should endeavour to 
find some rational and some scientific means of account for the 
phenomenon, and that's the very reason why we have no miracle 
now-a-days, between you and i, and no prophets and saints, and all that 
sort of thing." 

"i would rather avoid such observations in such a place as this," said 
marchdale. 

"nay, do not be the moral coward," cry mr. chillingworth, "to make 
your opinions, or the expression of them, dependent upon any certain 
locality." 

"i know not what to think," said henry; "i am bewilder quite. let us 
now come away." 

mr. marchdale replace the lid of the coffin, and then the little party 
move towards the staircase. henry turn before he ascended, and 
glance back into the vault. 

"oh," he said, "if i could but think there had been some mistake, some 
error of judgment, on which the mind could rest for hope." 

"i deep regret," said marchdale, "that i so strenuous advise this 
expedition. i did hope that from it would have result much good." 

"and you had every reason so to hope," said chillingworth. "i advise it 
likewise, and i tell you that its result perfectly astonish me, 
although i will not allow myself to embrace at once all the conclusion 
to which it would seem to lead me." 

"i am satisfied," said henry; "i know you both advise me for the best. 
the curse of heaven seem now to have fallen upon me and my house." 

"oh, nonsense!" said chillingworth. "what for?" 

"alas! i know not." 

"then you may depend that heaven would never act so oddly. in the first 
place, heaven don't curse anybody; and, in the second, it is too just to 
inflict pain where pain is not ample deserved." 

they ascend the gloomy staircase of the vault. the countenance of 
both george and henry were very much saddened, and it was quite evident 
that their thought were by far too busy to enable them to enter into 
any conversation. they did not, and particularly george, seem to hear 
all that was said to them. their intellect seem almost stun by the 
unexpected circumstance of the disappearance of the body of their 
ancestor. 

all along they had, although almost unknown to themselves, felt a sort 
of conviction that they must find some remains of marmaduke bannerworth, 
which would render the supposition, even in the most superstitious 
minds, that he was the vampyre, a thing total and physically 
impossible. 

but now the whole question assume a far more bewilder shape. the 
body was not in its coffin--it had not there quiet slept the long 
sleep of death common to humanity. where was it then? what had become of 
it? where, how, and under what circumstances had it been removed? had it 
itself burst the band that held it, and hideous stalk forth into 
the world again to make one of its seeming inhabitants, and kept up for 
a hundred years a dreadful existence by such adventure as it had 
consummate at the hall, where, in the course of ordinary human life, it 
had once lived? 

all these were question which irresistible pressed themselves upon the 
consideration of henry and his brother. they were awful questions. 

and yet, take any sober, sane, thinking, educated man, and show him all 
that they had seen, subject him to all to which they had been subjected, 
and say if human reason, and all the argument that the subtlest brain 
could back it with, would be able to hold out against such a vast 
accumulation of horrible evidences, and say--"i don't believe it." 

mr. chillingworth's was the only plan. he would not argue the question. 
he said at once,-- 

"i will not believe this thing--upon this point i will yield to no 
evidence whatever." 

that was the only way of dispose of such a question; but there are not 
many who could so dispose of it, and not one so much interested in it as 
were the brother bannerworth, who could at all hope to get into such a 
state of mind. 

the boards were laid careful down again, and the screw replaced. 
henry found himself unequal to the task, so it was done by marchdale, 
who took pains to replace everything in the same state in which they had 
found it, even to the lay even the matting at the bottom of the pew. 

then they extinguish the light, and, with heavy hearts, they all 
walk towards the window, to leave the sacred edifice by the same means 
they had enter it. 

"shall we replace the pane of glass?" said marchdale. 

"oh, it matter not--it matter not," said henry, listlessly; "nothing 
matter now. i care not what become of me--i am get weary of a life 
which now must be one of misery and dread." 

"you must not allow yourself to fall into such a state of mind as this," 
said the doctor, "or you will become a patient of mine very quickly." 

"i cannot help it." 

"well, but be a man. if there are serious evil affecting you, fight out 
against them the best way you can." 

"i cannot." 

"come, now, listen to me. we need not, i think, trouble ourselves about 
the pane of glass, so come along." 

he took the arm of henry and walk on with him a little in advance of 
the others. 

"henry," he said, "the best way, you may depend, of meeting evils, be 
they great or small, is to get up an obstinate feeling of defiance 
against them. now, when anything occur which is uncomfortable to me, i 
endeavour to convince myself, and i have no great difficulty in do 
so, that i am a decidedly injure man." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; i get very angry, and that get up a kind of obstinacy, which 
make me not feel half so much mental misery as would be my portion, if 
i were to succumb to the evil, and commence whine over it, as many 
people do, under the pretence of being resigned." 

"but this family affliction of mine transcend anything that anybody 
else ever endured." 

"i don't know that; but it is a view of the subject which, if i were 
you, would only make me more obstinate." 

"what can i do?" 

"in the first place, i would say to myself, 'there may or there may not 
be supernatural beings, who, from some physical derange of the 
ordinary nature of things, make themselves obnoxious to living people; 
if there are, d--n them! there may be vampyres; and if there are, i defy 
them.' let the imagination paint its very worst terrors; let fear do 
what it will and what it can in people the mind with horrors. shrink 
from nothing, and even then i would defy them all." 

"is not that like defy heaven?" 

"most certainly not; for in all we say and in all we do we act from the 
impulse of that mind which is given to us by heaven itself. if heaven 
create an intellect and a mind of a certain order, heaven will not 
quarrel that it do the work which it was adapt to do." 

"i know these are your opinions. i have heard you mention them before." 

"they are the opinion of every rational person. henry bannerworth, 
because they will stand the test of reason; and what i urge upon you is, 
not to allow yourself to be mental prostrated, even if a vampyre has 
paid a visit to your house. defy him, say i--fight him. 
self-preservation is a great law of nature, implant in all our hearts; 
do you summon it to your aid." 

"i will endeavour to think as you would have me. i thought more than 
once of summon religion to my aid." 

"well, that is religion." 

"indeed!" 

"i consider so, and the most rational religion of all. all that we read 
about religion that do not seem expressly to agree with it, you may 
consider as an allegory." 

"but, mr. chillingworth, i cannot and will not renounce the sublime 
truth of scripture. they may be incomprehensible; they may be 
inconsistent; and some of them may look ridiculous; but still they are 
sacred and sublime, and i will not renounce them although my reason may 
not accord with them, because they are the law of heaven." 

no wonder this powerful argument silence mr. chillingworth, who was one 
of those character in society who hold most dreadful opinions, and who 
would destroy religious beliefs, and all the different sect in the 
world, if they could, and endeavour to introduce instead some horrible 
system of human reason and profound philosophy. 

but how soon the religious man silence his opponent; and let it not be 
supposed that, because his opponent say no more upon the subject, he 
do so because he is disgust with the stupidity of the other; no, it 
is because he is completely beaten, and has nothing more to say. 

the distance now between the church and the hall was nearly traversed, 
and mr. chillingworth, who was a very good man, notwithstanding his 
disbelief in certain things of course paved the way for him to hell, 
took a kind leave of mr. marchdale and the brothers, promising to call 
on the following morning and see flora. 

henry and george then, in earnest conversation with marchdale, proceed 
homewards. it was evident that the scene in the vault had made a deep 
and sadden impression upon them, and one which was not likely easily 
to be eradicated. 




chapter ix. 

the occurrence of the night at the hall.--the second appearance of the 
vampyre, and the pistol-shot. 


[illustration] 

despite the full and free consent which flora had given to her brother 
to entrust her solely to the care of her mother and her own courage at 
the hall, she felt greater fear creep over her after they were gone than 
she chose to acknowledge. 

a sort of presentiment appear to come over her that some evil was 
about to occur, and more than once she caught herself almost in the act 
of saying,-- 

"i wish they had not gone." 

mrs. bannerworth, too, could not be supposed to be entire destitute of 
uncomfortable feelings, when she came to consider how poor a guard she 
was over her beautiful child, and how much terror might even deprive of 
the little power she had, should the dreadful visitor again make his 
appearance. 

"but it is but for two hours," thought flora, "and two hour will soon 
pass away." 

there was, too, another feeling which gave her some degree of 
confidence, although it arose from a bad source, inasmuch as it was one 
which show powerful how much her mind was dwelling on the 
particulars of the horrible belief in the class of supernatural beings, 
one of whom she believe had visit her. 

that consideration was this. the two hour of absence from the hall of 
its male inhabitants, would be from nine o'clock until eleven, and those 
were not the two hour during which she felt that she would be most 
timid on account of the vampyre. 

"it was after midnight before," she thought, "when it came, and perhaps 
it may not be able to come earlier. it may not have the power, until 
that time, to make its hideous visits, and, therefore, i will believe 
myself safe." 

she had made up her mind not to go to bed until the return of her 
brothers, and she and her mother sat in a small room that was use as a 
breakfast-room, and which had a lattice window that open on to the 
lawn. 

this window had in the inside strong oaken shutters, which had been 
fasten as secure as their construction would admit of some time 
before the departure of the brother and mr. marchdale on that 
melancholy expedition, the object of which, if it had been known to her, 
would have add so much to the terror of poor flora. 

it was not even guess at, however remotely, so that she had not the 
additional affliction of thinking, that while she was sitting there, a 
prey to all sort of imaginative terrors, they were perhaps gathering 
fresh evidence, as, indeed, they were, of the dreadful reality of the 
appearance which, but for the collateral circumstances attendant upon 
its coming and its going, she would fain have persuade herself was but 
the vision of a dream. 

it was before nine that the brother started, but in her own mind flora 
gave them to eleven, and when she heard ten o'clock sound from a clock 
which stood in the hall, she felt pleased to think that in another hour 
they would surely be at home. 

"my dear," said her mother, "you look more like yourself, now." 

"do, i, mother?" 

"yes, you are well again." 

"ah, if i could forget--" 

"time, my dear flora, will enable you to do so, and all the fear of what 
made you so unwell will pass away. you will soon forget it all." 

"i will hope to do so." 

"be assured that, some day or another, something will occur, as henry 
says, to explain all that has happened, in some way consistent with 
reason and the ordinary nature of things, my dear flora." 

"oh, i will cling to such a belief; i will get henry, upon whose 
judgment i know i can rely, to tell me so, and each time that i hear 
such words from his lips, i will contrive to dismiss some portion of the 
terror which now, i cannot but confess, cling to my heart." 

flora laid her hand upon her mother's arm, and in a low, anxious tone of 
voice, said,--"listen, mother." 

mrs. bannerworth turn pale, as she said,--"listen to what, dear?" 

"within these last ten minutes," said flora, "i have thought three or 
four times that i heard a slight noise without. nay, mother, do not 
tremble--it may be only fancy." 

[illustration] 

flora herself trembled, and was of a death-like paleness; once or twice 
she pass her hand across her brow, and altogether she present a 
picture of much mental suffering. 

they now converse in anxious whispers, and almost all they said 
consist in anxious wish for the return of the brother and mr. 
marchdale. 

"you will be happy and more assured, my dear, with some company," said 
mrs. bannerworth. "shall i ring for the servants, and let them remain in 
the room with us, until they who are our best safeguard next to heaven 
return?" 

"hush--hush--hush, mother!" 

"what do you hear?" 

"i thought--i heard a faint sound." 

"i heard nothing, dear." 

"listen again, mother. surely i could not be deceive so often. i have 
now, at least, six times heard a sound as if some one was outside by the 
windows." 

"no, no, my darling, do not think; your imagination is active and in a 
state of excitement." 

"it is, and yet--" 

"believe me, it deceive you." 

"i hope to heaven it does!" 

there was a pause of some minutes' duration, and then mrs. bannerworth 
again urge slightly the calling of some of the servants, for she 
thought that their presence might have the effect of give a different 
direction to her child's thoughts; but flora saw her place her hand upon 
the bell, and she said,-- 

"no, mother, no--not yet, not yet. perhaps i am deceived." 

mrs. bannerworth upon this sat down, but no soon had she done so than 
she heartily regret she had not rung the bell, for, before, another 
word could be spoken, there came too perceptible upon their ear for 
there to be any mistake at all about it, a strange scratch noise upon 
the window outside. 

a faint cry came from flora's lips, as she exclaimed, in a voice of 
great agony,-- 

"oh, god!--oh, god! it has come again!" 

mrs. bannerworth became faint, and unable to move or speak at all; she 
could only sit like one paralysed, and unable to do more than listen to 
and see what was go on. 

the scratch noise continue for a few seconds, and then altogether 
ceased. perhaps, under ordinary circumstances, such a sound outside the 
window would have scarcely afford food for comment at all, or, if it 
had, it would have been attribute to some natural effect, or to the 
exertion of some bird or animal to obtain admittance to the house. 

but there had occur now enough in that family to make any little 
sound of wonderful importance, and these things which before would have 
pass completely unheeded, at all event without create much alarm, 
were now invest with a fearful interest. 

when the scratch noise ceased, flora spoke in a low, anxious whisper, 
as she said,-- 

"mother, you heard it then?" 

mrs. bannerworth try to speak, but she could not; and then suddenly, 
with a loud clash, the bar, which on the inside appear to fasten the 
shutter strongly, fell as if by some invisible agency, and the shutter 
now, but for the intervention of the window, could be easily pushed open 
from without. 

mrs. bannerworth cover her face with her hands, and, after rock to 
and fro for a moment, she fell off her chair, have faint with the 
excess of terror that came over her. 

for about the space of time in which a fast speaker could count twelve, 
flora thought her reason was leave her, but it did not. she found 
herself recovering; and there she sat, with her eyes fixed upon the 
window, look more like some exquisitely-chiselled statue of despair 
than a being of flesh and blood, expect each moment to have its eyes 
blasted by some horrible appearance, such as might be supposed to drive 
her to madness. 

and now again came the strange knock or scratch against the glass 
of the window. 

this continue for some minutes, during which it appear likewise to 
flora that some confusion was go on at another part of the house, for 
she fancy she heard voice and the bang of doors. 

it seem to her as if she must have sat look at the shutter of that 
window a long time before she saw them shake, and then one wide hinge 
portion of them slow opened. 

once again horror appear to be on the point of produce madness in 
her brain, and then, as before, a feeling of calm rapid ensued. 

she was able to see plainly that something was by the window, but what 
it was she could not plainly discern, in consequence of the lights she 
had in the room. a few moments, however, suffice to settle that 
mystery, for the window was open and a figure stood before her. 

one glance, one terrify glance, in which her whole soul was 
concentrated, suffice to shew her who and what the figure was. there 
was the tall, gaunt form--there was the fade ancient apparel--the 
lustrous metallic-looking eyes--its half-opened month, exhibit the 
tusk-like teeth! it was--yes, it was--_the vampyre!_ 

it stood for a moment gaze at her, and then in the hideous way it had 
attempt before to speak, it apparently endeavour to utter some words 
which it could not make articulate to human ears. the pistol lay before 
flora. mechanical she raise one, and pointed it at the figure. it 
advanced a step, and then she pull the trigger. 

a stunning report followed. there was a loud cry of pain, and the 
vampyre fled. the smoke and the confusion that was incidental to the 
spot prevent her from seeing if the figure walk or ran away. she 
thought she heard a crashing sound among the plant outside the window, 
as if it had fallen, but she did not feel quite sure. 

it was no effort of any reflection, but a purely mechanical movement, 
that made her raise the other pistol, and discharge that likewise in the 
direction the vampyre had taken. then casting the weapon away, she rose, 
and made a frantic rush from the room. she open the door, and was 
dashing out, when she found herself caught in the circle arms of some 
one who either had been there waiting, or who had just at that moment 
got there. 

the thought that it was the vampyre, who by some mysterious means, had 
got there, and was about to make her his prey, now overcame her 
completely, and she sunk into a state of utter insensibility on the 
moment. 




chapter x. 

the return from the vault.--the alarm, and the search around the hall. 


[illustration] 

it so happen that george and henry bannerworth, along with mr. 
marchdale, had just reach the gate which conduct into the garden of 
the mansion when they all were alarm by the report of a pistol. amid 
the still of the night, it came upon them with so sudden a shock, 
that they involuntary paused, and there came from the lip of each an 
expression of alarm. 

"good heavens!" cry george, "can that be flora fire at any 
intruder?" 

"it must be," cry henry; "she has in her possession the only weapon 
in the house." 

mr. marchdale turn very pale, and tremble slightly, but he did not 
speak. 

"on, on," cry henry; "for god's sake, let us hasten on." 

as he spoke, he clear the gate at a bound, and at a terrific pace he 
made towards the house, passing over beds, and plantations, and flower 
heedlessly, so that he went the most direct way to it. 

before, however, it was possible for any human speed to accomplish even 
half of the distance, the report of the other shot came upon his ears, 
and he even fancy he heard the bullet whistle past his head in 
tolerably close proximity. this supposition gave him a clue to the 
direction at all event from whence the shot proceeded, otherwise he 
knew not from which window they were fired, because it had not occur 
to him, previous to leave home, to inquire in which room flora and his 
mother were likely to be seat wait his return. 

he was right as regard the bullet. it was that wing messenger of 
death which had pass his head in such very dangerous proximity, and 
consequently he made with tolerable accuracy towards the open window 
from whence the shot had been fired. 

the night was not near so dark as it had been, although even yet it was 
very far from being a light one, and he was soon enable to see that 
there was a room, the window of which was wide open, and lights burning 
on the table within. he made towards it in a moment, and enter it. to 
his astonishment, the first object he beheld were flora and a stranger, 
who was now support her in his arms. to grapple him by the throat was 
the work of a moment, but the stranger cry aloud in a voice which 
sound familiar to harry,-- 

"good god, are you all mad?" 

henry relax his hold, and look in his face. 

"gracious heavens, it is mr. holland!" he said. 

"yes; did you not know me?" 

henry was bewildered. he stagger to a seat, and, in do so, he saw 
his mother, stretch apparently lifeless upon the floor. to raise her 
was the work of a moment, and then marchdale and george, who had 
follow him as fast as they could, appear at the open window. 

such a strange scene as that small room now exhibit had never been 
equal in bannerworth hall. there was young mr. holland, of whom 
mention has already been made, as the affiance lover of flora, 
support her faint form. there was henry do equal service to his 
mother; and on the floor lay the two pistols, and one of the candle 
which had been upset in the confusion; while the terrify attitude of 
george and mr. marchdale at the window complete the strange-looking 
picture. 

"what is this--oh! what has happened?" cry george. 

"i know not--i know not," said henry. "some one summon the servants; i 
am nearly mad." 

mr. marchdale at once rung the bell, for george look so faint and ill 
as to be incapable of do so; and he rung it so loud and so 
effectually, that the two servant who had been employ sudden upon 
the other leave came with much speed to know what was the matter. 

"see to your mistress," said henry. "she is dead, or has fainted. for 
god's sake, let who can give me some account of what has cause all this 
confusion here." 

"are you aware, henry," said marchdale, "that a stranger is present in 
the room?" 

he pointed to mr. dutch as he spoke, who, before henry could reply, 
said,-- 

"sir, i may be a stranger to you, as you are to me, and yet no stranger 
to those whose home this is." 

"no, no," said henry, "you are no stranger to us, mr. holland, but are 
thrice welcome--none can be more welcome. mr. marchdale, this is mr 
holland, of whom you have heard me speak." 

"i am proud to know you, sir," said marchdale. 

"sir, i thank you," reply holland, coldly. 

it will so happen; but, at first sight, it appear as if those two 
person had some sort of antagonist feeling towards each other, which 
threaten to prevent effectually their ever becoming intimate friends. 

the appeal of henry to the servant to know if they could tell him what 
had occur was answer in the negative. all they knew was that they 
had heard two shot fired, and that, since then, they had remain where 
they were, in a great fright, until the bell was rung violently. this 
was no news at all and, therefore, the only chance was, to wait 
patient for the recovery of the mother, or of flora, from one or the 
other of whom surely some information could be at once then procured. 

mrs. bannerworth was remove to her own room, and so would flora have 
been; but mr. holland, who was support her in his arms, said,-- 

"i think the air from the open window is recover her, and it is 
likely to do so. oh, do not now take her from me, after so long an 
absence. flora, flora, look up; do you not know me? you have not yet 
given me one look of acknowledgment. flora, dear flora!" 

the sound of his voice seem to act as the most potent of charm in 
restore her to consciousness; it broke through the death-like trance 
in which she lay, and, opening her beautiful eyes, she fixed them upon 
his face, saying,-- 

"yes, yes; it is charles--it is charles." 

she burst into a hysterical flood of tears, and clung to him like some 
terrify child to its only friend in the whole wide world. 

"oh, my dear friends," cry charles holland, "do not deceive me; has 
flora been ill?" 

"we have all been ill," said george. 

"all ill?" 

"ay, and nearly mad," exclaim harry. 

dutch look from one to the other in surprise, as well he might, nor 
was that surprise at all lessen when flora made an effort to extricate 
herself from his embrace, as she exclaimed,-- 

"you must leave me--you must leave me, charles, for ever! oh! never, 
never look upon my face again!" 

"i--i am bewildered," said charles. 

"leave me, now," continue flora; "think me unworthy; think what you 
will, charles, but i cannot, i dare not, now be yours." 

"is this a dream?" 

"oh, would it were. charles, if we had never met, you would be 
happier--i could not be more wretched." 

"flora, flora, do you say these words of so great cruelty to try my 
love?" 

"no, as heaven is my judge, i do not." 

"gracious heaven, then, what do they mean?" 

flora shuddered, and henry, coming up to her, took her hand in his 
tenderly, as he said,-- 

"has it been again?" 

"it has." 

"you shot it?" 

"i fire full upon it, henry, but it fled." 

"it did--fly?" 

"it did, henry, but it will come again--it will be sure to come again." 

"you--you hit it with the bullet?" interpose mr. marchdale. "perhaps 
you kill it?" 

"i think i must have hit it, unless i am mad." 

charles dutch look from one to the other with such a look of intense 
surprise, that george remark it, and said at once to him,-- 

"mr. holland, a full explanation is due to you, and you shall have it." 

"you seem the only rational person here," said charles. "pray what is it 
that everybody call '_it_?'" 

"hush--hush!" said henry; "you shall hear soon, but not at present." 

"hear me, charles," said flora. "from this moment mind, i do release you 
from every vow, from every promise made to me of constancy and love; and 
if you are wise, charles, and will be advised, you will now this moment 
leave this house never to return to it." 

"no," said charles--"no; by heaven i love you, flora! i have come to say 
again all that in another clime i said with joy to you. when i forget 
you, let what trouble may oppress you, may god forget me, and my own 
right hand forget to do me honest service." 

[illustration] 

"oh! no more--no more!" sob flora. 

"yes, much more, if you will tell me of words which shall be strong 
than other in which to paint my love, my faith, and my constancy." 

"be prudent," said henry. "say no more." 

"nay, upon such a theme i could speak for ever. you may cast me off, 
flora; but until you tell me you love another, i am yours till the 
death, and then with a sanguine hope at my heart that we shall meet 
again, never, dearest, to part." 

flora sob bitterly. 

"oh!" she said, "this is the unkindest blow of all--this is worse than 
all." 

"unkind!" echo holland. 

"heed her not," said henry; "she means not you." 

"oh, no--no!" she cried. "farewell, charles--dear charles." 

"oh, say that word again!" he exclaimed, with animation. "it is the 
first time such music has met my ears." 

"it must be the last." 

"no, no--oh, no." 

"for your own sake i shall be able now, charles, to show you that i 
really love you." 

"not by casting me from you?" 

"yes, even so. that will be the way to show you that i love you." 

she held up her hand wildly, as she added, in an excited voice,-- 

"the curse of destiny is upon me! i am single out as one lost and 
accursed. oh, horror--horror! would that i were dead!" 

charles stagger back a pace or two until he came to the table, at 
which he clutch for support. he turn very pale as he said, in a 
faint voice,-- 

"is--is she mad, or am i?" 

"tell him i am mad, henry," cry flora. "do not, oh, do not make his 
lonely thought terrible with more than that. tell him i am mad." 

"come with me," whisper henry to holland. "i pray you come with me at 
once, and you shall know all." 

"i--will." 

"george, stay with flora for a time. come, come, mr. holland, you ought, 
and you shall know all; then you can come to a judgment for yourself. 
this way, sir. you cannot, in the wildest freak of your imagination, 
guess that which i have now to tell you." 

never was mortal man so utterly bewilder by the event of the last 
hour of his existence as was now charles holland, and truly he might 
well be so. he had arrive in england, and made what speed he could to 
the house of a family whom he admire for their intelligence, their high 
culture, and in one member of which his whole thought of domestic 
happiness in this world were centered, and he found nothing but 
confusion, incoherence, mystery, and the wildest dismay. 

well might he doubt if he were sleep or waking--well might he ask if 
he or they were mad. 

and now, as, after a long, lingering look of affection upon the pale, 
suffering face of flora, he follow henry from the room, his thought 
were busy in fancy a thousand vague and wild imagination with 
respect to the communication which was promise to be made to him. 

but, as henry had truly said to him, not in the wildest freak of his 
imagination could he conceive of any thing near the terrible strange 
and horror of that which he had to tell him, and consequently he found 
himself closet with henry in a small private room, remove from the 
domestic part of the hall, to the full in as bewilder a state as he 
had been from the first. 




chapter xi. 

the communications to the lover.--the heart's despair. 


[illustration] 

consternation is sympathetic, and any one who had look upon the 
features of charles holland, now that he was seat with henry 
bannerworth, in expectation of a communication which his fear told him 
was to blast all his dearest and most fondly cherish hope for ever, 
would scarce have recognise in him the same young man who, one short 
hour before, had knock so loudly, and so full of joyful hope and 
expectation, at the door of the hall. 

but so it was. he knew henry bannerworth too well to suppose that any 
unreal cause could blanch his cheek. he knew flora too well to imagine 
for one moment that caprice had dictate the, to him, fearful words of 
dismissal she had utter to him. 

happy would it at that time have been for charles dutch had she 
act capricious towards him, and convinced him that his true heart's 
devotion had been cast at the feet of one unworthy of so really noble a 
gift. pride would then have enable him, no doubt, successful to 
resist the blow. a feeling of honest and proper indignation at have 
his feelings trifle with, would, no doubt, have sustain him, but, 
alas! the case seem widely different. 

true, she implore him to think of her no more--no long to cherish in 
his breast the fond dream of affection which had been its guest so long; 
but the manner in which she did so brought along with it an irresistible 
conviction, that she was making a noble sacrifice of her own feelings 
for him, from some cause which was involved in the profoundest mystery. 

but now he was to hear all. henry had promise to tell him, and as he 
look into his pale, but handsome intellectual face, he half dread 
the disclosure he yet pant to hear. 

"tell me all, henry--tell me all," he said. "upon the words that come 
from your lip i know i can rely." 

"i will have no reservation with you," said henry, sadly. "you ought to 
know all, and you shall. prepare yourself for the strangest revelation 
you ever heard." 

"indeed!" 

"ay. one which in hearing you may well doubt; and one which, i hope, you 
will never find an opportunity of verifying." 

"you speak in riddles." 

"and yet speak truly, charles. you heard with what a frantic vehemence 
flora desire you to think no more of her?" 

"i did--i did." 

"she was right. she is a noble-hearted girl for utter those words. a 
dreadful incident in our family has occurred, which might well induce 
you to pause before unite your fate with that of any member of it." 

"impossible. nothing can possibly subdue the feelings of affection i 
entertain for flora. she is worthy of any one, and, as such, amid all 
changes--all mutation of fortune, she shall be mine." 

"do not suppose that any change of fortune has produce the scene you 
were witness to." 

"then, what else?" 

"i will tell you, holland. in all your travels, and in all your reading, 
did you ever come across anything about vampyres?" 

"about what?" cry charles, drawing his chair forward a little. "about 
what?" 

"you may well doubt the evidence of your own ears, charles holland, and 
wish me to repeat what i said. i say, do you know anything about 
vampyres?" 

charles dutch look curious in henry's face, and the latter 
immediately added,-- 

"i can guess what is passing in your mind at present, and i do not 
wonder at it. you think i must be mad." 

"well, really, henry, your extraordinary question--" 

"i knew it. were i you, i should hesitate to believe the tale; but the 
fact is, we have every reason to believe that one member of our own 
family is one of those horrible preternatural being call vampyres." 

"good god, henry, can you allow your judgment for a moment to stoop to 
such a supposition?" 

"that is what i have ask myself a hundred times; but, charles holland, 
the judgment, the feelings, and all the prejudices, natural and 
acquired, must succumb to actual ocular demonstration. listen to me, and 
do not interrupt me. you shall know all, and you shall know it 
circumstantially." 

henry then related to the astonish charles dutch all that had 
occurred, from the first alarm of flora, up to that period when he, 
holland, caught her in his arms as she was about to leave the room. 

"and now," he said, in conclusion, "i cannot tell what opinion you may 
come to as regards these most singular events. you will recollect that 
here is the unbiass evidence of four or five people to the facts, and, 
beyond that, the servants, who have seen something of the horrible 
visitor." 

"you bewilder me, utterly," said charles holland. 

"as we are all bewildered." 

"but--but, gracious heaven! it cannot be." 

"it is." 

"no--no. there is--there must be yet some dreadful mistake." 

"can you start any supposition by which we can otherwise explain any of 
the phenomena i have describe to you? if you can, for heaven's sake do 
so, and you will find no one who will cling to it with more tenacity 
than i." 

"any other species or kind of supernatural appearance might admit of 
argument; but this, to my perception, is too wildly improbable--too much 
at variance with all we see and know of the operation of nature." 

"it is so. all that we have told ourselves repeatedly, and yet is all 
human reason at once struck down by the few brief words of--'we have 
seen it.'" 

"i would doubt my eyesight." 

"one might; but many cannot be labour under the same delusion." 

"my friend, i pray you, do not make me shudder at the supposition that 
such a dreadful thing as this is at all possible." 

"_i_ am, believe me, charles, most unwill to oppress anyone with the 
knowledge of these evils; but you are so situated with us, that you 
ought to know, and you will clearly understand that you may, with 
perfect honour, now consider yourself free from all engagement you have 
enter into with flora." 

"no, no! by heaven, no!" 

"yes, charles. reflect upon the consequence now of a union with such a 
family." 

"oh, henry bannerworth, can you suppose me so dead to all good feeling, 
so utterly lost to honourable impulses, as to eject from my heart her 
who has possession of it entirely, on such a ground as this?" 

"you would be justified." 

"coldly justified in prudence i might be. there are a thousand 
circumstances in which a man may be justified in a particular course of 
action, and that course yet may be neither honourable nor just. i love 
flora; and were she torment by the whole of the supernatural world, i 
should still love her. nay, it becomes, then, a higher and a noble duty 
on my part to stand between her and those evils, if possible." 

"charles--charles," said henry, "i cannot of course refuse to you my 
meed of praise and admiration for your generous of feeling; but, 
remember, if we are compelled, despite all our feelings and all our 
predilection to the contrary, to give in to a belief in the existence 
of vampyres, why may we not at once receive as the truth all that is 
record of them?" 

"to what do you allude?" 

"to this. that one who has been visit by a vampyre, and whose blood 
has form a horrible repast for such a being, becomes, after death, one 
of the dreadful race, and visit other in the same way." 

"now this must be insanity," cry charles. 

"it bear the aspect of it, indeed," said henry; "oh, that you could by 
some means satisfy yourself that i am mad." 

"there may be insanity in this family," thought charles, with such an 
exquisite pang of misery, that he groan aloud. 

"already," add henry, mournfully, "already the blight influence of 
the dreadful tale is upon you, charles. oh, let me add my advice to 
flora's entreaties. she love you, and we all esteem you; fly, then, 
from us, and leave us to encounter our misery alone. fly from us, 
charles holland, and take with you our best wish for happiness which 
you cannot know here." 

"never," cry charles; "i devote my existence to flora. i will not play 
the coward, and fly from one whom i love, on such grounds. i devote my 
life to her." 

henry could not speak for emotion for several minutes, and when at 
length, in a falter voice, he could utter some words, he said,-- 

"god of heaven, what happiness is mar by these horrible events? what 
have we all done to be the victim of such a dreadful act of vengeance?" 

"henry, do not talk in that way," cry charles. "rather let us bend all 
our energy to overcome the evil, than spend any time in useless 
lamentations. i cannot even yet give in to a belief in the existence of 
such a being as you say visit flora." 

"but the evidences." 

"look you here, henry: until i am convinced that some things have 
happen which it is total impossible could happen by any human means 
whatever, i will not ascribe them to supernatural influence." 

"but what human means, charles, could produce what i have now narrate 
to you?" 

"i do not know, just at present, but i will give the subject the most 
attentive consideration. will you accommodate me here for a time?" 

"you know you are as welcome here as if the house were your own, and all 
that it contains." 

"i believe so, most truly. you have no objection, i presume, to my 
converse with flora upon this strange subject?" 

"certainly not. of course you will be careful to say nothing which can 
add to her fears." 

"i shall be most guarded, believe me. you say that your brother george, 
mr. chillingworth, yourself, and this mr. marchdale, have all been 
cognisant of the circumstances." 

"yes--yes." 

"then with the whole of them you permit me to hold free communication 
upon the subject?" 

"most certainly." 

"i will do so then. keep up good heart, henry, and this affair, which 
looks so full of terror at first sight, may yet be divest of some of 
its hideous aspect." 

"i am rejoiced, if anything can rejoice me now," said henry, "to see you 
view the subject with so much philosophy." 

"why," said charles, "you made a remark of your own, which enable me, 
view the matter in its very worst and most hideous aspect, to gather 
hope." 

"what was that?" 

"you said, properly and naturally enough, that if ever we felt that 
there was such a weight of evidence in favour of a belief in the 
existence of vampyre that we are compel to succumb to it, we might 
as well receive all the popular feelings and superstition concerning 
them likewise." 

"i did. where is the mind to pause, when once we open it to the 
reception of such things?" 

"well, then, if that be the case, we will watch this vampyre and catch 
it." 

"catch it?" 

"yes; surely it can be caught; as i understand, this species of being is 
not like an apparition, that may be compose of thin air, and utterly 
impalpable to the human touch, but it consist of a revivify corpse." 

"yes, yes." 

"then it is tangible and destructible. by heaven! if ever i catch a 
glimpse of any such thing, it shall drag me to its home, be that where 
it may, or i will make it prisoner." 

"oh, charles! you know not the feeling of horror that will come across 
you when you do. you have no idea of how the warm blood will seem to 
curdle in your veins, and how you will be paralyse in every limb." 

"did you feel so?" 

"i did." 

"i will endeavour to make head against such feelings. the love of flora 
shall enable me to vanquish them. think you it will come again 
to-morrow?" 

[illustration] 

"i can have no thought the one way or the other." 

"it may. we must arrange among us all, henry, some plan of watch 
which, without completely prostrate our health and strength, will 
always provide that one shall be up all night and on the alert." 

"it must be done." 

"flora ought to sleep with the consciousness now that she has ever at 
hand some intrepid and well-armed protector, who is not only himself 
prepared to defend her, but who can in a moment give an alarm to us all, 
in case of necessity require it." 

"it would be a dreadful capture to make to seize a vampyre," said henry. 

"not at all; it would be a very desirable one. being a corpse 
revivified, it is capable of complete destruction, so as to render it no 
long a scourge to any one." 

"charles, charles, are you jesting with me, or do you really give any 
credence to the story?" 

"my dear friend, i always make it a rule to take things at their worst, 
and then i cannot be disappointed. i am content to reason upon this 
matter as if the fact of the existence of a vampyre were thorough 
established, and then to think upon what is best to be done about it." 

"you are right." 

"if it should turn out then that there is an error in the fact, well and 
good--we are all the better off; but if otherwise, we are prepared, and 
armed at all points." 

"let it be so, then. it strike me, charles, that you will be the 
coolest and the calmest among us all on this emergency; but the hour now 
wax late, i will get them to prepare a chamber for you, and at least 
to-night, after what has occur already, i should think we can be 
under no apprehension." 

"probably not. but, henry, if you would allow me to sleep in that room 
where the portrait hang of him whom you suppose to be the vampyre, i 
should prefer it." 

"prefer it!" 

"yes; i am not one who court danger for danger's sake, but i would 
rather occupy that room, to see if the vampyre, who perhaps has a 
partiality for it, will pay me a visit." 

"as you please, charles. you can have the apartment. it is in the same 
state as when occupy by flora. nothing has been, i believe, remove 
from it." 

"you will let me, then, while i remain here, call it my room?" 

"assuredly." 

this arrangement was accordingly made to the surprise of all the 
household, not one of whom would, indeed, have slept, or attempt to 
sleep there for any amount of reward. but charles dutch had his own 
reason for prefer that chamber, and he was conduct to it in the 
course of half an hour by henry, who look around it with a shudder, as 
he bade his young friend good night. 




chapter xii. 

charles holland's sad feelings.--the portrait.--the occurrence of the 
night at the hall. 


[illustration] 

charles dutch wish to be alone, if ever any human being had wish 
fervent to be so. his thought were most fearful oppressive. 

the communication that had been made to him by henry bannerworth, had 
about it too many strange, confirmatory circumstances to enable him to 
treat it, in his own mind, with the disrespect that some mere freak of a 
distracted and weak imagination would, most probably, have received from 
him. 

he had found flora in a state of excitement which could arise only from 
some such terrible cause as had been mention by her brother, and then 
he was, from an occurrence which certainly never could have enter into 
his calculations, ask to forego the bright dream of happiness which he 
had held so long and so rapturous to his heart. 

how truly he found that the course of true love ran not smooth; and yet 
how little would any one have suspect that from such a cause as that 
which now oppress his mind, any obstruction would arise. 

flora might have been fickle and false; he might have seen some other 
fair face, which might have enchain his fancy, and woven for him a 
new heart's chain; death might have step between him and the 
realization of his fondest hopes; loss of fortune might have made the 
love cruel which would have yoke to its distress a young and 
beautiful girl, rear in the lap of luxury, and who was not, even by 
those who love her, suffer to feel, even in later years, any of the 
pinch necessity of the family. 

all these things were possible--some of them were probable; and yet none 
of them had occurred. she love him still; and he, although he had 
look on many a fair face, and bask in the sunny smile of beauty, 
had never for a moment forgotten her faith, or lost his devotion to his 
own dear english girl. 

fortune he had enough for both; death had not even threaten to rob him 
of the prize of such a noble and faithful heart which he had won. but a 
horrible superstition had arisen, which seem to place at once an 
impassable abyss between them, and to say to him, in a voice of 
thundering denunciation,-- 

"charles holland, will you have a vampyre for your bride?" 

the thought was terrific. he pace the gloomy chamber to and fro with 
rapid strides, until the idea came across his mind that by so do he 
might not only be proclaim to his kind entertainer how much he was 
mental distracted, but he likewise might be seriously distract 
them. 

the moment this occur to him he sat down, and was profound still 
for some time. he then glance at the light which had been given to him, 
and he found himself almost unconscious engaged in a mental 
calculation as to how long it would last him in the night. 

half ashamed, then, of such terrors, as such a consideration would seem 
to indicate, he was on the point of hasty extinguish it, when he 
happen to cast his eyes on the now mysterious and highly interesting 
portrait in the panel. 

the picture, as a picture, was well done, whether it was a correct 
likeness or not of the party whom it represented. it was one of those 
kind of portrait that seem so life-like, that, as you look at them, 
they seem to return your gaze fully, and even to follow you with their 
eyes from place to place. 

by candle-light such an effect is more likely to become striking and 
remarkable than by daylight; and now, as charles dutch shade his own 
eyes from the light, so as to cast its full radiance upon the portrait, 
he felt wonderful interested in its life-like appearance. 

"here is true skill," he said; "such as i have not before seen. how 
strange this likeness of a man whom i never saw seem to gaze upon 
me." 

unconsciously, too, he aid the effect, which he just enough call 
life-like, by a slight movement of the candle, such as any one not 
blessed with nerves of iron would be sure to make, and such a movement 
made the face look as if it was inspired with vitality. 

charles remain look at the portrait for a considerable period of 
time. he found a kind of fascination in it which prevent him from 
drawing his eyes away from it. it was not fear which induce him to 
continue gaze on it, but the circumstance that it was a likeness of 
the man who, after death, was supposed to have borrow so new and so 
hideous an existence, combine with its artistic merits, chain him to 
the spot. 

"i shall now," he said, "know that face again, let me see it where i 
may, or under what circumstances i may. each feature is now indelible 
fixed upon my memory--i never can mistake it." 

he turn aside as he utter these words, and as he did so his eyes 
fell upon a part of the ornamental frame which compose the edge of the 
panel, and which seem to him to be of a different colour from the 
surrounding portion. 

curiosity and increase interest prompt him at once to make a close 
inquiry into the matter; and, by a careful and diligent scrutiny, he was 
almost induce to come to the positive opinion, that it no very distant 
period in time past, the portrait had been remove from the place it 
occupied. 

when once this idea, even vague and indistinct as it was, in consequence 
of the slight grounds he form it on, had got possession of his mind, 
he felt most anxious to prove its verify or its fallacy. 

he held the candle in a variety of situations, so that its light fell in 
different ways on the picture; and the more he examine it, the more he 
felt convinced that it must have been move lately. 

it would appear as if, in its removal, a piece of the old oaken carve 
framework of the panel had been accidental broken off, which cause 
the new look of the fracture, and that this accident, from the nature of 
the broken bit of framing, could have occur in any other way than 
from an actual or attempt removal of the picture, he felt was 
extremely unlikely. 

he set down the candle on a chair near at hand, and try if the panel 
was fast in its place. upon the very first touch, he felt convinced it 
was not so, and that it easily moved. how to get it out, though, 
present a difficulty, and to get it out was tempting. 

"who knows," he said to himself, "what may be behind it? this is an old 
baronial sort of hall, and the greater portion of it was, no doubt, 
built at a time when the construction of such place as hidden chambers 
and intricate staircase were, in all building of importance, 
considered a disiderata." 

that he should make some discovery behind the portrait, now became an 
idea that possessed him strongly, although he certainly had no definite 
grounds for really supposing that he should do so. 

perhaps the wish was more father to the thought than he, in the partial 
state of excitement he was in, really imagined; but so it was. he felt 
convinced that he should not be satisfy until he had remove that 
panel from the wall, and seen what was immediately behind it. 

after the panel contain the picture had been placed where it was, it 
appear that pieces of moulding had been insert all around, which had 
had the effect of keeping it in its place, and it was a fracture of one 
of these pieces which had first call charles holland's attention to 
the probability of the picture have been removed. that he should have 
to get two, at least, of the pieces of moulding away, before he could 
hope to remove the picture, was to him quite apparent, and he was 
considering how he should accomplish such a result, when he was sudden 
startle by a knock at his chamber door. 

until that sudden demand for admission at his door came, he scarcely 
knew to what a nervous state he had work himself up. it was an odd 
sort of tap--one only--a single tap, as if some one demand admittance, 
and wish to awaken his attention with the least possible chance of 
disturb any one else. 

"come in," said charles, for he knew he had not fasten his door; "come 
in." 

there was no reply, but after a moment's pause, the same sort of low tap 
came again. 

again he cry "come in," but, whoever it was, seem determined that 
the door should be open for him, and no movement was made from the 
outside. a third time the tap came, and charles was very close to the 
door when he heard it, for with a noiseless step he had approach it 
intend to open it. the instant this third mysterious demand for 
admission came, he did open it wide. there was no one there! in an 
instant he cross the threshold into the corridor, which ran right and 
left. a window at one end of it now sent in the moon's rays, so that it 
was tolerably light, but he could see no one. indeed, to look for any 
one, he felt sure was needless, for he had open his chamber-door 
almost simultaneous with the last knock for admission. 

"it is strange," he said, as he linger on the threshold of his room 
door for some moments; "my imagination could not so completely deceive 
me. there was most certainly a demand for admission." 

slowly, then, he return to his room again, and closed the door behind 
him. 

"one thing is evident," he said, "that if i am in this apartment to be 
subject to these annoyances, i shall get no rest, which will soon 
exhaust me." 

this thought was a very provoking one, and the more he thought that he 
should ultimately find a necessity for give up that chamber he had 
himself ask as a special favour to be allow to occupy, the more 
vex he became to think what construction might be put upon his conduct 
for so doing. 

"they will all fancy me a coward," he thought, "and that i dare not 
sleep here. they may not, of course, say so, but they will think that my 
appear so bold was one of those acts of bravado which i have not 
courage to carry fairly out." 

taking this view of the matter was just the way to enlist a young man's 
pride in staying, under all circumstances, where he was, and, with a 
slight accession of colour, which, even although he was alone, would 
visit his cheeks, charles dutch said aloud,-- 

"i will remain the occupant of this room come what may, happen what may. 
no terrors, real or unsubstantial, shall drive me from it: i will brave 
them all, and remain here to brave them." 

tap came the knock at the door again, and now, with more an air of 
vexation than fear, charles turn again towards it, and listened. tap 
in another minute again succeeded, and much annoyed, he walk close to 
the door, and laid his hand upon the lock, ready to open it at the 
precise moment of another demand for admission being made. 

he had not to wait long. in about half a minute it came again, and, 
simultaneous with the sound, the door flew open. there was no one to 
be seen; but, as he open the door, he heard a strange sound in the 
corridor--a sound which scarcely could be call a groan, and scarcely a 
sigh, but seem a compound of both, have the agony of the one 
combine with the sad of the other. from what direction it came he 
could not at the moment decide, but he call out,-- 

"who's there? who's there?" 

the echo of his own voice alone answer him for a few moments, and then 
he heard a door open, and a voice, which he knew to be henry's, cried,-- 

"what is it? who speaks?" 

"henry," said charles. 

"yes--yes--yes." 

"i fear i have disturbed you." 

"you have been disturbed yourself, or you would not have done so. i 
shall be with you in a moment." 

henry closed his door before charles dutch could tell him not to come 
to him, as he intended to do, for he felt ashamed to have, in a manner 
of speaking, summon assistance for so trifling a cause of alarm as 
that to which he had been subjected. however, he could not go to henry's 
chamber to forbid him from coming to his, and, more vex than before, 
he retired to his room again to await his coming. 

he left the door open now, so that henry bannerworth, when he had got on 
some articles of dress, walk in at once, saying,-- 

"what has happened, charles?" 

"a mere trifle, henry, concerning which i am ashamed you should have 
been at all disturbed." 

"never mind that, i was wakeful." 

"i heard a door open, which kept me listening, but i could not decide 
which door it was till i heard your voice in the corridor." 

"well, it was this door; and i open it twice in consequence of the 
repeated taps for admission that came to it; some one has been knock 
at it, and, when i go to it, lo! i can see nobody." 

"indeed!" 

[illustration] 

"such is the case." 

"you surprise me." 

"i am very sorry to have disturbed you, because, upon such a ground, i 
do not feel that i ought to have done so; and, when i call out in the 
corridor, i assure you it was with no such intention." 

"do not regret it for a moment," said henry; "you were quite justified 
in making an alarm on such an occasion." 

"it's strange enough, but still it may arise from some accidental cause; 
admitting, if we did but know it, of some ready enough explanation." 

"it may, certainly, but, after what has happen already, we may well 
suppose a mysterious connexion between any unusual sight or sound, and 
the fearful one we have already seen." 

"certainly we may." 

"how earnest that strange portrait seem to look upon us, charles." 

"it does, and i have been examine it carefully. it seem to have been 
remove lately." 

"removed!" 

"yes, i think, as far as i can judge, that it has been taken from its 
frame; i mean, that the panel on which it is paint has been taken 
out." 

"indeed!" 

"if you touch it you will find it loose, and, upon a close examination, 
you will perceive that a piece of the moulding which hold it in its 
place has been chip off, which is done in such a place that i think 
it could only have arisen during the removal of the picture." 

"you must be mistaken." 

"i cannot, of course, take upon myself, henry, to say precisely such is 
the case," said charles. 

"but there is no one here to do so." 

"that i cannot say. will you permit me and assist me to remove it? i 
have a great curiosity to know what is behind it." 

"if you have, i certainly will do so. we thought of taking it away 
altogether, but when flora left this room the idea was given up as 
useless. remain here a few moments, and i will endeavour to find 
something which shall assist us in its removal." 

henry left the mysterious chamber in order to search in his own for some 
means of remove the frame-work of the picture, so that the panel would 
slip easily out, and while he was gone, charles dutch continue gaze 
upon it with greater interest, if possible, than before. 

in a few minutes henry returned, and although what he had succeed in 
finding were very inefficient implement for the purpose, yet with this 
aid the two young men set about the task. 

it is said, and said truly enough, that "where there is a will there is 
a way," and although the young men had no tool at all adapt for the 
purpose, they did succeed in remove the moulding from the side of the 
panel, and then by a little tap at one end of it, and use a knife 
at a lever at the other end of the panel, they got it fairly out. 

disappointment was all they got for their pains. on the other side there 
was nothing but a rough wooden wall, against which the fine and more 
nicely finished oak panelling of the chamber rested. 

"there is no mystery here," said henry. 

"none whatever," said charles, as he tap the wall with his knuckles, 
and found it all hard and sound. "we are foiled." 

"we are indeed." 

"i had a strange presentiment, now," add charles, "that we should make 
some discovery that would repay us for our trouble. it appears, however, 
that such is not to be the case; for you see nothing presents itself to 
us but the most ordinary appearances." 

"i perceive as much; and the panel itself, although of more than 
ordinary thickness, is, after all, but a bit of plan oak, and 
apparently fashion for no other object than to paint the portrait on." 

"true. shall we replace it?" 

charles reluctantly assented, and the picture was replace in its 
original position. we say charles reluctantly assented, because, 
although he had now had ocular demonstration that there was really 
nothing behind the panel but the ordinary woodwork which might have been 
expect from the construction of the old house, yet he could not, even 
with such a fact staring him in the face, get rid entire of the 
feeling that had come across him, to the effect that the picture had 
some mystery or another. 

"you are not yet satisfied," said henry, as he observe the doubtful 
look of charles holland's face. 

"my dear friend," said charles, "i will not deceive you. i am much 
disappointed that we have made no discovery behind that picture." 

"heaven know we have mystery enough in our family," said henry. 

even as he spoke they were both startle by a strange clatter noise 
at the window, which was accompany by a shrill, odd kind of shriek, 
which sound fearful and preternatural on the night air. 

"what is that?" said charles. 

"god only knows," said henry. 

the two young men naturally turn their earnest gaze in the direction 
of the window, which we have before remark was one unprovided with 
shutters, and there, to their intense surprise, they saw, slow rising 
up from the lower part of it, what appear to be a human form. henry 
would have dashed forward, but charles restrained him, and drawing 
quick from its case a large holster pistol, he level it careful 
at the figure, saying in a whisper,-- 

"henry, if i don't hit it, i will consent to forfeit my head." 

he pull the trigger--a loud report followed--the room was fill with 
smoke, and then all was still. a circumstance, however, had occurred, as 
a consequence of the concussion of air produce by the discharge of the 
pistol, which neither of the young men had for the moment calculate 
upon, and that was the putt out of the only light they there had. 

in spite of this circumstance, charles, the moment he had discharge the 
pistol, drop it and sprung forward to the window. but here he was 
perplexed, for he could not find the old fashioned, intricate fastening 
which held it shut, and he had to call to henry,-- 

"henry! for god's sake open the window for me, henry! the fastening of 
the window is known to you, but not to me. open it for me." 

thus call upon, henry sprung forward, and by this time the report of 
the pistol had effectually alarm the whole household. the flash of 
lights from the corridor came into the room, and in another minute, just 
as henry succeed in get the window wide open, and charles dutch 
had made his way on to the balcony, both george bannerworth and mr. 
marchdale enter the chamber, eager to know what had occurred. to their 
eager question henry replied,-- 

"ask me not now;" and then calling to charles, he said,--"remain where 
you are, charles, while i run down to the garden immediately beneath the 
balcony." 

"yes--yes," said charles. 

henry made prodigious haste, and was in the garden immediately below the 
bay window in a wonderful short space of time. he spoke to charles, 
saying,-- 

"will you now descend? i can see nothing here; but we will both make a 
search." 

george and mr. marchdale were both now in the balcony, and they would 
have descended likewise, but henry said,-- 

"do not all leave the house. god only knows, now, situated as we are, 
what might happen." 

"i will remain, then," said george. "i have been sitting up to-night as 
the guard, and, therefore, may as well continue to do so." 

marchdale and charles dutch clamber over the balcony, and easily, 
from its insignificant height, drop into the garden. the night was 
beautiful, and profound still. there was not a breath of air 
sufficient to stir a leaf on a tree, and the very flame of the candle 
which charles had left burning in the balcony burnt clearly and 
steadily, being perfectly unruffled by any wind. 

it cast a sufficient light close to the window to make everything very 
plainly visible, and it was evident at a glance that no object was 
there, although had that figure, which charles shot at, and no doubt 
hit, been flesh and blood, it must have drop immediately below. 

as they look up for a moment after a cursory examination of the 
ground, charles exclaimed,-- 

"look at the window! as the light is now situated, you can see the hole 
made in one of the pane of glass by the passage of the bullet from my 
pistol." 

they did look, and there the clear, round hole, without any starring, 
which a bullet discharge close to a pane of glass will make in it, was 
clearly and plainly discernible. 

"you must have hit him," said henry. 

"one would think so," said charles; "for that was the exact place where 
the figure was." 

"and there is nothing here," add marchdale. "what can we think of 
these events--what resource has the mind against the most dreadful 
supposition concerning them?" 

charles and henry were both silent; in truth, they knew not what to 
think, and the words utter by marchdale were too striking true to 
dispute for a moment. they were lost in wonder. 

"human means against such an appearance as we saw to-night," said 
charles, "are evidently useless." 

"my dear young friend," said marchdale, with much emotion, as he grasp 
henry bannerworth's hand, and the tear stood in his eyes as he did 
so,--"my dear young friend, these constant alarm will kill you. they 
will drive you, and all whose happiness you hold dear, distracted. you 
must control these dreadful feelings, and there is but one chance that i 
can see of get now the better of these." 

"what is that?" 

"by leave this place for ever." 

"alas! am i to be driven from the home of my ancestor from such a cause 
as this? and whither am i to fly? where are we to find a refuge? to 
leave here will be at once to break up the establishment which is now 
held together, certainly upon the sufferance of creditors, but still to 
their advantage, inasmuch as i am do what no one else would do, 
namely, pay away to within the scantiest pittance the whole proceeds 
of the estate that spread around me." 

"heed nothing but an escape from such horrors as seem to be accumulate 
now around you." 

"if i were sure that such a removal would bring with it such a 
corresponding advantage, i might, indeed, be induce to risk all to 
accomplish it." 

"as regards poor dear flora," said mr. marchdale, "i know not what to 
say, or what to think; she has been attack by a vampyre, and after 
this mortal life shall have ended, it is dreadful to think there may be 
a possibility that she, with all her beauty, all her excellence and 
purity of mind, and all those virtue and quality which should make 
her the beloved of all, and which do, indeed, attach all heart towards 
her, should become one of that dreadful tribe of being who cling to 
existence by feeding, in the most dreadful manner, upon the life blood 
of others--oh, it is too dreadful to contemplate! too horrible--too 
horrible!" 

"then wherefore speak of it?" said charles, with some asperity. "now, by 
the great god of heaven, who see all our hearts, i will not give in to 
such a horrible doctrine! i will not believe it; and were death itself 
my portion for my want of faith, i would this moment die in my disbelief 
of anything so truly fearful!" 

"oh, my young friend," add marchdale, "if anything could add to the 
pang which all who love, and admire, and respect flora bannerworth must 
feel at the unhappy condition in which she is placed, it would be the 
noble nature of you, who, under happy auspices, would have been her 
guide through life, and the happy partner of her destiny." 

"as i will be still." 

"may heaven forbid it! we are now among ourselves, and can talk freely 
upon such a subject. mr. charles holland, if you wed, you would look 
forward to being blessed with children--those sweet tie which bind the 
sternest heart to life with so exquisite a bondage. oh, fancy, then, 
for a moment, the mother of your babe coming at the still hour of 
midnight to drain from their vein the very life blood she gave to them. 
to drive you and them mad with the expect horror of such 
visitations--to make your nights hideous--your days but so many hour of 
melancholy retrospection. oh, you know not the world of terror, on the 
awful brink of which you stand, when you talk of making flora 
bannerworth a wife." 

"peace! oh, peace!" said henry. 

"nay, i know my words are unwelcome," continue mr. marchdale. "it 
happens, unfortunately for human nature, that truth and some of our best 
and holiest feelings are too often at variance, and hold a sad 
contest--" 

"i will hear no more of this," cry charles holland.--"i will hear no 
more." 

"i have done," said mr. marchdale. 

"and 'twere well you had not begun." 

"nay, say not so. i have but done what i considered was a solemn duty." 

"under that assumption of do duty--a solemn duty--heedless of the 
feelings and the opinion of others," said charles, sarcastically, "more 
mischief is produced--more heart-burnings and anxiety caused, than by 
any other two cause of such mischievous result combined. i wish to 
hear no more of this." 

"do not be anger with mr. marchdale, charles," said henry. "he can 
have no motive but our welfare in what he says. we should not condemn a 
speaker because his words may not sound pleasant to our ears." 

"by heaven!" said charles, with animation, "i meant not to be illiberal; 
but i will not because i cannot see a man's motive for active 
interference in the affair of others, always be ready, merely on 
account of such ignorance, to jump to a conclusion that they must be 
estimable." 

"to-morrow, i leave this house," said marchdale. 

"leave us?" exclaim henry. 

"ay, for ever." 

"nay, now, mr. marchdale, is this generous?" 

"am i treat generous by one who is your own guest, and towards whom 
i was willing to hold out the honest right hand of friendship?" 

henry turn to charles holland, saying,-- 

"charles, i know your generous nature. say you meant no offence to my 
mother's old friend." 

"if to say i meant no offence," said charles, "is to say i meant no 
insult, i say it freely." 

"enough," cry marchdale; "i am satisfied." 

"but do not," add charles, "draw me any more such pictures as the one 
you have already present to my imagination, i beg of you. from the 
storehouse of my own fancy i can find quite enough to make me wretched, 
if i choose to be so; but again and again do i say i will not allow this 
monstrous superstition to tread me down, like the tread of a giant on a 
broken reed. i will contend against it while i have life to do so." 

"bravely spoken." 

"and when i desert flora bannerworth, may heaven, from that moment, 
desert me!" 

"charles!" cry henry, with emotion, "dear charles, my more than 
friend--brother of my heart--noble charles!" 

"nay, henry, i am not entitle to your praises. i were base indeed to be 
other than that which i purpose to be. come weal or woe--come what may, 
i am the affiance husband of your sister, and she, and she only, can 
break asunder the tie that bind me to her." 




chapter xiii. 

the offer for the hall.--the visit to sir francis varney.--the strange 
resemblance.--a dreadful suggestion. 


[illustration] 

the party made a strict search through every nook and corner of the 
garden, but it prove to be a fruitless one: not the least trace of any 
one could be found. there was only one circumstance, which was ponder 
over deep by them all, and that was that, beneath the window of the 
room in which flora and her mother sat while the brother were on their 
visit to the vault of their ancestors, were visible mark of blood to a 
considerable extent. 

it will be remember that flora had fire a pistol at the spectral 
appearance, and that immediately upon that it had disappeared, after 
utter a sound which might well be construe into a cry of pain from a 
wound. 

that a wound then had been inflict upon some one, the blood beneath 
the window now abundant testified; and when it was discovered, henry 
and charles made a very close examination indeed of the garden, to 
discover what direction the wound figure, be it man or vampyre, had 
taken. 

[illustration] 

but the closest scrutiny did not reveal to them a single spot of blood, 
beyond the space immediately beneath the window;--there the apparition 
seem to have received its wound, and then, by some mysterious means, 
to have disappeared. 

at length, weary with the continue excitement, combine with want of 
sleep, to which they had been subjected, they return to the hall. 

flora, with the exception of the alarm she experienced from the fire 
of the pistol, had met with no disturbance, and that, in order to spare 
her painful reflections, they told her was merely done as a 
precautionary measure, to proclaim to any one who might be lurk in 
the garden that the inmate of the house were ready to defend themselves 
against any aggression. 

whether or not she believe this kind deceit they knew not. she only 
sigh deeply, and wept. the probability is, that she more than 
suspect the vampyre had made another visit, but they forbore to press 
the point; and, leave her with her mother, henry and george went from 
her chamber again--the former to endeavour to seek some repose, as it 
would be his turn to watch on the succeed night, and the latter to 
resume his station in a small room close to flora's chamber, where it 
had been agree watch and ward should be kept by turn while the alarm 
lasted. 

at length, the morning again dawn upon that unhappy family, and to 
none were its beam more welcome. 

the bird sang their pleasant carol beneath the window. the sweet, 
deep-coloured autumnal sun shone upon all object with a golden luster; 
and to look abroad, upon the beam face of nature, no one could for a 
moment suppose, except from sad experience, that there were such things 
as gloom, misery, and crime, upon the earth. 

"and must i," said henry, as he gaze from a window of the hall upon the 
undulate park, the majestic trees, the flowers, the shrubs, and the 
many natural beauty with which the place was full,--"must i be chase 
from this spot, the home of my self and of my kindred, by a 
phantom--must i indeed seek refuge elsewhere, because my own home has 
become hideous?" 

it was indeed a cruel and a painful thought! it was one he yet would 
not, could not be convinced was absolutely necessary. but now the sun 
was shining: it was morning; and the feelings, which found a home in his 
breast amid the darkness, the stillness, and the uncertainty of night, 
were chase away by those glorious beam of sunlight, that fell upon 
hill, valley, and stream, and the thousand sweet sound of life and 
animation that fill that sunny air! 

such a revulsion of feeling was natural enough. many of the distress 
and mental anxiety of night vanish with the night, and those which 
oppress the heart of henry bannerworth were considerably modified. 

he was engaged in these reflection when he heard the sound of the lodge 
bell, and as a visitor was now somewhat rare at this establishment, he 
wait with some anxiety to see to whom he was indebted for so early a 
call. 

in the course of a few minutes, one of the servant came to him with a 
letter in her hand. 

it bore a large handsome seal, and, from its appearance, would seem to 
have come from some personage of consequence. a second glance at it 
shew him the name of "varney" in the corner, and, with some degree of 
vexation, he mutter to himself, 

"another condole epistle from the troublesome neighbour whom i have 
not yet seen." 

"if you please, sir," said the servant who had brought him the letter, 
"as i'm here, and you are here, perhaps you'll have no objection to give 
me what i'm to have for the day and two nights as i've been here, cos i 
can't stay in a family as is so familiar with all sort o' ghostesses: i 
ain't use to such company." 

"what do you mean?" said henry. 

the question was a superfluous one--: too well he knew what the woman 
meant, and the conviction came across his mind strong that no domestic 
would consent to live long in a house which was subject to such dreadful 
visitations. 

"what do i mean!" said the woman,--"why, sir, if it's all the same to 
you, i don't myself come of a wampyre family, and i don't choose to 
remain in a house where there is sich things encouraged. that's what i 
means, sir." 

"what wages are owe to you?" said henry. 

"why, as to wages, i only come here by the day." 

"go, then, and settle with my mother. the soon you leave this house, 
the better." 

"oh, indeed. i'm sure i don't want to stay." 

this woman was one of those who were always armed at all points for a 
row, and she had no notion of conclude any engagement, of any 
character whatever, without some disturbance; therefore, to see henry 
take what she said with such provoking calm was aggravate in the 
extreme; but there was no help for such a source of vexation. she could 
find no other ground of quarrel than what was connected with the 
vampyre, and, as henry would not quarrel with her on such a score, she 
was compel to give it up in despair. 

when henry found himself alone, and free from the annoyance of this 
woman, he turn his attention to the letter he held in his hand, and 
which, from the autograph in the corner, he knew came from his new 
neighbour, sir francis varney, whom, by some chance or another, he had 
never yet seen. 

to his great surprise, he found that the letter contained the following 
words:-- 

dear sir,--"as a neighbour, by purchase of an estate contiguous 
to your own, i am quite sure you have excused, and taken in good 
part, the cordial offer i made to you of friendship and service 
some short time since; but now, in address to you a distinct 
proposition, i trust i shall meet with an indulgent 
consideration, whether such proposition be accordant with your 
view or not. 

"what i have heard from common report induce me to believe that 
bannerworth hall cannot be a desirable residence for yourself, or 
your amiable sister. if i am right in that conjecture, and you 
have any serious thought of leave the place, i would earnest 
recommend you, as one have some experience in such description 
of property, to sell it at once. 

"now, the proposition with which i conclude this letter is, i 
know, of a character to make you doubt the disinterested of 
such advice; but that it is disinterested, nevertheless, is a 
fact of which i can assure my own heart, and of which i beg to 
assure you. i propose, then, should you, upon consideration, 
decide upon such a course of proceeding, to purchase of you the 
hall. i do not ask for a bargain on account of any extraneous 
circumstances which may at the present time depreciate the value 
of the property, but i am willing to give a fair price for it. 
under these circumstances, i trust, sir, that you will give a 
kindly consideration to my offer, and even if you reject it, i 
hope that, as neighbours, we may live long in peace and amity, 
and in the interchange of those good offices which should subsist 
between us. await your reply, 

"believe me to be, dear sir, 

"your very obedient servant, 

"francis varney. 

"to henry bannerworth, esq." 

henry, after have read this most unobjectionable letter through, 
fold it up again, and placed it in his pocket. clasp his hands, 
then, behind his back, a favourite attitude of his when he was in deep 
contemplation, he pace to and fro in the garden for some time in deep 
thought. 

"how strange," he muttered. "it seem that every circumstance combine 
to induce me to leave my old ancestral home. it appear as if everything 
now that happen had that direct tendency. what can be the meaning of 
all this? 'tis very strange--amazingly strange. here arise circumstances 
which are enough to induce any man to leave a particular place. then a 
friend, in whose single-mindedness and judgment i know i can rely, 
advise the step, and immediately upon the back of that come a fair and 
candid offer." 

there was an apparent connexion between all these circumstances which 
much puzzle henry. he walk to and fro for nearly an hour, until he 
heard a hasty footstep approach him, and upon look in the 
direction from whence it came, he saw mr. marchdale. 

"i will seek marchdale's advice," he said, "upon this matter. i will 
hear what he say concerning it." 

"henry," said marchdale, when he came sufficient near to him for 
conversation, "why do you remain here alone?" 

"i have received a communication from our neighbour, sir francis 
varney," said henry. 

"indeed!" 

"it is here. peruse it for yourself, and then tell me, marchdale, 
candidly what you think of it." 

"i suppose," said marchdale, as he open the letter, "it is another 
friendly note of condolence on the state of your domestic affairs, 
which, i grieve to say, from the prattle of domestics, whose tongue 
it is quite impossible to silence, have become food for gossip all over 
the neighbouring village and estates." 

"if anything could add another pang to those i have already been made to 
suffer," said henry, "it would certainly arise from being made the food 
of vulgar gossip. but read the letter, marchdale. you will find its 
contents of a more important character than you anticipate." 

"indeed!" said marchdale, as he ran his eyes eager over the note. 

when he had finished it he glance at henry, who then said,-- 

"well, what is your opinion?" 

"i know not what to say, henry. you know that my own advice to you has 
been to get rid of this place." 

"it has." 

"with the hope that the disagreeable affair connected with it now may 
remain connected with it as a house, and not with you and yours as a 
family." 

"it may be so." 

"there appear to me every likelihood of it." 

"i do not know," said henry, with a shudder. "i must confess, marchdale, 
that to my own perception it seem more probable that the infliction we 
have experienced from the strange visitor, who seem now resolve to 
pester us with visits, will rather attach to a family than to a house. 
the vampyre may follow us." 

"if so, of course the parting with the hall would be a great pity, and 
no gain." 

"none in the least." 

"henry, a thought has struck me." 

"let's hear it, marchdale." 

"it is this:--suppose you were to try the experiment of leave the hall 
without sell it. suppose for one year you were to let it to some one, 
henry." 

"it might be done." 

"ay, and it might, with very great promise and candour, be propose to 
this very gentleman, sir francis varney, to take it for one year, to see 
how he like it before becoming the possessor of it. then if he found 
himself torment by the vampyre, he need not complete the purchase, or 
if you found that the apparition follow you from hence, you might 
yourself return, feeling that perhaps here, in the spot familiar to 
your youth, you might be most happy, even under such circumstances as at 
present oppress you." 

"most happy!" ejaculate henry. 

"perhaps i should not have use that word." 

"i am sure you should not," said henry, "when you speak of me." 

"well--well; let us hope that the time may not be very far distant when 
i may use the term happy, as applied to you, in the most conclusive and 
the strongest manner it can be used." 

"oh," said henry, "i will hope; but do not mock me with it now, 
marchdale, i pray you." 

"heaven forbid that i should mock you!" 

"well--well; i do not believe you are the man to do so to any one. but 
about this affair of the house." 

"distinctly, then, if i were you, i would call upon sir francis varney, 
and make him an offer to become a tenant of the hall for twelve months, 
during which time you could go where you please, and test the fact of 
absence rid you or not rid you of the dreadful visitant who 
make the night here truly hideous." 

"i will speak to my mother, to george, and to my sister of the matter. 
they shall decide." 

mr. marchdale now strove in every possible manner to raise the spirits 
of henry bannerworth, by painting to him the future in far more radiant 
colours than the present, and endeavour to induce a belief in his 
mind that a short period of time might after all replace in his mind, 
and in the mind of those who were naturally so dear to him, all their 
wonted serenity. 

henry, although he felt not much comfort from these kindly efforts, yet 
could feel gratitude to him who made them; and after express such a 
feeling to marchdale, in strong terms, he repair to the house, in 
order to hold a solemn consultation with those whom he felt ought to be 
consult as well as himself as to what steps should be taken with 
regard to the hall. 

the proposition, or rather the suggestion, which had been made by 
marchdale upon the proposition of sir francis varney, was in every 
respect so reasonable and just, that it met, as was to be expected, with 
the concurrence of every member of the family. 

flora's cheek almost resume some of their wonted colour at the mere 
thought now of leave that home to which she had been at one time so 
much attached. 

"yes, dear henry," she said, "let us leave here if you are agreeable so 
to do, and in leave this house, we will believe that we leave behind 
us a world of terror." 

"flora," remark henry, in a tone of slight reproach, "if you were so 
anxious to leave bannerworth hall, why did you not say so before this 
proposition came from other mouths? you know your feelings upon such a 
subject would have been law to me." 

"i knew you were attach to the old house," said flora; "and, besides, 
event have come upon us all with such fearful rapidity, there has 
scarcely been time to think." 

"true--true." 

"and you will leave, henry?" 

"i will call upon sir francis varney myself, and speak to him upon the 
subject." 

a new impetus to existence appear now to come over the whole family, 
at the idea of leave a place which always would be now associate in 
their mind with so much terror. each member of the family felt happier, 
and breathe more freely than before, so that the change which had come 
over them seem almost magical. and charles holland, too, was much 
better pleased, and he whisper to flora,-- 

"dear flora, you will now surely no long talk of driving from you the 
honest heart that love you?" 

"hush, charles, hush!" she said; "meet me an hour hence in the garden, 
and we will talk of this." 

"that hour will seem an age," he said. 

henry, now, have made a determination to see sir francis varney, lost 
no time in putt it into execution. at mr. marchdale's own request, he 
took him with him, as it was desirable to have a third person present in 
the sort of business negotiation which was go on. the estate which 
had been so recently enter upon by the person calling himself sir 
francis varney, and which common report said he had purchased, was a 
small, but complete property, and situated so close to the grounds 
connected with bannerworth hall, that a short walk soon placed henry and 
mr. marchdale before the residence of this gentleman, who had shown so 
kindly a feeling towards the bannerworth family. 

"have you seen sir francis varney?" ask henry of mr. marchdale, as he 
rung the gate-bell. 

"i have not. have you?" 

"no; i never saw him. it is rather awkward our both being absolute 
stranger to his person." 

"we can but send in our names, however; and, from the great vein of 
courtesy that runs through his letter, i have no doubt but we shall 
receive the most gentlemanly reception from him." 

a servant in handsome livery appear at the iron-gates, which open 
upon a lawn in the front of sir francis varney's house, and to this 
domestic henry bannerworth hand his card, on which he had written, in 
pencil, likewise the name of mr. marchdale. 

"if your master," he said, "is within, we shall be glad to see him." 

"sir francis is at home, sir," was the reply, "although not very well. 
if you will be pleased to walk in, i will announce you to him." 

henry and marchdale follow the man into a handsome enough 
reception-room, where they were desire to wait while their name were 
announced. 

"do you know if this gentleman be a baronet," said henry, "or a knight 
merely?" 

"i really do not; i never saw him in my life, or heard of him before he 
came into this neighbourhood." 

"and i have been too much occupy with the painful occurrence of this 
hall to know anything of our neighbours. i dare say mr. chillingworth, 
if we had thought to ask him, would have known something concerning 
him." 

"no doubt." 

this brief colloquy was put an end to by the servant, who said,-- 

"my master, gentlemen, is not very well; but he beg me to present his 
best compliments, and to say he is much gratify with your visit, and 
will be happy to see you in his study." 

henry and marchdale follow the man up a flight of stone stairs, and 
then they were conduct through a large apartment into a small one. 
there was very little light in this small room; but at the moment of 
their entrance a tall man, who was seated, rose, and, touching the 
spring of a blind that was to the window, it was up in a moment, 
admit a broad glare of light. a cry of surprise, mingle with 
terror, came from henry bannerworth's lip. _the original of the portrait 
on the panel stood before him!_ there was the lofty stature, the long, 
sallow face, the slightly project teeth, the dark, lustrous, although 
somewhat sombre eyes; the expression of the features--all were alike. 

"are you unwell, sir?" said sir francis varney, in soft, mellow accents, 
as he hand a chair to the bewilder henry. 

"god of heaven!" said henry; "how like!" 

"you seem surprised, sir. have you ever seen me before?" 

sir francis drew himself up to his full height, and cast a strange 
glance upon henry, whose eyes were rivet upon his face, as if with a 
species of fascination which he could not resist. 

"marchdale," henry gasped; "marchdale, my friend, marchdale. i--i am 
surely mad." 

"hush! be calm," whisper marchdale. 

"calm--calm--can you not see? marchdale, is this a dream? 
look--look--oh! look." 

"for god's sake, henry, compose yourself." 

"is your friend often thus?" said sir francis varney, with the same 
mellifluous tone which seem habitual to him. 

"no, sir, he is not; but recent circumstances have shatter his nerves; 
and, to tell the truth, you bear so strong a resemblance to an old 
portrait, in his house, that i do not wonder so much as i otherwise 
should at his agitation." 

"indeed." 

"a resemblance!" said henry; "a resemblance! god of heaven! it is the 
face itself." 

"you much surprise me," said sir francis. 

[illustration] 

henry sunk into the chair which was near him, and he tremble violently. 
the rush of painful thought and conjecture that came through his mind 
was enough to make any one tremble. "is this the vampyre?" was the 
horrible question that seem impress upon his very brain, in letters 
of flame. "is this the vampyre?" 

"are you better, sir?" said sir francis varney, in his bland, musical 
voice. "shall i order any refreshment for you?" 

"no--no," gasp henry; "for the love of truth tell me! is--is your name 
really varney!" 

"sir?" 

"have you no other name to which, perhaps, a better title you could 
urge?" 

"mr. bannerworth, i can assure you that i am too proud of the name of 
the family to which i belong to exchange it for any other, be it what it 
may." 

"how wonderful like!" 

"i grieve to see you so much distressed. mr. bannerworth. i presume ill 
health has thus shatter your nerves?" 

"no; ill health has not done the work. i know not what to say, sir 
francis varney, to you; but recent event in my family have made the 
sight of you full of horrible conjectures." 

"what mean you, sir?" 

"you know, from common report, that we have had a fearful visitor at our 
house." 

"a vampyre, i have heard," said sir francis varney, with a bland, and 
almost beautiful smile, which display his white glisten teeth to 
perfection. 

"yes; a vampyre, and--and--" 

"i pray you go on, sir; you surely are far above the vulgar superstition 
of believe in such matters?" 

"my judgment is assail in too many ways and shape for it to hold out 
probably as it ought to do against so hideous a belief, but never was it 
so much bewilder as now." 

"why so?" 

"because--" 

"nay, henry," whisper mr. marchdale, "it is scarcely civil to tell sir 
francis to his face, that he resemble a vampyre." 

"i must, i must." 

"pray, sir," interrupt varney to marchdale, "permit mr. bannerworth to 
speak here freely. there is nothing in the whole world i so much admire 
as candour." 

"then you so much resemble the vampyre," add henry, "that--that i know 
not what to think." 

"is it possible?" said varney. 

"it is a damning fact." 

"well, it's unfortunate for me, i presume? ah!" 

varney gave a twinge of pain, as if some sudden bodily ailment had 
attack him severely. 

"you are unwell, sir?" said marchdale. 

"no, no--no," he said; "i--hurt my arm, and happen accidental to 
touch the arm of this chair with it." 

"a hurt?" said henry. 

"yes, mr. bannerworth." 

"a--a wound?" 

"yes, a wound, but not much more than skin deep. in fact, little beyond 
an abrasion of the skin." 

"may i inquire how you came by it?" 

"oh, yes. a slight fall." 

"indeed." 

"remarkable, is it not? very remarkable. we never know a moment when, 
from same most trifling cause, we may receive really some serious bodily 
harm. how true it is, mr. bannerworth, that in the midst of life we are 
in death." 

"and equally true, perhaps," said henry, "that in the midst of death 
there may be found a horrible life." 

"well, i should not wonder. there are really so many strange things in 
this world, that i have left off wonder at anything now." 

"there are strange things," said henry. "you wish to purchase of me the 
hall, sir?" 

"if you wish to sell." 

"you--you are perhaps attach to the place? perhaps you recollect it, 
sir, long ago?" 

"not very long," smile sir francis varney. "it seem a nice comfortable 
old house; and the grounds, too, appear to be amazing well wooded, 
which, to one of rather a romantic temperament like myself, is always an 
additional charm to a place. i was extremely pleased with it the first 
time i beheld it, and a desire to call myself the owner of it took 
possession of my mind. the scenery is remarkable for its beauty, and, 
from what i have seen of it, it is rarely to be excelled. no doubt you 
are greatly attach to it." 

"it has been my home from infancy," return henry, "and being also the 
residence of my ancestor for centuries, it is natural that i should be 
so." 

"true--true." 

"the house, no doubt, has suffer much," said henry, "within the last 
hundred years." 

"no doubt it has. a hundred years is a tolerable long space of time, you 
know." 

"it is, indeed. oh, how any human life which is spun out to such an 
extent, must lose its charms, by lose all its fondest and dearest 
associations." 

"ah, how true," said sir francis varney. he had some minutes previous 
touched a bell, and at this moment a servant brought in on a tray some 
wine and refreshments. 




chapter xiv. 

henry's agreement with sir francis varney.--the sudden arrival at the 
hall.--flora's alarm. 


[illustration] 

on the tray which the servant brought into the room, were refreshments 
of different kinds, including wine, and after wave his hand for the 
domestic to retire, sir francis varney said,-- 

"you will be better, mr. bannerworth, for a glass of wine after your 
walk, and you too, sir. i am ashamed to say, i have quite forgotten your 
name." 

"marchdale." 

"mr. marchdale. ay, marchdale. pray, sir, help yourself." 

"you take nothing yourself?" said henry. 

"i am under a strict regimen," reply varney. "the simplest diet alone 
do for me, and i have accustomed myself to long abstinence." 

"he will not eat or drink," mutter henry, abstractedly. 

"will you sell me the hall?" said sir francis varney. 

henry look in his face again, from which he had only momentarily 
withdrawn his eyes, and he was then more struck than ever with the 
resemblance between him and the portrait on the panel of what had been 
flora's chamber. what made that resemblance, too, one about which there 
could scarcely be two opinions, was the mark or cicatrix of a wound in 
the forehead, which the painter had slightly indent in the portrait, 
but which was much more plainly visible on the forehead of sir francis 
varney. now that henry observe this distinctive mark, which he had not 
done before, he could feel no doubt, and a sickening sensation came over 
him at the thought that he was actually now in the presence of one of 
those terrible creatures, vampyres. 

"you do not drink," said varney. "most young men are not so modest with 
a decanter of unimpeachable wine before them. i pray you help yourself." 

"i cannot." 

henry rose as he spoke, and turning to marchdale, he said, in 
addition,-- 

"will you come away?" 

"if you please," said marchdale, rising. 

"but you have not, my dear sir," said varney, "given me yet any answer 
about the hall?" 

"i cannot yet," answer henry, "i will think. my present impression is, 
to let you have it on whatever terms you may yourself propose, always 
provided you consent to one of mine." 

"name it." 

"that you never show yourself in my family." 

"how very unkind. i understand you have a charming sister, young, 
beautiful, and accomplished. shall i confess, now, that i had hope of 
making myself agreeable to her?" 

"you make yourself agreeable to her? the sight of you would blast her 
for ever, and drive her to madness." 

"am i so hideous?" 

"no, but--you are--" 

"what am i?" 

"hush, henry, hush," cry marchdale. "remember you are in this 
gentleman's house." 

"true, true. why do he tempt me to say these dreadful things? i do not 
want to say them." 

"come away, then--come away at once. sir francis varney, my friend, mr. 
bannerworth, will think over your offer, and let you know. i think you 
may consider that your wish to become the purchaser of the hall will be 
comply with." 

"i wish to have it," said varney, "and i can only say, that if i am 
master of it, i shall be very happy to see any of the family on a visit 
at any time." 

"a visit!" said henry, with a shudder. "a visit to the tomb were far 
more desirable. farewell, sir." 

"adieu," said sir francis varney, and he made one of the most elegant 
bow in the world, while there came over his face a peculiarity of 
expression that was strange, if not painful, to contemplate. in another 
minute henry and marchdale were clear of the house, and with feelings of 
bewilder and horror, which beggar all description, poor henry 
allow himself to be led by the arm by marchdale to some distance, 
without utter a word. when he did speak, he said,-- 

"marchdale, it would be charity of some one to kill me." 

"to kill you!" 

"yes, for i am certain otherwise that i must go mad." 

"nay, nay; rouse yourself." 

"this man, varney, is a vampyre." 

"hush! hush!" 

"i tell you, marchdale," cry henry, in a wild, excited manner, "he is 
a vampyre. he is the dreadful being who visit flora at the still hour 
of midnight, and drain the life-blood from her veins. he is a vampyre. 
there are such things. i cannot doubt now. oh, god, i wish now that your 
lightning would blast me, as here i stand, for over into annihilation, 
for i am go mad to be compel to feel that such horrors can really 
have existence." 

"henry--henry." 

"nay, talk not to me. what can i do? shall i kill him? is it not a 
sacred duty to destroy such a thing? oh, horror--horror. he must be 
killed--destroyed--burnt, and the very dust to which he is consume must 
be scattered to the wind of heaven. it would be a deed well done, 
marchdale." 

"hush! hush! these words are dangerous." 

"i care not." 

"what if they were overheard now by unfriend ears? what might not be 
the uncomfortable results? i pray you be more cautious what you say of 
this strange man." 

"i must destroy him." 

"and wherefore?" 

"can you ask? is he not a vampyre?" 

"yes; but reflect, henry, for a moment upon the length to which you 
might carry out so dangerous an argument. it is said that vampyre are 
made by vampyre suck the blood of those who, but for that 
circumstance, would have die and gone to decay in the tomb along with 
ordinary mortals; but that being so attack during life by a vampyre, 
they themselves, after death, become such." 

"well--well, what is that to me?" 

"have you forgotten flora?" 

a cry of despair came from poor henry's lips, and in a moment he seem 
completely, mental and physically, prostrated. 

"god of heaven!" he moaned, "i had forgotten her!" 

"i thought you had." 

"oh, if the sacrifice of my own life would suffice to put an end to all 
this accumulate horror, how gladly would i lay it down. ay, in any 
way--in any way. no mode of death should appal me. no amount of pain 
make me shrink. i could smile then upon the destroyer, and say, 
'welcome--welcome--most welcome.'" 

"rather, henry, seek to live for those whom you love than die for them. 
your death would leave them desolate. in life you may ward off many a 
blow of fate from them." 

"i may endeavour so to do." 

"consider that flora may be wholly dependent upon such kindness as you 
may be able to bestow upon her." 

"charles cling to her." 

"humph!" 

"you do not doubt him?" 

"my dear friend, henry bannerworth, although i am not an old man, yet i 
am so much old than you that i have seen a great deal of the world, 
and am, perhaps, far better able to come to accurate judgment with 
regard to individuals." 

"no doubt--no doubt; but yet--" 

"nay, hear me out. such judgments, found upon experience, when utter 
have all the character of prophecy about them. i, therefore, now 
prophecy to you that charles dutch will yet be so stung with horror at 
the circumstance of a vampyre visiting flora, that he will never make 
her his wife." 

"marchdale, i differ from you most completely," said henry. "i know that 
charles dutch is the very soul of honour." 

"i cannot argue the matter with you. it has not become a thing of fact. 
i have only sincerely to hope that i am wrong." 

"you are, you may depend, entire wrong. i cannot be deceive in 
charles. from you such words produce no effect but one of regret that 
you should so much err in your estimate of any one. from any one but 
yourself they would have produce in me a feeling of anger i might have 
found it difficult to smother." 

"it has often been my misfortune through life," said mr. marchdale, 
sadly, "to give the greatest offence where i feel the truest friendship, 
because it is in such quarters that i am always tempt to speak too 
freely." 

"nay, no offence," said henry. "i am distracted, and scarcely know what 
i say. marchdale, i know you are my sincere friend--but, as i tell you, 
i am nearly mad." 

"my dear henry, be calmer. consider upon what is to be said concerning 
this interview at home." 

"ay; that is a consideration." 

"i should not think it advisable to mention the disagreeable fact, that 
in your neighbour you think you have found out the nocturnal disturb 
of your family." 

"no--no." 

"i would say nothing of it. it is not at all probable that, after what 
you have said to him this sir francis varney, or whatever his real name 
may be will obtrude himself upon you." 

"if he should he die." 

"he will, perhaps, consider that such a step would be dangerous to him." 

"it would be fatal, so help me. however, and then would i take especial 
care that no power of resuscitate should ever enable that man again to 
walk the earth." 

"they say that only way of destroy a vampyre is to fix him to the 
earth with a stake, so that he cannot move, and then, of course, 
decompose will take its course, as in ordinary cases." 

"fire would consume him, and be a quick process," said henry. "but 
these are fearful reflections, and, for the present, we will not pursue 
them. now to play the hypocrite, and endeavour to look compose and 
serene to my mother, and to flora while my heart is breaking." 

the two friends had by this time reach the hall, and leave his 
friend marchdale, henry bannerworth, with feelings of the most 
unenviable description, slow made his way to the apartment occupy by 
his mother and sister. 

[illustration] 




chapter xv. 

the old admiral and his servant.--the communication from the landlord of 
the nelson's arms. 


[illustration] 

while those matter of most grave and serious import were go on at 
the hall, while each day, and almost each hour in each day, was 
produce more and more conclusive evidence upon a matter which at first 
had seem too monstrous to be at all credited, it may well be supposed 
what a wonderful sensation was produce among the gossip-mongers of the 
neighbourhood by the exaggerate report that had reach them. 

the servants, who had left the hall on no other account, as they 
declared, but sheer fright at the awful visit of the vampyre, spread 
the news far and wide, so that in the adjoin village and 
market-towns the vampyre of bannerworth hall became quite a staple 
article of conversation. 

such a positive godsend for the lovers of the marvellous had not 
appear in the country side within the memory of that sapient 
individual--the oldest inhabitant. 

and, moreover, there was one thing which stagger some people of better 
education and mature judgments, and that was, that the more they took 
pains to inquire into the matter, in order, if possible, to put an end 
to what they considered a gross lie from the commencement, the more 
evidence they found to stagger their own senses upon the subject. 

everywhere then, in every house, public as well as private, something 
was being continual said of the vampyre. nursery maid began to think 
a vampyre vastly superior to "old scratch and old bogie" as a means of 
terrify their infant charge into quietness, if not to sleep, until 
they themselves became too much afraid upon the subject to mention it. 

but nowhere was gossip carry on upon the subject with more 
systematic fervour than at an inn call the nelson's arms, which was in 
the high street of the nearest market town to the hall. 

there, it seem as if the lovers of the horrible made a point of 
holding their head quarters, and so thirsty did the numerous discussion 
make the guests, that the landlord was heard to declare that he, from 
his heart, really considered a vampyre as very nearly equal to a 
contest election. 

it was towards evening of the same day that marchdale and henry made 
their visit to sir francis varney, that a postchaise drew up to the inn 
we have mentioned. in the vehicle were two person of exceedingly 
dissimilar appearance and general aspect. 

one of these people was a man who seem fast verge upon seventy years 
of age, although, from his still ruddy and embrowne complexion and 
stentorian voice, it was quite evident he intended yet to keep time at 
arm's-length for many years to come. 

he was attire in ample and expensive clothing, but every article had a 
naval animus about it, if we may be allow such an expression with 
regard to clothing. on his buttons was an anchor, and the general 
assortment and colour of the clothing as nearly assimilate as possible 
to the undress naval uniform of an officer of high rank some fifty or 
sixty years ago. 

his companion was a younger man, and about his appearance there was no 
secret at all. he was a genuine sailor, and he wore the shore costume of 
one. he was hearty-looking, and well dressed, and evidently well fed. 

as the chaise drove up to the door of the inn, this man made an 
observation to the other to the following effect,-- 

"a-hoy!" 

"well, you lubber, what now?" cry the other. 

"they call this the nelson's arms; and you know, shiver me, that for the 
best half of his life he had but one." 

"d--n you!" was the only rejoinder he got for this observation; but, 
with that, he seem very well satisfied. 

"heave to!" he then shout to the postilion, who was about to drive the 
chaise into the yard. "heave to, you lubber son of a gun! we don't 
want to go into dock." 

"ah!" said the old man, "let's get out, jack. this is the port; and, do 
you hear, and be cursed to you, let's have no swearing, d--n you, nor 
bad language, you lazy swab." 

"aye, aye," cry jack; "i've not been ashore now a matter o' ten years, 
and not larnt a little shore-going politeness, admiral, i ain't been 
your _walley de sham_ without larn a little about land reckonings. 
nobody would take me for a sailor now, i'm thinking, admiral." 

"hold your noise!" 

"aye, aye, sir." 

jack, as he was called, bundle out of the chaise when the door was 
opened, with a movement so close resemble what would have ensue had 
he been drag out by the collar, that one was tempt almost to 
believe that such a feat must have been accomplished all at once by some 
invisible agency. 

he then assist the old gentleman to alight, and the landlord of the 
inn commence the usual profusion of bow with which a passenger by a 
postchaise is usually welcome in preference to one by a stage coach. 

"be quiet, will you!" shout the admiral, for such indeed he was. "be 
quiet." 

"best accommodation, sir--good wine--well-aired beds--good 
attendance--fine air--" 

"belay there," said jack; and he gave the landlord what no doubt he 
considered a gentle admonition, but which consist of such a dig in the 
ribs, that he made as many evolution as the clown in a pantomime when 
he vociferate hot codlings. 

"now, jack, where's the sailing instructions?" said his master. 

"here, sir, in the locker," said jack, as he took from his pocket a 
letter, which he hand to the admiral. 

"won't you step in, sir?" said the landlord, who had begun now to 
recover a little from the dig in the ribs. 

"what's the use of coming into port and pay harbour dues, and all 
that sort of thing, till we know if it's the right, you lubber, eh?" 

"no; oh, dear me, sir, of course--god bless me, what can the old 
gentleman mean?" 

the admiral open the letter, and read:-- 

"if you stop at the nelson's aim at uxotter, you will hear of 
me, and i can be sent for, when i will tell you more. 

"yours, very obedient and humbly, 

"josiah crinkles." 

"who the deuce is he?" 

"this is uxotter, sir," said the landlord; "and here you are, sir, at 
the nelson's arms. good beds--good wine--good--" 

"silence!" 

"yes, sir--oh, of course" 

"who the devil is josiah crinkles?" 

"ha! ha! ha! ha! make me laugh, sir. who the devil indeed! they do say 
the devil and lawyers, sir, know something of each other--makes me 
smile." 

"i'll make you smile on the other side of that d----d great hatchway of 
a mouth of yours in a minute. who is crinkles?" 

"oh, mr. crinkles, sir, everybody knows, most respectable attorney, sir, 
indeed, highly respectable man, sir." 

"a lawyer?" 

"yes, sir, a lawyer." 

"well, i'm d----d!" 

jack gave a long whistle, and both master and man look at each other 
aghast. 

"now, hang me!" cry the admiral, "if ever i was so taken in in all my 
life." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. 

"to come a hundred and seventy mile see a d----d swab of a rascally 
lawyer." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"i'll smash him--jack!" 

"yer honour?" 

"get into the chaise again." 

"well, but where's master charles? lawyers, in course, sir, is all 
blessed rogues; but, howsomdever, he may have for once in his life this 
here one of 'em have told us of the right channel, and if so be as he 
has, don't be the yankee to leave him among the pirates. i'm ashamed on 
you." 

"you infernal scoundrel; how dare you preach to me in such a way, you 
lubber rascal?" 

"cos you desarve it." 

"mutiny--mutiny--by jove! jack, i'll have you put in irons--you're a 
scoundrel, and no seaman." 

"no seaman!--no seaman!" 

"not a bit of one." 

"very good. it's time, then, as i was off the purser's books. good bye 
to you; i only hope as you may get a better seaman to stick to you and 
be your _walley de sham_ nor jack pringle, that's all the harm i wish 
you. you didn't call me no seaman in the bay of corfu, when the bullet 
were scuttle our nobs." 

"jack, you rascal, give us your fin. come here, you d----d villain. 
you'll leave me, will you?" 

"not if i know it." 

"come in, then" 

"don't tell me i'm no seaman. call me a wagabone if you like, but don't 
hurt my feelings. there i'm as tender as a baby, i am.--don't do it." 

"confound you, who is do it?" 

"the devil." 

"who is?" 

"don't, then." 

thus wrangling, they enter the inn, to the great amusement of several 
bystanders, who had collected to hear the altercation between them. 

"would you like a private room, sir?" said the landlord. 

"what's that to you?" said jack. 

"hold your noise, will you?" cry his master. "yes, i should like a 
private room, and some grog." 

"strong as the devil!" put in jack. 

"yes, sir-yes, sir. good wines--good beds--good--" 

"you said all that before, you know," remark jack, as he bestow upon 
the landlord another terrific dig in the ribs. 

"hilloa!" cry the admiral, "you can send for that infernal lawyer, 
mister landlord." 

"mr. crinkles, sir?" 

"yes, yes." 

"who may i have the honour to say, sir, wants to see him?" 

"admiral bell." 

"certainly, admiral, certainly. you'll find him a very conversible, 
nice, gentlemanly little man, sir." 

"and tell him as jack pringle is here, too," cry the seaman. 

"oh, yes, yes--of course," said the landlord, who was in such a state of 
confusion from the digs in the rib he had received and the noise his 
guest had already made in his house, that, had he been sudden put 
upon his oath, he would scarcely have like to say which was the master 
and which was the man. 

"the idea now, jack," said the admiral, "of coming all this way to see a 
lawyer." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"if he'd said he was a lawyer, we would have known what to do. but it's 
a take in, jack." 

"so i think. howsomdever, we'll serve him out when we catch him, you 
know." 

"good--so we will." 

"and, then, again, he may know something about master charles, sir, you 
know. lord love him, don't you remember when he came aboard to see you 
once at portsmouth?" 

"ah! i do, indeed." 

"and how he said he hate the french, and quite a baby, too. what 
perseverance and sense. 'uncle,' say he to you, 'when i'm a big man, 
i'll go in a ship, and fight all the france in a heap,' say he. 'and 
beat 'em, my boy, too,' say you; cos you thought he'd forgot that; and 
then he says, 'what's the use of saying that, stupid?--don't we always 
beat 'em?'" 

the admiral laugh and rub his hands, as he cry aloud,-- 

"i remember, jack--i remember him. i was stupid to make such a remark." 

"i know you was--a d----d old fool i thought you." 

"come, come. hilloa, there!" 

"well, then, what do you call me no seaman for?" 

"why, jack, you bear malice like a marine." 

"there you go again. goodbye. do you remember when we were yard arm to 
yard arm with those two yankee frigates, and took 'em both! you didn't 
call me a marine then, when the scupper were running with blood. was i 
a seaman then?" 

"you were, jack--you were; and you save my life." 

"i didn't." 

"you did." 

"i say i didn't--it was a marlin-spike." 

"but i say you did, you rascally scoundrel.--i say you did, and i won't 
be contradict in my own ship." 

"call this your ship?" 

"no, d--n it--i--" 

"mr. crinkles," said the landlord, fling the door wide open, and so 
at once putt an end to the discussion which always apparently had a 
tendency to wax exceedingly warm. 

"the shark, by g--d!" said jack. 

a little, neat dress man made his appearance, and advanced rather 
timid into the room. perhaps he had heard from the landlord that the 
party who had sent for him were of rather a violent sort. 

"so you are crinkles, are you?" cry the admiral. "sit down, though you 
are a lawyer." 

"thank you, sir. i am an attorney, certainly, and my name as certainly 
is crinkles." 

"look at that." 

the admiral placed the letter in the little lawyer's hands, who said,-- 

"am i to read it?" 

"yes, to be sure." 

"aloud?" 

"read it to the devil, if you like, in a pig's whisper, or a west india 
hurricane." 

"oh, very good, sir. i--i am willing to be agreeable, so i'll read it 
aloud, if it's all the same to you." 

he then open the letter, and read as follows:-- 

"to admiral bell. 

"admiral,--being, from various circumstances, aware that you take 
a warm and a praiseworthy interest in your nephew, charles 
holland, i venture to write to you concerning a matter in which 
your immediate and active co-operation with other may rescue him 
from a condition which will prove, if allow to continue, very 
much to his detriment, and ultimate unhappiness. 

"you are, then, hereby informed, that he, charles holland, has, 
much early than he ought to have done, return to england, and 
that the object of his return is to contract a marriage into a 
family in every way objectionable, and with a girl who is highly 
objectionable. 

"you, admiral, are his nearest and almost his only relative in 
the world; you are the guardian of his property, and, therefore, 
it become a duty on your part to interfere to save him from the 
ruinous consequence of a marriage, which is sure to bring ruin 
and distress upon himself and all who take an interest in his 
welfare. 

"the family he wish to marry into is name bannerworth, and the 
young lady's name is flora bannerworth. when, however, i inform 
you that a vampyre is in that family, and that if he marry into 
it, he marry a vampyre, and will have vampyre for children, i 
trust i have said enough to warn you upon the subject, and to 
induce you to lose no time in repair to the spot. 

"if you stop at the nelson's arms at uxotter, you will hear of 
me. i can be sent for, when i will tell you more. 

"yours, very obedient and humbly, 

"josiah crinkles." 

"p.s. i enclose you dr. johnson's definition of a vampyre, which 
is as follows: 

"vampyre (a germany blood-sucker)--by which you perceive how many 
vampyres, from time immemorial, must have been well entertain 
at the expense of john bull, at the court of st. james, where no 
thing hardly is to be met with but germany blood-suckers." 

[illustration] 

* * * * * 

the lawyer cease to read, and the amaze look with which he glance at 
the face of admiral bell would, under any other circumstances, have much 
amuse him. his mind, however, was by far too much engross with a 
consideration of the danger of charles holland, his nephew, to be amuse 
at anything; so, when he found that the little lawyer said nothing, he 
bellow out,-- 

"well, sir?" 

"we--we--well," said the attorney. 

"i've sent for you, and here you are, and here i am, and here's jack 
pringle. what have you got to say?" 

"just this much," said mr. crinkles, recover himself a little, "just 
this much, sir, that i never saw that letter before in all my life." 

"you--never--saw--it?" 

"never." 

"didn't you write it?" 

"on my solemn word of honour, sir, i did not." 

jack pringle whistled, and the admiral look puzzled. like the admiral 
in the song, too, he "grew paler," and then mr. crinkle added,-- 

"who has forge my name to a letter such as this, i cannot imagine. as 
for writing to you, sir, i never heard of your existence, except 
publicly, as one of those gallant officer who have spent a long life in 
nobly fight their country's battles, and who are entitle to the 
admiration and the applause of every englishman." 

jack and the admiral look at each other in amazement, and then the 
latter exclaimed,-- 

"what! this from a lawyer?" 

"a lawyer, sir," said crinkles, "may know how to appreciate the deed of 
gallant men, although he may not be able to imitate them. that letter, 
sir, is a forgery, and i now leave you, only much gratify at the 
incident which has procure me the honour of an interview with a 
gentleman, whose name will live in the history of his country. good day, 
sir! good day!" 

"no! i'm d----d if you go like that," said jack, as he sprang to the 
door, and put his back against it. "you shall take a glass with me in 
honour of the wooden wall of old england, d----e, if you was twenty 
lawyers." 

"that's right, jack," said the admiral. "come, mr. crinkles, i'll think, 
for your sake, there may be two decent lawyer in the world, and you one 
of them. we must have a bottle of the best wine the ship--i mean the 
house--can afford together." 

"if it is your command, admiral, i obey with pleasure," said the 
attorney; "and although i assure you, on my honour, i did not write that 
letter, yet some of the matter mention in it are so generally 
notorious here, that i can afford you information concerning them." 

"can you?" 

"i regret to say i can, for i respect the parties." 

"sit down, then--sit down. jack, run to the steward's room and get the 
wine. we will go into it now starboard and larboard. who the deuce could 
have written that letter?" 

"i have not the least idea, sir." 

"well--well, never mind; it has brought me here, that's something, so i 
won't grumble much at it. i didn't know my nephew was in england, and i 
dare say he didn't know i was; but here we both are, and i won't rest 
till i've seen him, and ascertain how the what's-its-name--" 

"the vampyre." 

"ah! the vampyre." 

"shiver my timbers!" said jack pringle, who now brought in some wine 
much against the remonstrance of the waiter of the establishment, who 
considered that he was tread upon their vest interests by so 
doing.--"shiver my timbers, if i know what a _wamphigher_ is, unless 
he's some distant relation to davy jones!" 

"hold your ignorant tongue," said the admiral; "nobody wants you to make 
a remark, you great lubber!" 

"very good," said jack, and he sat down the wine on the table, and then 
retired to the other end of the room, remark to himself that he was 
not call a great lubber on a certain occasion, when bullet were 
scuttle their nobs, and they were yard arm and yard arm with god know 
who. 

"now, mister lawyer," said admiral bell, who had about him a large share 
of the habit of a rough sailor. "now, mister lawyer, here is a glass 
first to our better acquaintance, for d----e, if i don't like you!" 

"you are very good, sir." 

"not at all. there was a time, when i'd just as soon have thought of 
ask a young shark to supper with me in my own cabin as a lawyer, but 
i begin to see that there may be such a thing as a decent, good sort of 
a fellow seen in the law; so here's good luck to you, and you shall 
never want a friend or a bottle while admiral bell has a shot in the 
locker." 

"gammon," said jack. 

"d--n you, what do you mean by that?" roar the admiral, in a furious 
tone. 

"i wasn't speak to you," shout jack, about two octave higher. 
"it's two boys in the street as is pretend they're a go to fight, 
and i know d----d well they won't." 

"hold your noise." 

"i'm going. i wasn't told to hold my noise, when our nob were being 
scuttle off beyrout." 

"never mind him, mister lawyer," add the admiral. "he don't know what 
he's talk about. never mind him. you go on and tell me all you know 
about the--the--" 

"the vampyre!" 

"ah! i always forget the name of strange fish. i suppose, after all, 
it's something of the mermaid order?" 

"that i cannot say, sir; but certainly the story, in all its painful 
particulars, has made a great sensation all over the country." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, sir. you shall hear how it occurred. it appear that one night 
miss flora bannersworth, a young lady of great beauty, and respect and 
admire by all who knew her was visit by a strange being who came in 
at the window." 

"my eye," said jack, "it waren't me, i wish it had a been." 

"so petrify by fear was she, that she had only time to creep half out 
of the bed, and to utter one cry of alarm, when the strange visitor 
seize her in his grasp." 

"d--n my pig tail," said jack, "what a squall there must have been, to 
be sure." 

"do you see this bottle?" roar the admiral. 

"to be sure, i does; i think as it's time i seed another." 

"you scoundrel, i'll make you feel it against that d----d stupid head of 
yours, if you interrupt this gentleman again." 

"don't be violent." 

"well, as i was saying," continue the attorney, "she did, by great good 
fortune, manage to scream, which had the effect of alarm the whole 
house. the door of her chamber, which was fast, was broken open." 

"yes, yes--" 

"ah," cry jack. 

"you may imagine the horror and the consternation of those who enter 
the room to find her in the grasp of a fiend-like figure, whose teeth 
were fasten on her neck, and who was actually drain her vein of 
blood." 

"the devil!" 

"before any one could lay hand sufficient upon the figure to detain 
it, it had flee precipitate from its dreadful repast. shot were fire 
after it in vain." 

"and they let it go?" 

"they follow it, i understand, as well as they were able, and saw it 
scale the garden wall of the premises; there it escaped, leaving, as you 
may well imagine, on all their minds, a sensation of horror difficult to 
describe." 

"well, i never did hear anything the equal of that. jack, what do you 
think of it?" 

"i haven't begun to think, yet," said jack. 

"but what about my nephew, charles?" add the admiral. 

"of him i know nothing." 

"nothing?" 

"not a word, admiral. i was not aware you had a nephew, or that any 
gentleman bearing that, or any other relationship to you, had any sort 
of connexion with these mysterious and most unaccountable circumstances. 
i tell you all i have gather from common report about this vampyre 
business. further i know not, i assure you." 

"well, a man can't tell what he don't know. it puzzle me to think who 
could possibly have written me this letter." 

"that i am completely at a loss to imagine," said crinkles. "i assure 
you, my gallant sir, that i am much hurt at the circumstance of any one 
use my name in such a way. but, nevertheless, as you are here, permit 
me to say, that it will be my pride, my pleasure, and the boast of the 
remainder of my existence, to be of some service to so gallant a 
defend of my country, and one whose name, along with the memory of his 
deeds, is engrave upon the heart of every briton." 

"quite eke to a book, he talks," said jack. "i never could read one 
myself, on account o' not knowing how, but i've heard 'em read, and 
that's just the sort o' incomprehensible gammon." 

"we don't want any of your ignorant remarks," said the admiral, "so you 
be quiet." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"now, mister lawyer, you are an honest fellow, and an honest fellow is 
generally a sensible fellow." 

"sir, i thank you." 

"if so be as what this letter say is true, my nephew charles has got a 
liking for this girl, who has had her neck bitten by a vampyre, you 
see." 

"i perceive, sir." 

"now what would you do?" 

"one of the most difficult, as well, perhaps, as one of the most 
ungracious of tasks," said the attorney, "is to interfere with family 
affairs. the cold and steady eye of reason generally see things in such 
very different lights to what they appear to those whose feelings and 
whose affection are much compromise in their results." 

"very true. go on." 

"taking, my dear sir, what in my humble judgment appear to be a 
reasonable view of this subject, i should say it would be a dreadful 
thing for your nephew to marry into a family any member of which was 
liable to the visitation of a vampyre." 

"it wouldn't be pleasant." 

"the young lady might have children." 

"oh, lots," cry jack. 

"hold your noise, jack." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"and she might herself actually, when after death she became a vampyre, 
come and feed on her own children." 

"become a vampyre! what, is she go to be a vampyre too?" 

"my dear sir, don't you know that it is a remarkable fact, as regards 
the physiology of vampyres, that whoever is bitten by one of those 
dreadful beings, become a vampyre?" 

"the devil!" 

"it is a fact, sir." 

"whew!" whistle jack; "she might bite us all, and we should be a whole 
ship's crew o' _wamphighers_. there would be a confounded go!" 

"it's not pleasant," said the admiral, as he rose from his chair, and 
pace to and fro in the room, "it's not pleasant. hang me up at my own 
yard-arm if it is." 

"who said it was?" cry jack. 

"who ask you, you brute?" 

"well, sir," add mr. crinkles, "i have given you all the information i 
can; and i can only repeat what i before had the honour of saying more 
at large, namely, that i am your humble servant to command, and that i 
shall be happy to attend upon you at any time." 

"thank ye--thank ye, mr.--a--a--" 

"crinkles." 

"ah, crinkles. you shall hear from me again, sir, shortly. now that i am 
down here, i will see to the very bottom of this affair, were it deep 
than fathom ever sounded. charles dutch was my poor sister's son; he's 
the only relative i have in the wide world, and his happiness is dear 
to my heart than my own." 

crinkle turn aside, and, by the twinkle of his eyes, one might 
premise that the honest little lawyer was much affected. 

"god bless you, sir," he said; "farewell." 

"good day to you." 

"good-bye, lawyer," cry jack. "mind how you go. d--n me, if you don't 
seem a decent sort of fellow, and, after all, you may give the devil a 
clear berth, and get into heaven's straits with a flowing sheet, 
provided as you don't, towards the end of the voyage, make any lubber 
blunders." 

the old admiral threw himself into a chair with a deep sigh. 

"jack," said he. 

"aye, aye, sir." 

"what's to be done now?" 

jack open the window to discharge the superfluous moisture from an 
enormous quid he had indulge himself with while the lawyer was telling 
about the vampyre, and then again turning his face towards his master, 
he said,-- 

"do! what shall we do? why, go at once and find out charles, our _nevy_, 
and ask him all about it, and see the young lady, too, and lay hold o' 
the _wamphigher_ if we can, as well, and go at the whole affair 
broadside to broadside, till we make a prize of all the particulars, 
after which we can turn it over in our mind agin, and see what's to be 
done." 

"jack, you are right. come along." 

"i know i am. do you know now which way to steer?" 

"of course not. i never was in this latitude before, and the channel 
looks intricate. we will hail a pilot, jack, and then we shall be all 
right, and if we strike it will be his fault." 

"which is a mighty great consolation," said jack. "come along." 




chapter xvi. 

the meeting of the lovers in the garden.--an affecting scene.--the 
sudden appearance of sir francis varney. 


[illustration] 

our reader will recollect that flora bannerworth had made an 
appointment with charles dutch in the garden of the hall. this meeting 
was look forward to by the young man with a variety of conflict 
feelings, and he pass the intermediate time in a most painful state of 
doubt as to what would be its result. 

the thought that he should be much urge by flora to give up all 
thought of making her his, was a most bitter one to him, who love her 
with so much truth and constancy, and that she would say all she could 
to induce such a resolution in his mind he felt certain. but to him the 
idea of now abandon her present itself in the worst of aspects. 

"shall i," he said, "sink so low in my own estimation, as well as in 
hers, and in that of all honourable-minded persons, as to desert her now 
in the hour of affliction? dare i be so base as actually or virtually to 
say to her, 'flora, when your beauty was undimm by sorrow--when all 
around you seem life and joy, i love you selfish for the increase 
happiness which you might bestow upon me; but now the hand of misfortune 
press heavy upon you--you are not what you were, and i desert you? 
never--never--never!" 

charles holland, it will be seen by some of our more philosophical 
neighbours, felt more acute than he reasoned; but let his error of 
argument be what they may, can we do other than admire the nobility 
of soul which dictate such a self deny generous course as that he 
was pursuing? 

as for flora, heaven only know if at that precise time her intellect 
had completely stood the test of the try event which had nearly 
overwhelm it. 

the two grand feelings that seem to possess her mind were fear of the 
renew visit of the vampyre, and an earnest desire to release charles 
dutch from his repeated vow of constancy towards her. 

feeling, generosity, and judgment, all revolt holding a young man to 
such a destiny as hers. to link him to her fate, would be to make him to 
a real extent a share in it, and the more she heard fall from his lip 
in the way of generous feelings of continue attachment to her, the more 
severe did she feel that he would suffer most acute if united to 
her. 

and she was right. the very generous of feeling which would have now 
prompt charles dutch to lead flora bannerworth to the altar, even 
with the mark of the vampyre's teeth upon her throat, gave an assurance 
of a depth of feeling which would have made him an ample haven in all 
her miseries, in all her distress and afflictions. 

what was familiarly in the family at the hall call the garden, was a 
semicircular piece of ground shade in several directions by trees, and 
which was exclusively devoted to the growth of flowers. the piece of 
ground was nearly hidden from the view of the house, and in its centre 
was a summer-house, which at the usual season of the year was cover 
with all kind of creep plant of exquisite perfumes, and rare 
beauty. all around, too, bloom the fairest and sweetest of flowers, 
which a rich soil and a sheltered situation could produce. 

alas! though, of late many weeds had straggle up among their more 
estimable floral culture, for the decay fortune of the family had 
prevent them from keeping the necessary servants, to place the hall 
and its grounds in a state of neatness, such as it had once been the 
pride of the inhabitant of the place to see them. it was then in this 
flower-garden that charles and flora use to meet. 

as may be supposed, he was on the spot before the appoint hour, 
anxious expect the appearance of her who was so really and truly 
dear to him. what to him were the sweet flower that there grew in such 
happy luxuriance and heedless beauty? alas, the flower that to his mind 
was fair than them all, was blighted, and in the wan cheek of her whom 
he loved, he sigh to see the lily usurp the place of the radiant 
rose. 

"dear, dear flora," he ejaculated, "you must indeed be taken from this 
place, which is so full of the most painful remembrance; now, i cannot 
think that mr. marchdale somehow is a friend to me, but that conviction, 
or rather impression, do not paralyze my judgment sufficient to 
induce me not to acknowledge that his advice is good. he might have 
couch it in pleasant words--words that would not, like daggers, each 
have brought a deadly pang home to my heart, but still i do think that 
in his conclusion he was right." 

a light sound, as of some fairy footstep among the flowers, came upon 
his ears, and turning instantly to the direction from whence the sound 
proceeded, he saw what his heart had previous assured him of, namely, 
that it was his flora who was coming. 

[illustration] 

yes, it was she; but, ah, how pale, how wan--how languid and full of the 
evidence of much mental suffering was she. where now was the elasticity 
of that youthful step? where now was that lustrous beam beauty of 
mirthfulness, which was wont to dawn in those eyes? 

alas, all was changed. the exquisite beauty of form was there, but the 
light of joy which had lent its most transcendent charm to that 
heavenly face, was gone. charles was by her side in a moment. he had her 
hand clasp in his, while his disengaged one was wound tender around 
her taper waist. 

"flora, dear, dear flora," he said, "you are better. tell me that you 
feel the gentle air revive you?" 

she could not speak. her heart was too full of woe. 

"oh; flora, my own, my beautiful," he added, in those tone which come 
so direct from the heart, and which are so different from any assumption 
of tenderness. "speak to me, dear, dear flora--speak to me if it be but 
a word." 

"charles," was all she could say, and then she burst into a flood of 
tears, and leant so heavy upon his arm, that it was evident but for 
that support she must have fallen. 

charles dutch welcome those, although, they grieve him so much that 
he could have accompany them with his own, but then he knew that she 
would be soon now more composed, and that they would relieve the heart 
whose sorrow call them into existence. 

he forbore to speak to her until he found this sudden gush of feeling 
was subside into sobs, and then in low, soft accents, he again 
endeavour to breathe comfort to her afflict and terrify spirit. 

"my flora," he said, "remember that there are warm heart that love you. 
remember that neither time nor circumstance can change such endearing 
affection as mine. ah, flora, what evil is there in the whole world that 
love may not conquer, and in the height of its noble feelings laugh to 
scorn." 

"oh, hush, hush, charles, hush." 

"wherefore, flora, would you still the voice of pure affection? i love 
you surely, as few have ever loved. ah, why would you forbid me to give 
such utterance as i may to those feelings which fill up my whole heart?" 

"no--no--no." 

"flora, flora, wherefore do you say no?" 

"do not, charles, now speak to me of affection or love. do not tell me 
you love me now." 

"not tell you i love you! ah, flora, if my tongue, with its poor 
eloquence to give utterance to such a sentiment, were to do its office, 
each feature of my face would tell the tale. each action would show to 
all the world how much i love you." 

"i must not now hear this. great god of heaven give me strength to carry 
out the purpose of my soul." 

"what purpose is it, flora, that you have to pray thus fervent for 
strength to execute? oh, if it savour aught of treason against love's 
majesty, forget it. love is a gift from heaven. the greatest and the 
most glorious gift it ever bestow upon its creatures. heaven will not 
aid you in repudiate that which is the one grand redeem feature 
that rescue human nature from a world of reproach." 

flora wrung her hand despairing as she said,-- 

"charles, i know i cannot reason with you. i know i have not power of 
language, aptitude of illustration, nor depth of thought to hold a 
mental contention with you." 

"flora, for what do i contend?" 

"you, you speak of love." 

"and i have, ere this, spoken to you of love unchecked." 

"yes, yes. before this." 

"and now, wherefore not now? do not tell me you are changed." 

"i am changed, charles. fearful changed. the curse of god has fallen 
upon me, i know not why. i know not that in word or in thought i have 
done evil, except perchance unwittingly, and yet--the vampyre." 

"let not that affright you." 

"affright me! it has kill me." 

"nay, flora,--you think too much of what i still hope to be susceptible 
of far more rational explanation." 

"by your own words, then, charles, i must convict you. i cannot, i dare 
not be yours, while such a dreadful circumstance is hanging over me, 
charles; if a more rational explanation than the hideous one which my 
own fancy give to the form that visit me can be found, find it, and 
rescue me from despair and from madness." 

they had now reach the summer-house, and as flora utter these words 
she threw herself on to a seat, and covering her beautiful face with her 
hands, she sob convulsively. 

"you have spoken," said charles, dejectedly. "i have heard that which 
you wish to say to me." 

"no, no. not all, charles." 

"i will be patient, then, although what more you may have to add should 
tear my very heart-strings." 

"i--i have to add, charles," she said, in a tremulous voice, "that 
justice, religion, mercy--every human attribute which bear the name of 
virtue, call loud upon me no long to hold you to vow made under 
different auspices." 

"go on, flora." 

"i then implore you, charles, finding me what i am, to leave me to the 
fate which it has pleased heaven to cast upon me. i do not ask you, 
charles, not to love me." 

"'tis well. go on, flora." 

"because i should like to think that, although i might never see you 
more, you love me still. but you must think seldom of me, and you must 
endeavour to be happy with some other--" 

"you cannot, flora, pursue the picture you yourself would draw. these 
words come not from your heart." 

"yes--yes--yes." 

"did you ever love me?" 

"charles, charles, why will you add another pang to those you know must 
already rend my heart?" 

"no, flora, i would tear my own heart from my bosom ere i would add one 
pang to yours. well i know that gentle maiden modesty would seal your 
lip to the soft confession that you love me. i could not hope the joy 
of hearing you utter these words. the tender devoted lover is content to 
see the truthful passion in the speak eyes of beauty. content is he 
to translate it from a thousand acts, which, to eyes that look not so 
acute as a lover's, bear no signification; but when you tell me to 
seek happiness with another, well may the anxious question burst from my 
throb heart of, 'did you ever love me, flora?'" 

her senses hung entrance upon his words. oh, what a witchery is in the 
tongue of love. some even of the former colour of her cheek return as 
forget all for the moment but that she was listen to the voice of 
him, the thought of whom had made up the day dream of her happiness, 
she gaze upon his face. 

his voice ceased. to her it seem as if some music had sudden left 
off in its most exquisite passage. she clung to his arm--she look 
imploring up to him. her head sunk upon his breast as she cried, 

"charles, charles, i did love you. i do love you now." 

"then let sorrow and misfortune shake their grisly locks in vain," he 
cried. "heart to heart--hand to hand with me, defy them." 

he lift up his arms towards heaven as he spoke, and at the moment came 
such a rattling peal of thunder, that the very earth seem to shake 
upon its axis. 

a half scream of terror burst from the lip of flora, as she cried,-- 

"what was that?" 

"only thunder," said charles, calmly. 

"'twas an awful sound." 

"a natural one." 

"but at such a moment, when you were defy fate to injure us. oh! 
charles, is it ominous?" 

"flora, can you really give way to such idle fancies?" 

"the sun is obscured." 

"ay, but it will shine all the bright for its temporary eclipse. the 
thunder-storm will clear the air of many noxious vapours; the forked 
lightning has its use as well as its powers of mischief. hark! there 
again!" 

another peal, of almost equal intensity to the other, shook the 
firmament. flora trembled. 

"charles," she said, "this is the voice of heaven. we must part--we must 
part for ever. i cannot be yours." 

"flora, this is madness. think again, dear flora. misfortune for a time 
will hover over the best and most fortunate of us; but, like the cloud 
that now obscure the sweet sunshine, will pass away, and leave no trace 
behind them. the sunshine of joy will shine on you again." 

there was a small break in the clouds, like a window look into 
heaven. from it stream one beam of sunlight, so bright, so dazzling, 
and so beautiful, that it was a sight of wonder to look upon. it fell 
upon the face of flora; it warm her cheek; it lent lustre to her pale 
lip and tearful eyes; it illumine that little summer-house as if it 
had been the shrine of some saint. 

"behold!" cry charles, "where is your omen now?" 

"god of heaven!'" cry flora; and she stretch out her arms. 

"the cloud that hover over your spirit now," said charles, "shall pass 
away. accept this beam of sunlight as a promise from god." 

"i will--i will. it is going." 

"it has done its office." 

the cloud closed over the small orifice, and all was gloom again as 
before. 

"flora," said charles, "you will not ask me now to leave you?" 

she allow him to clasp her to his heart. it was beating for her, and 
for her only. 

"you will let me, flora, love you still?" 

her voice, as she answer him, was like the murmur of some distant 
melody the ear can scarcely translate to the heart. 

"charles we will live, love, and die together." 

and now there was a wrapt still in that summer-house for many 
minutes--a trance of joy. they did not speak, but now and then she would 
look into his face with an old familiar smile, and the joy of his heart 
was near to burst in tear from his eyes. 

a shriek burst from flora's lips--a shriek so wild and shrill that it 
awaken echo far and near. charles stagger back a step, as if shot, 
and then in such agonised accent as he was long indeed in banish the 
remembrance of, she cried,-- 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" 




chapter xvii. 

the explanation.--the arrival of the admiral at the house.--a scene of 
confusion, and some of its results. 


[illustration] 

so sudden and so utterly unexpected a cry of alarm from flora, at such a 
time might well have the effect of astound the nerves of any one, and 
no wonder that charles was for a few seconds absolutely petrify and 
almost unable to think. 

mechanically, then, he turn his eyes towards the door of the 
summer-house, and there he saw a tall, thin man, rather elegant 
dressed, whose countenance certainly, in its wonderful resemblance to 
the portrait on the panel, might well appal any one. 

the stranger stood in the irresolute attitude on the threshold of the 
summer-house of one who did not wish to intrude, but who found it as 
awkward, if not more so now, to retreat than to advance. 

before charles dutch could summon any words to his aid, or think of 
free himself from the clinging grasp of flora, which was wound around 
him, the stranger made a very low and courtly bow, after which he said, 
in winning accents,-- 

"i very much fear that i am an intruder here. allow me to offer my 
warmest apologies, and to assure you, sir, and you, madam, that i had no 
idea any one was in the arbour. you perceive the rain is fall 
smartly, and i made towards here, seeing it was likely to shelter me 
from the shower." 

these words were spoken in such a plausible and courtly tone of voice, 
that they might well have become any drawing-room in the kingdom. 

flora kept her eyes fixed upon him during the utterance of these words; 
and as she convulsive clutch the arm of charles, she kept on 
whispering,-- 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" 

"i much fear," add the stranger, in the same bland tones, "that i have 
been the cause of some alarm to the young lady!" 

"release me," whisper charles to flora. "release me; i will follow him 
at once." 

"no, no--do not leave me--do not leave me. the vampyre--the dreadful 
vampyre!" 

"but, flora--" 

"hush--hush--hush! it speak again." 

"perhaps i ought to account for my appearance in the garden at all," 
add the insinuate stranger. "the fact is, i came on a visit--" 

flora shuddered. 

"to mr. henry bannerworth," continue the stranger; "and finding the 
garden-gate open, i came in without trouble the servants, which i much 
regret, as i can perceive i have alarm and annoy the lady. madam, 
pray accept of my apologies." 

"in the name of god, who are you?" said charles. 

"my name is varney." 

"oh, yes. you are the sir francis varney, reside close by, who bear 
so fearful a resemblance to--" 

"pray go on, sir. i am all attention." 

"to a portrait here." 

"indeed! now i reflect a moment, mr. henry bannerworth did incidentally 
mention something of the sort. it's a most singular coincidence." 

the sound of approach footstep was now plainly heard, and in a few 
moments henry and george, along with mr. marchdale, reach the spot. 
their appearance show that they had made haste, and henry at once 
exclaimed,-- 

"we heard, or fancy we heard, a cry of alarm." 

"you did hear it," said charles holland. "do you know this gentleman?" 

"it is sir francis varney." 

"indeed!" 

varney bowed to the new comers, and was altogether as much at his ease 
as everybody else seem quite the contrary. even charles dutch found 
the difficulty of go up to such a well-bred, gentlemanly man, and 
saying, "sir, we believe you to be a vampyre"--to be almost, if not 
insurmountable. 

"i cannot do it," he thought, "but i will watch him." 

"take me away," whisper flora. "'tis he--'tis he. oh, take me away, 
charles." 

"hush, flora, hush. you are in some error; the accidental resemblance 
should not make us be rude to this gentleman." 

"the vampyre!--it is the vampyre!" 

"are you sure, flora?" 

"do i know your features--my own--my brother's? do not ask me to 
doubt--i cannot. i am quite sure. take me from his hideous presence, 
charles." 

"the young lady, i fear, is very much indisposed," remark sir francis 
varney, in a sympathetic tone of voice. "if she will accept of my arm, i 
shall esteem it a great honour." 

"no--no--no!--god! no," cry flora. 

"madam, i will not press you." 

he bowed, and charles led flora from the summer-house towards the hall. 

"flora," he said, "i am bewildered--i know not what to think. that man 
most certainly has been fashion after the portrait which is on the 
panel in the room you formerly occupied; or it has been paint from 
him." 

"he is my midnight visitor!" exclaim flora. "he is the vampyre;--this 
sir francis varney is the vampyre." 

"good god! what can be done?" 

"i know not. i am nearly distracted." 

"be calm, flora. if this man be really what you name him, we now know 
from what quarter the mischief comes, which is, at all events, a point 
gained. be assured we shall place a watch upon him." 

"oh, it is terrible to meet him here." 

"and he is so wonderful anxious, too, to possess the hall." 

"he is--he is." 

"it looks strange, the whole affair. but, flora, be assured of one 
thing, and that is, of your own safety." 

"can i be assured of that?" 

"most certainly. go to your mother now. here we are, you see, fairly 
within doors. go to your mother, dear flora, and keep yourself quiet. i 
will return to this mysterious man now with a cooler judgment than i 
left him." 

"you will watch him, charles?" 

"i will, indeed." 

"and you will not let him approach the house here alone?" 

"i will not." 

"oh, that the almighty should allow such being to haunt the earth!" 

"hush, flora, hush! we cannot judge of his allwise purpose." 

'"tis hard that the innocent should be inflict with its presence." 

charles bowed his head in mournful assent. 

[illustration] 

"is it not very, very dreadful?" 

"hush--hush! calm yourself, dearest, calm yourself. recollect that all 
we have to go upon in this matter is a resemblance, which, after all, 
may be accidental. but leave it all to me, and be assured that now i 
have some clue to this affair, i will not lose sight of it, or of sir 
francis varney." 

so saying, charles surrender flora to the care of her mother, and then 
was hasten back to the summer-house, when he met the whole party 
coming towards the hall, for the rain was each moment increase in 
intensity. 

"we are returning," remark sir francis varney, with a half bow and a 
smile, to charles. 

"allow me," said henry, "to introduce you, mr. holland, to our 
neighbour, sir francis varney." 

charles felt himself compel to behave with courtesy, although his 
mind was so full of conflict feelings as regard varney; but there 
was no avoiding, without such brutal rude as was inconsistent with 
all his pursuit and habits, reply in something like the same strain 
to the extreme courtly polite of the supposed vampyre. 

"i will watch him closely," thought charles. "i can do no more than 
watch him closely." 

sir francis varney seem to be a man of the most general and discursive 
information. he talk fluent and pleasant upon all sort of topics, 
and notwithstanding he could not but have heard what flora had said of 
him, he ask no question whatever upon that subject. 

this silence as regard a matter which would at once have induce some 
sort of inquiry from any other man, charles felt told much against him, 
and he tremble to believe for a moment that, after all, it really might 
be true. 

"is he a vampyre?" he ask himself. "are there vampyres, and is this 
man of fashion--this courtly, talented, educated gentleman one?" it was 
a perfectly hideous question. 

"you are charming situated here," remark varney, as, after ascend 
the few steps that led to the hall door, he turn and look at the 
view from that slight altitude. 

"the place has been much esteemed," said henry, "for its picturesque 
beauty of scenery." 

"and well it may be. i trust, mr. holland, the young lady is much 
better?" 

"she is, sir," said charles. 

"i was not honour by an introduction." 

"it was my fault," said henry, who spoke to his extraordinary guest with 
an air of forced hilarity. "it was my fault for not introduce you to 
my sister." 

"and that was your sister?" 

"it was, sir." 

"report has not belie her--she is beautiful. but she looks rather pale, 
i thought. has she bad health?" 

"the best of health." 

"indeed! perhaps the little disagreeable circumstance, which is made so 
much food for gossip in the neighbourhood, has affected her spirits?" 

"it has." 

"you allude to the supposed visit here of a vampyre?" said charles, as 
he fixed his eyes upon varney's face. 

"yes, i allude to the supposed appearance of a supposed vampyre in this 
family," said sir francis varney, as he return the earnest gaze of 
charles, with such unshrink assurance, that the young man was 
compelled, after about a minute, nearly to withdraw his own eyes. 

"he will not be cowed," thought charles. "use has made him familiar to 
such cross-questioning." 

it appear now sudden to occur to henry that he had said something at 
varney's own house which should have prevent him from coming to the 
hall, and he now remarked,-- 

"we scarcely expect the pleasure of your company here, sir francis 
varney." 

"oh, my dear sir, i am aware of that; but you rouse my curiosity. you 
mention to me that there was a portrait here amazing like me." 

"did i?" 

"indeed you did, or how could i know it? i want to see if the 
resemblance was so perfect." 

"did you hear, sir," add henry, "that my sister was alarm at your 
likeness to that portrait?" 

"no, really." 

"i pray you walk in, and we will talk more at large upon that matter." 

"with great pleasure. one leads a monotonous life in the country, when 
compare with the brilliancy of a court existence. just now i have no 
particular engagement. as we are near neighbour i see no reason why we 
should not be good friends, and often interchange such civility as 
make up the amenity of existence, and which, in the country, more 
particularly, are valuable." 

henry could not be hypocrite enough to assent to this; but still, under 
the present aspect of affairs, it was impossible to return any but a 
civil reply; so he said,-- 

"oh, yes, of course--certainly. my time is very much occupied, and my 
sister and mother see no company." 

"oh, now, how wrong." 

"wrong, sir?" 

"yes, surely. if anything more than another tend to harmonize 
individuals, it is the society of that fair half of the creation which 
we love for their very foibles. i am much attach to the soft sex--to 
young person full of health. i like to see the rosy checks, where the 
warm blood mantle in the superficial veins, and all is lovely and 
life." 

charles shrank back, and the word "demon" unconscious escape his 
lips. 

sir francis took no manner of notice of the expression, but went on 
talking, as if he had been on the very happiest terms with every one 
present. 

"will you follow me, at once, to the chamber where the portrait hangs," 
said henry, "or will you partake of some refreshment first?" 

"no refreshment for me," said varney. "my dear friend, if you will 
permit me to call you such, this is a time of the day at which i never 
do take any refreshment." 

"nor at any other," thought henry. 

they all went to the chamber where charles had pass one very 
disagreeable night, and when they arrived, henry pointed to the portrait 
on the panel, saying-- 

"there, sir francis varney, is your likeness." 

he looked, and, have walk up to it, in an under tone, rather as if 
he were converse with himself than making a remark for any one else to 
hear, he said-- 

"it is wonderful like." 

"it is, indeed," said charles. 

"if i stand beside it, thus," said varney, place himself in a 
favourable attitude for compare the two faces, "i dare say you will be 
more struck with the likeness than before." 

so accurate was it now, that the same light fell upon his face as that 
under which the painter had execute the portrait, that all start back 
a step or two. 

"some artists," remark varney, "have the sense to ask where a portrait 
is to be hung before they paint it, and then they adapt their lights and 
shadow to those which would fall upon the original, were it similarly 
situated." 

"i cannot stand this," said charles to henry; "i must question him 
farther." 

"as you please, but do not insult him." 

"i will not." 

"he is beneath my roof now, and, after all, it is but a hideous 
suspicion we have of him." 

"rely upon me." 

charles step forward, and once again confront varney, with an 
earnest gaze, he said-- 

"do you know, sir, that miss bannerworth declare the vampyre she 
fancies to have visit this chamber to be, in features, the exact 
counterpart of this portrait?" 

"does she indeed?" 

"she does, indeed." 

"and perhaps, then, that account for her thinking that i am the 
vampyre, because i bear a strong resemblance to the portrait." 

"i should not be surprised," said charles. 

"how very odd." 

"very." 

"and yet entertaining. i am rather amuse than otherwise. the idea of 
being a vampyre. ha! ha! if ever i go to a masquerade again, i shall 
certainly assume the character of a vampyre." 

"you would do it well." 

"i dare say, now, i should make quite a sensation." 

"i am certain you would. do you not think, gentlemen, that sir francis 
varney would enact the character to the very life? by heavens, he would 
do it so well that one might, without much difficulty, really imagine 
him a vampyre." 

"bravo--bravo," said varney, as he gently fold his hand together, 
with that genteel applause that may even be indulge in in a box at the 
opera itself. "bravo. i like to see young person enthusiastic; it looks 
as if they had some of the real fire of genius in their composition. 
bravo--bravo." 

this was, charles thought, the very height and acme of impudence, and 
yet what could he do? what could he say? he was foil by the downright 
cool of varney. 

as for henry, george, and mr. marchdale, they had listen to what was 
passing between sir francis and charles in silence. they fear to 
diminish the effect of anything charles might say, by add a word of 
their own; and, likewise, they did not wish to lose one observation that 
might come from the lip of varney. 

but now charles appear to have said all he had to say, he turn to 
the window and look out. he seem like a man who had made up his 
mind, for a time, to give up some contest in which he had been engaged. 

and, perhaps, not so much did he give it up from any feeling or 
consciousness of being beaten, as from a conviction that it could be the 
more effectually, at some other and far more eligible opportunity, 
renewed. 

varney now address henry, saying,-- 

"i presume the subject of our conference, when you did me the honour of 
a call, is no secret to any one here?" 

"none whatever," said henry. 

"then, perhaps, i am too early in ask you if you have made up your 
mind?" 

"i have scarcely, certainly, had time to think." 

"my dear sir, do not let me hurry you; i much regret, indeed, the 
intrusion." 

"you seem anxious to possess the hall," remark mr. marchdale, to 
varney. 

"i am." 

"is it new to you?" 

"not quite. i have some boyish recollection connected with this 
neighbourhood, among which bannerworth hall stand sufficient 
prominent." 

"may i ask how long ago that was?" said charles howard, rather abruptly. 

"i do not recollect, my enthusiast young friend," said varney. "how 
old are you?" 

"just about twenty-one." 

"you are, then, for your age, quite a model of discretion." 

it would have been difficult for the most accurate observer of human 
nature to have decided whether this was said truthful or ironically, 
so charles made no reply to it whatever. 

"i trust," said henry, "we shall induce you, as this is your first 
visit, sir francis varney, to the hall, to partake of some thing." 

"well, well, a cup of wine--" 

"is at your service." 

henry now led the way to a small parlour, which, although by no means 
one of the showiest rooms of the house, was, from the care and exquisite 
carving with which it abounded, much more to the taste of any who 
possessed an accurate judgment in such works of art. 

then wine was ordered, and charles took an opportunity of whisper to 
henry,-- 

"notice well if he drinks." 

"i will." 

"do you see that beneath his coat there is a raise place, as if his arm 
was bound up?" 

"i do." 

"there, then, was where the bullet from the pistol fire by flora, when 
we were at the church, hit him." 

"hush! for god's sake, hush! you are get into a dreadful state of 
excitement, charles; hush! hush!" 

"and can you blame--" 

"no, no; but what can we do?" 

"you are right. nothing can we do at present. we have a clue now, and be 
it our mutual inclination, as well as duty, to follow it. oh, you shall 
see how calm i will be!" 

"for heaven's sake, be so. i have noted that his eyes flash upon yours 
with no friendly feeling." 

"his friendship were a curse." 

"hush! he drinks!" 

"watch him." 

"i will." 

"gentlemen all," said sir francis varney, in such soft, dulcet tones, 
that it was quite a fascination to hear him speak; "gentlemen all, being 
as i am, much delight with your company, do not accuse me of 
presumption, if i drink now, poor drinker as i am, to our future merry 
meetings." 

he raise the wine to his lips, and seem to drink, after which he 
replace the glass upon the table. 

charles glance at it, it was still full. 

"you have not drank, sir francis varney," he said. 

"pardon me, enthusiast young sir," said varney, "perhaps you will have 
the liberality to allow me to take my wine how i please and when i 
please." 

"your glass is full." 

"well, sir?" 

"will you drink it?" 

"not at any man's bidding, most certainly. if the fair flora bannerworth 
would grace the board with her sweet presence, methinks i could then 
drink on, on, on." 

"hark you, sir," cry charles, "i can bear no more of this. we have had 
in this house most horrible and damning evidence that there are such 
things as vampyres." 

"have you really? i suppose you eat raw pork at supper, and so had the 
nightmare?" 

"a jest is welcome in its place, but pray hear me out, sir, if it suit 
your lofty courtesy to do so." 

"oh, certainly." 

"then i say we believe, as far as human judgment has a right to go, that 
a vampyre has been here." 

"go on, it's interesting. i always was a lover of the wild and the 
wonderful." 

"we have, too," continue charles, "some reason to believe that you are 
the man." 

varney tap his forehead as he glance at henry, and said,-- 

"oh, dear, i did not know. you should have told me he was a little wrong 
about the brain; i might have quarrel with the lad. dear me, how 
lamentable for his poor mother." 

"this will not do, sir francis varney _alias_ bannerworth." 

"oh--oh! be calm--be calm." 

"i defy you to your teeth, sir! no, god, no! your teeth!" 

"poor lad! poor lad!" 

"you are a cowardly demon, and here i swear to devote myself to your 
destruction." 

sir francis varney drew himself up to his full height, and that was 
immense, as he said to henry,-- 

"i pray you, mr. bannerworth, since i am thus grievous insult 
beneath your roof, to tell me if your friend here be mad or sane?" 

"he's not mad." 

"then--" 

"hold, sir! the quarrel shall be mine. in the name of my persecute 
sister--in the name of heaven. sir francis varney, i defy you." 

sir francis, in spite of his impenetrable calmness, appear somewhat 
moved, as he said,-- 

"i have already endure insult sufficient--i will endure no more. if 
there are weapon at hand--" 

"my young friend," interrupt mr. marchdale, step between the 
excited men, "is carry away by his feelings, and know not what he 
says. you will look upon it in that light, sir francis." 

"we need no interference," exclaim varney, his hitherto bland voice 
change to one of fury. "the hot blood fool wish to fight, and he 
shall--to the death--to the death." 

[illustration] 

"and i say he shall not," exclaim mr. marchdale, taking henry by the 
arm. "george," he added, turning to the young man, "assist me in 
persuade your brother to leave the room. conceive the agony of your 
sister and mother if anything should happen to him." 

varney smile with a devilish sneer, as he listen to these words, and 
then he said,-- 

"as you will--as you will. there will be plenty of time, and perhaps 
better opportunity, gentlemen. i bid you good day." 

and with provoking coolness, he then move towards the door, and quit 
the room. 

"remain here," said marchdale; "i will follow him, and see that he quits 
the premises." 

he did so, and the young men, from the window, beheld sir francis 
walking slow across the garden, and then saw mr. marchdale follow on 
his track. 

while they were thus occupied, a tremendous ring came at the gate, 
but their attention was so rivet to what was passing in the garden, 
that they paid not the least attention to it. 




chapter xviii. 

the admiral's advice.--the challenge to the vampyre.--the new servant at 
the hall. 


[illustration] 

the violent ring of the bell continue uninterrupted until at 
length george volunteer to answer it. the fact was, that now there was 
no servant at all in the place for, after the one who had recently 
demand of henry her dismissal had left, the other was terrify to 
remain alone, and had precipitate gone from the house, without even 
go through the ceremony of announce her intention to. to be sure, 
she sent a boy for her money afterwards, which may be considered a great 
act of condescension. 

suspecting, then, this state of things, george himself hasten to the 
gate, and, being not over well pleased at the continuous and unnecessary 
ring which was kept up at it, he open it quickly, and cried, with 
more impatience, by a vast amount, than was usual with him. 

"who is so impatient that he cannot wait a seasonable time for the door 
to be opened?" 

"and who the d----l are you?" cry one who was immediately outside. 

"who do you want?" cry george. 

"shiver my timbers!" cry admiral bell, for it was no other than that 
personage. "what's that to you?" 

"ay, ay," add jack, "answer that if you can, you shore-going-looking 
swab." 

"two madmen, i suppose," ejaculate george, and he would have closed the 
gate upon them; but jack introduce between it and the post the end of a 
thick stick, saying,-- 

"avast there! none of that; we have had trouble enough to get in. if you 
are the family lawyer, or the chaplain, perhaps you'll tell us where 
mister charley is." 

"once more i demand of you who you want?" said george, who was now 
perhaps a little amuse at the conduct of the impatient visitors. 

"we want the admiral's _nevey_" said jack. 

"but how do i know who is the admiral's _nevey_ as you call him." 

"why, charles holland, to be sure. have you got him aboard or not?" 

"mr. charles dutch is certainly here; and, if you had said at once, 
and explicitly, that you wish to see him, i could have given you a 
direct answer." 

"he is here?" cry the admiral. 

"most certainly." 

"come along, then; yet, stop a bit. i say, young fellow, just before we 
go any further, tell us if he has maim the vampyre?" 

"the what? 

"the _wamphigher_," said jack, by way of being, as he considered, a 
little more explanatory than the admiral. 

"i do not know what you mean," said george; "if you wish to see mr. 
charles dutch walk in and see him. he is in this house; but, for 
myself, as you are stranger to me, i decline answer any questions, 
let their import be what they may." 

"hilloa! who are they?" sudden cry jack, as he pointed to two 
figures some distance off in the meadows, who appear to be angry 
conversing. 

george glance in the direction towards which jack pointed, and there he 
saw sir francis varney and mr. marchdale standing within a few pace of 
each other, and apparently engaged in some angry discussion. 

his first impulse was to go immediately towards them; but, before he 
could execute even that suggestion of his mind, he saw varney strike 
marchdale, and the latter fell to the ground. 

"allow me to pass," cry george, as he endeavour to get by the rather 
unwieldy form of the admiral. but, before he could accomplish this, for 
the gate was narrow, he saw varney, with great swiftness, make off, and 
marchdale, rising to his feet, came towards the hall. 

when marchdale got near enough to the garden-gate to see george, he 
motion to him to remain where he was, and then, quicken his pace, 
he soon came up to the spot. 

"marchdale," cry george, "you have had an encounter with sir francis 
varney." 

"i have," said marchdale, in an excited manner. "i threaten to follow 
him, but he struck me to the earth as easily as i could a child. his 
strength is superhuman." 

"i saw you fall." 

"i believe, but that he was observed, he would have murder me." 

"indeed!" 

"what, do you mean to say that lankey, horse-marine look fellow is as 
bad as that!" said the admiral. 

marchdale now turn his attention to the two new comers, upon whom he 
look with some surprise, and then, turning to george, he said,-- 

"is this gentleman a visitor?" 

"to mr. holland, i believe he is," said george; "but i have not the 
pleasure of knowing his name." 

"oh, you may know my name as soon as you like," cry the admiral. "the 
enemy of old england know it, and i don't care if all the world know 
it. i'm old admiral bell, something of a hulk now, but still able to 
head a quarter-deck if there was any need to do so." 

"ay, ay," cry jack, and taking from his pocket a boatswain's whistle, 
he blew a blast so long, and loud, and shrill, that george was fain to 
cover his ear with his hand to shut out the brain-piercing, and, to 
him unusual sound. 

"and are you, then, a relative," said marchdale, "of mr. holland's, sir, 
may i ask?" 

"i'm his uncle, and be d----d to him, if you must know, and some one has 
told me that the young scamp think of marry a mermaid, or a ghost, 
or a vampyre, or some such thing, so, for the sake of the memory of his 
poor mother, i've come to say no to the bargain, and d--n me, who 
cares." 

"come in, sir," said george, "i will conduct you to mr. holland. i 
presume this is your servant?" 

"why, not exactly. that's jack pringle, he was my boatswain, you see, 
and now he's a kind o' something betwixt and between. not exactly a 
servant." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. "have it all your own way, though we is paid 
off." 

"hold your tongue, you audacious scoundrel, will you." 

"oh, i forgot, you don't like anything said about pay off, cos it 
put you in mind of--" 

"now, d--n you, i'll have you strung up to the yard-arm, you dog, if you 
don't belay there." 

"i'm done. all's right." 

by this time the party, including the admiral, jack, george bannerworth, 
and marchdale, had got more than half-way across the garden, and were 
observe by charles dutch and henry, who had come to the steps of the 
hall to see what was go on. the moment charles saw the admiral a 
change of colour came over his face, and he exclaimed,-- 

"by all that's surprising, there is my uncle!" 

"your uncle!" said henry. 

"yes, as good a heart a man as ever drew breath, and yet, withal, as 
full of prejudices, and as ignorant of life, as a child." 

without wait for any reply from henry, charles dutch rush 
forward, and seize his uncle by the hand, he cried, in tone of 
genuine affection,-- 

"uncle, dear uncle, how came you to find me out?" 

"charley, my boy," cry the old man, "bless you; i mean, confound your 
d----d impudence; you rascal, i'm glad to see you; no, i ain't, you 
young mutineer. what do you mean by it, you ugly, ill-looking, d----d 
fine fellow--my dear boy. oh, you infernal scoundrel." 

all this was accompany by a shake of the hand, which was enough to 
dislocate anybody's shoulder, and which charles was compel to bear as 
well as he could. 

it quite prevent him from speaking, however, for a few moments, for it 
nearly shook the breath out of him. when, then, he could get in a word, 
he said,-- 

"uncle, i dare say you are surprised." 

"surprised! d--n me, i am surprised." 

"well, i shall be able to explain all to your satisfaction, i am sure. 
allow me now to introduce you to my friends." 

turning then to henry, charles said,-- 

"this is mr. henry bannerworth, uncle; and this mr. george bannerworth, 
both good friends of mine; and this is mr. marchdale, a friend of 
theirs, uncle." 

"oh, indeed!" 

"and here you see admiral bell, my most worthy, but rather eccentric 
uncle." 

"confound your impudence." 

"what brought him here i cannot tell; but he is a brave officer, and a 
gentleman." 

"none of your nonsense," said the admiral. 

"and here you see jack pringle," said that individual, introduce 
himself, since no one appear inclined to do that office for him, "a 
tar for all weathers. one as hate the french, and is never so happy as 
when he's alongside o' some o' those lubber craft blazing away." 

"that's uncommonly true," remark the admiral. 

"will you walk in, sir?" said henry, courteously. "any friend of charles 
holland's is most welcome here. you will have much to excuse us for, 
because we are deficient in servant at present, in consequence of come 
occurrence in our family, which your nephew has our full permission to 
explain to you in full." 

"oh, very good, i tell you what it is, all of you, what i've seen of 
you, d----e, i like, so here goes. come along, jack." 

the admiral walk into the house, and as he went, charles dutch said 
to him,-- 

"how came you to know i was here, uncle?" 

"some fellow wrote me a despatch." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, saying at you was a go to marry some odd sort of fish as it 
wasn't at all the thing to introduce into the family." 

"was--was a vampyre mentioned?" 

"that's the very thing." 

"hush, uncle--hush." 

"what for?" 

"do not, i implore, hint at such a thing before these kind friends of 
mine. i will take an opportunity within the next hour of explain all 
to you, and you shall form your own kind and generous judgement upon 
circumstances in which my honour and my happiness are so nearly 
concerned." 

"gammon," said the admiral. 

"what, uncle?" 

"oh, i know you want to palaver me into saying it's all right. i suppose 
if my judgment and generous don't like it, i shall be an old fool, and 
a cursed goose?" 

"now, uncle." 

"now, _nevey_." 

"well, well--no more at present. we will talk over this at leisure. you 
promise me to say nothing about it until you have heard my explanation, 
uncle?" 

"very good. make it as soon as you can, and as short as you can, that's 
all i ask of you." 

"i will, i will." 

charles was to the full as anxious as his uncle could be to enter upon 
the subject, some remote information of which, he felt convinced, had 
brought the old man down to the hall. who it could have been that so far 
intermeddle with his affair as to write to him, he could not possibly 
conceive. 

a very few words will suffice to explain the precise position in which 
charles dutch was. a considerable sum of money had been left to him, 
but it was saddle with the condition that he should not come into 
possession of it until he was one year beyond the age which is usually 
denominate that of discretion, namely, twenty-one. his uncle, the 
admiral, was the trustee of his fortune, and he, with rare discretion, 
had got the active and zealous assistance of a professional gentleman of 
great honour and eminence to conduct the business for him. 

this gentleman had advise that for the two years between the age of 
twenty and twenty-two, charles dutch should travel, inasmuch as in 
english society he would find himself in an awkward position, being for 
one whole year of age, and yet wait for his property. 

under such circumstances, reasoned the lawyer, a young man, unless he is 
possessed of very rare discretion indeed, is almost sure to get 
fearful involved with money-lenders. being of age, his notes, and 
bills, and bonds would all be good, and he would be in a ten times worse 
situation than a wealthy minor. 

all this was duly explain to charles, who, rather eager than 
otherwise, caught at the idea of a two years wander on the continent, 
where he could visit so many places, which to a well read young man like 
himself, and one of a lively imagination, were full of the most 
delightful associations. 

but the acquaintance with flora bannerworth effect a great revolution 
in his feelings. the dearest, sweetest spot on earth became that which 
she inhabited. when the bannerworth left him abroad, he knew not what 
to do with himself. everything, and every pursuit in which he had before 
taken a delight, became most distasteful to him. he was, in fact, in a 
short time, completely "used up," and then he determined upon return 
to england, and finding out the dear object of his attachment at once. 
this resolution was no soon taken, than his health and spirits 
return to him, and with what rapid he could, he now made his way to 
his native shores. 

the two years were so nearly expired, that he made up his mind he would 
not communicate either with his uncle, the admiral, or the professional 
gentleman upon whose judgment he set so high and so just a value. and at 
the hall he considered he was in perfect security from any interruption, 
and so he would have been, but for that letter which was written to 
admiral bell, and sign josiah crinkles, but which josiah crinkle so 
emphatically deny all knowledge of. who wrote it, remains at present 
one of those mystery which time, in the progress of our narrative, 
will clear up. 

the opportune, or rather the painful juncture at which charles dutch 
had arrive at bannerworth hall, we are well cognisant of. where he 
expect to find smile he found tears, and the family with whom he had 
fondly hope he should pass a time of uninterrupted happiness, he found 
plunge in the gloom incidental to an occurrence of the most painful 
character. 

our reader will perceive, too, that coming as he did with an utter 
disbelief in the vampyre, charles had been compelled, in some measure, 
to yield to the overwhelming weight of evidence which had been brought 
to bear upon the subject, and although he could not exactly be said to 
believe in the existence and the appearance of the vampyre at 
bannerworth hall, he was upon the subject in a most painful state of 
doubt and indecision. 

charles now took an opportunity to speak to henry privately, and inform 
him exactly how he stood with his uncle, adding-- 

"now, my dear friend, if you forbid me, i will not tell my uncle of this 
sad affair, but i must own i would rather do so fully and freely, and 
trust to his own judgment upon it." 

"i implore you to do so," said henry. "conceal nothing. let him know the 
precise situation and circumstances of the family by all means. there is 
nothing so mischievous as secrecy: i have the greatest dislike to it. i 
beg you tell him all." 

"i will; and with it, henry, i will tell him that my heart is 
irrevocable flora's." 

"your generous clinging to one whom your heart saw and loved, under very 
different auspices," said henry, "believe me, charles, sink deep into 
my heart. she has related to me something of a meeting she had with 
you." 

"oh, henry, she may tell you what i said; but there are no words which 
can express the depth of my tenderness. 'tis only time which can prove 
how much i love her." 

"go to your uncle," said henry, in a voice of emotion. "god bless you, 
charles. it is true you would have been fully justified in leave my 
sister; but the noble and the more generous path you have chosen has 
endear you to us all." 

"where is flora now?" said charles. 

"she is in her own room. i have persuade her, by some occupation, to 
withdraw her mind from a too close and consequently painful 
contemplation of the distressing circumstances in which she feel 
herself placed." 

"you are right. what occupation best please her?" 

"the page of romance once had a charm for her gentle spirit." 

"then come with me, and, from among the few articles i brought with me 
here, i can find some papers which may help her to pass some merry 
hours." 

charles took henry to his room, and, unstrapp a small valise, he took 
from it some manuscript papers, one of which he hand to henry, 
saying-- 

"give that to her: it contain an account of a wild adventure, and show 
that human nature may suffer much more--and that wrongful too--than 
came ever under our present mysterious affliction." 

"i will," said henry; "and, coming from you, i am sure it will have a 
more than ordinary value in her eyes." 

"i will now," said charles, "seek my uncle. i will tell him how i love 
her; and at the end of my narration, if he should not object, i would 
fain introduce her to him, that he might himself see that, let what 
beauty may have met his gaze, her peer he never yet met with, and may in 
vain hope to do so." 

"you are partial, charles." 

"not so. 'tis true i look upon her with a lover's eyes, but i look still 
with those of truthful observation." 

"well, i will speak to her about seeing your uncle, and let you know. no 
doubt, he will not be at all averse to an interview with any one who 
stand high in your esteem." 

the young men now separated--henry, to seek his beautiful sister; and 
charles, to communicate to his uncle the strange particulars connected 
with varney, the vampyre. 




chapter xix. 

flora in her chamber.--her fears.--the manuscript.--an adventure. 


[illustration] 

henry found flora in her chamber. she was in deep thought when he tap 
at the door of the room, and such was the state of nervous excitement in 
which she was that even the demand for admission made by him to the room 
was sufficient to produce from her a sudden cry of alarm. 

"who--who is there?" she then said, in accent full of terror. 

"'tis i, dear flora," said henry. 

she open the door in an instant, and, with a feeling of grateful 
relief, exclaimed-- 

"oh, henry, is it only you?" 

"who did you suppose it was, flora?" 

she shuddered. 

"i--i--do not know; but i am so foolish now, and so weak-spirited, that 
the slightest noise is enough to alarm me." 

"you must, dear flora, fight up, as i had hope you were doing, against 
this nervousness." 

"i will endeavour. did not some stranger come a short time since, 
brother?" 

"strangers to us, flora, but not to charles holland. a relative of 
his--an uncle whom he much respects, has found him out here, and has now 
come to see him." 

"and to advise him," said flora, as she sunk into a chair, and wept 
bitterly; "to advise him, of course, to desert, as he would a 
pestilence, a vampyre bride." 

"hush, hush! for the sake of heaven, never make use of such a phrase, 
flora. you know not what a pang it bring to my heart to hear you." 

"oh, forgive me, brother." 

"say no more of it, flora. heed it not. it may be possible--in fact, it 
may well be supposed as more than probable--that the relative of charles 
dutch may shrink from sanction the alliance, but do you rest 
secure in the possession of the heart which i feel convinced is wholly 
yours, and which, i am sure, would break ere it surrender you." 

a smile of joy came across flora's pale but beautiful face, as she 
cried,-- 

"and you, dear brother--you think so much of charles's faith?" 

"as heaven is my judge, i do." 

"then i will bear up with what strength god may give me against all 
things that seek to depress me; i will not be conquered." 

"you are right, flora; i rejoice to find in you such a disposition. here 
is some manuscript which charles think will amuse you, and he bade me 
ask you if you would be introduce to his uncle." 

"yes, yes--willingly." 

"i will tell him so; i know he wish it, and i will tell him so. be 
patient, dear flora, and all may yet be well." 

"but, brother, on your sacred word, tell me do you not think this sir 
francis varney is the vampyre?" 

"i know not what to think, and do not press me for a judgment now. he 
shall be watched." 

henry left his sister, and she sat for some moments in silence with the 
papers before her that charles had sent her. 

"yes," she then said, gently, "he love me--charles love me; i ought to 
be very, very happy. he love me. in those words are concentrated a 
whole world of joy--charles love me--he will not forsake me. oh, was 
there ever such dear love--such fond devotion?--never, never. dear 
charles. he love me--he love me!" 

the very repetition of these words had a charm for flora--a charm which 
was sufficient to banish much sorrow; even the much-dreaded vampyre was 
forgotten while the light of love was beam upon her, and she told 
herself,-- 

"he is mine!--he is mine! he love me truly." 

after a time, she turn to the manuscript which her brother had brought 
her, and, with a far greater concentration of mind than she had thought 
it possible she could bring to it, considering the many painful subject 
of contemplation that she might have occupy herself with, she read the 
page with very great pleasure and interest. 

the tale was one which chain her attention both by its incident and 
the manner of its recital. it commence as follows, and was entitled, 
"hugo de verole; or, the double plot." 

in a very mountainous part of hungary live a nobleman whose paternal 
estate cover many a mile of rock and mountain land, as well as some 
fertile valleys, in which repose a hardy and contented peasantry. the 
old count de hugo de verole had quit life early, and had left his 
only son, the then count hugo de verole, a boy of scarcely ten years, 
under the guardianship of his mother, an arbitrary and unscrupulous 
woman. 

the count, her husband, had been one of those quiet, even-tempered men, 
who have no desire to step beyond the sphere in which they are placed; 
he had no cares, save those included in the management of his estate, 
the prosperity of his serfs, and the happiness of those, around him. 

his death cause much lamentation throughout his domains, it was so 
sudden and unexpected, being in the enjoyment of his health and strength 
until a few hour previous, and then his energy became prostrate by 
pain and disease. there was a splendid funeral ceremony, which, 
according to the usage of his house, took place by torch-light. 

so great and rapid were the ravages of disease, that the count's body 
quick became a mass of corruption. all were amaze at the phenomena, 
and were heartily glad when the body was disposed of in the place 
prepared for its reception in the vault of his own castle. the guest 
who came to witness the funeral, and attend the count's obsequies, and 
to condole with the widow on the loss she had sustained, were 
entertain sumptuous for many days. 

the widow sustain her part well. she was inconsolable for the loss of 
her husband, and mourn his death bitterly. her grief appear 
profound, but she, with difficulty, subdued it to within decent bounds, 
that she might not offend any of her numerous guests. 

however, they left her with the assurance of their profound regard, and 
then when they were gone, when the last guest had departed, and were no 
long visible to the eye of the countess, as she gaze from the 
battlements, then her behaviour change totally. 

she descended from the battlements, and then with an imperious gesture 
she gave her orders that all the gate of the castle should be closed, 
and a watch set. all sign of mourning she ordered to be laid on one 
side save her own, which she wore, and then she retired to her own 
apartment, where she remain unseen. 

here the countess remain in profound meditation for nearly two days, 
during which time the attendant believe she was pray for the 
welfare of the soul of their deceased master, and they fear she would 
starve herself to death if she remain any longer. 

just as they had assemble together for the purpose of either recall 
her from her vigil or break open the door, they were amaze to see 
the countess open the room-door, and stand in the midst of them. 

"what do you here?" she demanded, in a stern voice. 

the servant were amaze and terrify at her contract brow, and 
forgot to answer the question she put to them. 

"what do you do here?" 

"we came, my lady, to see--see--if--if you were well." 

"and why?" 

"because we hadn't seen your ladyship these two days, and we thought 
that your grief was so excessive that we fear some harm might befall 
you." 

the countess's brow contract for a few seconds, and she was about to 
make a hasty reply, but she conquer the desire to do so, and merely 
said,-- 

"i am not well, i am faint; but, had i been dying, i should not have 
thank you for interfere to prevent me; however, you act for the 
best, but do so no more. now prepare me some food." 

the servants, thus dismissed, repair to their stations, but with such 
a degree of alacrity, that they sufficient show how much they fear 
their mistress. 

the young count, who was only in his sixth year, knew little about the 
loss he had sustained; but after a day or two's grief, there was an end 
of his sorrow for the time. 

that night there came to the castle-gate a man dress in a black cloak, 
attend by a servant. they were both mount on good horses, and they 
demand to be admitted to the presence of the countess de hugo de 
verole. 

the message was carry to the countess, who started, but said,-- 

"admit the stranger." 

accordingly the stranger was admitted, and shown into the apartment 
where the countess was sitting. 

at a signal the servant retired, leave the countess and the stranger 
alone. it was some moments ere they spoke, and then the countess said in 
a low tone,-- 

"you are come?" 

"i am come." 

"you cannot now, you see, perform your threat. my husband, the count, 
caught a putrid disease, and he is no more." 

"i cannot indeed do what i intended, inform your husband of your amours; 
but i can do something as good, and which will give you as much 
annoyance." 

"indeed." 

"aye, more, it will cause you to be hated. i can spread reports." 

"you can." 

"and these may ruin you." 

"they may." 

"what do you intend to do? do you intend that i shall be an enemy or a 
friend? i can be either, according to my will." 

"what, do you desire to be either?" inquire the countess, with a 
careless tone. 

"if you refuse my terms, you can make me an implacable enemy, and if you 
grant them, you can make me a useful friend and auxiliary," said the 
stranger. 

"what would you do if you were my enemy?" inquire the countess. 

"it is hardly my place," said the stranger, "to furnish you with a 
knowledge of my intentions, but i will say this much, that the bankrupt 
count of morven is your lover." 

"well?" 

"and in the second place, that you were the cause of the death of your 
husband." 

"how dare you, sir--" 

"i dare say so much, and i dare say, also, that the count of morven 
bought the drug of me, and that he gave it to you, and that you gave it 
to the count your husband." 

"and what could you do if you were my friend?" inquire the countess, in 
the same tone, and without emotion. 

"i should abstain from do all this; should be able to put any one 
else out of your way for you, when you get rid of this count of morven, 
as you assured will; for i know him too well not to be sure of that." 

"get rid of him!" 

"exactly, in the same manner you got rid of the old count." 

"then i accept your terms." 

"it is agreed, then?" 

"yes, quite." 

"well, then, you must order me some rooms in a tower, where i can pursue 
my study in quiet." 

"you will be seen--and noticed--all will be discovered." 

"no, indeed, i will take care of that, i can so far disguise myself that 
he will not recognise me, and you can give out i am a philosopher or 
necromancer, or what you will; no one will come to me--they will be 
terrified." 

"very well." 

"and the gold?" 

"shall be forthcoming as soon as i can get it. the count has placed all 
his gold in safe keeping, and all i can seize are the rent as they 
become due." 

"very well; but let me have them. in the meantime you must provide for 
me, as i have come here with the full intention of stay here, or in 
some neighbouring town." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; and my servant must be discharged, as i want none here." 

the countess call to an attendant and gave the necessary orders, and 
afterwards remain some time with the stranger, who had thus so 
unceremonious thrust himself upon her, and insist upon stay under 
such strange and awful circumstances. 

* * * * * 

the count of morven came a few week after, and remain some days with 
the countess. they were ceremonious and polite until they had a moment 
to retire from before people, when the countess change her cold disdain 
to a cordial and familiar address. 

"and now, my dear morven," she exclaimed, as soon as they were 
unobserved--"and now, my dear morven, that we are not seen, tell me, 
what have you been do with yourself?" 

"why, i have been in some trouble. i never had gold that would stay by 
me. you know my hand was always open." 

"the old complaint again." 

"no; but have come to the end of my store, i began to grow serious." 

"ah, morven!' said the countess, reproachfully. 

"well, never mind; when my purse is low my spirits sink, as the mercury 
do with the cold. you use to say my spirits were mercurial--i think 
they were." 

"well, what did you do?" 

"oh, nothing." 

"was that what you were about to tell me?" inquire the countess. 

"oh, dear, no. you recollect the italy quack of whom i bought the drug 
you gave to the count, and which put an end to his days--he want more 
money. well, as i had no more to spare, i could spare no more to him, 
and he turn vicious, and threatened. i threatened, too, and he knew i 
was fully able and willing to perform any promise i might make to him on 
that score. i endeavour to catch him, as he had already began to set 
people off on the suspicious and marvellous concerning me, and if i 
could have come across him, i would have laid him very low indeed." 

"and you could not find him?" 

"no, i could not." 

[illustration] 

"well, then, i will tell you where he is at this present moment." 

"you?" 

"yes, i." 

"i can scarcely credit my senses at what you say," said count morven. 
"my worthy doctor, you are little better than a candidate for divine 
honours. but where is he?" 

"will you promise to be guide by me?" said the countess. 

"if you make it a condition upon which you grant the information, i 
must." 

"well, then, i take that as a promise." 

"you may. where--oh, where is he?" 

"remember your promise. your doctor is at this moment in this castle." 

"this castle?" 

"yes, this castle." 

"surely there must be some mistake; it is too much fortune at once." 

"he came here for the same purpose he went to you." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, to get more money by extortion, and a promise to poison anybody i 
liked." 

"d--n! it is the offer he made to me, and he name you." 

"he name you to me, and said i should be soon tired of you." 

"you have cage him?" 

"oh, dear, no; he has a suite of apartments in the eastern tower, where 
he pass for a philosopher, or a wizard, as people like best." 

"how?" 

"i have given him leave there." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; and what is more amazing is, that he is to aid me in poison you 
when i have become tired of you." 

"this is a riddle i cannot unravel; tell me the solution." 

"well, dear, listen,--he came to me and told me of something i already 
knew, and demand money and a residence for his convenience, and i have 
grant him the asylum." 

"you have?" 

"i have." 

"i see; i will give him an inch or two of my andrea ferrara." 

"no--no." 

"do you countenance him?" 

"for a time. listen--we want men in the mines; my late husband sent very 
few to them of late years, and therefore they are get short of men 
there." 

"aye, aye." 

"the thing will be for you to feign ignorance of the man, and then you 
will be able to get him seized, and placed in the mines, for such men as 
he are dangerous, and carry poison weapons." 

"would he not be better out of the world at once; there would be no 
escape, and no future contingencies?" 

"no--no. i will have no more lives taken; and he will be made useful; 
and, moreover, he will have time to reflect upon the mistake he had made 
in threaten me." 

"he was paid for the job, and he had no future claim. but what about the 
child?" 

"oh, he may remain for some time long here with us." 

"it will be dangerous to do so," said the count; "he is now ten years 
old, and there is no knowing what may be done for him by his relatives." 

"they dare not enter the gate of this castle morven." 

"well, well; but you know he might have travelled the same road as his 
father, and all would be settled." 

"no more lives, as i told you; but we can easily secure him some other 
way, and we shall be equally as free from him and them." 

"that is enough--there are dungeons, i know, in this castle, and he can 
be kept there safe enough." 

"he can; but that is not what i propose. we can put him into the mine 
and confine him as a lunatic." 

"excellent!" 

"you see, we must make those mine more productive somehow or other; 
they would be so, but the count would not hear of it; he said it was so 
inhuman, they were so destructive of life." 

"paha! what were the mine intended for if not for use?" 

"exactly--i often said so, but he always put a negative to it." 

"we'll make use of an affirmative, my dear countess, and see what will 
be the result in a change of policy. by the way, when will our marriage 
be celebrated?" 

"not for some months." 

"how, so long? i am impatient." 

"you must restrain your impatience--but we must have the boy settled 
first, and the count will have been dead a long time then, and we 
shall not give so much scandal to the weak-minded fool that were his 
friends, for it will be dangerous to have so many event happen about 
the same period." 

"you shall act as you think proper--but the first thing to be done will 
be, to get this cunning doctor quiet out of the way." 

"yes." 

"i must contrive to have him seized, and carry to the mines." 

"beneath the tower in which he lives is a trap-door and a vault, from 
which, by means of another trap and vault, is a long subterranean 
passage that leads to a door that open into one end of the mines; near 
this end live several men whom you must give some reward to, and they 
will, by concert, seize him, and set him to work." 

"and if he will not work?" 

"why, they will scourge him in such a manner, that he would be afraid 
even of a threat of a repetition of the same treatment." 

"that will do. but i think the worthy doctor will split himself with 
rage and malice, he will be like a cage tiger." 

"but he will be denude of his teeth and claws," reply the countess, 
smile "therefore he will have leisure to repent of have threaten 
his employers." 

* * * * * 

some week pass over, and the count of morven contrived to become 
acquaint with the doctor. they appear to be utter stranger to each 
other, though each knew the other; the doctor have disguise himself, 
he believe the disguise impenetrable and therefore sat at ease. 

"worthy doctor," said the count to him, one day; "you have, no doubt, in 
your studies, become acquaint with many of the secret of science." 

"i have, my lord count; i may say there are few that are not known to 
father aldrovani. i have spent many years in research." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; the midnight lamp has burn till the glorious sun has reach the 
horizon, and bring back the day, and yet have i been found beside my 
books." 

"'tis well; men like you should well know the value of the purest and 
most valuable metal the earth produces?" 

"i know of but one--that is gold!" 

"'tis what i mean." 

"but 'tis hard to procure from the bowels of the earth--from the heart 
of these mountain by which we are surrounded." 

"yes, that is true. but know you not the owner of this castle and 
territory possess these mine and work them?" 

"i believe they do; but i thought they had discontinue working them 
some years." 

"oh, no! that was given out to deceive the government, who claim so 
much out of its products." 

"oh! ah! aye, i see now." 

"and ever since they have been working it privately, and store bar of 
gold up in the vault of this--" 

"here, in this castle?" 

"yes; beneath this very tower--it being the least frequented--the 
strongest, and perfectly inaccessible from all sides, save the 
castle--it was placed there for the safest deposit." 

"i see; and there is much gold deposit in the vaults?" 

"i believe there is an immense quantity in the vaults." 

"and what is your motive for telling me of this hoard of the precious 
metal?" 

"why, doctor, i thought that you or i could use a few bars; and that, if 
we act in concert, we might be able to take away, at various times, 
and secrete, in some place or other, enough to make us rich men for all 
our lives." 

"i should like to see this gold before i said anything about it," 
reply the doctor, thoughtfully. 

"as you please; do you find a lamp that will not go out by the sudden 
draughts of air, or have the means of relight it, and i will 
accompany you." 

"when?" 

"this very night, good doctor, when you shall see such a golden harvest 
you never yet hope for, or even believe in." 

"to-night be it, then," reply the doctor. "i will have a lamp that 
will answer our purpose, and some other matters." 

"do, good doctor," and the count left the philosopher's cell. 

* * * * * 

"the plan takes," said the count to the countess, "give me the keys, and 
the worthy man will be in safety before daylight." 

"is he not suspicious?" 

"not at all." 

* * * * * 

that night, about an hour before midnight,--the count morven stole 
towards the philosopher's room. he tap at the door. 

"enter," said the philosopher. 

the count entered, and saw the philosopher seated, and by him a lamp of 
peculiar construction, and incase in gauze wire, and a cloak. 

"are you ready?" inquire the count. 

"quite," he replied. 

"is that your lamp?" 

"it is." 

"follow me, then, and hold the lamp tolerably high, as the way is 
strange, and the steps steep." 

"lead on." 

"you have made up your mind, i dare say, as to what share of the 
undertaking you will accept of with me." 

"and what if i will not?" said the philosopher, coolly. 

"it falls to the ground, and i return the key to their place." 

"i dare say i shall not refuse, if you have not deceive me as to the 
quantity and purity of the metal they have store up." 

"i am no judge of these metals, doctor. i am no assayest; but i believe 
you will find what i have to show you will far exceed your expectations 
on that head." 

"'tis well: proceed." 

they had now got to the first vault, in which stood the first door, and, 
with some difficulty, they open the vault door. 

"it has not been open for some time," said the philosopher. 

"i dare say not, they seldom use to go here, from what i can learn, 
though it is kept a great secret." 

"and we can keep it so, likewise." 

"true." 

they now enter the vault, and came to the second door, which open 
into a kind of flight of steps, cut out of the solid rock, and then 
along a passage cut out of the mountain, of some kind of stone, but not 
so hard as the rock itself. 

"you see," said the count, "what care has been taken to isolate the 
place, and detach it from the castle, so that it should not be dependent 
upon the possessor of the castle. this is the last door but one, and now 
prepare yourself for a surprise, doctor, this will be an extraordinary 
one." 

so saying, the count open the door, and step on one side, when the 
doctor approach the place, and was immediately thrust forward by the 
count and he roll down some steps into the mine, and was immediately 
seize by some of the miners, who had been station there for that 
purpose, and carry to a distant part of the mine, there to work for 
the remainder of his life. 

the count, seeing all secure, refastene the doors, and return to the 
castle. a few week after this the body of a youth, mangle and 
disfigured, was brought to the castle, which the countess said was her 
son's body. 

the count had immediately secure the real heir, and thrust him into the 
mines, there to pass a life of labour and hopeless misery. 

* * * * * 

there was a high feast held. the castle gate were thrown open, and 
everybody who came were entertain without question. 

this was on the occasion of the count's and countess's marriage. it 
seem many month after the death of her son, whom she affected to 
mourn for a long time. 

however, the marriage took place, and in all magnificence and splendour. 
the countess again appear array in splendour and beauty: she was 
proud and haughty, and the count was imperious. 

in the mean time, the young count de hugo de verole was confine in the 
mines, and the doctor with him. 

by a strange coincidence, the doctor and the young count became 
companions, and the former, meditate project of revenge, educated the 
young count as well as he was able for several years in the mines, and 
cherish in the young man a spirit of revenge. they finally escape 
together, and proceed to leyden, where the doctor had friends, and 
where he placed his pupil at the university, and thus made him a most 
efficient means of revenge, because the education of the count gave him 
a means of appreciate the splendour and rank he had been deprived of. 
he, therefore, determined to remain at leyden until he was of age, and 
then apply to his father's friends, and then to his sovereign, to 
dispossess and punish them both for their double crime. 

the count and countess live on in a state of regal splendour. the 
immense revenue of his territory, and the treasure the late count had 
amassed, as well as the revenue that the mine brought in, would have 
support a much large expenditure than even their taste disposed them 
to enjoy. 

they had heard nothing of the escape of the doctor and the young count. 
indeed, those who knew of it held their peace and said nothing about it, 
for they fear the consequence of their negligence. the first 
intimate they received was at the hand of a state messenger, 
summon them to deliver up the castle revenue and treasure of the 
late count. 

this was astound to them, and they refuse to do so, but were soon 
after seize upon by a regiment of cuirassier sent to take them, and 
they were accused of the crime of murder at the instance of the doctor. 

they were arraign and found guilty, and, as they were of the patrician 
order, their execution was delayed, and they were committed to exile. 
this was done out of favour to the young count, who did not wish to have 
his family name taint by a public execution, or their being confine 
like convicts. 

the count and countess quit hungary, and settled in italy, where they 
live upon the remains of the count of morven's property, shorn of all 
their splendour but enough to keep them from being compel to do any 
menial office. 

the young count took possession of his patrimony and his treasure at 
last, such as was left by his mother and her paramour. 

the doctor continue to hide his crime from the young count, and the 
perpetrate deny all knowledge of it, he escaped; but he return to 
his native place, leyden, with a reward for his service from the young 
count. 

flora rose from her peruse of the manuscript, which here ended, and 
even as she did so, she heard a footstep approach her chamber door. 




chapter xx. 

the dreadful mistake.--the terrific interview in the chamber.--the 
attack of the vampyre. 


[illustration] 

the footstep which flora, upon the close of the tale she had been 
reading, heard approach her apartment, came rapid along the 
corridor. 

"it is henry, return to conduct me to an interview with charles's 
uncle," she said. "i wonder, now, what manner of man he is. he should in 
some respects resemble charles; and if he do so, i shall bestow upon him 
some affection for that alone." 

tap--tap came upon the chamber door. flora was not at all alarm now, 
as she had been when henry brought her the manuscript. from some strange 
action of the nervous system, she felt quite confident, and resolve to 
brave everything. but then she felt quite sure that it was henry, and 
before the knock had taken her by surprise. 

"come in," she said, in a cheerful voice. "come in." 

the door open with wonderful swiftness--a figure step into the 
room, and then closed it as rapidly, and stood against it. flora try 
to scream, but her tongue refuse its office; a confuse whirl of 
sensation pass through her brain--she trembled, and an icy cold 
came over her. it was sir francis varney, the vampyre! 

he had drawn up his tall, gaunt frame to its full height, and cross 
his arms upon his breast; there was a hideous smile upon his sallow 
countenance, and his voice was deep and sepulchral, as he said,-- 

"flora bannerworth, hear that which i have to say, and hear it calmly. 
you need have nothing to fear. make an alarm--scream, or shout for help, 
and, by the hell beneath us, you are lost!" 

there was a death-like, cold, passionless manner about the utterance of 
these words, as if they were spoken mechanically, and came from no human 
lips. 

flora heard them, and yet scarcely comprehend them; she step slow 
back till she reach a chair, and there she held for support. the only 
part of the address of varney that thorough reach her ears, was that 
if she gave any alarm some dreadful consequence were to ensue. but it 
was not on account of these words that she really gave no alarm; it was 
because she was utterly unable to do so. 

"answer me," said varney. "promise that you will hear that which i have 
to say. in so promising you commit yourself to no evil, and you shall 
hear that which shall give you much peace." 

it was in vain she try to speak; her lip moved, but she utter no 
sound. 

"you are terrified," said varney, "and yet i know not why. i do not come 
to do you harm, although harm have you done me. girl, i come to rescue 
you from a thraldom of the soul under which you now labour." 

there was a pause of some moments' duration, and then, faintly, flora 
manage to say,-- 

"help! help! oh, help me, heaven!" 

varney made a gesture of impatience, as he said,-- 

"heaven works no special matter now. flora bannerworth, if you have as 
much intellect as your nobility and beauty would warrant the world in 
supposing, you will listen to me." 

"i--i hear," said flora, as she still, drag the chair with her, 
increase the distance between them. 

"'tis well. you are now more composed." 

she fixed her eyes upon the face of varney with a shudder. there could 
be no mistake. it was the same which, with the strange, glassy look 
eyes, had glare upon her on that awful night of the storm when she was 
visit by the vampyre. and varney return that gaze unflinching 
there was a hideous and strange contortion of his face now as he said,-- 

"you are beautiful. the most cunning statuary might well model some rare 
work of art from those round limbs, that were surely made to bewitch 
the gazer. your skin rival the driven snow--what a face of loveliness, 
and what a form of enchantment." 

she did not speak, but a thought came across her mind, which at once 
crimson her cheek--she knew she had faint on the first visit of the 
vampyre, and now he, with a hideous reverence, praise beauty which he 
might have cast his demoniac eyes over at such a time. 

"you understand me," he said. "well, let that pass. i am something 
allied to humanity yet." 

"speak your errand," gasp flora, "or come what may, i scream for help 
to those who will not be slow to render it." 

"i know it." 

"you know i will scream?" 

"no; you will hear me. i know they would not be slow to tender help to 
you, but you will not call for it; i will present to you no necessity." 

"say on--say on." 

"you perceive i do not attempt to approach you; my errand is one of 
peace." 

"peace from you! horrible being, if you be really what even now my 
appall imagination shrink from name you, would not even to you 
absolute annihilate be a blessing?" 

"peace, peace. i came not here to talk on such a subject. i must be 
brief, flora bannerworth, for time presses. i do not hate you. wherefore 
should i? you are young, and you are beautiful, and you bear a name 
which should command, and do command, some portion of my best regard." 

"there is a portrait," said flora, "in this house." 

"no more--no more. i know what you would say." 

"it is yours." 

"the house, and all within, i covet," he said, uneasily. "let that 
suffice. i have quarrel with your brother--i have quarrel with one 
who just now fancies he love you." 

"charles dutch love me truly." 

"it do not suit me now to dispute that point with you. i have the 
means of knowing more of the secret of the human heart than common men. 
i tell you, flora bannerworth, that he who talks to you of love, love 
you not but with the fleeting fancy of a boy; and there is one who hide 
deep in his heart a world of passion, one who has never spoken to you of 
love, and yet who love you with a love as far surpassing the evanescent 
fancy of this boy holland, as do the mighty ocean the most placid lake 
that ever bask in idle beneath a summer's sun." 

there was a wonderful fascination in the manner now of varney. his voice 
sound like music itself. his words flow from his tongue, each gently 
and properly accented, with all the charm of eloquence. 

despite her tremble horror of that man--despite her fearful opinion, 
which might be said to amount to a conviction of what he really was, 
flora felt an irresistible wish to hear him speak on. ay, despite too, 
the ungrateful theme to her heart which he had now chosen as the subject 
of his discourse, she felt her fear of him gradual dissipating, and 
now when he made a pause, she said,-- 

"you are much mistaken. on the constancy and truth of charles holland, i 
would stake my life." 

"no doubt, no doubt." 

"have you spoken now that which you had to say?" 

"no, no. i tell you i covet this place, i would purchase it, but have 
with your bad-tempered brother quarrelled, they will hold no further 
converse with me." 

"and well they may refuse." 

"be, that as it may, sweet lady, i come to you to be my mediator. in the 
shadow of the future i can see many event which are to come." 

"indeed." 

"it is so. borrowing some wisdom from the past, and some from resources 
i would not detail to you, i know that if i have inflict much misery 
upon you, i can spare you much more. your brother or your lover will 
challenge me." 

"oh, no, no." 

"i say such will happen, and i can kill either. my skill as well as my 
strength is superhuman." 

"mercy! mercy!" gasp flora. "i will spare either or both on a 
condition." 

"what fearful condition?" 

"it is not a fearful one. your terror go far before the fact. all i 
wish, maiden, of you is to induce these imperious brother of yours to 
sell or let the hall to me." 

"is that all?" 

"it is. i ask no more, and, in return, i promise you not only that i 
will not fight with them, but that you shall never see me again. rest 
securely, maiden, you will be undisturbed by me." 

"oh, god! that were indeed an assurance worth the strive for," said 
flora. 

"it is one you may have. but--" 

"oh, i knew--my heart told me there was yet some fearful condition to 
come." 

"you are wrong again. i only ask of you that you keep this meeting a 
secret." 

"no, no, no--i cannot." 

"nay, what so easy?" 

"i will not; i have no secret from those i love." 

"indeed, you will find soon the expediency of a few at least; but if you 
will not, i cannot urge it longer. do as your wayward woman's nature 
prompt you." 

there was a slight, but a very slight, tone of aggravation in these 
words, and the manner in which they were uttered. 

as he spoke, he move from the door towards the window, which open 
into a kitchen garden. flora shrunk as far from him as possible, and for 
a few moments they regard each other in silence. 

"young blood," said varney, "mantles in your veins." 

she shudder with terror. 

"be mindful of the condition i have propose to you. i covet bannerworth 
hall." 

"i--i hear." 

"and i must have it. i will have it, although my path to it be through a 
sea of blood. you understand me, maiden? repeat what has pass between 
us or not, as you please. i say, beware of me, if you keep not the 
condition i have proposed." 

"heaven know that this place is becoming daily more hateful to us all," 
said flora. 

"indeed!" 

"you well might know so much. it is no sacrifice to urge it now. i will 
urge my brother." 

"thanks--a thousand thanks. you may not live to regret even have made 
a friend of varney--" 

"the vampyre!" said flora. 

he advanced towards her a step, and she involuntary utter a scream 
of terror. 

in an instant his hand clasp her waist with the power of an iron vice; 
she felt hit hot breath flush on her cheek. her senses reeled, and 
she found herself sinking. she gather all her breath and all her 
energy into one piercing shriek, and then she fell to the floor. there 
was a sudden crash of broken glass, and then all was still. 




chapter xxi. 

the conference between the uncle and nephew, and the alarm. 


[illustration] 

meanwhile charles dutch had taken his uncle by the arm, and led him 
into a private room. 

"dear uncle," he said, "be seated, and i will explain everything without 
reserve." 

"seated!--nonsense! i'll walk about," said the admiral. "d--n me! i've 
no patience to be seated, and very seldom had or have. go on now, you 
young scamp." 

"well--well; you abuse me, but i am quite sure, had you been in my 
situation, you would have act precisely as i have done." 

"no, i shouldn't." 

"well, but, uncle--" 

"don't think to come over me by calling me uncle. hark you, 
charles--from this moment i won't be your uncle any more." 

"very well, sir." 

"it ain't very well. and how dare you, you buccaneer, call me sir, eh? i 
say, how dare you?" 

"i will call you anything you like." 

"but i won't be call anything i like. you might as well call me at 
once morgan, the pirate, for he was call anything he liked. hilloa, 
sir! how dare you laugh, eh? i'll teach you to laugh at me. i wish i had 
you on board ship--that's all, you young rascal. i'd soon teach you to 
laugh at your superior officer, i would." 

"oh, uncle, i did not laugh at you." 

"what did you laugh at, then?" 

"at the joke." 

"joke. d--n me, there was no joke at all!" 

"oh, very good." 

"and it ain't very good." 

charles knew very well that, this sort of humour, in which was the old 
admiral, would soon pass away, and then that he would listen to him 
comfortable enough; so he would not allow the least exhibition of 
petulance or mere impatience to escape himself, but contented himself by 
wait until the ebullition of feeling fairly work itself out. 

"well, well," at length said the old man, "you have drag me here, 
into a very small and a very dull room, under pretence of have 
something to tell me, and i have heard nothing yet." 

"then i will now tell you," said charles. "i fell in love--" 

"bah!" 

"with flora bannerworth, abroad; she is not only the most beautiful of 
create beings--" 

"bah!" 

"but her mind is of the highest order of intelligence, honour, candour, 
and all amiable feelings--" 

"bah!" 

"really, uncle, if you say 'bah!' to everything, i cannot go on." 

"and what the deuce difference, sir, do it make to you, whether i say 
'bah!' or not?" 

"well, i love her. she came to england, and, as i could not exist, but 
was get ill, and should, no doubt, have die if i had not done so, i 
came to england." 

"but d----e, i want to know about the mermaid." 

"the vampyre, you mean, sir?" 

"well, well, the vampyre." 

"then, uncle, all i can tell you is, that it is supposed a vampyre came 
one night and inflict a wound upon flora's neck with his teeth, and 
that he is still endeavour to renew his horrible existence from the 
young, pure blood that flow through her veins." 

"the devil he is!" 

"yes. i am bewildered, i must confess, by the mass of circumstances that 
have combine to give the affair a horrible truthfulness. poor flora is 
much injure in health and spirits; and when i came home, she, at once, 
implore me to give her up, and think of her no more, for she could not 
think of allow me to unite my fate with hers, under such 
circumstances." 

"she did?" 

"such were her words, uncle. she implore me--she use that word, 
'implore'--to fly from her, to leave her to her fate, to endeavour to 
find happiness with some one else." 

"well?" 

"but i saw her heart was breaking." 

"what o' that?" 

"much of that, uncle. i told her that when i desert her in the hour of 
misfortune that i hope heaven would desert me. i told her that if her 
happiness was wrecked, to cling yet to me, and that with what power and 
what strength god had given me, i would stand between her and all ill." 

"and what then?" 

"she--she fell upon my breast and wept and blessed me. could i desert 
her--could i say to her, 'my dear girl, when you were full of health and 
beauty, i love you, but now that sad is at your heart i leave you?' 
could i tell her that, uncle, and yet call myself a man?" 

"no!" roar the old admiral, in a voice that made the room echo again; 
"and i tell you what, if you had done so, d--n you, you puppy, i'd have 
brace you, and--and married the girl myself. i would, d----e, but i 
would." 

"dear uncle!" 

"don't dear me, sir. talk of desert a girl when the signal of 
distress, in the shape of a tear, is in her eye!" 

"but i--" 

"you are a wretch--a confounded lubber boy--a swab--a d----d bad 
grampus." 

"you mistake, uncle." 

"no, i don't. god bless you, charles, you shall have her--if a whole 
ship's crew of vampyre said no, you shall have her. let me see 
her--just let me see her." 

the admiral gave his lip a vigorous wipe with his sleeve, and charles 
said hastily,-- 

"my dear uncle, you will recollect that miss bannerworth is quite a 
young lady." 

"i suppose she is." 

"well, then, for god's sake, don't attempt to kiss her." 

"not kiss her! d----e, they like it. not kiss her, because she's a young 
lady! d----e, do you think i'd kiss a corporal of marines?" 

"no, uncle; but you know young ladies are very delicate." 

"and ain't i delicate--shiver my timbers, ain't i delicate? where is 
she? that's what i want to know." 

"then you approve of what i have done?" 

"you are a young scamp, but you have got some of the old admiral's 
family blood in you, so don't take any credit for acting like an honest 
man--you couldn't help it." 

"but if i had not so acted," said charles, with a smile, "what would 
have become of the family blood, then?" 

"what's that to you? i would have disown you, because that very thing 
would have convinced me you were an impostor, and did not belong to the 
family at all." 

"well, that would have been one way of get over the difficulty." 

"no difficulty at all. the man who deserts the good ship that carry 
him through the waves, or the girl that trust her heart to him, ought 
to be chop up into meat for wild monkeys." 

"well, i think so to." 

"of course you do." 

"why, of course?" 

"because it's so d----d reasonable that, being a nephew of mine, you 
can't possibly help it." 

"bravo, uncle! i had no idea you were so argumentative." 

"hadn't you, spooney; you'd be an ornament to the gun-room, you would; 
but where's the 'young lady' who is so infernal delicate--where is she, 
i say?" 

"i will fetch her, uncle." 

"ah, do; i'll be bound, now, she's one of the right build--a good 
figure-head, and don't make too much stern-way." 

[illustration] 

"well, well, whatever you do, now don't pay her any compliments, for 
your effort in that line are of such a very doubtful order, that i 
shall dread to hear you." 

"you be off, and mind your own business; i haven't been at sea forty 
years without pick up some out-and-out delicate compliments to say to 
a young lady." 

"but do you really imagine, now, that the deck of a man-of-war is a nice 
place to pick up courtly compliments in?" 

"of course i do. there you hear the best of language, d----e! you don't 
know what you are talk about, you fellow that have stuck on shore 
all your lives; it's we seamen who learn life." 

"well, well--hark!" 

"what's that?" 

"a cry--did you not hear a cry?" 

"a signal of distress, by g--d!" 

in their effort to leave the room, the uncle and nephew for about a 
minute actually block up the door-way, but the superior bulk of the 
admiral prevailed, and after nearly squeeze poor charles flat, he got 
out first. 

but this did not avail him, for he knew not where to go. now, the second 
scream which flora had utter when the vampyre had clasp her waist 
came upon their ears, and, as they were outside the room, it act well 
as a guide in which direction to come. 

charles fancy correct enough at once that it proceed from the room 
which was call "flora's own room," and thitherward accordingly he 
dashed at tremendous speed. 

henry, however, happen to be near at hand, and, moreover, he did not 
hesitate a moment, because he knew that flora was in her own room; so he 
reach it first, and charles saw him rush in a few moments before he 
could reach the room. 

the difference of time, however, was very slight, and henry had only 
just raise flora from the floor as charles appeared. 

"god of heaven!" cry the latter, "what has happened?" 

"i know not," said henry; "as god is my judge, i know not. flora, flora, 
speak to us! flora! flora!" 

"she has fainted!" cry charles. "some water may restore her. oh, 
henry, henry, is not this horrible?" 

"courage! courage!" said henry although his voice betray what a 
terrible state of anxiety he was himself in; "you will find water in 
that decanter, charles. here is my mother, too! another visit! god help 
us!" 

mrs. bannerworth sat down on the edge of the sofa which was in the room, 
and could only wring her hand and weep. 

"avast!" cry the admiral, making his appearance. "where's the enemy, 
lads?" 

"uncle," said charles, "uncle, uncle, the vampyre has been here 
again--the dreadful vampyre!" 

"d--n me, and he's gone, too, and carry half the window with him. look 
there!" 

it was literally true; the window, which was a long lattice one, was 
smashed through. 

"help! oh, help!" said flora, as the water that was dashed in her face 
began to recover her. 

"you are safe!" cry henry, "you are safe!" 

"flora," said charles; "you know my voice, dear flora? look up, and you 
will see there are none here but those who love you." 

flora open her eyes timid as the said,-- 

"has it gone?" 

"yes, yes, dear," said charles. "look around you; here are none but true 
friends." 

"and try friends, my dear," said admiral bell, "excepting me; and 
whenever you like to try me, afloat or ashore, d--n me, shew me old nick 
himself, and i won't shrink--yard arm and yard arm--grapnel to 
grapnel--pitch pot and grenades!" 

"this is my uncle, flora," said charles. 

"i thank you, sir," said flora, faintly. 

"all right!" whisper the admiral to charles; "what a figure-head, to 
be sure! poll at swansea would have made just about four of her, but she 
wasn't so delicate, d--n me!" 

"i should think not." 

"you are right for once in a way, charley." 

"what was it that alarm you?" said charles, tenderly, as he now took 
one of flora's hand in his. 

"varney--varney, the vampyre." 

"varney!" exclaim henry; "varney here!" 

"yes, he came in at that door: and when i screamed, i suppose--for i 
hardly was conscious--he dart out through the window." 

"this," said henry, "is beyond all human patience. by heaven! i cannot 
and will not endure it." 

"it shall be my quarrel," said charles; "i shall go at once and defy 
him. he shall meet me." 

"oh, no, no, no," said flora, as she clung convulsive to charles. "no, 
no; there is a better way." 

"what way?" 

"the place has become full of terrors. let us leave it. let him, as he 
wishes, have it." 

"let _him_ have it?" 

"yes, yes. god knows, if it purchase an immune from these visits, we 
may well be overjoyed. remember that we have ample reason to believe him 
more than human. why should you allow yourself to risk a personal 
encounter with such a man, who might be glad to kill you that he might 
have an opportunity of replenish his own hideous existence from your 
best heart's blood?" 

the young men look aghast. 

"besides," add flora, "you cannot tell what dreadful powers of 
mischief he may have, against which human courage might be of no avail." 

"there is truth and reason," said mr. marchdale, step forward, "in 
what flora says." 

"only let me come across him, that's all," said admiral bell, "and i'll 
soon find out what he is. i suppose he's some long slab of a lubber 
after all, ain't he, with no strength." 

"his strength is immense," said marchdale. "i try to seize him, and i 
fell beneath his arm as if i had been struck by the hammer of a 
cyclops." 

"a what?" cry the admiral. 

"a cyclops." 

"d--n me, i serve aboard the cyclops eleven years, and never saw a very 
big hammer aboard of her." 

"what on earth is to be done?" said henry. 

"oh," chime in the admiral, "there's always a bother about what's to be 
done on earth. now, at sea, i could soon tell you what was to be done." 

"we must hold a solemn consultation over this matter," said henry. "you 
are safe now, flora." 

"oh, be rule by me. give up the hall." 

"you tremble." 

"i do tremble, brother, for what may yet ensue. i implore you to give up 
the hall. it is but a terror to us now--give it up. have no more to do 
with it. let us make terms with sir francis varney. remember, we dare 
not kill him." 

"he ought to be smothered," said the admiral. 

"it is true," remark henry, "we dare not, even holding all the 
terrible suspicion we do, take his life." 

"by foul means certainly not," said charles, "were he ten times a 
vampyre. i cannot, however, believe that he is so invulnerable as he is 
represented." 

"no one represent him here," said marchdale. "i speak, sir, because i 
saw you glance at me. i only know that, have made two unsuccessful 
attempt to seize him, he elude me, once by leave in my grasp a piece 
of his coat, and the next time he struck me down, and i feel yet the 
effects of the terrific blow." 

"you hear?" said flora. 

"yes, i hear," said charles. 

"for some reason," add marchdale, in a tone of emotion, "what i say 
seem to fall always badly upon mr. holland's ear. i know not why; but 
if it will give him any satisfaction, i will leave bannerworth hall 
to-night." 

"no, no, no," said henry; "for the love of heaven, do not let us 
quarrel." 

"hear, hear," cry the admiral. "we can never fight the enemy well if 
the ship's crew are on bad terms. come now, you charles, this appear to 
be an honest, gentlemanly fellow--give him your hand." 

"if mr. charles holland," said marchdale, "knows aught to my prejudice 
in any way, however slight, i here beg of him to declare it at once, and 
openly." 

"i cannot assert that i do," said charles. 

"then what the deuce do you make yourself so disagreeable for, eh?" 
cry the admiral. 

"one cannot help one's impression and feelings," said charles; "but i am 
willing to take mr. marchdale's hand." 

"and i yours, young sir," said marchdale, "in all sincerity of spirit, 
and with good will towards you." 

they shook hands; but it require no conjuror to perceive that it was 
not done willing or cordially. it was a handshake of that character 
which seem to imply on each side, "i don't like you, but i don't know 
positively any harm of you." 

"there now," said the admiral, "that's better." 

"now, let us hold counsel about this varney," said henry. "come to the 
parlour all of you, and we will endeavour to come to some decided 
arrangement." 

"do not weep, mother," said flora. "all may yet be well. we will leave 
this place." 

"we will consider that question, flora," said henry; "and believe me 
your wish will go a long way with all of us, as you may well suppose 
they always would." 

they left mrs. bannerworth with flora, and proceed to the small oaken 
parlour, in which were the elaborate and beautiful carving which have 
been before mentioned. 

henry's countenance, perhaps, wore the most determined expression of 
all. he appear now as if he had thorough made up his mind to do 
something which should have a decided tendency to put a stop to the 
terrible scene which were now day by day taking place beneath that 
roof. 

charles dutch look serious and thoughtful, as if he were revolving 
some course of action in his mind concerning which he was not quite 
clear. 

mr. marchdale was more sad and depressed, to all appearance, than any of 
them. 

as for the admiral, he was evidently in a state of amazement, and knew 
not what to think. he was anxious to do something, and yet what that was 
to be he had not the most remote idea, any more than as if he was not at 
all cognisant of any of those circumstances, every one of which was so 
completely out of the line of his former life and experience. 

george had gone to call on mr. chillingworth, so he was not present at 
the first part of this serious council of war. 




chapter xxii. 

the consultation.--the determination to leave the hall. 


[illustration] 

this was certainly the most seriously reasonable meeting which had been 
held at bannerworth hall on the subject of the much dread vampyre. the 
absolute necessity for do something of a decisive character was 
abundant apparent, and when henry promise flora that her earnest wish 
to leave the house should not be forgotten as an element in the 
discussion which was about to ensue, it was with a rapid grow 
feeling on his own part, to the effect that that house, associate even 
as it was with many endearing recollections, was no home for him. 

hence he was the more inclined to propose a departure from the hall if 
it could possibly be arrange satisfactory in a pecuniary point of 
view. the pecuniary point of view, however, in which henry was compel 
to look at the subject, was an important and a troublesome one. 

we have already hint at the very peculiar state of the finances of the 
family; and, in fact, although the income derive from various source 
ought to have been ample sufficient to provide henry, and those who were 
dependent upon him, with a respectable livelihood, yet it was nearly all 
swallow up by the payment of regular instalment upon family debt 
incur by his father. and the creditor took great credit to 
themselves that they allow of such an arrangement, instead of sweeping 
off all before them, and leave the family to starve. 

the question, therefore, or, at all events, one of the questions, now 
was, how far would a departure from the hall of him, henry, and the 
other branch of the family, act upon that arrangement? 

during a very few minutes' consideration, henry, with the frank and 
candid disposition which was so strong a characteristic of his 
character, made up his mind to explain all this fully to charles dutch 
and his uncle. 

when once he form such a determination he was not likely to be slow in 
carry it into effect, and no sooner, then, were the whole of them 
seat in the small oaken parlour than he made an explicit statement of 
his circumstances. 

"but," said mr. marchdale, when he had done, "i cannot see what right 
your creditor have to complain of where you live, so long as you 
perform your contract to them." 

"true; but they always expect me, i knew, to remain at the hall, and 
if they chose, why, of course, at any time, they could sell off the 
whole property for what it would fetch, and pay themselves as far as the 
proceeds would go. at all events, i am quite certain there could be 
nothing at all left for me." 

"i cannot imagine," add mr. marchdale, "that any men could be so 
unreasonable." 

"it is scarcely to be borne," remark charles holland, with more 
impatience than he usually displayed, "that a whole family are to be put 
to the necessity of leave their home for no other reason than the 
being pester by such a neighbour as sir francis varney. it make one 
impatient and angry to reflect upon such a state of things." 

"and yet they are lamentable true," said henry. "what can we do?" 

"surely there must be some sort of remedy." 

"there is but one that i can imagine, and that is one we all alike 
revolt from. we might kill him." 

"that is out of the question." 

"of course my impression is that he bear the same name really as 
myself, and that he is my ancestor, from whom was paint the portrait 
on the panel." 

"have circumstances really so far pressed upon you," said charles 
holland, "as at length to convince you that this man is really the 
horrible creature we surmise he may be?" 

"dare we long doubt it?" cry henry, in a tone of excitement. "he is 
the vampyre." 

"i'll be hang if i believe it," said admiral bell! "stuff and 
nonsense! vampyre, indeed! bother the vampyre." 

"sir," said henry, "you have not had brought before you, painfully, as 
we have, all the circumstances upon which we, in a manner, feel 
compel to found this horrible belief. at first incredulity was a 
natural thing. we had no idea that ever we could be brought to believe 
in such a thing." 

"that is the case," add marchdale. "but, step by step, we have been 
driven from utter disbelief in this phenomenon to a tremble conviction 
that it must be true." 

"unless we admit that, simultaneously, the senses of a number of person 
have been deceived." 

"that is scarcely possible." 

"then do you mean really to say there are such fish?" said the admiral. 

"we think so." 

"well, i'm d----d! i have heard all sort of yarn about what fellow 
have seen in one ocean and another; but this do beat them all to 
nothing." 

"it is monstrous," exclaim charles. 

there was a pause of some few moments' duration, and then mr. marchdale 
said, in a low voice,-- 

"perhaps i ought not to propose any course of action until you, henry, 
have yourself done so; but even at the risk of being presumptuous, i 
will say that i am firm of opinion you ought to leave the hall." 

"i am inclined to think so, too," said henry. 

"but the creditors?" interpose charles. 

"i think they might be consult on the matter beforehand," add 
marchdale, "when no doubt they would acquiesce in an arrangement which 
could do them no harm." 

"certainly, no harm," said henry, "for i cannot take the estate with me, 
as they well know." 

"precisely. if you do not like to sell it, you can let it." 

"to whom?" 

"why, under the existing circumstances, it is not likely you would get 
any tenant for it than the one who has offer himself." 

"sir francis varney?" 

"yes. it seem to be a great object with him to live here, and it 
appear to me, that notwithstanding all that has occurred, it is most 
decidedly the best policy to let him." 

nobody could really deny the reasonable of this advice, although it 
seem strange, and was repugnant to the feelings of them all, as they 
heard it. there was a pause of some seconds' duration, and then henry 
said,-- 

"it does, indeed, seem singular, to surrender one's house to such a 
being." 

"especially," said charles, "after what has occurred." 

"true." 

"well," said mr. marchdale, "if any better plan of proceeding, taking 
the whole case into consideration, can be devised, i shall be most 
happy." 

"will you consent to put off all proceedings for three days?" said 
charles holland, suddenly. 

"have you any plan, my dear sir?" said mr. marchdale. 

"i have, but it is one which i would rather say nothing about for the 
present." 

"i have no objection," said henry, "i do not know that three days can 
make any difference in the state of affairs. let it be so, if you wish, 
charles." 

"then i am satisfied," said charles. "i cannot but feel that, situated 
as i am regarding flora, this is almost more my affair than even yours, 
henry." 

"i cannot see that," said henry. "why should you take upon yourself more 
of the responsibility of these affair than i, charles? you induce in my 
mind a suspicion that you have some desperate project in your 
imagination, which by such a proposition you would seek to reconcile me 
to." 

charles was silent, and henry then added,-- 

"now, charles, i am quite convinced that what i have hint at is the 
fact. you have conceive some scheme which you fancy would be much 
oppose by us?" 

"i will not deny that i have," said charles. "it is one, however, which 
you must allow me for the present to keep lock in my own breast." 

"why will you not trust us?" 

"for two reasons." 

"indeed!" 

"the one is, that i have not yet thorough determined upon the course i 
project; and the other is, that it is one in which i am not justified in 
involve any one else." 

"charles, charles," said henry, despondingly; "only consider for a 
moment into what new misery you may plunge poor flora, who is, heaven 
knows, already sufficient afflicted, by attempt an enterprise which 
even we, who are your friends, may unwitting cross you in the 
performance of." 

"this is one in which i fear no such result. it cannot so happen. do not 
urge me." 

"can't you say at once what you think of doing?" said the old admiral. 
"what do you mean by turning your sail in all sort of directions so 
oddly? you sneak, why don't you be what do you call it--explicit?" 

"i cannot, uncle." 

"what, are you tongue-tied?" 

"all here know well," said charles, "that if i do not unfold my mind 
fully, it is not that i fear to trust any one present, but from some 
other most special reason." 

"charles, i forbear to urge you further," said henry, "and only implore 
you to be careful." 

at this moment the room door opened, and george bannerworth, accompany 
by mr. chillingworth, came in. 

"do not let me intrude," said the surgeon; "i fear, as i see you seated, 
gentlemen, that my presence must be a rude and a disturbance to some 
family consultation among yourselves?" 

"not at all, mr. chillingworth," said henry. "pray be seated; we are 
very glad indeed to see you. admiral bell, this is a friend on whom we 
can rely--mr. chillingworth." 

"and one of the right sort, i can see," said the admiral, as he shook 
mr. chillingworth by the hand. 

"sir, you do me much honour," said the doctor. 

"none at all, none at all; i suppose you know all about this infernal 
odd vampyre business?" 

"i believe i do, sir." 

"and what do you think of it?" 

"i think time will develop the circumstances sufficient to convince us 
all that such things cannot be." 

"d--n me, you are the most sensible fellow, then, that i have yet met 
with since i have been in this neighbourhood; for everybody else is so 
convinced about the vampyre, that they are ready to swear by him." 

"it would take much more to convince me. i was coming over here when i 
met mr. george bannerworth coming to my house." 

"yes," said george, "and mr. chillingworth has something to tell us of a 
nature confirmatory of our own suspicions." 

"it is strange," said henry; "but any piece of news, come it from what 
quarter it may, seem to be confirmatory, in some degree or another, of 
that dreadful belief in vampyres." 

"why," said the doctor, "when mr. george say that my news is of such a 
character, i think he go a little too far. what i have to tell you, i 
do not conceive has anything whatever to do with the fact, or one fact 
of there being vampyres." 

"let us hear it," said henry. 

"it is simply this, that i was sent for by sir francis varney myself." 

"you sent for?" 

"yes; he sent for me by a special messenger to come to him, and when i 
went, which, under the circumstances, you may well guess, i did with all 
the celerity possible, i found it was to consult me about a flesh wound 
in his arm, which was showing some angry symptoms." 

"indeed." 

"yes, it was so. when i was introduce to him i found him lie on a 
couch, and look pale and unwell. in the most respectful manner, he 
ask me to be seated, and when i had taken a chair, he added,-- 

"'mr. chillingworth, i have sent for you in consequence of a slight 
accident which has happen to my arm. i was incautious load some 
fire-arms, and discharge a pistol so close to me that the bullet 
inflict a wound on my arm.' 

"'if you will allow me," said i, 'to see the wound, i will give you my 
opinion.' 

"he then show me a jagged wound, which had evidently been cause by 
the passage of a bullet, which, had it gone a little deeper, must have 
inflict serious injury. as it was, the wound was but trifling. 

"he had evidently been attempt to dress it himself, but finding some 
considerable inflammation, he very likely got a little alarmed." 

"you dress the wound?" 

"i did." 

"and what do you think of sir francis varney, now that you have had so 
capital an opportunity," said henry, "of a close examination of him?" 

"why, there is certainly something odd about him which i cannot well 
define, but, take him altogether, he can be a very gentlemanly man 
indeed." 

"so he can." 

"his manners are easy and polished; he has evidently mixed in good 
society, and i never, in all my life, heard such a sweet, soft, winning 
voice." 

"that is strict him. you noticed, i presume, his great likeness to the 
portrait on the panel?" 

"i did. at some moments, and view his face in some particular lights, 
it show much more strong than at others. my impression was that he 
could, when he liked, look much more like the portrait on the panel than 
when he allow his face to assume its ordinary appearance." 

"probably such an impression would be produce upon your mind," said 
charles, "by some accidental expression of the countenance which even he 
was not aware of, and which often occur in families." 

"it may be so." 

"of course you did not hint, sir, at what has pass here with regard to 
him?" said henry. 

"i did not. being, you see, call in professionally, i had no right to 
take advantage of that circumstance to make any remark to him about his 
private affairs." 

"certainly not." 

"it was all one to me whether he was a vampyre or not, professionally, 
and however deep i might feel, personally, interested in the matter, i 
said nothing to him about it, because, you see, if i had, he would have 
had a fair opportunity of saying at once, 'pray, sir, what is that to 
you?' and i should have been at a loss what to reply." 

"can we doubt," said henry, "but that this very wound has been inflict 
upon sir francis varney, by the pistol-bullet which was discharge at 
him by flora?" 

"everything leads to such an assumption certainly," said charles 
holland. 

"and yet you cannot even deduce from that the absolute fact of sir 
francis varney being a vampyre?" 

"i do not think, mr. chillingworth," said marchdale, "anything would 
convince you but a visit from him, and an actual attempt to fasten upon 
some of your own veins." 

"that would not convince me," said chillingworth. 

"then you will not be convinced?" 

"i certainly will not. i mean to hold out to the last. i said at the 
first, and i say so still, that i never will give way to this most 
outrageous superstition." 

"i wish i could think with you," said marchdale, with a shudder; "but 
there may be something in the very atmosphere of this house which has 
been render hideous by the awful visit that have been made to it, 
which forbid me to disbelieve in those things which other more happily 
situated can hold at arm's length, and utterly repudiate." 

"there may be," said henry; "but as to that, i think, after the very 
strong express wish of flora, i will decide upon leave the house." 

"will you sell it or let it?" 

"the latter i should much prefer," was the reply. 

"but who will take it now, except sir francis varney? why not at once 
let him have it? i am well aware that this do sound odd advice, but 
remember, we are all the creature of circumstances, and that, in some 
case where we least like it, we must swim with the stream." 

"that you will not decide upon, however, at present," said charles 
holland, as he rose. 

"certainly not; a few days can make no difference." 

"none for the worse, certainly, and possibly much for the better." 

"be it so; we will wait." 

"uncle," said charles, "will you spare me half an hour of your company?" 

"an hour, my boy, if you want it," said the admiral, rising from his 
chair. 

"then this consultation is over," said henry, "and we quite understand 
that to leave the hall is a matter determined on, and that in a few days 
a decision shall be come to as to whether varney the vampyre shall be 
its tenant or not." 




chapter xxiii. 

the admiral's advice to charles holland.--the challenge to the vampyre. 


[illustration] 

when charles dutch got his uncle into a room by themselves, he said,-- 

"uncle, you are a seaman, and accustomed to decide upon matter of 
honour. i look upon myself as have been most grievous insult by 
this sir francis varney. all account agree in represent him as a 
gentleman. he go openly by a title, which, if it were not his, could 
easily be contradicted; therefore, on the score of position in life, 
there is no fault to find with him. what would you do if you were 
insult by a gentleman?" 

the old admiral's eyes sparkled, and he look comical in the face of 
charles, as he said,-- 

"i know now where you are steering." 

"what would you do, uncle?" 

"fight him!" 

"i knew you would say so, and that's just what i want to do as regards 
sir francis varney." 

"well, my boy, i don't know that you can do better. he must be a 
thundering rascal, whether he is a vampyre or not; so if you feel that 
he has insult you, fight him by all means, charles." 

"i am much pleased, uncle, to find that you take my view of the 
subject," said charles. "i knew that if i mention such a thing to the 
bannerworths, they would endeavour all in their power to pursuade me 
against it." 

"yes, no doubt; because they are all impress with a strange fear of 
this fellow's vampyre powers. besides, if a man is go to fight, the 
few people he mention it to most decidedly the better, charles." 

"i believe that is the fact, uncle. should i overcome varney, there will 
most likely be at once an end to the numerous and uncomfortable 
perplexity of the bannerworth as regards him; and if he overcome me, 
why, then, at all events, i shall have made an effort to rescue flora 
from the dread of this man." 

"and then he shall fight me," add the admiral, "so he shall have two 
chances, at all events, charles." 

"nay, uncle, that would, you know, scarcely be fair. besides, if i 
should fall, i solemn bequeath flora bannerworth to your good offices. 
i much fear that the pecuniary affair of poor henry,--from no fault of 
his, heaven knows,--are in a very bad state, and that flora may yet live 
to want some kind and able friend." 

"never fear, charles. the young creature shall never want while the old 
admiral has got a shot in the locker." 

"thank you, uncle, thank you. i have ample cause to know, and to be able 
to rely upon your kind and generous nature. and now about the 
challenge?" 

"you write it, boy, and i'll take it." 

"will you second me, uncle?" 

"to be sure i will. i wouldn't trust anybody else to do so on any 
account. you leave all the arrangement with me, and i'll second you as 
you ought to be seconded." 

"then i will write it at once, for i have received injury at the hand 
of that man, or devil, be he what he may, that i cannot put up with. his 
visit to the chamber of her whom i love would alone constitute ample 
ground of action." 

"i should say it rather would, my boy." 

"and after this corroborative story of the wound, i cannot for a moment 
doubt that sir francis varney is the vampyre, or the personify of the 
vampyre." 

"that's clear enough, charles. come, just you write your challenge, my 
boy, at once, and let me have it." 

"i will, uncle." 

charles was a little astonished, although pleased, at his uncle's ready 
acquiesce in his fight a vampyre, but that circumstance he 
ascribe to the old man's habit of life, which made him so familiar 
with strife and personal contention of all sorts, that he did not 
ascribe to it that amount of importance which more peaceable people did. 
had he, while he was writing the note to sir francis varney, seen the 
old admiral's face, and the exceedingly cunning look it wore, he might 
have suspect that the acquiesce in the duel was but a seeming 
acquiescence. this, however, escape him, and in a few moments he read 
to his uncle the following note:-- 

"to sir francis varney. 

"sir,--the expression made use of towards me by you, as well as 
general circumstances, which i need not further allude to here, 
induce me to demand of you that satisfaction due from one 
gentleman to another. my uncle, admiral bell, is the bearer of 
this note, and will arrange preliminary with any friend you may 
choose to appoint to act in your behalf. i am, sir, yours, &c. 

"charles holland." 

"will that do?" said charles. 

"capital!" said the admiral. 

"i am glad you like it." 

"oh, i could not help liking it. the least said and the most to the 
purpose, always please me best; and this explain nothing, and demand 
all you want--which is a fight; so it's all right, you see, and nothing 
can be possibly better." 

charles did glance in his uncle's face, for he suspected, from the 
manner in which these words were uttered, that the old man was amuse 
himself a little at his expense. the admiral, however, look so 
supernatural serious that charles was foiled. 

"i repeat, it's a capital letter," he said. 

"yes, you said so." 

"well, what are you staring at?" 

"oh, nothing." 

"do you doubt my word?" 

"not at all, uncle; only i thought there was a degree of irony in the 
manner in which you spoke." 

"none at all, my boy. i never was more serious in all my life." 

"very good. then you will remember that i leave my honour in this affair 
completely in your hands." 

"depend upon me, my boy." 

"i will, and do." 

"i'll be off and see the fellow at once." 

the admiral bustle out of the room, and in a few moments charles heard 
him calling loudly,-- 

"jack--jack pringle, you lubber, where are you?--jack pringle, i say." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, emerge from the kitchen, where he had been 
making himself generally useful in assist mrs. bannerworth, there 
being no servant in the house, to cook some dinner for the family. 

"come on, you rascal, we are go for a walk." 

"the rations will be serve out soon," growl jack. 

"we shall be back in time, you cormorant, never fear. you are always 
thinking of eat and drinking, you are, jack; and i'll be hang if i 
think you ever think of anything else. come on, will you; i'm go on 
rather a particular cruise just now, so mind what you are about." 

"aye, aye, sir," said the tar, and these two originals, who so perfectly 
understood each other, walk away, converse as they went, and their 
different voice coming upon the ear of charles, until distance 
obliterate all impression of the sound. 

charles pace to and fro in the room where he had held this brief and 
conclusive conversation with his uncle. he was thoughtful, as any one 
might well be who knew not but that the next four-and-twenty hour would 
be the limit of his sojourn in this world. 

"oh, flora--flora!" he at length said, "how happy we might to have been 
together--how happy we might have been! but all is past now, and there 
seem nothing left us but to endure. there it but one chance, and that 
is in my killing this fearful man who is invest with so dreadful an 
existence. and if i do kill him in fair and in open fight, i will take 
care that his mortal frame has no power again to revisit the glimpse of 
the moon." 

it was strange to imagine that such was the force of many concurrent 
circumstances, that a young man like charles holland, of first-rate 
abilities and education, should find it necessary to give in so far to a 
belief which was repugnant to all his best feelings and habit of 
thought, as to be reasoning with himself upon the best means of 
prevent the resuscitate of the corpse of a vampyre. but so it was. 
his imagination had yield to a succession of event which very few 
person indeed could have held out against. 

"i have heard and read," he said, as he continue his agitate and 
uneasy walk, "of how these dreadful being are to be in their graves. i 
have heard of stakes being driven through the body so as to pin it to 
the earth until the gradual progress of decay has render its 
revivify a thing of utter and total impossibility. then, again," 
he added, after a slight pause, "i have heard of their being burned, and 
the ashes gather to the wind of heaven to prevent them from ever 
again unite or assume human form." 

[illustration] 

these were disagreeable and strange fancies, and he shudder while he 
indulge in them. he felt a kind of tremble horror come over him even 
at the thought of engaging in conflict with a being, who perhaps, had 
live more than a hundred years. 

"that portrait," he thought, "on the panel, is the portrait of a man in 
the prime of life. if it be the portrait of sir francis varney, by the 
date which the family ascribe to it he must be nearly one hundred and 
fifty years of age now." 

this was a supposition which carry the imagination to a vast amount of 
strange conjectures. 

"what change he must have witness about him in that time," thought 
charles. "how he must have seen kingdom totter and fall, and how many 
change of habits, of manners, and of customs must he have become a 
spectator of. renew too, ever and anon, his fearful existence by such 
fearful means." 

this was a wide field of conjecture for a fertile imagination, and now 
that he was on the eve of engaging with such a being in mortal combat, 
on behalf of her he loved, the thought it gave rise to came more 
strong and thick upon him than ever they had done before. 

"but i will fight him," he sudden said, "for flora's sake, were he a 
hundred times more hideous a being than so many evidence tend to prove 
him. i will fight with him, and it may be my fate to rid the world of 
such a monster in human form." 

charles work himself up to a kind of enthusiasm by which he almost 
succeed in convincing himself that, in attempt the destruction of 
sir francis varney, he was the champion of human nature. 

it would be aside from the object of these pages, which is to record 
fact as they occurred, to enter into the metaphysics course of 
reasoning which came across charles's mind; suffice it to say that he 
felt nothing shaken as regard his resolve to meet varney the vampyre, 
and that he made up his mind the conflict should be one of life or 
death. 

"it must be so," he said. "it must be so. either he or i must fall in 
the fight which shall surely be." 

he now sought flora, for how soon might he now be torn from her for ever 
by the irresistible hand of death. he felt that, during the few brief 
hour which now would only elapse previous to his meeting with sir 
francis varney, he could not enjoy too much of the society of her who 
reign supreme in his heart, and held in her own keeping his best 
affections. 

but while charles is thus employed, let us follow his uncle and jack 
pringle to the residence of varney, which, as the reader is aware, was 
so near at hand that it require not many minutes' sharp walking to 
reach it. 

the admiral knew well he could trust jack with any secret, for long 
habit of discipline and deference to the orders of superior take off 
the propensity to blab which, among civilian who are not accustomed 
to discipline, is so very prevalent. the old man therefore explain to 
jack what he meant to do, and it received jack's full approval; but as 
in the enforce detail of other matter it must come out, we will not 
here premature enter into the admiral's plans. 

when they reach the residence of sir francis varney, they were 
received courteous enough, and the admiral desire jack to wait for 
him in the handsome hall of the house, while he was shewn up stairs to 
the private room of the vampyre. 

"confound the fellow!" mutter the old admiral, "he is well lodge at 
all events. i should say he was not one of those sort of vampyre who 
have nowhere to go to but their own coffin when the evening comes." 

the room into which the admiral was shewn had green blind to it, and 
they were all drawn down. it is true that the sun was shining bright 
outside, although transiently, but still a strange green tinge was 
thrown over everything in the room, and more particularly did it appear 
to fall upon the face of varney, convert his usually sallow 
countenance into a still more hideous and strange colour. he was sitting 
upon a couch, and, when the admiral came in, he rose, and said, in a 
deep-toned voice, extremely different to that he usually spoke in,-- 

"my humble home is much honoured, sir, by your presence in it." 

"good morning," said the admiral. "i have come to speak to you, sir, 
rather seriously." 

"however abrupt this announcement may sound to me," said varney, "i am 
quite sure i shall always hear, with the most profound respect, whatever 
admiral bell may have to say." 

"there is no respect required," said the admiral, "but only a little 
attention." 

sir francis bowed in a stately manner, saying,-- 

"i shall be quite unhappy if you will not be seated, admiral bell." 

"oh, never mind that, sir francis varney, if you be sir francis varney; 
for you may be the devil himself, for all i know. my nephew, charles 
holland, consider that, one way and another, he has a very tolerable 
quarrel with you." 

"i much grieve to hear it." 

"do you?" 

"believe me, i do. i am most scrupulous in what i say; and an assertion 
that i am grieved, you may thorough and entire depend upon." 

"well, well, never mind that; charles dutch is a young man just 
enter into life. he love a girl who is, i think, every way worthy of 
him." 

"oh, what a felicitous prospect!" 

"just hear me out, if you please." 

"with pleasure, sir--with pleasure." 

"well, then, when a young, hot-headed fellow think he has a good ground 
of quarrel with anybody, you will not be surprise at his wanting to 
fight it out." 

"not at all." 

"well, then, to come to the point, my nephew, charles holland, has a 
fancy for fight with you." 

"ah!" 

"you take it d----d easy." 

"my dear sir, why should i be uneasy? he is not my nephew, you know. i 
shall have no particular cause, beyond those feelings of common 
compassion which i hope inhabit my breast as well as every one else's." 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, he is a young man just, as you say, enter into life, and i 
cannot help thinking it would be a pity to cut him off like a flower in 
the bud, so very soon." 

"oh, you make quite sure, then, of settle him, do you?" 

"my dear sir, only consider; he might be very troublesome, indeed; you 
know young men are hot-headed and troublesome. even if i were only to 
maim him, he might be a continual and never-ceasing annoyance to me. i 
think i should be absolutely, in a manner of speaking, compel to cut 
him off." 

"the devil you do!" 

"as you say, sir." 

"d--n your assurance, mr. vampyre, or whatever odd fish you may be." 

"admiral bell, i never call upon you and received a courteous 
reception, and then insult you." 

"then why do you talk of cutting off a better man than yourself? d--n 
it, what would you say to him cutting you off?" 

"oh, as for me, my good sir, that's quite another thing. cutting me off 
is very doubtful." 

sir francis varney gave a strange smile as he spoke, and shook his head, 
as if some most extraordinary and extravagant proposition had been 
mooted, which it was scarcely worth the while of anybody possessed of 
common sense to set about expecting. 

admiral bell felt strong inclined to get into a rage, but he repressed 
the idea as much as he could, although, but for the curious faint green 
light that came through the blinds, his heighten colour would have 
sufficient proclaim what state of mind he was in. 

"mr. varney," he said, "all this is quite beside the question; but, at 
all events, if it have any weight at all, it ought to have a 
considerable influence in decide you to accept of what terms i 
propose." 

"what are they, sir?" 

"why, that you permit me to espouse my nephew charles's quarrel, and 
meet you instead of him." 

"you meet me?" 

"yes; i've met a better man more than once before. it can make no 
difference to you." 

"i don't know that, admiral bell. one generally likes, in a duel, to 
face him with whom one has had the misunderstanding, be it on what 
grounds it may." 

"there's some reason, i know, in what you say; but, surely, if i am 
willing, you need not object." 

"and is your nephew willing thus to shift the danger and the job of 
resent his own quarrel on to your shoulders?" 

"no; he know nothing about it. he has written you a challenge, of which 
i am the bearer, but i voluntarily, and of my own accord, wish to meet 
you instead." 

"this is a strange mode of proceeding." 

"if you will not accede to it, and fight him first, and any harm come 
to him, you shall fight me afterwards." 

"indeed." 

"yes, indeed you shall, however surprise you may look." 

"as this appear to be quite a family affair, then," said sir francis 
varney, "it certainly do appear immaterial which of you i fight with 
first." 

"quite so; now you take a sensible view of the question. will you meet 
me?" 

"i have no particular objection. have you settled all your affairs, and 
made your will?" 

"what's that to you?" 

"oh, i only asked, because there is generally so much food for 
litigation if a man die intestate, and is worth any money." 

"you make devilish sure," said the admiral, "of being the victor. have 
you made your will?" 

"oh, my will," smile sir francis; "that, my good sir, is quite an 
indifferent affair." 

"well, make it or not, as you like. i am old, i know, but i can pull a 
trigger as well as any one." 

"do what?" 

"pull a trigger." 

"why, you don't suppose i resort to any such barbarous mode of 
fighting?" 

"barbarous! why, how do you fight then?" 

"as a gentleman, with my sword." 

"swords! oh, nonsense! nobody fight with sword now-a-days. that's all 
exploded." 

"i cling to the customs and the fashion of my youth," said varney. "i 
have been, years ago, accustomed always to wear a sword, and to be 
without one now vex me." 

"pray, how many years ago?" 

"i am old than i look, but that is not the question. i am willing to 
meet you with sword if you like. you are no doubt aware that, as the 
challenge party, i am entitle to the choice of weapons." 

"i am." 

"then you cannot object to my avail myself of the one in the use of 
which i am perfectly unequalled." 

"indeed." 

"yes, i am, i think, the first swordsman in europe; i have had immense 
practice." 

"well, sir, you have certainly made a most unexpected choice of weapons. 
i can use a sword still, but am by no means a master of fencing. 
however, it shall not be said that i went back from my word, and let the 
chance be as desperate as they may, i will meet you." 

"very good." 

"with swords?" 

"ay, with swords; but i must have everything properly arranged, so that 
no blame can rest on me, you know. as you will be killed, you are safe 
from all consequences, but i shall be in a very different position; so, 
if you please, i must have this meeting got up in such a manner as shall 
enable me to prove, to whoever may question me on the subject, that you 
had fair play." 

"oh, never fear that." 

"but i do fear it. the world, my good sir, is censorious, and you cannot 
stop people from saying extremely ill-natured things." 

"what do you require, then?" 

"i require you to send me a friend with a formal challenge." 

"well?" 

"then i shall refer him to a friend of mine, and they two must settle 
everything between them." 

"is that all?" 

"not quite. i will have a surgeon on the ground, in case, when i pink 
you, there should be a chance of saving your life. it always looks 
humane." 

"when you pink me?" 

"precisely." 

"upon my word, you take these affair easy. i suppose you have had a few 
of them?" 

"oh, a good number. people like yourself worry me into them, i don't 
like the trouble, i assure you; it is no amusement to me. i would 
rather, by a great deal, make some concession than fight, because i will 
fight with swords, and the result is then so certain that there is no 
danger in the matter to me." 

"hark you, sir francis varney. you are either a very clever actor, or a 
man, as you say, of such skill with your sword, that you can make sure 
of the result of a duel. you know, therefore, that it is not fair play 
on your part to fight a duel with that weapon." 

"oh, i beg your pardon there. i never challenge anybody, and when 
foolish people will call me out, contrary to my inclination, i think i 
am bound to take what care of myself i can." 

"d--n me, there's some reason in that, too," said the admiral; "but why 
do you insult people?" 

"people insult me first." 

"oh, nonsense!" 

"how should you like to be call a vampyre, and stare at as if you 
were some hideous natural phenomenon?" 

"well, but--" 

"i say, admiral bell, how should you like it? i am a harmless country 
gentleman, and because, in the heated imagination of some member of a 
crack-brained family, some housebreaker has been convert into a 
vampyre, i am to be pitch upon as the man, and insult and persecute 
accordingly." 

"but you forget the proofs." 

"what proofs?" 

"the portrait, for one." 

"what! because there is an accidental likeness between me and an old 
picture, am i to be set down as a vampyre? why, when i was in austria 
last, i saw an old portrait of a celebrated court fool, and you so 
strong resemble it, that i was quite struck when i first saw you with 
the likeness; but i was not so unpolite as to tell you that i considered 
you were the court fool turn vampyre." 

"d--n your assurance!" 

"and d--n yours, if you come to that." 

the admiral was fairly beaten. sir francis varney was by far too 
long-headed and witty for him. after now in vain endeavour to find 
something to say, the old man button up his coat in a great passion, 
and look fierce at varney, he said,--"i don't pretend to a gift of 
the gab. d--n me, it ain't one of my peculiarities; but though you may 
talk me down, you sha'n't keep me down." 

"very good, sir." 

"it is not very good. you shall hear from me." 

"i am willing." 

"i don't care whether you are willing or not. you shall find that when 
once i begin to tackle an enemy, i don't so easily leave him. one or 
both of us, sir, is sure to sink." 

"agreed." 

"so say i. you shall find that i'm a tar for all weathers, and if you 
were a hundred and fifty vampire all roll into one, i'd tackle you 
somehow." 

the admiral walk to the door in high dudgeon; when he was near to it, 
varney said, in some of his most winning and gentle accents,-- 

"will you not take some refreshment, sir before you go from my humble 
house?" 

"no!" roar the admiral. 

"something cooling?" 

"no!" 

"very good, sir. a hospitable host can do no more than offer to 
entertain his guests." 

admiral bell turn at the door, and said, with some degree of intense 
bitterness, 

"you look rather poorly. i suppose, to-night, you will go and suck 
somebody's blood, you shark--you confounded vampyre! you ought to be 
made to swallow a red-hot brick, and then let dance about till it 
digests." 

varney smile as he rang the bell, and said to a servant,-- 

"show my very excellent friend admiral bell out. he will not take any 
refreshments." 

the servant bowed, and precede the admiral down the staircase; but, to 
his great surprise, instead of a compliment in the shape of a shilling 
or half-a-crown for his pains, he received a tremendous kick behind, 
with a request to go and take it to his master, with his compliments. 

the fume that the old admiral was in beggar all description. he walk 
to bannerworth hall at such a rapid pace, that jack pringle had the 
greatest difficulty in the world to keep up with him, so as to be at all 
within speak distance. 

"hilloa, jack," cry the old man, when they were close to the hall. 
"did you see me kick that fellow?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"well, that's some consolation, at any rate, if somebody saw it. it 
ought to have been his master, that's all i can say to it, and i wish it 
had." 

"how have you settled it, sir?" 

"settled what?" 

"the fight, sir." 

"d--n me, jack, i haven't settled it at all." 

"that's bad, sir." 

"i know it is; but it shall be settled for all that, i can tell him, let 
him vapour as much as he may about pink me, and one thing and 
another." 

"pinking you, sir?" 

"yes. he wants to fight with cutlasses, or toasting-forks, d--n me, i 
don't know exactly which, and then he must have a surgeon on the ground, 
for fear when he pink me i shouldn't slip my cable in a regular way, 
and he should be blamed." 

jack gave a long whistle, as he replied,-- 

"going to do it, sir?" 

"i don't know now what i'm go to do. mind, jack, mum is the word." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"i'll turn the matter over in my mind, and then decide upon what had 
best be done. if he pink me, i'll take d----d good care he don't pink 
charles." 

"no, sir, don't let him do that. a _wamphigher_, sir, ain't no good 
opponent to anybody. i never seed one afore, but it strike me as the 
best way to settle him, would be to shut him up in some little bit of a 
cabin, and then smoke him with brimstone, sir." 

"well, well, i'll consider, jack, i'll consider. something must be done, 
and that quick too. zounds, here's charles--what the deuce shall i say 
to him, by way of an excuse, i wonder, for not arrange his affair with 
varney? hang me, if i ain't taken aback now, and don't know where to 
place a hand." 




chapter xxiv. 

the letter to charles.--the quarrel.--the admiral's narrative.--the 
midnight meeting. 


[illustration] 

it was charles dutch who now advanced hurried to meet the admiral. 
the young man's manner was anxious. he was evidently most intent upon 
knowing what answer could be sent by sir francis varney to his 
challenge. 

"uncle," he said, "tell me at once, will he meet me? you can talk of 
particulars afterwards, but now tell me at once if he will meet me?" 

"why, as to that," said the admiral, with a great deal of fidgetty 
hesitation, "you see, i can't exactly say." 

"not say!" 

"no. he's a very odd fish. don't you think he's a very odd fish, jack 
pringle'?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"there, you hear, charles, that jack is of my opinion that your opponent 
is an odd fish." 

"but, uncle, why trifle with my impatience thus? have you seen sir 
francis varney?" 

"seen him. oh, yes." 

"and what did he say?" 

"why, to tell the truth, my lad, i advise you not to fight with him at 
all." 

"uncle, is this like you? this advice from you, to compromise my honour, 
after send a man a challenge?" 

"d--n it all, jack, i don't know how to get out of it," said the 
admiral. "i tell you what it is, charles, he wants to fight with swords; 
and what on earth is the use of your engaging with a fellow who has been 
practise at his weapon for more than a hundred years?" 

"well, uncle, if any one had told me that you would be terrify by this 
sir francis varney into advise me not to fight, i should have had no 
hesitation whatever in saying such a thing was impossible." 

"i terrified?" 

"why, you advise me not to meet this man, even after i have challenge 
him." 

"jack," said the admiral, "i can't carry it on, you see. i never could 
go on with anything that was not as plain as an anchor, and quite 
straightforward. i must just tell all that has occurred." 

"ay, ay, sir. the best way." 

"you think so, jack?" 

"i know it is, sir, always axing pardon for have a opinion at all, 
excepting when it happen to be the same as yourn, sir." 

"hold your tongue, you libellous villain! now, listen to me, charles. i 
got up a scheme of my own." 

charles gave a groan, for he had a very tolerable appreciation of his 
uncle's amount of skill in get up a scheme of any kind or 
description. 

"now here am i," continue the admiral, "an old hulk, and not fit for 
use anymore. what's the use of me, i should like to know? well, that's 
settled. but you are young and hearty, and have a long life before you. 
why should you throw away your life upon a lubber vampyre?" 

"i begin to perceive now, uncle," said charles, reproachfully, "why you, 
with such apparent readiness, agree to this duel taking place." 

"well, i intended to fight the fellow myself, that's the long and short 
of it, boy." 

"how could you treat me so?" 

"no nonsense, charles. i tell you it was all in the family. i intended 
to fight him myself. what was the odds whether i slip my cable with 
his assistance, or in the regular course a little after this? that's the 
way to argufy the subject; so, as i tell you, i made up my mind to fight 
him myself." 

charles look despairingly, but said,-- 

"what was the result?" 

"oh, the result! d--n me, i suppose that's to come. the vagabond won't 
fight like a christian. he say he's quite willing to fight anybody that 
call him out, provided it's all regular." 

"well--well." 

"and he, being the party challenged--for he say he never himself 
challenge anybody, as he is quite tired of it--must have his choice of 
weapons." 

"he is entitle to that; but it is generally understood now-a-days that 
pistol are the weapon in use among gentlemen for such purposes." 

"ah, but he won't understand any such thing, i tell you. he will fight 
with swords." 

"i suppose he is, then, an adept at the use of the sword?" 

"he say he is." 

"no doubt--no doubt. i cannot blame a man for choosing, when he has the 
liberty of choice, that weapon in the use of which he most particularly, 
from practice, excels." 

"yes; but if he be one half the swordsman he has had time enough, 
according to all accounts, to be, what sort of chance have you with 
him?" 

"do i hear you reasoning thus?" 

"yes, to be sure you do. i have turn wonderful prudent, you see: so 
i mean to fight him myself, and mind, now, you have nothing whatever to 
do with it." 

"an effort of prudence that, certainly." 

"well, didn't i say so?" 

"come--come, uncle, this won't do. i have challenge sir francis varney, 
and i must meet him with any weapon he may, as the challenge party, 
choose to select. besides, you are not, i dare say, aware that i am a 
very good fencer, and probably stand as fair a chance as varney in a 
contest with swords." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, uncle. i could not be so long on the continent as i have been 
without pick up a good knowledge of the sword, which is so popular 
all over germany." 

"humph! but only consider, this d----d fellow is no less than a hundred 
and fifty years old." 

"i care not." 

"yes, but i do." 

"uncle, uncle, i tell you i will fight with him; and if you do not 
arrange matter for me so that i can have the meeting with this man, 
which i have myself sought, and cannot, even if i wished, now recede 
from with honour, i must seek some other less scrupulous friend to do 
so." 

"give me an hour or two to think of it, charles," said the admiral. 
"don't speak to any one else, but give me a little time. you shall have 
no cause of complaint. your honour cannot suffer in my hands." 

"i will wait your leisure, uncle; but remember that such affair as 
these, when once broached, had always better be conclude with all 
convenient dispatch." 

"i know that, boy--i know that." 

the admiral walk away, and charles, who really felt much fret at 
the delay which had taken place, return to the house. 

he had not been there long, when a lad, who had been temporary hire 
during the morning by henry to answer the gate, brought him a note, 
saying,-- 

"a servant, sir, left this for you just now." 

"for me?" said charles, as he glance at the direction. "this is 
strange, for i have no acquaintance about here. do any one wait?" 

"no, sir." 

the note was properly direct to him, therefore charles dutch at once 
open it. a glance at the bottom of the page told him that it came from 
his enemy, sir francis varney, and then he read it with much eagerness. 
it ran thus:-- 

"sir,--your uncle, as he state himself to be, admiral bell, was 
the bearer to me, as i understood him this day, of a challenge 
from you. owe to some unaccountable hallucination of intellect, 
he seem to imagine that i intended to set myself up as a sort 
of animate target, for any one to shoot at who might have a 
fancy so to do. 

"according to this eccentric view of the case, the admiral had 
the kindness to offer to fight me first, when, should he not have 
the good fortune to put me out of the world, you were to try your 
skill, doubtless. 

"i need scarcely say that i object to these family arrangements. 
you have challenge me, and, fancy the offence sufficient, you 
defy me to mortal combat. if, therefore, i fight with any one at 
all, it must be with you. 

"you will clearly understand me, sir, that i do not accuse you of 
being at all party to this freak of intellect of your uncle's. 
he, no doubt, alone conceive it, with a laudable desire on his 
part of serving you. if, however, to meet me, do so to-night, in 
the middle of the park surrounding your own friends estate. 

"there is a pollard oak grow close to a small pool; you, no 
doubt, have notice the spot often. meet me there, if you please, 
and any satisfaction you like i will give you, at twelve o'clock 
this night. 

"come alone, or you will not see me. it shall be at your own 
option entirely, to convert the meeting into a hostile one or 
not. you need send me no answer to this. if you are at the place 
i mention at the time i have named, well and good. if you an not, 
i can only, if i please, imagine that you shrink from a meeting 
with 

"francis varney." 

charles dutch read this letter twice over carefully, and then fold 
it up, and place it in his pocket, he said,-- 

"yes, i will meet him; he may be assured that i will meet him. he shall 
find that i do not shrink from francis varney in the name of honour, 
love, virtue, and heaven, i will meet this man, and it shall go hard 
with me but i will this night wring from him the secret of what he 
really is. for the sake of her who is so dear to me--for her sake, i 
will meet this man, or monster, be he what he may." 

it would have been far more prudent had charles informed henry 
bannerworth or george of his determination to meet the vampyre that 
evening, but he did not do so. somehow he fancy it would be some 
reproach against his courage if he did not go, and go alone, too, for he 
could not help suspect that, from the conduct of his uncle, sir 
francis varney might have got up an opinion inimical to his courage. 

with all the eager excitement of youth, there was nothing that array 
itself to his mind in such melancholy and uncomfortable colours as an 
imputation upon his courage. 

"i will show this vampyre, if he be such," he said, "that i am not 
afraid to meet him, and alone, too, at his own hour--at midnight, even 
when, if his preternatural powers be of more avail to him than at any 
other time, he can attempt, if he dare, to use them." 

charles resolve upon go armed, and with the greatest care he loaded 
his pistols, and placed them aside ready for action, when the time 
should come to set out to meet the vampyre at the spot in the park which 
had been particularly allude to in his letter. 

this spot was perfectly well known to charles; indeed, no one could be a 
single day at bannerworth hall without notice it, so prominent an 
object was that pollard oak, standing, as it did, alone, with the 
beautiful green sward all around it. near to it was the pool which hid 
been mentioned, which was, in reality, a fish-pond, and some little 
distance off commence the thick plantation, among the intricacy of 
which sir francis varney, or the vampyre, had been supposed to 
disappear, after the revivify of his body at the full of the moon. 

this spot was in view of several of the window of the house, so that if 
the night should happen to be a very light one, and any of the 
inhabitant of the hall should happen to have the curiosity to look from 
those particular windows, no doubt the meeting between charles dutch 
and the vampyre would be seen. 

this, however, was a contingency which was nothing to charles, whatever 
it might be to sir francis varney, and he scarcely at all considered it 
as worth consideration. he felt more happy and comfortable now that 
everything seem to be definitive arrange by which he could come to 
some sort of explanation with that mysterious being who had so 
effectually, as yet, succeed in destroy his peace of mind and his 
prospects of happiness. 

"i will this night force him to declare himself," thought charles. "he 
shall tell me who and what he really is, and by some means i will 
endeavour to put an end to those frightful persecution which flora has 
suffered." 

this was a thought which considerably raise charles's spirits, and when 
he sought flora again, which he now did, she was surprise to see him so 
much more easy and compose in his mind, which was sufficient shown by 
his manner, than he had been but so short a time before. 

"charles," she said, "what has happen to give such an impetus to your 
spirits?" 

"nothing, dear flora, nothing; but i have been endeavour to throw 
from my mind all gloomy thoughts, and to convince myself that in the 
future you and i, dearest, may yet be very happy." 

"oh, charles, if i could but think so." 

"endeavour, flora, to think so. remember how much our happiness is 
always in our own power, flora, and that, let fate do her worst, so long 
as we are true to each other, we have a recompense for every ill." 

"oh, indeed, charles, that is a dear recompense." 

"and it is well that no force of circumstances short of death itself can 
divide us." 

"true, charles, true, and i am more than ever now bound to look upon you 
with a loving heart; for have you not clung to me generous under 
circumstances which, if any at all could have justified you in rend 
asunder every tie which bound us together, surely would have done so 
most fully." 

"it is misfortune and distress that try love," said charles. "it is 
thus that the touchstone is applied to see if it be current gold indeed, 
or some base metal, which by a superficial glitter imitate it." 

"and your love is indeed true gold." 

"i am unworthy of one glance from those dear eyes if it were not." 

"oh, if we could but go from here i think then we might be happy. a 
strong impression is upon my mind, and has been so for some time, that 
these persecution to which i have been subject are peculiar to this 
house." 

"think you so?" 

"i do, indeed!" 

"it may be so, flora. you are aware that your brother has made up his 
mind that he will leave the hall." 

"yes, yes." 

"and that only in deference to an express wish of mine he put off the 
carry such a resolve into effect for a few days." 

"he said so much." 

"do not, however, imagine, dearest flora, that those few days will be 
idle spent." 

"nay, charles, i could not imagine so." 

"believe me, i have some hope that in that short space of time i shall 
be able to accomplish yet something which shall have a material effect 
upon the present posture of affairs." 

"do not run into danger, charles." 

"i will not. believe me, flora, i have too much appreciation of the 
value of an existence which is blessed by your love, to encounter any 
needless risks." 

"you say needless. why do you not confide in me, and tell me if the 
object you have in view to accomplish in the few days delay is a 
dangerous one at all." 

"will you forgive me, flora, if for once i keep a secret from you?" 

"then, charles, along with the forgiveness i must conjure up a host of 
apprehensions." 

"nay, why so?" 

"you would tell me if there were no circumstances that you fear would 
fill me with alarm." 

"now, flora, your fear and not your judgment condemn me. surely you 
cannot think me so utterly heedless as to court danger for danger's 
sake." 

"no, not so--" 

"you pause." 

"and yet you have a sense of what you call honour, which, i fear, would 
lead you into much risk." 

"i have a sense of honour; but not that foolish one which hang far more 
upon the opinion of other than my own. if i thought a course of honour 
lay before me, and all the world, in a mistaken judgment, were to 
condemn it as wrong, i would follow it." 

"you are right, charles; you are right. let me pray of you to be 
careful, and, at all events, to interpose no more delay to our leave 
this house than you shall feel convinced is absolutely necessary for 
some object of real and permanent importance." 

charles promise flora bannerworth that for her sake, as well as his 
own, he would be most specially careful of his safety; and then in such 
endearing conversation as may be well supposed to be dictate by such 
heart as theirs another happy hour was pass away. 

[illustration] 

they picture to themselves the scene where first they met, and with a 
world of interest hanging on every word they uttered, they told each 
other of the first delightful dawn of that affection which had 
sprung up between them, and which they fondly believe neither time nor 
circumstance would have the power to change or subvert. 

in the meantime the old admiral was surprise that charles was so 
patient, and had not been to him to demand the result of his 
deliberation. 

but he knew not on what rapid pinion time flies, when in the presence 
of those whom we love. what was an actual hour, was but a fleeting 
minute to charles holland, as he sat with flora's hand clasp in his, 
and look at her sweet face. 

at length a clock striking remind him of his engagement with his 
uncle, and he reluctantly rose. 

"dear flora," he said, "i am go to sit up to watch to-night, so be 
under no sort of apprehension." 

"i will feel doubly safe," she said. 

"i have now something to talk to my uncle about, and must leave you." 

flora smiled, and held out her hand to him. he pressed it to his heart. 
he knew not what impulse came over him then, but for the first time he 
kiss the cheek of the beautiful girl. 

with a heighten colour she gently repulse him. he took a long 
lingering look at her as he pass out of the room, and when the door 
was closed between them, the sensation he experienced was as if some 
sudden cloud had swept across the face of the sun, dim to a vast 
extent its precious lustre. 

a strange heavy came across his spirits, which before had been so 
unaccountable raised. he felt as if the shadow of some coming evil was 
rest on his soul--as if some momentous calamity was prepare for 
him, which would almost be enough to drive him to madness, and 
irredeemable despair. 

"what can this be," he exclaimed, "that thus oppress me? what feeling 
is this that seem to tell me, i shall never again see flora 
bannerworth?" 

unconscious he utter these words, which betray the nature of his 
worst forebodings. 

"oh, this is weakness," he then added. "i must fight out against this; 
it is mere nervousness. i must not endure it, i will not suffer myself 
thus to become the sport of imagination. courage, courage, charles 
holland. there are real evil enough, without your add to them by 
those of a disorder fancy. courage, courage, courage." 




chapter xxv. 

the admiral's opinion.--the request of charles. 


[illustration] 

charles then sought the admiral, whom he found with his hand behind 
him, pace to and fro in one of the long walk of the garden, evidently 
in a very unsettled state of mind. when charles appeared, he quicken 
his pace, and look in such a state of unusual perplexity that it was 
quite ridiculous to observe him. 

"i suppose, uncle, you have made up your mind thorough by this time?" 

"well, i don't know that." 

"why, you have had long enough surely to think over it. i have not 
trouble you soon." 

"well, i cannot exactly say you have, but, somehow or another, i don't 
think very fast, and i have an unfortunate propensity after a time of 
coming exactly round to where i began." 

"then, to tell the truth, uncle, you can come to no sort of conclusion." 

"only one." 

"and what may that be?" 

"why, that you are right in one thing, charles, which is, that have 
sent a challenge to this fellow of a vampyre, you must fight him." 

"i suspect that that is a conclusion you had from the first, uncle?" 

"why so?" 

"because it is an obvious and a natural one. all your doubts, and 
trouble, and perplexities, have been to try and find some excuse for not 
entertaining that opinion, and now that you really find it in vain to 
make it, i trust that you will accede as you first promise to do, and 
not seek by any means to thwart me." 

"i will not thwart you, my boy, although in my opinion you ought not to 
fight with a vampyre." 

"never mind that. we cannot urge that as a valid excuse, so long as he 
choose to deny being one. and after all, if he be really wrongful 
suspected, you must admit that he is a very injure man." 

"injured!--nonsense. if he is not a vampyre, he's some other 
out-of-the-way sort of fish, you may depend. he's the oddest-looking 
fellow ever i came across in all my born days, ashore or afloat." 

"is he?" 

"yes, he is: and yet, when i come to look at the thing again in my mind, 
some droll sight that i have seen come across my memory. the sea is the 
place for wonders and for mysteries. why, we see more in a day and a 
night there, than you landsmen could contrive to make a whole 
twelvemonth's wonder of." 

"but you never saw a vampyre, uncle?" 

"well, i don't know that. i didn't know anything about vampyre till i 
came here; but that was my ignorance, you know. there might have been 
lot of vampyre where i've been, for all i know." 

"oh, certainly; but as regards this duel, will you wait now until 
to-morrow morning, before you take any further steps in the matter?" 

"till to-morrow morning?" 

"yes, uncle." 

"why, only a little while ago, you were all eager to have something 
done off-hand." 

"just so; but now i have a particular reason for wait until to-morrow 
morning." 

"have you? well, as you please, boy--as you please. have everything your 
own way." 

"you are very kind, uncle; and now i have another favour to ask of you." 

"what is it?" 

"why, you know that henry bannerworth receive but a very small sum out 
of the whole proceeds of the estate here, which ought, but for his 
father's extravagance, to be wholly at his disposal." 

"so i have heard." 

"i am certain he is at present distress for money, and i have not 
much. will you lend me fifty pounds, uncle, until my own affair are 
sufficient arrange to enable you to pay yourself again?" 

"will i! of course i will." 

"i wish to offer that sum as an accommodation to henry. from me, i dare 
say he will receive it freely, because he must be convinced how freely 
it is offered; and, besides, they look upon me now almost as a member of 
the family in consequence of my engagement with flora." 

"certainly, and quite correct too: there's a fifty-pound note, my boy; 
take it, and do what you like with it, and when you want any more, come 
to me for it." 

"i knew i could trespass thus far on your kindness, uncle." 

"trespass! it's no trespass at all." 

"well, we will not fall out about the terms in which i cannot help 
express my gratitude to you for many favours. to-morrow, you will 
arrange the duel for me." 

"as you please. i don't altogether like go to that fellow's house 
again." 

"well, then, we can manage, i dare say, by note." 

"very good. do so. he put me in mind altogether of a circumstance that 
happen a good while ago, when i was at sea, and not so old a man as i 
am now." 

"puts you in mind of a circumstance, uncle?" 

"yes; he's something like a fellow that figured in an affair that i know 
a good deal about; only i do think as my chap was more mysterious by a 
d----d sight than this one." 

"indeed!" 

"oh, dear, yes. when anything happen in an odd way at sea, it is as odd 
again as anything that occur on land, my boy, you may depend." 

"oh, you only fancy that, uncle, because you have spent so long a time 
at sea." 

"no, i don't imagine it, you rascal. what can you have on shore equal to 
what we have at sea? why, the sight that come before us would make you 
landsmen's hair stand up on end, and never come down again." 

"in the ocean, do you mean, that you see those sights, uncle?" 

"to be sure. i was once in the southern ocean, in a small frigate, 
look out for a seventy-four we were to join company with, when a man 
at the mast-head sung out that he saw her on the larboard bow. well, we 
thought it was all right enough, and made away that quarter, when what 
do you think it turn out to be?" 

"i really cannot say." 

"the head of a fish." 

"a fish!" 

"yes! a d----d deal big than the hull of a vessel. he was swimming 
along with his head just what i dare say he considered a shaving or so 
out of the water." 

"but where were the sails, uncle?" 

"the sails?" 

"yes; your man at the mast-head must have been a poor seaman not to have 
miss the sails." 

"all, that's one of your shore-going ideas, now. you know nothing 
whatever about it. i'll tell you where the sail were, master charley." 

"well, i should like to know." 

"the spray, then, that he dashed up with a pair of fin that were close 
to his head, was in such a quantity, and so white, that they look just 
like sails." 

"oh!" 

"ah! you may say 'oh!' but we all saw him--the whole ship's crew; and we 
sail alongside of him for some time, till he got tired of us, and 
sudden dive down, making such a vortex in the water, that the ship 
shook again, and seem for about a minute as if she was inclined to 
follow him to the bottom of the sea." 

"and what do you suppose it was, uncle?" 

"how should i know?" 

"did you ever see it again?" 

"never; though other have caught a glimpse of him now and then in the 
same ocean, but never came so near him as we did, that ever i heard of, 
at all events. they may have done so." 

"it is singular!" 

"singular or not, it's a fool to what i can tell you. why, i've seen 
things that, if i were to set about describe them to you, you would 
say i was making up a romance." 

"oh, no; it's quite impossible, uncle, any one could ever suspect you of 
such a thing." 

"you'd believe me, would you?" 

"of course i would." 

"then here goes. i'll just tell you now of a circumstance that i haven't 
like to mention to anybody yet." 

"indeed! why so?" 

"because i didn't want to be continual fight people for not 
believe it; but here you have it:--" 

we were outward bound; a good ship, a good captain, and good messmates, 
you know, go far towards making a prosperous voyage a pleasant and happy 
one, and on this occasion we had every reasonable prospect of all. 

our hand were all try men--they had been sailor from infancy; none 
of your france craft, that serve an apprenticeship and then become land 
lubber again. oh, no, they were stanch and true, and love the ocean as 
the sluggard love his bed, or the lover his mistress. 

ay, and for the matter of that, the love was a more enduring and a more 
healthy love, for it increase with years, and made men love one 
another, and they would stand by each other while they had a limb to 
lift--while they were able to chew a quid or wink an eye, leave alone 
wag a pigtail. 

we were outward bound for ceylon, with cargo, and were to bring spice 
and other matter home from the indian market. the ship was new and 
good--a pretty craft; she sat like a duck upon the water, and a stiff 
breeze carry her along the surface of the wave without your rocking, 
and pitching, and tossing, like an old wash-tub at a mill-tail, as i 
have had the misfortune to sail in more than once afore. 

no, no, we were well laden, and well pleased, and weigh anchor with 
light heart and a hearty cheer. 

away we went down the river, and soon round the north foreland, and 
stood out in the channel. the breeze was a steady and stiff one, and 
carry us through the water as though it had been made for us. 

"jack," said i to a messmate of mine, as he stood look at the skies, 
then at the sails, and finally at the water, with a grave air than i 
thought was at all consistent with the occasion or circumstances. 

"well," he replied. 

"what ail you? you seem as melancholy as if we were about to cast lot 
who should be eaten first. are you well enough?" 

"i am hearty enough, thank heaven," he said, "but i don't like this 
breeze." 

"don't like the breeze!" said i; "why, mate, it is as good and kind a 
breeze as ever fill a sail. what would you have, a gale?" 

"no, no; i fear that." 

"with such a ship, and such a set of hearty able seamen, i think we 
could manage to weather out the stiffest gale that ever whistle through 
a yard." 

"that may be; i hope it is, and i really believe and think so." 

"then what make you so infernal mopish and melancholy?" 

"i don't know, but can't help it. it seem to me as though there was 
something hanging over us, and i can't tell what." 

"yes, there are the colours, jack, at the masthead; they are flying over 
us with a hearty breeze." 

"ah! ah!" said jack, look up at the colours, and then went away 
without saying anything more, for he had some piece of duty to perform. 

i thought my messmate had something on his mind that cause him to feel 
sad and uncomfortable, and i took no more notice of it; indeed, in the 
course of a day or two he was as merry as any of the rest, and had no 
more melancholy that i could perceive, but was as comfortable as 
anybody. 

we had a gale off the coast of biscay, and rode it out without the loss 
of a spar or a yard; indeed, without the slightest accident or rent of 
any kind. 

"now, jack, what do you think of our vessel?" said i. 

"she's like a duck upon water, rise and falls with the waves, and 
doesn't tumble up and down like a hoop over stones." 

"no, no; she go smooth and sweetly; she is a gallant craft, and this 
is her first voyage, and i predict a prosperous one." 

"i hope so," he said. 

well, we went on prosperous enough for about three weeks; the ocean 
was as calm and as smooth as a meadow, the breeze light but good, and we 
stem along majestic over the deep blue waters, and pass coast 
after coast, though all around was nothing but the apparently pathless 
main in sight. 

"a better sail i never step into," said the captain one day; "it 
would be a pleasure to live and die in such a vessel." 

well, as i said, we had been three week or thereabouts, when one 
morning, after the sun was up and the deck washed, we saw a strange man 
sitting on one of the water-casks that were on deck, for, being full, we 
were compel to stow some of them on deck. 

you may guess those on deck did a little more than stare at this strange 
and unexpected apparition. by jingo, i never saw men open their eyes 
wide in all my life, nor was i any exception to the rule. i stared, as 
well i might; but we said nothing for some minutes, and the stranger 
look calm on us, and then cock his eye with a nautical air up at 
the sky, as if he expect to receive a twopenny-post letter from st. 
michael, or a _billet doux_ from the virgin mary. 

"where has he come from?" said one of the men in a low tone to his 
companion, who was standing by him at that moment. 

"how can i tell?" reply his companion. "he may have drop from the 
clouds; he seem to be examine the road; perhaps he is go back." 

the stranger sat all this time with the most extreme and provoking 
cool and unconcern; he deign us but a passing notice, but it was 
very slight. 

he was a tall, spare man--what is term long and lathy--but he was 
evidently a powerful man. he had a broad chest, and long, sinewy arms, a 
hooked nose, and a black, eagle eye. his hair was curly, but frost by 
age; it seem as though it had been tinge with white at the 
extremities, but he was hale and active otherwise, to judge from 
appearances. 

notwithstanding all this, there was a singular repulsive about him 
that i could not imagine the cause, or describe; at the same time there 
was an air of determination in his wild and singular-looking eyes, and 
over their whole there was decidedly an air and an appearance so 
sinister as to be positively disagreeable. 

"well," said i, after we had stood some minutes, "where did you come 
from, shipmate?" 

he look at me and then up at the sky, in a knowing manner. 

"come, come, that won't do; you have none of peter wilkins's wings, and 
couldn't come on the aerial dodge; it won't do; how did you get here?" 

he gave me an awful wink, and made a sort of involuntary movement, which 
jump him up a few inches, and he bump down again on the water-cask. 

"that's as much as to say," thought i, "that he's sat himself on it." 

"i'll go and inform the captain," said i, "of this affair; he'll hardly 
believe me when i tell him, i am sure." 

so saying, i left the deck and went to the cabin, where the captain was 
at breakfast, and related to him what i had seen respecting the 
stranger. the captain look at me with an air of disbelief, and said,-- 

"what?--do you mean to say there's a man on board we haven't seen 
before?" 

"yes, i do, captain. i never saw him afore, and he's sitting beating his 
heel on the water-cask on deck." 

"the devil!" 

"he is, i assure you, sir; and he won't answer any questions." 

"i'll see to that. i'll see if i can't make the lubber say something, 
providing his tongue's not cut out. but how came he on board? confound 
it, he can't be the devil, and drop from the moon." 

"don't know, captain," said i. "he is evil-looking enough, to my mind, 
to be the father of evil, but it's ill bespeak attention from that 
quarter at any time." 

"go on, lad; i'll come up after you." 

i left the cabin, and i heard the captain coming after me. when i got on 
deck, i saw he had not move from the place where i left him. there was 
a general commotion among the crew when they heard of the occurrence, 
and all crowded round him, save the man at the wheel, who had to remain 
at his post. 

the captain now came forward, and the men fell a little back as he 
approached. for a moment the captain stood silent, attentive examine 
the stranger, who was excessive cool, and stood the scrutiny with the 
same unconcern that he would had the captain been look at his watch. 

"well, my man," said the captain, "how did you come here?" 

"i'm part of the cargo," he said, with an indescribable leer. 

"part of the cargo be d----d!" said the captain, in sudden rage, for he 
thought the stranger was coming his joke too strong. "i know you are 
not in the bill of lading." 

"i'm contraband," reply the stranger; "and my uncle's the great chain 
of tartary." 

the captain stared, as well he might, and did not speak for some 
minutes; all the while the stranger kept kick his heel against the 
water-casks and squint up at the skies; it made us feel very queer. 

"well, i must confess you are not in the regular way of trading." 

"oh, no," said the stranger; "i am contraband--entirely contraband." 

"and how did you come on board?" 

at this question the stranger again look curious up at the skies, 
and continue to do so for more than a minute; he then turn his gaze 
upon the captain. 

"no, no," said the captain; "eloquent dumb show won't do with me; you 
didn't come, like mother shipton, upon a birch broom. how did you come 
on board my vessel?" 

"i walk on board," said the stranger. 

"you walk on board; and where did you conceal yourself?" 

"below." 

"very good; and why didn't you stay below altogether?" 

"because i want fresh air. i'm in a delicate state of health, you see; 
it doesn't do to stay in a confine place too long." 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain; it was his usual oath when 
anything bother him, and he could not make it out. "confound the 
binnacle!--what a delicate-looking animal you are. i wish you had stay 
where you were; your delicacy would have been all the same to me. 
delicate, indeed!" 

"yes, very," said the stranger, coolly. 

there was something so comic in the assertion of his delicate of 
health, that we should all have laughed; but we were somewhat scared, 
and had not the inclination. 

"how have you live since you came on board?" inquire the captain. 

"very indifferently." 

"but how? what have you eaten? and what have you drank?" 

"nothing, i assure you. all i did while was below was--" 

"what?" 

"why, i suck my thumb like a polar bear in its winter quarters." 

and as he spoke the stranger put his two thumb into his mouth, and 
extraordinary thumb they were, too, for each would have fill an 
ordinary man's mouth. 

"these," said the stranger, pull them out, and gaze at them 
wistfully, and with a deep sigh he continued,-- 

"these were thumb at one time; but they are nothing now to what they 
were." 

"confound the binnacle!" mutter the captain to himself, and then he 
added, aloud,-- 

"it's cheap living, however; but where are you go to, and why did you 
come aboard?" 

"i want a cheap cruise, and i am go there and back." 

"why, that's where we are going," said the captain. 

"then we are brothers," exclaim the stranger, hop off the 
water-cask like a kangaroo, and bound towards the captain, holding 
out his hand as though he would have shaken hand with him. 

"no, no," said the captain; "i can't do it." 

"can't do it!" exclaim the stranger, angrily. "what do you mean?" 

"that i can't have anything to do with contraband articles; i am a fair 
trader, and do all above board. i haven't a chaplain on board, or he 
should offer up prayer for your preservation, and the recovery of your 
health, which seem so delicate." 

"that be--" 

the stranger didn't finish the sentence; he merely screw his mouth up 
into an incomprehensible shape, and puffed out a lot of breath, with 
some force, and which sound very much like a whistle: but, oh, what 
thick breath he had, it was as much like smoke as anything i ever saw, 
and so my shipmate said. 

"i say, captain," said the stranger, as he saw him pace the deck. 

"well." 

"just send me up some beef and biscuit, and some coffee royal--be sure 
it's royal, do you hear, because i'm partial to brandy, it's the only 
good thing there is on earth." 

i shall not easily forget the captain's look as he turn towards the 
stranger, and gave his huge shoulder a shrug, as much as to say,-- 

"well, i can't help it now; he's here, and i can't throw him overboard." 

the coffee, beef, and biscuit were sent him, and the stranger seem to 
eat them with great _gout_, and drank the coffee with much relish, and 
return the things, saying, 

"your captain is an excellent cook; give him my compliments." 

i thought the captain would think that was but a left-handed compliment, 
and look more angry than pleased, but no notice was taken of it. 

it was strange, but this man had impress upon all in the vessel some 
singular notion of his being more than he should be--more than a mere 
mortal, and not one endeavour to interfere with him; the captain was a 
stout and dare-devil a fellow as you would well met with, yet he seem 
tacit to acknowledge more than he would say, for he never after took 
any further notice of the stranger nor he of him. 

they had barely any conversation, simply a civil word when they first 
met, and so forth; but there was little or no conversation of any kind 
between them. 

the stranger slept upon deck, and live upon deck entirely; he never 
once went below after we saw him, and his own account of being below so 
long. 

this was very well, but the night-watch did not enjoy his society, and 
would have willing dispense with it at that hour so particularly 
lonely and dejected upon the broad ocean, and perhaps a thousand mile 
away from the nearest point of land. 

at this dread and lonely hour, when no sound reach the ear and 
disturb the wrapt still of the night, save the whistle of the 
wind through the cordage, or an occasional dash of water against the 
vessel's side, the thought of the sailor are fixed on far distant 
objects--his own native land and the friends and love one he has left 
behind him. 

he then think of the wilderness before, behind, and around him; of the 
immense body of water, almost in place bottomless; gaze upon such a 
scene, and with thought as strange and indefinite as the very 
boundless expanse before him, it is no wonder if he should become 
superstitious; the time and place would, indeed unbidden, conjure up 
thought and feelings of a fearful character and intensity. 

the stranger at such times would occupy his favourite seat on the water 
cask, and look up at the sky and then on the ocean, and between 
while he would whistle a strange, wild, unknown melody. 

the flesh of the sailor use to creep up in knot and bump when they 
heard it; the wind use to whistle as an accompaniment and pronounce 
fearful sound to their ears. 

the wind had been highly favourable from the first, and since the 
stranger had been discover it had blown fresh, and we went along at a 
rapid rate, stem the water, and dashing the spray off from the bows, 
and cutting the water like a shark. 

this was very singular to us, we couldn't understand it, neither could 
the captain, and we look very suspicious at the stranger, and wish 
him at the bottom, for the fresh of the wind now became a gale, and 
yet the ship came through the water steadily, and away we went before 
the wind, as if the devil drove us; and mind i don't mean to say he 
didn't. 

the gale increase to a hurricane, and though we had not a stitch of 
canvass out, yet we drove before the gale as if we had been shot out of 
the mouth of a gun. 

the stranger still sat on the water casks, and all night long he kept up 
his infernal whistle. now, sailor don't like to hear any one whistle 
when there's such a gale blow over their heads--it's like ask for 
more; but he would persist, and the loud and strong the wind blew, 
the loud he whistled. 

at length there came a storm of rain, lightning, and wind. we were 
toss mountain high, and the foam rose over the vessel, and often 
entire over our heads, and the men were lash to their post to 
prevent being wash away. 

but the stranger still lay on the water casks, kick his heel and 
whistle his infernal tune, always the same. he wasn't wash away nor 
move by the action of the water; indeed, we heartily hope and expect 
to see both him and the water cask float overboard at every minute; 
but, as the captain said,-- 

"confound the binnacle! the old water tub seem as if it were screw on 
to the deck, and won't move off and he on the top of it." 

there was a strong inclination to throw him overboard, and the men 
converse in low whispers, and came round the captain, saying,-- 

"we have come, captain, to ask you what you think of this strange man 
who has come so mysterious on board?" 

"i can't tell what to think, lads; he's past thinking about--he's 
something above my comprehension altogether, i promise you." 

"well, then, we are thinking much of the same thing, captain." 

"what do you mean?" 

"that he ain't exactly one of our sort." 

"no, he's no sailor, certainly; and yet, for a land lubber, he's about 
as rum a customer as ever i met with." 

"so he is, sir." 

"he stand salt water well; and i must say that i couldn't lay a top of 
those water cask in that style very well." 

"nor nobody amongst us, sir." 

"well, then, he's in nobody's way, it he?--nobody wants to take his 
berth, i suppose?" 

the men look at each other somewhat blank; they didn't understand the 
meaning at all--far from it; and the idea of any one's wanting to take 
the stranger's place on the water cask was so outrageous ludicrous, 
that at any other time they would have considered it a devilish good 
joke and have never cease laugh at it. 

he pause some minutes, and then one of them said,-- 

"it isn't that we envy him his berth, captain, 'cause nobody else could 
live there for a moment. any one amongst us that had been there would 
have been wash overboard a thousand times over." 

"so they would," said the captain. 

"well, sir, he's more than us." 

"very likely; but how can i help that?" 

"we think he's the main cause of all this racket in the heavens--the 
storm and hurricane; and that, in short, if he remains much long we 
shall all sink." 

"i am sorry for it. i don't think we are in any danger, and had the 
strange being any power to prevent it, he would assured do so, lest he 
got drowned." 

"but we think if he were thrown overboard all would be well." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, captain, you may depend upon it he's the cause of all the 
mischief. throw him overboard and that's all we want." 

"i shall not throw him overboard, even if i could do such a thing; and i 
am by no means sure of anything of the kind." 

"we do not ask it, sir." 

"what do you desire?" 

"leave to throw him overboard--it is to save our own lives." 

"i can't let you do any such thing; he's in nobody's way." 

"but he's always a whistling. only hark now, and in such a hurricane as 
this, it is dreadful to think of it. what else can we do, sir?--he's not 
human." 

at this moment, the stranger's whistle came clear upon their ears; 
there was the same wild, unearthly note as before, but the cadence 
were stronger, and there was a supernatural clear in all the tones. 

"there now," said another, "he's kick the water cask with his heels." 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain; "it sound like short peal 
of thunder. go and talk to him, lads." 

"and if that won't do, sir, may we--" 

"don't ask me any questions. i don't think a score of the best men that 
were ever born could move him." 

"i don't mind trying," said one. 

upon this the whole of the men move to the spot where the water cask 
were standing and the stranger lay. 

there was he, whistle like fury, and, at the same time, beating his 
heel to the tune against the empty casks. we came up to him, and he 
took no notice of us at all, but kept on in the same way. 

"hilloa!" shout one. 

"hilloa!" shout another. 

no notice, however, was taken of us, and one of our number, a big, 
herculean fellow, an irishman, seize him by the leg, either to make him 
get up, or, as we thought, to give him a lift over our head into the 
sea. 

however, he had scarcely got his finger round the calf of the leg, when 
the stranger pinched his leg so tight against the water cask, that he 
could not move, and was as effectually pin as if he had been nail 
there. the stranger, after he had finished a bar of the music, rose 
gradual to a sitting posture, and without the aid of his hands, and 
look the unlucky fellow in the face, he said,-- 

"well, what do you want?" 

"my hand," said the fellow. 

"take it then," he said. 

he did take it, and we saw that there was blood on it. 

the stranger stretch out his left hand, and taking him by the breech, 
he lift him, without any effort, upon the water-cask beside him. 

we all stare at this, and couldn't help it; and we were quite convinced 
we could not throw him overboard, but he would probably have no 
difficulty in throw us overboard. 

"well, what do you want?" he again exclaim to us all. 

we look at one another, and had scarce courage to speak; at length i 
said,-- 

"we wish you to leave off whistling." 

"leave off whistling!" he said. "and why should i do anything of the 
kind?" 

"because it bring the wind." 

"ha! ha! why, that's the very reason i am whistling, to bring the wind." 

"but we don't want so much." 

"pho! pho! you don't know what's good for you--it's a beautiful breeze, 
and not a bit too stiff." 

"it's a hurricane." 

"nonsense." 

"but it is." 

"now you see how i'll prove you are wrong in a minute. you see my hair, 
don't you?" he said, after he took off his cap. "very well, look now." 

he got up on the water-cask, and stood bolt upright; and running his 
finger through his hair, made it all stand straight on end. 

"confound the binnacle!" said the captain, "if ever i saw the like." 

"there," said the stranger, triumphantly, "don't tell me there's any 
wind to signify; don't you see, it doesn't even move one of my grey 
hairs; and if it blew as hard as you say, i am certain it would move a 
hair." 

"confound the binnacle!" mutter the captain as he walk away. "d--n 
the cabouse, if he ain't old than i am--he's too many for me and 
everybody else." 

"are you satisfied?" 

what could we say?--we turn away and left the place, and stood at our 
quarters--there was no help for it--we were impel to grin and abide 
by it. 

[illustration] 

as soon as we had left the place he put his cap on again and sat down on 
the water-casks, and then took leave of his prisoner, whom he set free, 
and there lay at full length on his back, with his leg hanging down. 
once more he began to whistle most furiously, and beat time with his 
feet. 

for full three week did he continue at this game night and day, without 
any interruption, save such as he require to consume enough coffee 
royal, junk, and biscuit, as would have serve three hearty men. 

well, about that time, one night the whistle cease and he began to 
sing--oh! it was singing--such a voice! gog and magog in guildhall, 
london, when they spoke were nothing to him--it was awful; but the wind 
calm down to a fresh and stiff breeze. he continue at this game for 
three whole days and nights, and on the fourth it ceased, and when we 
went to take his coffee royal to him he was gone. 

we hunt about everywhere, but he was entire gone, and in three week 
after we safe cast anchor, have perform our voyage in a good month 
under the usual time; and had it been an old vessel she would have 
leak and stint like a tub from the straining; however, we were glad 
enough to get in, and were curious inquisitive as to what was put in 
our vessel to come back with, for as the captain said,-- 

"confound the binnacle! i'll have no more contraband articles if i can 
help it." 




chapter xxvi. 

the meeting by moonlight in the park.--the turret window in the 
hall.--the letters. 


[illustration] 

the old admiral show such a strong disposition to take offence at 
charles if he should presume, for a moment, to doubt the truth of the 
narrative that was thus communicate to him, that the latter would not 
anger him by so doing, but confine his observations upon it to saying 
that he considered it was very wonderful, and very extraordinary, and so 
on, which very well satisfy the old man. 

the day was now, however, get far advanced, and charles dutch 
began to think of his engagement with the vampyre. he read and read the 
letter over and over again, but he could not come to a correct 
conclusion as to whether it intended to imply that he, sir francis 
varney, would wish to fight him at the hour and place mentioned, or 
merely give him a meeting as a preliminary step. 

he was rather, on the whole, inclined to think that some explanation 
would be offer by varney, but at all event he persevere in his 
determination of go well armed, lest anything in the shape of 
treachery should be intended. 

as nothing of any importance occur now in the interval of time till 
nearly midnight, we will at once step to that time, and our reader will 
suppose it to be a quarter to twelve o'clock at night, and young charles 
dutch on the point of leave the house, to keep his appointment by 
the pollard oak, with the mysterious sir francis varney. 

he placed his loaded pistol convenient in his pocket, so that at a 
moment's notice he could lay hand on them, and then wrapping himself up 
in a travel cloak he had brought with him to bannerworth hall, he 
prepared to leave his chamber. 

the moon still shone, although now somewhat on the wane, and although 
there were certainly many cloud in the sky they were but of a light 
fleecy character, and very little interrupt the ray of light that 
came from the nearly full disc of the moon. 

from his window he could not perceive the spot in the park where he was 
to meet varney, because the room in which he was occupy not a 
sufficient high place in the house to enable him to look over a belt 
of tree that stop the view. from almost any of the upper window the 
pollard oak could be seen. 

it so happen now that the admiral had been placed in a room 
immediately above the one occupy by his nephew, and, as his mind was 
full of how he should manage with regard to arrange the preliminary 
of the duel between charles and varney on the morrow, he found it 
difficult to sleep; and after remain in bed about twenty minutes, and 
finding that each moment he was only get more and more restless, he 
adopt a course which he always did under such circumstances. 

he rose and dress himself again, intend to sit up for an hour and 
then turn into bed and try a second time to get to sleep. but he had no 
means of get a light, so he drew the heavy curtain from before the 
window, and let in as much of the moonlight as he could. 

this window command a most beautiful and extensive view, for from it 
the eye could carry completely over the tops of the tallest trees, so 
that there was no interrupt whatever to the prospect, which was as 
extensive as it was delightful. 

even the admiral, who never would confess to seeing much beauty in 
scenery where water form not a large portion of it, could not resist 
opening his window and look out, with a considerable degree of 
admiration, upon wood and dale, as they were illuminate by the moon's 
rays, softened, and rendered, if anything, more beautiful by the light 
vapours, through which they had to struggle to make their way. 

charles holland, in order to avoid the likelihood of meeting with any 
one who would question him as to where he was going, determined upon 
leave his room by the balcony, which, as we are aware, present ample 
facilities for his so doing. 

he cast a glance at the portrait in the panel before he left the 
apartment, and then saying,-- 

"for you, dear flora, for you i essay this meeting with the fearful 
original of that portrait," he immediately open his window, and 
step out on to the balcony. 

young and active as was charles holland, to descend from that balcony 
present to him no difficulty whatever, and he was, in a very few 
moments, safe in the garden of bannerworth hall. 

he never thought, for a moment, to look up, or he would, in an instant, 
have seen the white head of his old uncle, as it was project over the 
sill of the window of his chamber. 

the drop of charles from the balcony of his window, just made sufficient 
noise to attract the admiral's attention, and, then, before he could 
think of making any alarm, he saw charles walking hasty across a grass 
plot, which was sufficient in the light of the moon to enable the 
admiral at once to recognise him, and leave no sort of doubt as to his 
positive identity. 

of course, upon discover that it was charles, the necessity for 
making an alarm no long existed, and, indeed, not knowing what it was 
that had induce him to leave his chamber, a moment's reflection 
suggest to him the propriety of not even calling to charles, lest he 
should defeat some discovery which he might be about to make. 

"he has heard something, or seen something," thought the admiral, "and 
is gone to find out what it is. i only wish i was with him; but up here 
i can do nothing at all, that's quite clear." 

charles, he saw, walk very rapidly, and like a man who has some fixed 
destination which he wish to reach as quick as possible. 

when he dive among the tree which skirt one side of the flower 
gardens, the admiral was more puzzle than ever, and he said-- 

"now where on earth is he off to? he is fully dressed, and has his cloak 
about him." 

after a few moments' reflection he decided that, have seen something 
suspicious, charles must have got up, and dress himself, to fathom it. 

the moment this idea became fairly impress upon his mind, he left his 
bedroom, and descended to where one of the brother he knew was sitting 
up, keeping watch during the night. it was henry who was so on guard; 
and when the admiral came into the room, he utter an expression of 
surprise to find him up, for it was now some time past twelve o'clock. 

"i have come to tell you that charles has left the house," said the 
admiral. 

"left the house?" 

"yes; i saw him just now go across the garden." 

"and you are sure it was he?" 

"quite sure. i saw him by the moonlight cross the green plot." 

"then you may depend he has seen or heard something, and gone alone to 
find out what it is rather than give any alarm." 

"that is just what i think." 

"it must be so. i will follow him, if you can show me exactly which way 
he went." 

"that i can easily. and in case i should have made any mistake, which it 
is not at all likely, we can go to his room first and see if it is 
empty." 

"a good thought, certainly; that will at once put an end to all doubt 
upon the question." 

they both immediately proceed to charles's room, and then the 
admiral's accuracy of identification of his nephew was immediately 
prove by finding that charles was not there, and that the window was 
wide open. 

"you see i am right," said the admiral. 

"you are," cry henry; "but what have we here?" 

"where?" 

"here on the dressing-table. here are no less than three letters, all 
laid as it on purpose to catch the eye of the first one who might enter 
the room." 

"indeed!" 

"you perceive them?" 

henry held them to the light, and after a moment's inspection of them, 
he said, in a voice of much surprise,-- 

"good god! what is the meaning of this?" 

"the meaning of what?" 

"the letters are address to party in the house here. do you not 
see?" 

"to whom?" 

"one to admiral bell--" 

"the deuce!" 

"another to me, and the third to my sister flora. there is some new 
mystery here." 

the admiral look at the superscription of one of the letters which was 
hand to him in silent amazement. then he cried,-- 

"set down the light, and let us read them." 

henry did so, and then they simultaneous open the epistle which 
were severally address to them. there was a silence, as of the very 
grave, for some moments, and then the old admiral stagger to a seat, 
as he exclaimed,-- 

"am i dreaming--am i dreaming?" 

"is this possible?" said henry, in a voice of deep emotion, as he 
allow the note address to him to drop on to the floor. 

"d--n it, what do yours say?" cry the old admiral, in a loud tone. 

"read it--what say yours?" 

"read it--i'm amazed." 

the letters were exchanged, and read by each with the same breathless 
attention they had bestow upon their own; after which, they both 
look at each other in silence, pictures of amazement, and the most 
absolute state of bewilderment. 

not to keep our reader in suspense, we at once transcribe each of these 
letters. 

the one to the admiral contained these words,-- 

"my dear uncle, 

"of course you will perceive the prudence of keeping this letter 
to yourself, but the fact is, i have now made up my mind to leave 
bannerworth hall. 

"flora bannerworth is not now the person she was when first i 
knew her and love her. such being the case, and she have 
altered, not i, she cannot accuse me of fickleness. 

"i still love the flora bannerworth i first knew, but i cannot 
make my wife one who is subject to the visitation of a vampyre. 

"i have remain here long enough now to satisfy myself that this 
vampyre business is no delusion. i am quite convinced that it is 
a positive fact, and that, after death, flora will herself become 
one of the horrible existence known by that name. 

"i will communicate to you from the first large city on the 
continent whither i am going, at which i make any stay, and in 
the meantime, make what excuse you like at bannerworth hall, 
which i advise you to leave as quick as you can, and believe me 
to be, my dear uncle, yours truly, 

"charles holland." 

henry's letter was this:-- 

"my dear sir, 

"if you calm and dispassionate consider the painful and 
distressing circumstances in which your family are placed, i am 
sure that, far from blame me for the step which this note will 
announce to you i have taken, you will be the first to give me 
credit for acting with an amount of prudence and foresight which 
was highly necessary under the circumstances. 

"if the supposed visit of a vampyre to your sister flora had 
turn out, as first i hope they would, a delusion and been 
in any satisfactory manner explain away i should certainly have 
felt pride and pleasure in fulfill my engagement to that young 
lady. 

"you must, however, yourself feel that the amount of evidence in 
favour of a belief that an actual vampyre has visit flora, 
enforce a conviction of its truth. 

"i cannot, therefore, make her my wife under such very singular 
circumstances. 

"perhaps you may blame me for not taking at once advantage of the 
permission given me to forego my engagement when first i came to 
your house; but the fact is, i did not then in the least believe 
in the existence of the vampyre, but since a positive conviction 
of that most painful fact has now forced itself upon me, i beg to 
decline the honour of an alliance which i had at one time look 
forward to with the most considerable satisfaction. 

"i shall be on the continent as fast as conveyance can take me, 
therefore, should you entertain any romantic notions of calling 
me to an account for a course of proceeding i think perfectly and 
fully justifiable, you will not find me. 

"accept the assurance of my respect for yourself and pity for 
your sister, and believe me to be, my dear sir, your sincere 
friend, 

"charles holland." 

these two letters might well make the admiral stare at henry 
bannerworth, and henry stare at him. 

an occurrence so utterly and entire unexpected by both of them, was 
enough to make them doubt the evidence of their own senses. but there 
were the letters, as a damning evidence of the outrageous fact, and 
charles dutch was gone. 

it was the admiral who first recover from the stunning effect of the 
epistles, and he, with a gesture of perfect fury, exclaimed,-- 

"the scoundrel--the cold-blooded villain! i renounce him for ever! he is 
no nephew of mine; he is some d----d imposter! nobody with a dash of my 
family blood in his vein would have act so to save himself from a 
thousand deaths." 

"who shall we trust now," said henry, "when those whom we take to our 
inmost heart deceive us thus? this is the greatest shock i have yet 
received. if there be a pang greater than another, surely it is to be 
found in the faithless and heartless of one we love and 
trusted." 

"he is a scoundrel!" roar the admiral. "d--n him, he'll die on a 
dunghill, and that's too good a place for him. i cast him off--i'll find 
him out, and old as i am, i'll fight him--i'll wring his neck, the 
rascal; and, as for poor dear miss flora, god bless her! i'll--i'll 
marry her myself, and make her an admiral.--i'll marry her myself. oh, 
that i should be uncle to such a rascal!" 

"calm yourself," said henry, "no one can blame you." 

"yes, you can; i had no right to be his uncle, and i was an old fool to 
love him." 

the old man sat down, and his voice became broken with emotion as he 
said,-- 

"sir, i tell you i would have die willing rather than this should 
have happened. this will kill me now,--i shall die now of shame and 
grief." 

tear gush from the admiral's eyes and the sight of the noble old 
man's emotion did much to calm the anger of henry which, although he 
said but little, was boil at his heart like a volcano. 

"admiral bell," he said, "you have nothing to do with this business; we 
can not blame you for the heartless of another. i have but one 
favour to ask of you." 

"what--what can i do?" 

"say no more about him at all." 

"i can't help saying something about him. you ought to turn me out of 
the house." 

"heaven forbid! what for?" 

"because i'm his uncle--his d----d old fool of an uncle, that always 
thought so much of him." 

"nay, my good sir, that was a fault on the right side, and cannot 
discredit you. i thought him the most perfect of human beings." 

"oh, if i could but have guess this." 

"it was impossible. such duplicity never was equal in this world--it 
was impossible to foresee it." 

"hold--hold! did he give you fifty pounds?" 

"what?" 

"did he give you fifty pounds?" 

"give me fifty pounds! most decidedly not; what made you think of such a 
thing?" 

"because to-day he borrow fifty pound of me, he said, to lend to 
you." 

"i never heard of the transaction until this moment." 

"the villain!" 

"no, doubt, sir, he want that amount to expedite his progress abroad." 

"well, now, damme, if an angel had come to me and said 'hilloa! admiral 
bell, your nephew, charles holland, is a thundering rogue,' i should 
have said 'you're a liar!'" 

"this is fight against facts, my dear sir. he is gone--mention him no 
more; forget him, as i shall endeavour myself to do, and persuade my 
poor sister to do." 

"poor girl! what can we say to her?" 

"nothing, but give her all the letters, and let her be at once satisfy 
of the worthless of him she loved." 

"the best way. her woman's pride will then come to her help." 

"i hope it will. she is of an honourable race, and i am sure she will 
not condescend to shed a tear for such a man as charles dutch has 
prove himself to be." 

"d--n him, i'll find him out, and make him fight you. he shall give you 
satisfaction." 

"no, no." 

"no? but he shall." 

"i cannot fight with him." 

"you cannot?" 

"certainly not. he is too far beneath me now. i cannot fight on 
honourable terms with one whom i despise as too dishonourable to contend 
with. i have nothing now but silence and contempt." 

"i have though, for i'll break his neck when i see him, or he shall 
break mine. the villain! i'm ashamed to stay here, my young friend." 

"how mistaken a view you take of this matter, my dear sir. as admiral 
bell, a gentleman, a brave officer, and a man of the purest and most 
unblemished honour, you confer a distinction upon us by your presence 
here." 

the admiral wrung henry by the hand, as he said,-- 

"to-morrow--wait till to-morrow; we will talk over this matter to 
morrow--i cannot to-night, i have not patience; but to-morrow, my dear 
boy, we will have it all out. god bless you. good night." 




chapter xxvii. 

the noble confidence of flora bannerworth in her lover.--her opinion of 
the three letters.--the admiral's admiration. 


[illustration] 

to describe the feelings of henry bannerworth on the occasion of this 
apparent defalcation from the path of rectitude and honour by his 
friend, as he had fondly imagine charles dutch to be, would be next 
to impossible. 

if, as we have taken occasion to say, it be a positive fact, that a 
noble and a generous mind feel more acute any heartless of this 
description from one on whom it has placed implicit confidence, than the 
most deliberate and wicked of injury from absolute strangers, we can 
easily conceive that henry bannerworth was precisely the person to feel 
most acute the conduct which all circumstances appear to fix upon 
charles holland, upon whose faith, truth, and honour, he would have 
stake his very existence but a few short hour before. 

with such a bewilder sensation that he scarcely knew where he walk 
or whither to betake himself, did he repair to his own chamber, and 
there he strove, with what energy he was able to bring to the task, to 
find out some excuses, if he could, for charles's conduct. but he could 
find none. view it in what light he would, it present but a picture of 
the most heartless selfish it had ever been his lot to encounter. 

the tone of the letters, too, which charles had written, material 
aggravate the moral delinquency of which he had been guilty; belief, 
far better, had he not attempt an excuse at all than have attempt 
such excuse as were there put down in those epistles. 

a more cold blooded, dishonourable proceeding could not possibly be 
conceived. 

it would appear, that while he entertain a doubt with regard to the 
reality of the visitation of the vampyre to flora bannerworth, he had 
been willing to take to himself abundance of credit for the most 
honourable feelings, and to induce a belief in the mind of all that an 
exalted feeling of honour, as well as a true affection that would know 
no change, kept him at the feet of her whom he loved. 

like some braggart, who, when there is no danger, is a very hero, but 
who, the moment he feel convinced he will be actually and truly call 
upon for an exhibition of his much-vaunted prowess, had charles dutch 
desert the beautiful girl who, if anything, had now certainly, in her 
misfortunes, a far higher claim upon his kindly feeling than before. 

henry could not sleep, although, at the request of george, who offer 
to keep watch for him the remainder of the night he attempt to do so. 

he in vain said to himself, "i will banish from my mind this most 
unworthy subject. i have told admiral bell that contempt is the only 
feeling i can now have for his nephew, and yet i now find myself 
dwelling upon him, and upon his conduct, with a perseverance which is a 
foe to my repose." 

at length came the welcome and beautiful light of day, and henry rose 
fevered and unrefreshed. 

his first impulse now was to hold a consultation with his brother 
george, as to what was to be done, and george advise that mr. 
marchdale, who as yet knew nothing of the matter, should be immediately 
informed of it, and consulted, as being probably better qualified than 
either of them to come to a just, a cool, and a reasonable opinion upon 
the painful circumstance, which it could not be expect that either of 
them would be able to view calmly. 

"let it be so, then," said henry; "mr. marchdale shall decide for us." 

they at once sought this friend of the family, who was in his own 
bed-room, and when henry knock at the door, marchdale open it 
hurriedly, eager inquiring what was the matter. 

"there is no alarm," said henry. "we have only come to tell you of a 
circumstance which has occur during the night, and which will 
somewhat surprise you." 

"nothing calamitous, i hope?" 

"vexatious; and yet, i think it is a matter upon which we ought almost 
to congratulate ourselves. read those two letters, and give us your 
candid opinion upon them." 

henry placed in mr. marchdale's hand the letter address to himself, 
as well as that to the admiral. 

marchdale read them both with marked attention, but he did not exhibit 
in his countenance so much surprise as regret. 

when he had finished, henry said to him,-- 

"well, marchdale, what think you of this new and extraordinary episode 
in our affairs?" 

"my dear young friends," said marchdale, in a voice of great emotion, "i 
know not what to say to you. i have no doubt but that you are both of 
you much astonish at the receipt of these letters, and equally so at 
the sudden absence of charles holland." 

"and are not you?" 

"not so much as you, doubtless, are. the fact is, i never did entertain 
a favourable opinion of the young man, and he knew it. i have been 
accustomed to the study of human nature under a variety of aspects; i 
have made it a matter of deep, and i may add, sorrowful, contemplation, 
to study and remark those minor shades of character which commonly 
escape observation wholly. and, i repeat, i always had a bad opinion of 
charles holland, which he guessed, and hence he conceive a hatred to 
me, which more than once, as you cannot but remember, show itself in 
little acts of opposition and hostility." 

"you much surprise me." 

"i expect to do so. but you cannot help remember that at one time i 
was on the point of leave here solely on his account." 

"you were so." 

"indeed i should have done so, but that i reasoned with myself upon the 
subject, and subdued the impulse of the anger which some years ago, when 
i had not seen so much of the world, would have guide me." 

"but why did you not impart to us your suspicions? we should at least, 
then, have been prepared for such a contingency as has occurred." 

"place yourself in my position, and then yourself what you would have 
done. suspicion is one of those hideous things which all men should be 
most specially careful not only how they entertain at all, but how they 
give expression to. besides, whatever may be the amount of one's own 
internal conviction with regard to the character of any one, there is 
just a possibility that one may be wrong." 

"true, true." 

"that possibility ought to keep any one silent who has nothing but 
suspicion to go upon, however cautious it may make him, as regards his 
dealings with the individual. i only suspect from little minute shades 
of character, that would peep out in spite of him, that charles dutch 
was not the honourable man he would fain have had everybody believe him 
to be." 

"and had you from the first such a feeling?" 

"i had." 

"it is very strange." 

"yes; and what is more strange still, is that he from the first seem 
to know it; and despite a caution which i could see he always kept 
uppermost in his thoughts, he could not help speak tart to me at 
times." 

"i have notice that," said george. 

"you may depend it is a fact," add marchdale, "that nothing so much 
excite the deadly and desperate hatred of a man who is acting a 
hypocrite part, as the suspicion, well ground or not, that another 
see and understand the secret impulse of his dishonourable heart." 

"i cannot blame you, or any one else, mr. marchdale," said henry, "that 
you did not give utterance to your secret thoughts, but i do wish that 
you had done so." 

"nay, dear henry," reply mr. marchdale, "believe me, i have made this 
matter a subject of deep thought, and have abundance of reason why i 
ought not to have spoken to you upon the subject." 

"indeed!" 

"indeed i have, and not among the least important is the one, that if i 
had acquaint you with my suspicions, you would have found yourself in 
the painful position of acting a hypocrite part yourself towards this 
charles holland, for you must either have kept the secret that he was 
suspected, or you must have shewn it to him by your behaviour." 

"well, well. i dare say, marchdale, you act for the best. what shall 
we do now?" 

"can you doubt?" 

"i was thinking of letting flora at once know the absolute and complete 
worthless of her lover, so that she could have no difficulty in at 
once tear herself from him by the assistance of the natural pride 
which would surely come to her aid, upon finding herself so much 
deceived." 

"the test may be possible." 

"you think so?" 

"i do, indeed." 

"here is a letter, which of course remains unopened, address to flora 
by charles holland. the admiral rather thought it would hurt her 
feelings to deliver her such an epistle, but i must confess i am of a 
contrary opinion upon that point, and think now the more evidence she 
has of the utter worthless of him who professed to love her with so 
much disinterested affection, the better it will be for her." 

"you could not, possibly, henry, have taken a more sensible view of the 
subject." 

"i am glad you agree with me." 

"no reasonable man could do otherwise, and from what i have seen of 
admiral bell, i am sure, upon reflection, he will be of the same 
opinion." 

"then it shall be so. the first shock to poor flora may be severe, but 
we shall then have the consolation of knowing that it is the only one, 
and that in knowing the very worst, she has no more on that score to 
apprehend. alas, alas! the hand of misfortune now appear to have 
pressed heavy upon us indeed. what in the name of all that is unlucky 
and disastrous, will happen next, i wonder?" 

"what can happen?" said marchdale; "i think you have now got rid of the 
greatest evil of all--a false friend." 

"we have, indeed." 

"go, then, to flora; assure her that in the affection of other who know 
no falsehood, she will find a solace from every ill. assure her that 
there are heart that will place themselves between her and every 
misfortune." 

mr. marchdale was much affected as he spoke. probably he felt deep 
than he chose to express the misfortune of that family for whom he 
entertain so much friendship. he turn aside his head to hide the 
trace of emotion which, despite even his great powers of self-command, 
would shew themselves upon his handsome and intelligent countenance. 
then it appear as if his noble indignation had got, for a few brief 
moments, the better of all prudence, and he exclaimed,-- 

"the villain! the worse than villain! who would, with a thousand 
artifices, make himself beloved by a young, unsuspecting, and beautiful 
girl, but then to leave her to the bitter of regret, that she had 
ever given such a man a place in her esteem. the heartless ruffian!" 

"be calm, mr. marchdale, i pray you be calm," said george; "i never saw 
you so much moved." 

"excuse me," he said, "excuse me; i am much moved, and i am human. i 
cannot always, let me strive my utmost, place a curb upon my feelings." 

"they are feelings which do you honour." 

"nay, nay, i am foolish to have suffer myself to be led away into such 
a hasty expression of them. i am accustomed to feel acute and to feel 
deeply, but it is seldom i am so much overcome as this." 

"will you accompany us to the breakfast room at once, mr. marchdale, 
where we will make this communication to flora; you will then be able to 
judge by her manner of receiving it, what it will be best to say to 
her." 

"come, then, and pray be calm. the least that is said upon this painful 
and harass subject, after this morning, will be the best." 

"you are right--you are right." 

mr. marchdale hasty put on his coat. he was dressed, with the 
exception of that one article of apparel, when the brother came to his 
chamber, and then he came to the breakfast-parlour where the painful 
communication was to be made to flora of her lover's faithlessness. 

flora was already seat in that apartment. indeed, she had been 
accustomed to meet charles dutch there before other of the family 
made their appearance, but, alas! this morning the kind and tender lover 
was not there. 

the expression that sat upon the countenance of her brothers, and of 
mr. marchdale, was quite sufficient to convince her that something more 
serious than usual had occurred, and she at the moment turn very pale. 
marchdale observe this change of change of countenance in her, and he 
advanced towards her, saying,-- 

"calm yourself, flora, we have something to communicate to you, but it 
is a something which should excite indignation, and no other feeling, in 
your breast." 

"brother, what is the meaning of this?" said flora, turning aside from 
marchdale, and withdraw the hand which he would have taken. 

"i would rather have admiral bell here before i say anything," said 
henry, "regarding a matter in which he cannot but feel much interested 
personally." 

"here he is," said the admiral, who at that moment had open the door 
of the breakfast room. "here he is, so now fire away, and don't spare 
the enemy." 

"and charles?" said flora, "where is charles?" 

"d--n charles!" cry the admiral, who had not been much accustomed to 
control his feelings. 

"hush! hush!" said henry; "my dear sir, hush! do not indulge now in any 
invectives. flora, here are three letters; you will see that the one 
which is unopened is address to yourself. however, we wish you to read 
the whole three of them, and then to form your own free and unbiased 
opinion." 

flora look as pale as a marble statue, when she took the letters into 
her hands. she let the two that were open fall on the table before her, 
while she eager broke the seal of that which was address to herself. 

[illustration] 

henry, with an instinctive delicacy, beckon every one present to the 
window, so that flora had not the pain of feeling that any eyes were 
fixed upon her but those of her mother, who had just come into the room, 
while she was peruse those document which told such a tale of 
heartless dissimulation. 

"my dear child," said mrs. bannerworth, "you are ill." 

"hush! mother--hush!" said flora, "let me know all." 

she read the whole of the letters through, and then, as the last one 
drop from her grasp, she exclaimed,-- 

"oh, god! oh, god! what is all that has occur compare to this? 
charles--charles--charles!" 

"flora!" exclaim henry, sudden turning from the window. "flora, is 
this worthy of you?" 

"heaven now support me!" 

"is this worthy of the name you bear flora? i should have thought, and i 
did hope, that woman's pride would have support you." 

"let me implore you," add marchdale, "to summon indignation to your 
aid, miss bannerworth." 

"charles--charles--charles!" she again exclaimed, as she wrung her hand 
despairingly. 

"flora, if anything could add a sting to my already irritate feelings," 
said henry, "this conduct of yours would." 

"henry--brother, what mean you? are you mad?" 

"are you, flora?" 

"god, i wish now that i was." 

"you have read those letters, and yet you call upon the name of him who 
wrote them with frantic tenderness." 

"yes, yes," she cried; "frantic tender is the word. it is with 
frantic tender i call upon his name, and ever will.--charles! 
charles!--dear charles!" 

"this surpass all belief," said marchdale. 

"it is the frenzy of grief," add george; "but i did not expect it of 
her. flora--flora, think again." 

"think--think--the rush of thought distracts. whence came these 
letters?--where did you find these most disgraceful forgeries?" 

"forgeries!" exclaim henry; and he stagger back, as if someone had 
struck him a blow. 

"yes, forgeries!" scream flora. "what has become of charles holland? 
has he been murder by some secret enemy, and then these most vile 
fabrication made up in his name? oh, charles, charles, are you lost to 
me for ever?" 

"good god!" said henry; "i did not think of that" 

"madness!--madness!" cry marchdale. 

"hold!" shout the admiral. "let me speak to her." 

he pushed every one aside, and advanced to flora. he seize both her 
hand in his own, and in a tone of voice that was struggle with 
feeling, he cried,-- 

"look at me, my dear; i'm an old man old enough to be your grandfather, 
so you needn't mind look me steady in the face. look at me, i want 
to ask you a question." 

flora raise her beautiful eyes, and look the old weather-beaten 
admiral full in the face. 

oh! what a striking contrast did those two person present to each 
other. that young and beautiful girl, with her small, delicate, 
childlike hand clasped, and completely hidden in the huge one of the 
old sailor, the white, smooth skin contrast wonderful with his 
wrinkled, harden features. 

"my dear," he cried, "you have read those--those d----d letters, my 
dear?" 

"i have, sir." 

"and what do you think of them?" 

"they were not written by charles holland, your nephew." 

a choke sensation seem to come over the old man, and he try to 
speak, but in vain. he shook the hand of the young girl violently, 
until he saw that he was hurt her, and then, before she could be 
aware of what he was about, he gave her a kiss on the cheek, as he 
cried,-- 

"god bless you--god bless you! you are the sweetest, dearest little 
creature that ever was, or that ever will be, and i'm a d----d old fool, 
that's what i am. these letters were not written by my nephew, charles. 
he is incapable of writing them, and, d--n me, i shall take shame to 
myself as long as i live for ever thinking so." 

"dear sir," said flora, who somehow or another did not seem at all 
offend at the kiss which the old man had given her; "dear sir, how 
could you believe, for one moment, that they came from him? there has 
been some desperate villany on foot. where is he?--oh, find him, if he 
be yet alive. if they who have thus striven to steal from him that 
honour, which is the jewel of his heart, have murder him, seek them 
out, sir, in the sacred name of justice, i implore you." 

"i will--i will. i don't renounce him; he is my nephew still--charles 
holland--my own dear sister's son; and you are the best girl, god bless 
you, that ever breathed. he love you--he love you still; and if he's 
above ground, poor fellow, he shall yet tell you himself he never saw 
those infamous letters." 

"you--you will seek for him?" sob flora, and the tear gush from 
her eyes. "upon you, sir, who, as i do, feel assured of his innocence, i 
alone rely. if all the world say he is guilty, we will not think so." 

"i'm d----d if we do." 

henry had sat down by the table, and, with his hand clasp together, 
seem in an agony of thought. 

he was now rouse by a thump on the back by the admiral, who cried,-- 

"what do you think, now, old fellow? d--n it, things look a little 
different now." 

"as god is my judge," said henry, holding up his hands, "i know not what 
to think, but my heart and feelings all go with you and with flora, in 
your opinion of the innocence of charles holland." 

"i knew you would say that, because you could not possibly help it, my 
dear boy. now we are all right again, and all we have got to do is to 
find out which way the enemy has gone, and then give chase to him." 

"mr. marchdale, what do you think of this new suggestion," said george 
to that gentleman. 

"pray, excuse me," was his reply; "i would much rather not be call 
upon to give an opinion." 

"why, what do you mean by that?" said the admiral. 

"precisely what i say, sir." 

"d--n me, we had a fellow once in the combine fleets, who never had an 
opinion till after something had happened, and then he always said that 
was just what he thought." 

"i was never in the combined, or any other fleet, sir," said marchdale, 
coldly. 

"who the devil said you were?" roar the admiral. 

marchdale merely hawed. 

"however," add the admiral, "i don't care, and never did, for 
anybody's opinion, when i know i am right. i'd back this dear girl here 
for opinions, and good feelings, and courage to express them, against 
all the world, i would, any day. if i was not the old hulk i am, i would 
take a cruise in any latitude under the sun, if it was only for the 
chance of meeting with just such another." 

"oh, lose no time!" said flora. "if charles is not to be found in the 
house, lose no time in searching for him, i pray you; seek him, wherever 
there is the remotest probability he may chance to be. do not let him 
think he is deserted." 

"not a bit of it," cry the admiral. "you make your mind easy, my dear. 
if he's above ground, we shall find him out, you may depend upon it. 
come along master henry, you and i will consider what had best be done 
in this uncommonly ugly matter." 

henry and george follow the admiral from the breakfast-room, leave 
marchdale there, who look serious and full of melancholy thought. 

it was quite clear that he considered flora had spoken from the generous 
warmth of her affection as regard charles holland, and not from the 
conviction which reason would have enforce her to feel. 

when he was now alone with her and mrs. bannerworth, he spoke in a 
feeling and affectionate tone regarding the painful and inexplicable 
event which had transpired. 




chapter xxviii. 

mr. marchdale's exculpate of himself.--the search through the 
gardens.--the spot of the deadly struggle.--the mysterious paper. 


[illustration] 

it was, perhaps, very natural that, with her feelings towards charles 
holland, flora should shrink from every one who seem to be of a 
directly contrary impression, and when mr. marchdale now spoke, she 
show but little inclination to hear what he had to say in explanation. 

the genuine and unaffected manner, however, in which he spoke, could not 
but have its effect upon her, and she found herself compel to listen, 
as well as, to a great extent, approve of the sentiment that fell from 
his lips. 

"flora," he said, "i beg that you will here, in the presence of your 
mother, give me a patient hearing. you fancy that, because i cannot join 
so glib as the admiral in believe that these letters are forgeries, 
i must be your enemy." 

"those letters," said flora, "were not written by charles holland." 

"that is your opinion." 

"it is more than an opinion. he could not write them." 

"well, then, of course, if i felt inclined, which heaven alone know i 
do not, i could not hope successful to argue against such a 
conviction. but i do not wish to do so. all i want to impress upon you 
is, that i am not to be blame for doubt his innocence; and, at the 
same time, i wish to assure you that no one in this house would feel 
more exquisite satisfaction than i in seeing it established." 

"i thank you for so much," said flora; "but as, to my mind, his 
innocence has never been doubted, it needs to me no establishing." 

"very good. you believe these letters forgeries?" 

"i do." 

"and that the disappearance of charles dutch is enforced, and not of 
his own free will?" 

"i do." 

"then you may rely upon my unremitting exertion night and day to find 
him and any suggestion you can make, which is likely to aid in the 
search, shall, i pledge myself, be fully carry out." 

"i thank you, mr. marchdale." 

"my dear," said the mother, "rely on mr. marchdale." 

"i will rely on any one who believe charles dutch innocent of writing 
those odious letters, mother--i rely upon the admiral. he will aid me 
heart and hand." 

"and so will mr. marchdale." 

"i am glad to hear it." 

"and yet doubt it, flora," said marchdale, dejectedly. "i am very sorry 
that such should be the case; i will not, however, trouble you any 
further, nor, give me leave to assure you, will i relax in my honest 
endeavour to clear up this mystery." 

so saying, mr. marchdale bowed, and left the room, apparently more vex 
than he care to express at the misconstruction which had been put upon 
his conduct and motives. he at once sought henry and the admiral, to 
whom he express his most earnest desire to aid in attempt to 
unravel the mysterious circumstances which had occurred. 

"this strongly-expressed opinion of flora," he remarked, "is of course 
ample sufficient to induce us to pause before we say one word more that 
shall in any way sound like a condemnation of mr. holland. heaven forbid 
that i should." 

"no," said the admiral; "don't." 

"i do not intend." 

"i would not advise anybody." 

"sir, if you use that as a threat--" 

"a threat?" 

"yes; i must say, it sound marvellous like one." 

"oh, dear, no--quite a mistake. i consider that every man has a fair 
right to the enjoyment of his opinion. all i have to remark is, that i 
shall, after what has occurred, feel myself call upon to fight anybody 
who say those letters were written by my nephew." 

"indeed, sir!" 

"ah, indeed." 

"you will permit me to say such is a strange mode of allow every one 
the free enjoyment of his opinion." 

"not at all." 

"whatever pains and penalty may be the result, admiral bell, of 
differ with so infallible authority as yourself, i shall do so 
whenever my judgment induce me." 

"you will?" 

"indeed i will." 

"very good. you know the consequences." 

"as to fight you, i should refuse to do so." 

"refuse?" 

"yes; most certainly." 

"upon what ground?" 

"upon the ground that you were a madman." 

"come," now interpose henry, "let me hope that, for my sake as well as 
for flora's, this dispute will proceed no further." 

"i have not court it," said marchdale. "i have much temper, but i am 
not a stick or a stone." 

"d----e, if i don't think," said the admiral, "you are a bit of both." 

"mr. henry bannerworth," said marchdale, "i am your guest, and but for 
the duty i feel in assist in the search for mr. charles holland, i 
should at once leave your house." 

"you need not trouble yourself on my account," said the admiral; "if i 
find no clue to him in the neighbourhood for two or three days, i shall 
be off myself." 

"i am going," said henry, rising, "to search the garden and adjoin 
meadows; if you two gentlemen choose to come with me, i shall of course 
be happy of your company; if, however, you prefer remain here to 
wrangle, you can do so." 

this had the effect, at all events, of putt a stop to the dispute for 
the present, and both the admiral and mr. marchdale accompany henry on 
his search. that search was commence immediately under the balcony of 
charles holland's window, from which the admiral had seen him emerge. 

there was nothing particular found there, or in the garden. admiral bell 
pointed out accurate the route he had seen charles take across the 
grass plot just before he himself left his chamber to seek henry. 

accordingly, this route was now taken, and it led to a low part of the 
garden wall, which any one of ordinary vigour could easily have 
surmounted. 

"my impression is," said the admiral, "that he got over here." 

"the ivy appear to be disturbed," remark henry. 

"suppose we mark the spot, and then go round to it on the outer side?" 
suggest george. 

this was agree to; for, although the young man might have chosen rather 
to clamber over the wall than go round, it was doubtful if the old 
admiral could accomplish such a feat. 

the distance round, however, was not great, and as they had cast over 
the wall a handful of flower from the garden to mark the precise spot, 
it was easily discoverable. 

the moment they reach it, they were panic-stricken by the appearances 
which it presented. the grass was for some yard round about completely 
trodden up, and convert into mud. there were deep indentation of 
feet-marks in all directions, and such abundance of evidence that some 
most desperate struggle had recently taken place there, that the most 
sceptical person in the world could not have entertain any doubt upon 
the subject. 

henry was the first to break the silence with which they each regard 
the broken ground. 

"this is conclusive to my mind," he said, with a deep sigh. "here has 
poor charles been attacked." 

"god keep him!" exclaim marchdale, "and pardon me my doubts--i am now 
convinced." 

the old admiral gaze about him like one distracted. sudden he cried-- 

"they have murder him. some fiend in the shape of men have murder 
him, and heaven only know for what." 

"it seem but too probable," said henry. "let us endeavour to trace the 
footsteps. oh! flora, flora, what terrible news this will be to you." 

"a horrible supposition come across my mind," said george. "what if he 
met the vampyre?" 

"it may have been so," said marchdale, with a shudder. "it is a point 
which we should endeavour to ascertain, and i think we may do so." 

"how!" 

"by some inquiry as to whether sir francis varney was from home at 
midnight last night." 

"true; that might be done." 

"the question, sudden put to one of his servants, would, most 
probably, be answer as a thing of course." 

"it would." 

"then that shall be decided upon. and now, my friends, since you have 
some of you thought me luke-warm in this business, i pledge myself that, 
should it be ascertain that varney was from home at midnight last 
evening, i will defy him personally, and meet him hand to hand." 

"nay, nay," said henry, "leave that course to younger hands." 

"why so?" 

"it more befit me to be his challenger." 

"no, henry. you are different situated to what i am." 

"how so?" 

"remember, that i am in the world a lone man; without tie or 
connexions. if i lose my life, i compromise no one by my death; but you 
have a mother and a bereaved sister to look to who will deserve your 
care." 

"hilloa," cry the admiral, "what's this?" 

"what?" cry each, eagerly, and they pressed forward to where the 
admiral was stoop to the ground to pick up something which was nearly 
completely trodden into the grass. 

he with some difficulty raise it. it was a small slip of paper, on 
which was some writing, but it was so much cover with mud as not to be 
legible. 

"if this be washed," said henry, "i think we shall be able to read it 
clearly." 

"we can soon try that experiment," said george. "and as the footsteps, 
by some mysterious means, show themselves nowhere else but in this one 
particular spot, any further pursuit of inquiry about here appear 
useless." 

"then we will return to the house," said henry, "and wash the mud from 
this paper." 

"there is one important point," remark marchdale, "which it appear to 
me we have all overlooked." 

"indeed!" 

"yes." 

"what may that be?" 

"it is this. is any one here sufficient acquaint with the 
handwriting of mr. charles dutch to come to an opinion upon the 
letters?" 

"i have some letters from him," said henry, "which we received while on 
the continent, and i dare say flora has likewise." 

"then they should be compare with the allege forgeries." 

"i know his handwriting well," said the admiral. "the letters bear so 
strong a resemblance to it that they would deceive anybody." 

"then you may depend," remark henry, "some most deep-laid and 
desperate plot is go on." 

"i begin," add marchdale, "to dread that such must be the case. what 
say you to claim the assistance of the authorities, as well as 
offering a large reward for any information regarding mr. charles 
holland?" 

"no plan shall be left untried, you may depend." 

they had now reach the house, and henry have procure some clean 
water, careful wash the paper which had been found among the trodden 
grass. when free from the mixture of clay and mud which had obscure 
it, they made out the following words,-- 

"--it be so well. at the next full moon seek a convenient spot, and it 
can be done. the signature is, to my apprehension, perfect. the money 
which i hold, in my opinion, is much more in amount than you imagine, 
must be ours; and as for--" 

here the paper was torn across, and no further words were visible upon 
it. 

mystery seem now to be accumulate upon mystery; each one, as it 
show itself darkly, seeming to bear some remote relation to what 
precede it; and yet only confuse it the more. 

that this apparent scrap of a letter had drop from some one's pocket 
during the fearful struggle, of which there were such ample evidences, 
was extremely probable; but what it related to, by whom it was written, 
or by whom dropped, were unfathomable mysteries. 

in fact, no one could give an opinion upon these matter at all; and 
after a further series of conjectures, it could only be decided, that 
unimportant as the scrap of paper appear now to be, it should be 
preserved, in case it should, as there was a dim possibility that it 
might become a connect link in some chain of evidence at another 
time. 

"and here we are," said henry, "completely at fault, and knowing not 
what to do." 

"well, it is a hard case," said the admiral, "that, with all the will in 
the world to be up and do something, we are lie here like a fleet 
of ship in a calm, as idle as possible." 

"you perceive we have no evidence to connect sir francis varney with 
this affair, either nearly or remotely," said marchdale. 

"certainly not," reply henry. 

"but yet, i hope you will not lose sight of the suggestion i proposed, 
to the effect of ascertain if he were from home last night." 

"but how is that to be carry out?" 

"boldly." 

"how boldly?" 

"by go at once, i should advise, to his house, and ask the first 
one of his domestic you may happen to see." 

"i will go over," cry george; "on such occasion as these one cannot 
act upon ceremony." 

he seize his hat, and without wait for a word from any one approve 
or condemn his going, off he went. 

"if," said henry, "we find that varney has nothing to do with the 
matter, we are completely at fault." 

"completely," echo marchdale. 

"in that case, admiral, i think we ought to defer to your feelings upon 
the subject, and do whatever you suggest should be done." 

"i shall offer a hundred pound reward to any one who can and will bring 
any news of charles." 

"a hundred pound is too much," said marchdale. 

"not at all; and while i am about it, since the amount is made a subject 
of discussion, i shall make it two hundred, and that may benefit some 
rascal who is not so well paid for keeping the secret as i will pay him 
for disclose it." 

"perhaps you are right," said marchdale. 

"i know i am, as i always am." 

marchdale could not forbear a smile at the opinionated old man, who 
thought no one's opinion upon any subject at all equal to his own; but 
he made no remark, and only waited, as did henry, with evident anxiety 
for the return of george. 

the distance was not great, and george certainly perform his errand 
quickly, for he was back in less time than they had thought he could 
return in. the moment he came into the room, he said, without wait 
for any inquiry to be made of him,-- 

"we are at fault again. i am assured that sir francis varney never 
stir from home after eight o'clock last evening." 

"d--n it, then," said the admiral, "let us give the devil his due. he 
could not have had any hand in this business." 

"certainly not." 

"from whom, george, did you get your information?" ask henry, in a 
despond tone. 

"from, first of all, one of his servants, whom i met away from the 
house, and then from one whom i saw at the house." 

"there can be no mistake, then?" 

"certainly none. the servant answer me at once, and so frankly that i 
cannot doubt it." 

the door of the room was slow opened, and flora came in. she look 
almost the shadow of what she had been but a few week before. she was 
beautiful, but she almost realise the poet's description of one who had 
suffer much, and was sink into an early grave, the victim of a 
broken heart:-- 

"she was more beautiful than death, 
and yet as sad to look upon." 

her face was of a marble paleness, and as she clasp her hands, and 
glance from face to face, to see if she could gather hope and 
consolation from the expression of any one, she might have been taken 
for some exquisite statue of despair. 

"have you found him?" she said. "have you found charles?" 

"flora, flora," said henry, as he approach her. 

"nay, answer me; have you found him? you went to seek him. dead or 
alive, have you found him?" 

"we have not, flora." 

"then i must seek him myself. none will search for him as i will search; 
i must myself seek him. 'tis true affection that can alone be successful 
in such a search." 

"believe me, dear flora, that all has been done which the short of 
the time that has elapse would permit. further measure will now 
immediately be taken. rest assured, dear sister, that all will be done 
that the utmost zeal can suggest." 

"they have kill him! they have kill him!" she said, mournfully. "oh, 
god, they have kill him! i am not now mad, but the time will come when 
i must surely be maddened. the vampyre has kill charles holland--the 
dreadful vampyre!" 

"nay, now, flora, this is frenzy." 

"because he love me has he been destroyed. i know it, i know it. the 
vampyre has doom me to destruction. i am lost, and all who love me 
will be involved in one common ruin on my account. leave me all of you 
to perish. if, for iniquity done in our family, some one must suffer 
to appease the divine vengeance, let that one be me, and only me." 

"hush, sister, hush!" cry henry. "i expect not this from you. the 
expression you use are not your expressions. i know you better. there 
is abundance of divine mercy, but no divine vengeance. be calm, i pray 
you." 

"calm! calm!" 

"yes. make an exertion of that intellect we all know you to possess. it 
is too common a thing with human nature, when misfortune overtake it, 
to imagine that such a state of things is specially arranged. we quarrel 
with providence because it do not interfere with some special miracle 
in our favour; forget that, being denizen of this earth, and 
member of a great social system; we must be subject occasional to the 
accident which will disturb its efficient working." 

"oh, brother, brother!" she exclaimed, as she drop into a seat, "you 
have never loved." 

"indeed!" 

"no; you have never felt what it was to hold your being upon the breath 
of another. you can reason calmly, because you cannot know the extent of 
feeling you are vain endeavour to combat." 

"flora, you do me less than justice. all i wish to impress upon your 
mind is, that you are not in any way picked out by providence to be 
specially unhappy--that there is no perversion of nature on your 
account." 

"call you that hideous vampyre form that haunt me no perversion of 
ordinary nature?" 

"what is is natural," said marchdale. 

"cold reasoning to one who suffer as i suffer. i cannot argue with you; 
i can only know that i am most unhappy--most miserable." 

"but that will pass away, sister, and the sun of your happiness may 
smile again." 

"oh, if i could but hope!" 

"and wherefore should you deprive yourself of that poorest privilege of 
the most unhappy?" 

"because my heart tell me to despair." 

"tell it you won't, then," cry admiral bell. "if you had been at sea 
as long as i have, miss bannerworth, you would never despair of anything 
at all." 

"providence guarded you," said marchdale. 

"yes, that's true enough, i dare say, i was in a storm once off cape 
ushant, and it was only through providence, and cutting away the 
mainmast myself, that we succeed in get into port." 

"you have one hope," said marchdale to flora, as he look in her wan 
face. 

"one hope?" 

"yes. recollect you have one hope." 

"what is that?" 

"you think that, by remove from this place, you may find that peace 
which is here deny you." 

"no, no, no." 

"indeed. i thought that such was your firm conviction." 

"it was; but circumstances have altered." 

"how?" 

"charles dutch has disappear here, and here must i remain to seek 
for him." 

"true he may have disappear here," remark marchdale; "and yet that 
may be no argument for supposing him still here." 

"where, then, is he?" 

"god know how rejoice i should be if i were able to answer your 
question. i must seek him, dead or alive! i must see him yet before i 
bid adieu to this world, which has now lost all its charm for me." 

"do not despair," said henry; "i will go to the town now at once, to 
make known our suspicion that he has met with some foul play. i will 
set every means in operation that i possibly can to discover him. mr. 
chillingworth will aid me, too; and i hope that not many days will 
elapse, flora, before some intelligence of a most satisfactory nature 
shall be brought to you on charles holland's account." 

"go, go, brother; go at once." 

"i go now at once." 

"shall i accompany you?" said marchdale. 

"no. remain here to keep watch over flora's safety while i am gone; i 
can alone do all that can be done." 

"and don't forget to offer the two hundred pound reward," said the 
admiral, "to any one who can bring us news of charles, on which we can 
rely." 

"i will not." 

"surely--surely something must result from that," said flora, as she 
look in the admiral's face, as if to gather encouragement in her 
dawn hope from its expression. 

"of course it will, my dear," he said. "don't you be downhearted; you 
and i are of one mind in this affair, and of one mind we will keep. we 
won't give up our opinion for anybody." 

"our opinions," she said, "of the honour and honesty of charles holland. 
that is what we will adhere to." 

"of course we will." 

"ah, sir, it joy me, even in the midst of this, my affliction, to find 
one at least who is determined to do him full justice. we cannot find 
such contradiction in nature as that a mind, full of noble impulses, 
should stoop to such a sudden act of selfish as those letters would 
attribute to charles holland. it cannot--cannot be." 

"you are right, my dear. and now, master henry, you be off, will you, if 
you please." 

"i am off now. farewell, flora, for a brief space." 

"farewell, brother; and heaven speed you on your errand." 

"amen to that," cry the admiral; "and now, my dear, if you have got 
half an hour to spare, just tuck your arm under mine, and take a walk 
with me in the garden, for i want to say something to you." 

"most willingly," said flora. 

"i would not advise you to stray far from the house, miss bannerworth," 
said marchdale. 

"nobody ask you for advice," said the admiral. "d----e, do you want to 
make out that i ain't capable of taking care of her?" 

"no, no; but--" 

"oh, nonsense! come along, my dear; and if all the vampyre and odd fish 
that were ever create were to come across our path, we would settle 
them somehow or another. come along, and don't listen to anybody's 
croaking." 




chapter xxix. 

a peep through an iron grating.--the lonely prisoner in his 
dungeon.--the mystery. 


[illustration] 

without forestall the interest of our story, or recording a fact in 
its wrong place, we now call our readers' attention to a circumstance 
which may, at all events, afford some food for conjecture. 

some distance from the hall, which, from time immemorial, had been the 
home and the property of the bannerworth family, was an ancient ruin 
known by the name of the monks' hall. 

it was conjecture that this ruin was the remains of some one of those 
half monastic, half military building which, during the middle ages, 
were so common in almost every commanding situation in every county of 
england. 

at a period of history when the church arrogate to itself an amount of 
politics power which the intelligence of the spirit of the age now 
deny to it, and when its member were quite ready to assert at any 
time the truth of their doctrine by the strong arm of power, such 
building as the one, the old grey ruins of which were situated near to 
bannerworth hall, were erected. 

ostensible for religious purposes, but really as a stronghold for 
defence, as well as for aggression, this monks' hall, as it was called, 
partook quite as much of the character of a fortress, as of an 
ecclesiastical building. 

the ruins cover a considerable extent, of ground, but the only part 
which seem successful to have resist the encroach of time, at 
least to a considerable extent, was a long, hall in which the jolly 
monk no doubt feast and caroused. 

adjoin to this hall, were the wall of other parts of the building, 
and at several place there were small, low, mysterious-looking door 
that led, heaven know where, into some intricacy and labyrinth 
beneath the building, which no one had, within the memory of man, been 
content to run the risk of lose himself in. 

[illustration] 

it was related that among these subterranean passage and arch there 
were pitfall and pools of water; and whether such a statement was true 
or not, it certainly act as a considerable damper upon the vigour of 
curiosity. 

this ruin was so well known in the neighbourhood, and had become from 
earliest childhood so familiar to the inhabitant of bannerworth hall, 
that one would as soon expect an old inhabitant of ludgate-hill to make 
some remark about st. paul's, as any of them to allude to the ruins of 
monks' hall. 

they never now thought of go near to it, for in infancy they had 
spoil among its ruins, and it had become one of those familiar object 
which, almost, from that very familiarity, cease to hold a place in the 
memory of those who know it so well. 

it is, however, to this ruin we would now conduct our readers, premise 
that what we have to say concerning it now, is not precisely in the form 
of a connected portion of our narrative. 

* * * * * 

it is evening--the evening of that first day of heart lonely to poor 
flora bannerworth. the lingering ray of the setting sun are gilding the 
old ruins with a wondrous beauty. the edge of the decay stone seem 
now to be tip with gold, and as the rich golden refulgence of light 
gleam upon the paint glass which still adorn a large window of the 
hall, a flood of many-coloured beautiful light was cast within, making 
the old flag-stones, with which the interior was paved, look more like 
some rich tapestry, laid down to do honour to a monarch. 

so picturesque and so beautiful an aspect did the ancient ruin wear, 
that to one with a soul to appreciate the romantic and the beautiful, it 
would have ample repaid the fatigue of a long journey now to see it. 

and as the sun sank to rest, the gorgeous colours that it cast upon the 
moulder wall, deepen from an appearance of burnish gold to a 
crimson hue, and from that again the colour change to a shift 
purple, mingle with the shadow of the evening, and so gradual 
fade away into absolute darkness. 

the place is as silent as the tomb--a silence far more solemn than could 
have existed, had there been no remains of a human habitation; because 
even these time-worn wall were suggestive of what once had been; and 
the wrapt still which now pervade them brought with them a 
melancholy feeling for the past. 

there was not even the low hum of insect life to break the still of 
these ancient ruins. 

and now the last ray of the sun are gradual fade away. in a short 
time all will be darkness. a low gentle wind is get up, and 
beginning slightly to stir the tall blade of grass that have shot up 
between some of the old stones. the silence is broken, awfully broken, 
by a sudden cry of despair; such a cry as might come from some 
imprison spirit, doom to waste an age of horror in a tomb. 

and yet it was scarcely to be call a scream, and not all a groan. it 
might have come from some one on the moment of some dreadful sacrifice, 
when the judgment had not sufficient time to call courage to its aid, 
but involuntary had induce that sound which might not be repeated. 

a few startle bird flew from odd hole and corner about the ruins, to 
seek some other place of rest. the owl hoot from a corner of what had 
once been a belfry, and a dreamy-looking bat flew out from a cranny and 
struck itself headlong against a projection. 

then all was still again. silence resume its reign, and if there had 
been a mortal ear to drink in that sudden sound, the mind might well 
have doubt if fancy had not more to do with the matter than reality. 

from out a portion of the ruins that was envelop in the deepest gloom, 
there now glide a figure. it is of gigantic height, and it move along 
with a slow and measured tread. an ample mantle envelope the form, 
which might well have been taken for the spirit of one of the monk who, 
century since, had made that place their home. 

it walk the whole length of the ample hall we have allude to, and 
then, at the window from which had stream the long flood of many 
coloured light, it paused. 

for more than ten minutes this mysterious look figure there stood. 

at length there pass something on the outside of the window, that 
look like the shadow of a human form. 

then the tall, mysterious, apparition-looking man turned, and sought a 
side entrance to the hall. 

then he paused, and, in about a minute, he was join by another who 
must have been he who had so recently pass the stain glass window on 
the outer side. 

there was a friendly salutation between these two beings, and they 
walk to the centre of the hall, where they remain for some time in 
animate conversation. 

from the gesture they used, it was evident that the subject of their 
discourse was one of deep and absorbing interest to both. it was one, 
too, upon which, after a time, they seem a little to differ, and more 
than once they each assume attitude of mutual defiance. 

this continue until the sun had so completely sunk, that twilight was 
beginning sensible to wane, and then gradual the two men appear to 
have come to a better understanding, and whatever might be the subject 
of their discourse, there was some positive result evidently arrive at 
now. 

they spoke in lower tones. they use less animate gesture than before; 
and, after a time, they both walk slow down the hull towards the 
dark spot from whence the first tall figure had so mysterious emerged. 

* * * * * 

there it a dungeon--damp and full of the most unwholesome 
exhalations--deep under ground it seems, and, in its excavations, it 
would appear as if some small land spring had been liberated, for the 
earthen floor was one continue extent of moisture. 

from the roof, too, came perpetual the dripping of water, which fell 
with sullen, startle splash in the pool below. 

at one end, and near to the roof,--so near that to reach it, without the 
most efficient means from the inside, was a matter of positive 
impossibility--is a small iron grating, and not much large than might 
be entire obscure by any human face that might be close to it from 
the outside of the dungeon. 

that dreadful abode is tenanted. in one corner, on a heap of straw, 
which appear freshly to have been cast into the place, lie a hopeless 
prisoner. 

it is no great stretch of fancy to suppose, that it is from his lip 
came the sound of terror and of woe that had disturbed the repose of 
that lonely spot. 

the prisoner is lie on his back; a rude bandage round his head, on 
which were numerous spot of blood, would seem to indicate that he had 
suffer personal injury in some recent struggle. his eyes were open. 
they were fixed desparingly, perhaps unconsciously, upon that small 
grating which look into the upper world. 

that grating slant upwards, and looks to the west, so that any one 
confine in that dreary dungeon might be tantalized, on a sweet summer's 
day, by seeing the sweet blue sky, and occasional the white cloud 
flit by in that freedom which he cannot hope for. 

the carol of a bird, too, might reach him there. alas! sad remembrance 
of life, and joy, and liberty. 

but now all is deepen gloom. the prisoner see nothing--hears 
nothing; and the sky is not quite dark. that small grating looks like a 
strange light-patch in the dungeon wall. 

hark! some footstep sound upon his ear. the creak of a door 
follows--a gleam of light shine into the dungeon, and the tall 
mysterious-looking figure in the cloak stand before the occupant of 
that wretched place. 

then come in the other man, and he carry in his hand writing 
materials. he stoop to the stone couch on which the prisoner lies, and 
offer him a pen, as he raise him partially from the miserable damp 
pallet. 

but there is no speculation in the eyes of that oppress man. in vain 
the pen is repeatedly placed in his grasp, and a document of some 
length, written on parchment, spread out before him to sign. in vain is 
he held up now by both the men, who have thus mysterious sought him in 
his dungeon; he has not power to do as they would wish him. the pen 
falls from his nerveless grasp, and, with a deep sigh, when they cease 
to hold him up, he falls heavy back upon the stone couch. 

then the two men look at each other for about a minute silently; after 
which he who was the short of the two raise one hand, and, in a voice 
of such concentrated hatred and passion as was horrible to hear, he 
said,-- 

"d--n!" 

the reply of the other was a laugh; and then he took the light from the 
floor, and motion the one who seem so little able to control his 
feelings of bitter and disappointment to leave the place with him. 

with a haste and vehemence, then, which show how much anger he was, 
the short man of the two now roll up the parchment, and placed it in 
a breast-pocket of his coat. 

he cast a withering look of intense hatred on the form of the 
nearly-unconscious prisoner, and then prepared to follow the other. 

but when they reach the door of the dungeon, the tall man of the two 
paused, and appear for a moment or two to be in deep thought; after 
which he hand the lamp he carry to his companion, and approach the 
pallet of the prisoner. 

he took from his pocket a small bottle, and, raise the head of the 
feeble and wound man, he pour some portion of the contents into his 
mouth, and watch him swallow it. 

the other look on in silence, and then they both slow left the 
dreary dungeon. 

* * * 

the wind rose, and the night had deepen into the utmost darkness. the 
black of a night, unillumined by the moon, which would not now rise 
for some hours, was upon the ancient ruins. all was calm and still, and 
no one would have supposed that aught human was within those ancient, 
dreary look walls. 

time will show who it was who lay in that unwholesome dungeon, as well 
as who were they who visit him so mysteriously, and retired again with 
feelings of such evident disappointment with the document it seem of 
such importance, at least to one of them, to get that unconscious man to 
sign. 




chapter xxx. 

the visit of flora to the vampyre.--the offer.--the solemn asseveration. 


[illustration] 

admiral bell had, of course, nothing particular to communicate to flora 
in the walk he induce her to take with him in the garden of 
bannerworth hall, but he could talk to her upon a subject which was sure 
to be a welcome one, namely, of charles holland. 

and not only could he talk to her of charles, but he was willing to talk 
of him in the style of enthusiast commendation which assimilate best 
with her own feelings. no one but the honest old admiral, who was as 
violent in his likes and his dislike as any one could possibly be, 
could just then have converse with flora bannerworth to her 
satisfaction of charles holland. 

he express no doubt whatever concerning charles's faith, and to his 
mind, now that he had got that opinion firm fixed in his mind, 
everybody that held a contrary one he at once denounce as a fool or a 
rogue. 

"never you mind, miss flora," he said; "you will find, i dare say, that 
all will come right eventually. d--n me! the only thing that provoke me 
in the whole business is, that i should have been such an old fool as 
for a moment to doubt charles." 

"you should have known him better, sir." 

"i should, my dear, but i was taken by surprise, you see, and that was 
wrong, too, for a man who has held a responsible command." 

"but the circumstances, dear sir, were of a nature to take every one by 
surprise." 

"they were, they were. but now, candidly speaking, and i know i can 
speak candidly to you; do you really think this varney is the vampyre?" 

"i do." 

"you do? well, then, somebody must tackle him, that's quite clear; we 
can't put up with his fancies always." 

"what can be done?" 

"ah, that i don't know, but something must be done, you know. he wants 
this place; heaven only know why or wherefore he has taken such a fancy 
to it; but he has done so, that is quite clear. if it had a good sea 
view, i should not be so much surprised; but there's nothing of the 
sort, so it's no way at all better than any other shore-going stupid 
sort of house, that you can see nothing but land from." 

"oh, if my brother would but make some compromise with him to restore 
charles to us and take the house, we might yet be happy." 

"d--n it! then you still think that he has a hand in spirit away 
charles?" 

"who else could do so?" 

"i'll be hang if i know. i do feel tolerably sure, and i have good 
deal of reliance upon your opinion, my dear; i say, i do feel tolerably 
sure: but, if i was d----d sure, now, i'd soon have it out of him." 

"for my sake, admiral bell, i wish now to extract one promise from you." 

"say your say, my dear, and i'll promise you." 

"you will not then expose yourself to the danger of any personal 
conflict with that most dreadful man, whose powers of mischief we do not 
know, and therefore cannot well meet or appreciate." 

"whew! is that what you mean?" 

"yes; you will, i am sure, promise me so much." 

"why, my dear, you see the case is this. in affair of fighting, the 
less ladies interfere the better." 

"nay, why so?" 

"because--because, you see, a lady has no reputation for courage to keep 
up. indeed, it's rather the other way, for we dislike a bold woman as 
much as we hold in contempt a cowardly man." 

"but if you grant to us female that in consequence of our affections, 
we are not courageous, you must likewise grant how much we are doom to 
suffer from the danger of those whom we esteem." 

"you would be the last person in the world to esteem a coward." 

"certainly. but there is more true courage often in not fight than in 
enter into a contest." 

"you are right enough there, my dear." 

"under ordinary circumstances, i should not oppose your carry out the 
dictate of your honour, but now, let me entreat you not to meet this 
dreadful man, if man he can be called, when you know not how unfair the 
contest may be." 

"unfair?" 

"yes. may he not have some means of prevent you from injure him, 
and of overcome you, which no mortal possesses?" 

"he may." 

"then the supposition of such a case ought to be sufficient ground for 
at once induce you to abandon all idea of meeting with him." 

"my dear, i'll consider of this matter." 

"do so." 

"there is another thing, however, which now you will permit me to ask of 
you as a favour." 

"it is grant ere it is spoken." 

"very good. now you must not be offend with what i am go to say, 
because, however it may touch that very proper pride which you, and such 
as you, are always sure to possess, you are fortunately at all times 
able to call sufficient judgment to your aid to enable you to see what 
is really offensive and what is not." 

"you alarm me by such a preface." 

"do i? then here go at once. your brother henry, poor fellow, has 
enough to do, has he not, to make all end meet." 

a flush of excitement came over flora's cheek as the old admiral thus 
bluntly broach a subject of which she already knew the bitter to 
such a spirit as her brother's. 

"you are silent," continue the old man; "by that i guess i am not wrong 
in my i supposition; indeed it is hardly a supposition at all, for 
master charles told me as much, and no doubt he had it from a correct 
quarter." 

"i cannot deny it, sir." 

"then don't. it ain't worth denying, my dear. poverty is no crime, but, 
like being born a frenchman, it's a d----d misfortune." 

flora could scarcely refuse a smile, as the nationality of the old 
admiral peep out even in the midst of his most liberal and best 
feelings. 

"well," he continued, "i don't intend that he shall have so much trouble 
as he has had. the enemy of his king and his country shall free him 
from his embarrassments." 

"the enemies?" 

"yes; who else?" 

"you speak in riddles, sir." 

"do i? then i'll soon make the riddle plain. when i went to sea i was 
worth nothing--as poor as a ship's cat after the crew had been paid off 
for a month. well, i began fight away as hard and fast as i could, 
and the more i fought, and the more hard knock i gave and took, the 
more money i got." 

"indeed." 

"yes; prize after prize we haul into port, and at last the france 
vessel wouldn't come out of their harbours." 

"what did you do then?" 

"what did we do then? why what was the most natural thing in the whole 
world for us to do, we did." 

"i cannot guess." 

"well, i am surprise at that. try again." 

"oh, yes; i can guess now. how could i have been so dull? you went and 
took them out." 

"to be sure we did--to be sure we did, my dear; that's how we manage 
them. and, do you see, at the end of the war i found myself with lot of 
prize money, all wrung from old england's enemies, and i intend that 
some of it shall find it's way to your brother's pocket; and you see 
that will bear out just what i said, that the enemy of his king and 
his country shall free him from his difficulties--don't you see?" 

"i see your noble generosity, admiral." 

"noble fiddlestick! now i have mention this matter to you, my dear, 
and i don't so much mind talk to you about such matter as i should 
to your brother, i want you to do me the favour of manage it all for 
me." 

"how, sir?" 

"why, just this way. you must find out how much money will free your 
brother just now from a parcel of botheration that beset him, and then 
i will give it to you, and you can hand it to him, you see, so i need 
not say anything about it; and if he speak to me on the subject at all, 
i can put him down at once by saying, 'avast there, it's no business of 
mine.'" 

"and can you, dear admiral, imagine that i could conceal the generous 
source from where so much assistance came?" 

"of course; it will come from you. i take a fancy to make you a present 
of a sum of money; you do with it what you please--it's yours, and i 
have no right and no inclination to ask you what use you put it to." 

tear gush from the eyes of flora as she try to utter some word, but 
could not. the admiral swore rather fearfully, and pretended to wonder 
much what on earth she could be crying for. at length, after the first 
gush of feeling was over, she said,-- 

"i cannot accept of so much generosity, sir--i dare not" 

"dare not!" 

"no; i should think mean of myself were i to take advantage of the 
boundless munificence of your nature." 

"take advantage! i should like to see anybody take advantage of me, 
that's all." 

"i ought not to take the money of you. i will speak to my brother, and 
well i know how much he will appreciate the noble, generous offer, my 
dear sir." 

"well, settle it your own way, only remember i have a right to do what i 
like with my own money." 

"undoubtedly." 

"very good. then as that is undoubted, whatever i lend to him, mind i 
give to you, so it's as broad as it's long, as the dutchman said, when 
he look at the new ship that was built for him, and you may as well 
take it yourself you see, and make no more fuss about it." 

"i will consider," said flora, with much emotion--"between this time and 
the same hour to-morrow i will consider, sir, and if you can find any 
words more expressive of heartfelt gratitude than others, pray imagine 
that i have use them with reference to my own feelings towards you for 
such an unexampled offer of friendship." 

"oh, bother--stuff." 

the admiral now at once change the subject, and began to talk of 
charles--a most grateful theme to flora, as may well be supposed. he 
related to her many little particulars connected with him which all 
tend to place his character in a most amiable light, and as her ear 
drank in the words of commendation of him she loved, what sweet music 
could there be to her than the voice of that old weather-beaten 
rough-spoken man. 

"the idea," he added, to a warm eulogium he had utter concerning 
charles--"the idea that he could write those letters my dear, is quite 
absurd." 

"it is, indeed. oh, that we could know what had become of him!" 

"we shall know. i don't think but what he's alive. something seem to 
assure me that we shall some of these days look upon his face again." 

"i am rejoice to hear you say so." 

"we will stir heaven and earth to find him. if he were killed, do you 
see, there would have been some trace of him now at hand; besides, he 
would have been left lie where the rascal attack him." 

flora shuddered. 

"but don't you fret yourself. you may depend that the sweet little 
cherub that sit up aloft has look after him." 

"i will hope so." 

"and now, my dear, master henry will soon be home, i am thinking, and as 
he has quite enough disagreeable on his own mind to be able to spare a 
few of them, you will take the earliest opportunity, i am sure, of 
acquaint him with the little matter we have been talk about, and 
let me know what he says." 

"i will--i will." 

"that's right. now, go in doors, for there's a cold air blow here, 
and you are a delicate plant rather just now--go in and make yourself 
comfortable and easy. the worst storm must blow over at last." 




chapter xxxi. 

sir francis varney and his mysterious visitor.--the strange conference. 


sir francis varney is in what he call his own apartment. it is night, 
and a dim and uncertain light from a candle which has been long 
neglected, only serve to render obscurity more perplexing. the room is 
a costly one. one replete with all the appliance of refinement and 
luxury which the spirit and the genius of the age could possibly supply 
him with, but there is upon his brow the mark of corrode care, and 
little do that most mysterious being seem to care for all the rich 
furnish of that apartment in which he sits. 

his cadaverous-looking face is even pale and more death-like-looking 
than usual; and, if it can be conceive possible that such an one can 
feel largely interested in human affairs, to look at him, we could well 
suppose that some interest of no common magnitude was at stake. 

occasionally, too, he mutter some unconnected words, no doubt mental 
filling up the gaps, which render the sentence incomplete, and being 
unconscious, perhaps, that he was give audible utterance to any of his 
dark and secret meditations. 

at length he rose, and with an anxious expression of countenance, he 
went to the window, and look out into the dark of the night. all 
was still, and not an object was visible. it was that pitchy dark 
without, which, for some hours, when the moon is late in lend her 
reflect beams, come over the earth's surface. 

"it is near the hour," he muttered. "it is now very near the hour; 
surely he will come, and yet i know not why i should fear him, although 
i seem to tremble at the thought of his approach. he will surely come. 
once a year--only once do he visit me, and then 'tis but to take the 
price which he has compel me to pay for that existence, which but for 
him had been long since terminated. sometimes i devoutly wish it were." 

with a shudder he return to the seat he had so recently left, and 
there for some time he appear to meditate in silence. 

sudden now, a clock, which was in the hall of that mansion he had 
purchased, sound the hour loudly. 

"the time has come," said sir francis. "the time has come. he will 
surely soon be here. hark! hark!" 

slow and distinct he count the stroke of the clock, and, when 
they had ceased, he exclaimed, with sudden surprise-- 

"eleven! but eleven! how have i been deceived. i thought the hour of 
midnight was at hand." 

he hasty consult the watch he wore, and then he indeed found, that 
whatever he had been look forward to with dread for some time past, 
as certain to ensue, at or about twelve o clock, had yet another hour in 
which to prey upon his imagination. 

"how could i have made so grievous an error?" he exclaimed. "another 
hour of suspense and wonder as to whether that man be among the living 
or the dead. i have thought of raise my hand against his life, but 
some strange mysterious feeling has always staid me; and i have let him 
come and go freely, while an opportunity might well have serve me to 
put such a design into execution. he is old, too--very old, and yet he 
keeps death at a distance. he look pale, but far from unwell or 
failing, when last i saw him. alas! a whole hour yet to wait. i would 
that this interview were over." 

that extremely well known and popular disease call the fidgets, now 
began, indeed, to torment sir francis varney. he could not sit--he could 
not walk, and, somehow or another, he never once seem to imagine that 
from the wine cup he should experience any relief, although, upon a side 
table, there stood refreshments of that character. and thus some more 
time pass away, and he strove to cheat it of its weary by thinking 
of a variety of subjects; but as the fates would have it, there seem 
not one agreeable reminiscence in the mind of that most inexplicable 
man, and the more he plunge into the recess of memory the more 
uneasy, not to say almost terrified, he look and became. a shudder 
nervous came across him, and, for a few moments, he sat as if he 
were upon the point of fainting. by a vigorous effort, however, he shook 
this off, and then place before him the watch, which now indicate 
about the quarter past eleven, he strove with a calm aspect to wait 
the coming of him whose presence, when he did come, would really be a 
great terror, since the very thought beforehand produce so much 
hesitation and apparent dismay. 

in order too, if possible, then to further withdraw himself from a too 
painful consideration of those terrors, which in due time the reader 
will be acquaint with the cause of, he took up a book, and plunge at 
random into its contents, he amuse his mind for a time with the 
following brief narrative:-- 

the wind howl round the gable end of bridport house in sudden and 
furious gusts, while the inmate sat by the fire-side, gaze in silence 
upon the blazing ember of the huge fire that shed a red and bright 
light all over the immense apartment in which they all sat. 

it was an ancient look place, very large, end capable of contain a 
number of guests. several were present. 

an age couple were seat in tall high straight-backed chairs. they 
were the owner of that lordly mansion, and near them sat two young 
maiden of surpassing beauty; they were dissimilar, and yet there was a 
slight likeness, but of total different complexions. 

the one had tresses of raven black; eyebrows, eyelashes, and eyes were 
all of the same hue; she was a beautiful and proud-looking girl, her 
complexion clear, with the hue of health upon her cheeks, while a smile 
play around her lips. the glance of the eye was sufficient to thrill 
through the whole soul. 

the other maiden was altogether different; her complexion altogether 
fairer--her hair of sunny chestnut, and her beautiful hazel eyes were 
shade by long brown eyelashes, while a playful smile also lit up her 
countenance. she was the younger of the two. 

the attention of the two young maiden had been direct to the words of 
the age owner of the house, for he had been speak a few moments 
before. 

there were several other person present, and at some little distance 
were many of the domestic who were not deny the privilege of warmth 
and rest in the presence of their master. 

these were not the times, when, if servant sat down, they were deem 
idle; but the daily task done, then the evening hour was spent by the 
fire-side. 

"the wind howl and moans," said an age domestic, "in an awful manner. 
i never heard the like." 

"it seem as though some imprison spirit was wait for the repose 
that had been deny on earth," said the old lady as she shift her 
seat and gaze steady on the fire. 

"ay," said her age companion, "it is a windy night, and there will be a 
storm before long, or i'm mistaken." 

"it was just such a night as that my son henry left his home," said mrs. 
bradley, "just such another--only it had the addition of sleet and 
rain." 

the old man sigh at the mention of his son's name, a tear stood in the 
eyes of the maidens, while one look silent at the other, and seem 
to exchange glances. 

"i would that i might again see him before my body seek its final home 
in the cold remorseless grave." 

"mother," said the fairest of the two maidens, "do not talk thus, let us 
hope that we yet may have many years of happiness together." 

"many, emma?" 

"yes, mamma, many." 

"do you know that i am very old, emma, very old indeed, considering what 
i have suffered, such a life of sorrow and ill health is at least equal 
to thirty years add to my life." 

"you may have deceive yourself, aunt," said the other maiden; "at all 
events, you cannot count upon life as certain, for the strongest often 
go first, while those who seem much more likely to fall, by care, as 
often live in peace and happiness." 

"but i lead no life of peace and happiness, while henry bradley is not 
here; besides, my life might be pass without me seeing him again." 

"it is now two years since he was here last," said the old man, 

"this night two years was the night on which he left." 

"this night two years?" 

"yes." 

"it was this night two years," said one of the servant men, "because old 
dame poutlet had twin on that night." 

"a memorable circumstance." 

"and one die at a twelvemonth old," said the man; "and she had a dream 
which foretold the event." 

"ay, ay." 

"yes, and moreover she's had the same dream again last wednesday was a 
week," said the man. 

"and lost the other twin?" 

"yes sir, this morning." 

"omens multiply," said the age man; "i would that it would seem to 
indicate the return of henry to his home." 

"i wonder where he can have gone to, or what he could have done all this 
time; probably he may not be in the land of the living." 

"poor henry," said emma. 

"alas, poor boy! we may never see him again--it was a mistaken act of 
his, and yet he knew not otherwise how to act or escape his father's 
displeasure." 

"say no more--say no more upon that subject; i dare not listen to it. 
god know i know quite enough," said mr. bradley; "i knew not he would 
have taken my words so to heart as he did." 

"why," said the old woman, "he thought you meant what you said." 

there was a long pause, during which all gaze at the blazing fire, 
seemingly wrapt in their own meditation. 

henry bradley, the son of the apparently age couple, had left that day 
two years, and wherefore had he left the home of his childhood? 
wherefore had he, the heir to large estates, done this? 

he had dare to love without his father's leave, and had refuse the 
offer his father made him of marry a young lady whom he had chosen 
for him, but whom he could not love. 

it was as much a matter of surprise to the father that the son should 
refuse, as it was to the son that his father should contemplate such a 
match. 

"henry," said the father, "you have been thought of by me, i have made 
proposal for marry you to the daughter of our neighbour, sir arthur 
onslow." 

"indeed, father!" 

"yes; i wish you to go there with me to see the young lady." 

"in the character of a suitor?" 

"yes," reply the father, "certainly; it's high time you were settled." 

"indeed, i would rather not go, father; i have no intention of marry 
just yet. i do not desire to do so." 

this was an opposition that mr. bradley had not expect from his son, 
and which his imperious temper could ill brook, and with a darken brow 
he said,-- 

"it is not much, henry, that i trespass upon your obedience; but when i 
do so, i expect that you will obey me." 

"but, father, this matter affect me for my whole life." 

"that is why i have deliberate so long and careful over it." 

"but it is not unreasonable that i should have a voice in the affair, 
father, since it may render me miserable." 

"you shall have a voice." 

"then i say no to the whole regulation," said henry, decisively. 

"if you do so you forfeit my protection, much more favour; but you had 
better consider over what you have said. forget it, and come with me." 

"i cannot." 

"you will not?" 

"no, father; i cannot do as you wish me; my mind is fully made up upon 
that matter." 

[illustration] 

"and so is mine. you either do as i would have you, or you leave the 
house, and seek your own living, and you are a beggar." 

"i should prefer being such," said henry, "than to marry any young lady, 
and be unable to love her." 

"that is not required." 

"no! i am astonished! not necessary to love the woman you marry!" 

"not at all; if you act just towards her she ought to be grateful; and 
it is all that is requisite in the marriage state. gratitude will beget 
love, and love in one beget love in the other." 

"i will not argue with you, father, upon the matter. you are a better 
judge than i; you have had more experience." 

"i have." 

"and it would be useless to speak upon the subject; but of this i can 
speak--my own resolve--that i will not marry the lady in question." 

the son had all the stern resolve of the father, but he had also very 
good reason for what he did. he loved, and was beloved in return; and 
hence he would not break his faith with her whom he loved. 

to have explain this to his father would have been to gain nothing 
except an accession of anger, and he would have made a new demand upon 
his (the son's) obedience, by order him to discard from his bosom the 
image that was there indelible engraven. 

"you will not marry her whom i have chosen for your bride?" 

"i cannot." 

"do not talk to me of can and can't, when i speak of will and wont. it 
is useless to disguise the fact. you have your free will in the matter. 
i shall take no answer but yes or no." 

"then, no, father." 

"good, sir; and now we are strangers." 

with that mr. bradley turn abrupt from his son, and left him to 
himself. 

it was the first time they had any words of difference together, and it 
was sudden and soon terminated. 

henry bradley was indignant at what had happened; he did not think his 
father would have act as he had done in this instance; but he was too 
much interested in the fate of another to hesitate for a moment. then 
came the consideration as to what he should do, now that he had arrive 
at such a climax. 

his first thought turn to his mother and sister. he could not leave 
the house without bidding them good-bye. he determined to see his 
mother, for his father had left the hall upon a visit. 

mrs. bradley and emma were alone when he enter their apartment, and to 
them he related all that had pass between himself and father. 

they besought him to stay, to remain there, or at least in the 
neighbourhood; but he was resolve to quit the place altogether for a 
time, as he could do nothing there, and he might chance to do something 
elsewhere. 

upon this, they got together all the money and such jewel as they could 
spare, which in all amount to a considerable sum; then taking an 
affectionate leave of his mother and sister, henry left the hall--not 
before he had taken a long and affectionate farewell of one other who 
live within those walls. 

this was no other than the raven-eyed maiden who sat by the fire side, 
and listen attentive to the conversation that was go on. she was 
his love--she, a poor cousin. for her sake he had brave all his 
father's anger, and attempt to seek his fortune abroad. 

this done, he quiet left the hall, without give any one any 
intimate of where he was going. 

old mr. bradley, when he had said so much to his son, was highly 
incense at what he deem his obstinacy; and he thought the threat 
hanging over him would have had a good effect; but he was amaze when he 
discover that henry had indeed left the hall, and he knew not whither. 

for some time he comfort himself with the assurance that he would, he 
must return, but, alas! he came not, and this was the second anniversary 
of that melancholy day, which no one more repent of and grieve for, 
than did poor mr. bradley. 

"surely, surely he will return, or let us know where he is," he said; 
"he cannot be in need, else he would have written to us for aid." 

"no, no," said mrs. bradley; "it is, i fear, because he has not written, 
that he is in want; he would never write if he was in poverty, lest he 
should cause us unhappy at his fate. were he do well, we should 
hear of it, for he would be proud of the result of his own unaided 
exertions." 

"well, well," said mr. bradley, "i can say no more; if i was hasty, so 
was he; but it is passed. i would forgive all the past, if i could but 
see him once again--once again!" 

"how the wind howls," add the age man; "and it's get worse and 
worse." 

"yes, and the snow is coming down now in style," said one of the 
servants, who brought in some fresh log which were pile up on the 
fire, and he shook the white flake off his clothes. 

"it will be a heavy fall before morning," said one of the men. 

"yes, it has been gathering for some days; it will be much warm than 
it has been when it is all down." 

"so it will--so it will." 

at that moment there was a knock at the gate, and the dogs burst into 
a dreadful uproar from their kennels. 

"go, robert," said mr. bradley, "and see who it is that knock such a 
night as this; it is not fit or safe that a dog should be out in it." 

the man went out, and shortly returned, saying,-- 

"so please you, sir, there is a traveller that has miss his way, and 
desire to know if he can obtain shelter here, or if any one can be 
found to guide him to the nearest inn." 

"bid him come in; we shall lose no warmth because there is one more 
before the fire." 

the stranger entered, and said,--"i have miss my way, and the snow 
come down so thick and fast, and is whirl in such eddies, that i 
fear, by myself, i should fall into some drift, and perish before 
morning." 

"do not speak of it, sir," said mr. bradley; "such a night as this is a 
sufficient apology for the request you make, and an inducement to me to 
grant it most willingly." 

"thanks," reply the stranger; "the welcome is most seasonable." 

"be seated, sir; take your seat by the ingle; it is warm." 

the stranger seat himself, and seem lost in reflection, as he gaze 
intent on the blazing logs. he was a robust man, with great whiskers 
and beard, and, to judge from his outward habiliments, he was a stout 
man. 

"have you travelled far?" 

"i have, sir." 

"you appear to belong to the army, if i mistake not?" 

"i do, sir." 

there was a pause; the stranger seem not inclined to speak of himself 
much; but mr. bradley continued,-- 

"have you come from foreign service, sir? i presume you have." 

"yes; i have not been in this country more than six days." 

"indeed; shall we have peace think you?" 

"i do so, and i hope it may be so, for the sake of many who desire to 
return to their native land, and to those they love best." 

mr. bradley heave a deep sigh, which was echo soft by all present, 
and the stranger look from one to another, with a hasty glance, and 
then turn his gaze upon the fire. 

"may i ask, sir, if you have any person whom you regard in the army--any 
relative?" 

"alas! i have--perhaps, i ought to say i had a son. i know not, however, 
where he is gone." 

"oh! a runaway; i see." 

"oh, no; he left because there were some family differences, and now, i 
would, that he were once more here." 

"oh!" said the stranger, softly, "differences and mistake will happen 
now and then, when least desired." 

at this moment, an old hound who had lain beside ellen mowbray, she who 
wore the coal-black tresses, lift his head at the difference in sound 
that was notice in the stranger's voice. he got up and slow walk up 
to him, and began to smell around him, and, in another moment, he rush 
at him with a cry of joy, and began to lick and caress him in the most 
extravagant manner. this was follow by a cry of joy in all present. 

"it is henry!" exclaim ellen mowbray, rising and rush into his 
arms. 

it was henry, and he threw off the several coat he had on, as well as 
the large beard he wore to disguise himself. 

the meeting was a happy one; there was not a more joyful house than that 
within many mile around. henry was restore to the arms of those who 
love him, and, in a month, a wedding was celebrated between him and his 
cousin ellen. 

* * * * * 

sir francis varney glance at his watch. it indicate but five minutes 
to twelve o'clock, and he sprang to his feet. even as he did so, a loud 
knock at the principal entrance to his house awaken every echo 
within its walls. 





chapter xxxii. 

the thousand pounds.--the stranger's precautions. 


[illustration] 

varney move not now, nor did he speak, but, like a statue, he stood, 
with his unearthly look eyes rivet upon the door of the apartment. 

in a few moments one of his servant came, and said-- 

"sir, a person is here, who say he wants to see you. he desire me to 
say, that he had ridden far, and that moments were precious when the 
tide of life was ebb fast." 

"yes! yes!" gasp varney; "admit him, i know him! bring him here? it 
is--an--old friend--of mine." 

he sank into a chair, and still he kept his eyes fixed upon that door 
through which his visitor must come. surely some secret of dreadful 
moment must be connected with him whom sir francis expected--dreaded--and 
yet dare not refuse to see. and now a footstep approaches--a slow and a 
solemn footstep--it pause a moment at the door of the apartment, and 
then the servant fling it open, and a tall man enters. he is envelop 
in the fold of a horseman's cloak, and there is the clank of spur upon 
his heel as he walk into the room. 

varney rose again, but he said not a word and for a few moments they 
stood opposite each other in silence. the domestic has left the room, 
and the door is closed, so that there was nothing to prevent them from 
conversing; and, yet, silent they continue for some minutes. it seem 
as if each was most anxious that the other should commence the 
conversation, first. 

and yet there was nothing so very remarkable in the appearance of that 
stranger which should entire justify sir francis varney, in feeling so 
much alarm at his presence. he certainly was a man past the prime of 
life; and he look like one who had battle much with misfortune, and 
as if time had not pass so lightly over his brow, but that it had left 
deep trace of its progress. the only thing positively bad about his 
countenance, was to be found in his eyes. there there was a most 
ungracious and sinister expression, a kind of lurk and suspicion 
look, as if he were always resolve in his mind some deep laid scheme, 
which might be sufficient to circumvent the whole of mankind. 

finding, probably, that varney would not speak first, he let his cloak 
fall more loose about him, and in a low, deep tone, he said, 

"i presume i was expected?" 

"you were," said varney. "it is the day, and it is the hour." 

"you are right. i like to see you so mindful. you don't improve in looks 
since--" 

"hush--hush! no more of that; can we not meet without a dreadful 
allusion to the past! there needs nothing to remind me of it; and your 
presence here now show that you are not forgetful. speak not of that 
fearful episode. let no words combine to place it in a tangible shape to 
human understanding. i cannot, dare not, hear you speak of that." 

"it is well," said the stranger; "as you please. let our interview be 
brief. you know my errand?" 

"i do. so fearful a drag upon limited means, is not likely to be readily 
forgotten." 

"oh, you are too ingenious--too full of well laid schemes, and to apt 
and ready in their execution, to feel, as any fearful drag, the 
conditions of our bargain. why do you look at me so earnestly?" 

"because," said varney--and he tremble as he spoke--"because each 
lineament of your countenance bring me back to the recollection of the 
only scene in life that made me shudder, and which i cannot think of, 
even with the indifference of contempt. i see it all before my mind's 
eye, coming in frightful panoramic array, those incidents, which even to 
dream of, are sufficient to drive the soul to madness; the dread of this 
annual visit, hang upon me like a dark cloud upon my very heart; it 
sit like some foul incubus, destroy its vitality and drag me, 
from day to day, near to that tomb, from whence not as before, i can 
emerge." 

"you have been among the dead?" said the stranger. 

"i have." 

"and yet are mortal." 

"yes," repeated varney, "yes, and yet am mortal." 

"it was i that pluck you back to that world, which, to judge from your 
appearance, has had since that eventful period but few charm for you. 
by my faith you look like--" 

"like what i am," interrupt varney. 

"this is a subject that once a year get frightfully renew between us. 
for week before your visit i am haunt by frightful recollections, and 
it take me many week after you are gone, before i can restore myself 
to serenity. look at me; am i not an alter man?" 

"in faith you are," said the stranger "i have no wish to press upon you 
painful recollections. and yet 'tis strange to me that upon such a man 
as you, the event to which you allude should produce so terrible an 
impression." 

"i have pass through the agony of death," said varney, "and have again 
endure the torture--for it is such--of the re-union of the body and the 
soul; not have endure so much, not the faintest echo of such feelings 
can enter into your imagination." 

"there may be truth in that, and yet, like a flutter moth round a 
flame, it seem to me, that when i do see you, you take a terrific kind 
of satisfaction in talk of the past." 

"that is strict true," said varney; "the image with which my mind is 
fill are frightful. pent up do they remain for twelve long months. i 
can speak to you, and you only, without disguise, and thus do it seem 
to me that i get rid of the uneasy load of horrible imaginings. when you 
are gone, and have been gone a sufficient lapse of time, my slumber are 
not haunt with frightful images--i regain a comparative peace, until 
the time slow come around again, when we are doom to meet." 

"i understand you. you seem well lodge here?" 

"i have ever kept my word, and sent to you, telling you where i am." 

"you have, truly. i have no shadow of complaint to make against you. no 
one, could have more faithfully perform his bond than you have. i give 
you ample credit for all that, and long may you live still to perform 
your conditions." 

"i dare not deceive you, although to keep such faith i may be compel 
to deceive a hundred others." 

"of that i cannot judge. fortune seem to smile upon you; you have not 
as yet disappointed me." 

"and will not now," said varney. "the gigantic and frightful penalty of 
disappointing you, stare me in the face. i dare not do so." 

he took from his pocket, as he spoke, a clasp book, from which he 
produce several bank notes, which he placed before the stranger. 

"a thousand pounds," he said; "that is the agreement." 

"it is to the very letter. i do not return to you a thousand thanks--we 
understand each other better than to waste time with idle compliment. 
indeed i will go quite as far as to say, truthfully, that did not my 
necessity require this amount from you, you should have the boon, for 
which you pay that price at a much cheap rate." 

"enough! enough!" said varney. "it is strange, that your face should 
have been the last i saw, when the world closed upon me, and the first 
that met my eyes when i was again snatch back to life! do you pursue 
still your dreadful trade?" 

"yes," said the stranger, "for another year, and then, with such a 
moderate competence as fortune has assign me, i retire, to make way 
for younger and able spirits." 

"and then," said varney, "shall you still require of me such an amount 
as this?" 

"no; this is my last visit but one. i shall be just and liberal towards 
you. you are not old; and i have no wish to become the clog of your 
existence. as i have before told you, it is my necessity, and not my 
inclination, that set the value upon the service i render you." 

"i understand you, and ought to thank you. and in reply to so much 
courtesy, be assured, that when i shudder at your presence, it is not 
that i regard you with horror, as an individual, but it is because the 
sight of you awaken mournful the remembrance of the past." 

"it is clear to me," said the stranger; "and now i think we part with 
each other in a better spirit than we ever did before; and when we meet 
again, the remembrance that it is the last time, will clear away the 
gloom that i now find hanging over you." 

"it may! it may! with what an earnest gaze you still regard me!" 

"i do. it do appear to me most strange, that time should not have 
obliterate the effects which i thought would have cease with their 
cause. you are no more the man that in my recollection you once were, 
than i am like a sporting child." 

"and i never shall be," said varney; "never--never again! this self-same 
look which the hand of death had placed upon me, i shall ever wear. i 
shudder at myself, and as i oft perceive the eye of idle curiosity fixed 
steadfast upon me, i wonder in my inmost heart, if even the wildest 
guess hit upon the cause why i am not like unto other men?" 

"no. of that you may depend there is no suspicion; but i will leave you 
now; we part such friends, as men situated as we are can be. once again 
shall we meet, and then farewell for ever." 

"do you leave england, then?" 

"i do. you know my situation in life. it is not one which offer me 
inducement to remain. in some other land, i shall win the respect and 
attention i may not hope for here. there my wealth will win many golden 
opinions; and casting, as best i may, the veil of forgetful over my 
former life, my decline years may yet be happy. this money, that i 
have had of you from time to time, has been more pleasant earn than 
all beside. wrung, as it has been, from your fears, still have i taken 
it with less reproach. and now, farewell!" 

varney rang for a servant to show the stranger from the house, and 
without another word they parted. 

then, when he was alone, that mysterious owner of that costly home drew 
a long breath of apparently exquisite relief. 

"that is over!--that is over!" he said. "he shall have the other 
thousand pounds, perchance, soon than he thinks. with all expedition i 
will send it to him. and then on that subject i shall be at peace. i 
shall have paid a large sum; but that which i purchase was to me 
priceless. it was my life!--it was my life itself! that possession which 
the world's wealth cannot restore! and shall i grudge these thousands, 
which have found their way into this man's hands? no! 'tis true, that 
existence, for me, has lost some of its most resplendent charms. 'tis 
true, that i have no earthly affections, and that shun companionship 
with all, i am alike shun by all; and yet, while the life-blood still 
will circulate within my shrunken veins, i cling to vitality." 

he pass into an inner room, and taking from a hook, on which it hung, 
a long, dark-coloured cloak, he envelop his tall, unearthly figure 
within its folds. 

then, with his hat in his hand, he pass out of his house, and appear 
to be taking his way towards bannerworth house. 

surely it must be guilt of no common die that could oppress a man so 
destitute of human sympathies as sir francis varney. the dreadful 
suspicion that hover round him with respect to what he was, appear 
to gather confirmation from every act of his existence. 

whether or not this man, to whom he felt bound to pay annual so large 
a sum, was in the secret, and knew him to be something more than 
earthly, we cannot at present declare; but it would seem from the tenor 
of their conversation as if such were the fact. 

perchance he had save him from the corruption of the tomb, by place 
out, on some sylvan spot, where the cold moonbeam fell, the apparently 
lifeless form, and now claim so large a reward for such a service, and 
the necessary secrecy contingent upon it. 

we say this may be so, and yet again some more natural and rational 
explanation may unexpected present itself; and there may be yet a dark 
page in sir francis varney's life's volume, which will place him in a 
light of superadd terror to our readers. 

time, and the now rapid accumulate incident of our tale, will soon 
tear aside the veil of mystery that now envelope some of our _dramatis 
personae_. 

and let us hope that in the development of those incident we shall be 
enable to rescue the beautiful flora bannerworth from the despairing 
gloom that is around her. let us hope and even anticipate that we shall 
see her smile again; that the roseate hue of health will again revisit 
her cheeks, the light buoyancy of her step return, and that as before 
she may be the joy of all around her, dispense and receiving 
happiness. 

and, he too, that gallant fearless lover, he whom no chance of time or 
tide could sever from the object of his fond affections, he who listen 
to nothing but the dictate of his heart's best feelings, let us indulge 
a hope that he will have a bright reward, and that the sunshine of a 
permanent felicity will only seem the bright for the shadow that for 
a time have obscure its glory. 




chapter xxxiii. 

the strange interview.--the chase through the hall. 


[illustration] 

it was with the most melancholy aspect that anything human could well 
bear, that sir francis varney took his lonely walk, although perhaps in 
saying so much, probably we are institute a comparison which 
circumstances scarcely empower us to do; for who shall say that that 
singular man, around whom a very atmosphere of mystery seem to be 
perpetual increasing, was human? 

averse as we are to believe in the supernatural, or even to invest 
humanity with any preternatural powers, the more than singular fact and 
circumstances surrounding the existence and the acts of that man bring 
to the mind a kind of shudder conviction, that if he be indeed really 
mortal he still must possess some powers beyond ordinary mortality, and 
be walking the earth for some unhallowed purposes, such as ordinary men 
with the ordinary attribute of human nature can scarcely guess at. 

silent and alone he took his way through that beautiful tract of 
country, comprehend such picturesque charm of hill and dale which 
lay between his home and bannerworth hall. he was evidently intent upon 
reach the latter place by the shortest possible route, and in the 
dark of that night, for the moon had not yet risen, he show no 
slight acquaintance with the intricacy of that locality, that he was 
at all enable to pursue so undeviating a tract as that which he took. 

he mutter frequent to himself low, indistinct words as he went, and 
chiefly did they seem to have reference to that strange interview he had 
so recently had with one who, from some combination of circumstances 
scarcely to be guess at, evidently exercise a powerful control over 
him, and was enable to make a demand upon his pecuniary resources of 
rather startle magnitude. 

and yet, from a stray word or two, which were pronounced more 
distinctly, he did not seem to be thinking in anger over that interview; 
but it would appear that it rather had recall to his remembrance 
circumstances of a painful and a degrade nature, which time had not 
been able entire to obliterate from his recollection. 

"yes, yes," he said, as he pause upon the margin of the wood, to the 
confines of which he, or what seem to be he, had once been chase by 
marchdale and the bannerworths--"yes, the very sight of that man recall 
all the frightful pageantry of a horrible tragedy, which i can 
never--never forget. never can it escape my memory, as a horrible, a 
terrific fact; but it is the sight of this man alone that can recall all 
its fearful minutiae to my mind, and paint to my imagination, in the 
most vivid colours, every, the least particular connected with that time 
of agony. these periodical visit much affect me. for month i dread 
them, and for month i am but slow recover from the shock they 
give me. 'but once more,' he says--'but once more,' and then we shall 
not meet again. well, well; perchance before that time arrives, i may be 
able to possess myself of those resources which will enable me to 
forestall his visit, and so at least free myself from the pang of 
expect him." 

he pause at the margin of the wood, and glance in the direction of 
bannerworth hall. by the dim light which yet show from out the light 
sky, he could discern the ancient gable ends, and turret-like windows; 
he could see the well laid out gardens, and the grove of stately fir 
that shade it from the northern blasts, and, as he gazed, a strong 
emotion seem to come over him, such as no one could have supposed 
would for one moment have possessed the frame of one so apparently 
unconnected with all human sympathies. 

"i know this spot well," he said, "and my appearance here on that 
eventful occasion, when the dread of my approach induce a crime only 
second to murder itself, was on such a night as this, when all was so 
still and calm around, and when he who, at the merest shadow of my 
presence, rather chose to rush on death than be assured it was myself. 
curse on the circumstances that so foil me! i should have been most 
wealthy. i should have possessed the means of commanding the adulation 
of those who now hold me but cheaply; but still the time may come. i 
have a hope yet, and that great which i have ever pant for, that 
magician-like power over my kind, which the possession of ample means 
alone can give, may yet be mine." 

wrapping his cloak more close around him, he strode forward with that 
long, noiseless step which was peculiar to him. mechanical he appear 
to avoid those obstacle of hedge and ditch which impede his pathway. 
surely he had come that road often, or he would not so easily have 
pursue his way. and now he stood by the edge of a plantation which in 
some measure protect from trespass the more private garden of the 
hall, and there he paused, as if a feeling of irresolute had come over 
him, or it might be, as indeed it seem from his subsequent conduct, 
that he had come without any fixed intention, or if with a fixed 
intention, without any regular plan of carry it into effect. 

did he again dream of intrude into any of the chambers of that 
mansion, with the ghastly aspect of that terrible creation with which, 
in the mind of its inhabitants, he seem to be but too close 
identified? he was pale, attenuated, and trembled. could it be that so 
soon it had become necessary to renew the life-blood in his vein in the 
awful manner which it is supposed the vampyre brood are compel to 
protract their miserable existence? 

it might be so, and that he was even now reflect upon how once more 
he could kindle the fire of madness in the brain of that beautiful girl, 
who he had already made so irretrievable wretched. 

he leant against an age tree, and his strange, lustrous-looking eyes 
seem to collect every wandering scintillate of light that was 
around, and to shine with preternatural intensity. 

"i must, i will," he said, "be master of bannerworth hall. it must come 
to that. i have set an existence upon its possession, and i will have 
it; and then, if with my own hand i displace it brick by brick and 
stone by stone, i will discover that hidden secret which no one but 
myself now dream of. it shall be done by force or fraud, by love or by 
despair, i care not which; the end shall sanctify all means. ay, even if 
i wade through blood to my desire, i say it shall be done." 

there was a holy and a still calm about the night much at variance 
with the storm of angry passion that appear to be momentarily 
gathering power in the breast of that fearful man. not the least sound 
came from bannerworth hall, and it was only occasional that from afar 
off on the night air there came the bark of some watchdog, or the low of 
distant cattle. all else was mute save when the deep sepulchral tone of 
that man, if man he was, gave an impulse to the soft air around him. 

with a strolling movement as if he were careless if he proceed in that 
direction or not, he still went onward toward the house, and now he 
stood by that little summer-house once so sweet and so dear a retreat, 
in which the heart-stricken flora had held her interview with him whom 
she love with a devotion unknown to mean minds. 

this spot scarcely command any view of the house, for so enclose was 
it among evergreen and blooming flowers, that it seem like a very 
wilderness of nature, upon which, with liberal hand, she had shower 
down in wild luxuriance her wildest floral beauties. 

in and around that spot the night air was loaded with sweets. the 
mingle perfume of many flower made that place seem a very paradise. 
but oh, how sadly at variance with that beauty and contented of 
nature was he who stood amidst such beauty! all incapable as he was of 
appreciate its tenderness, or of gathering the faintest moral from its 
glory. 

"why am i here?" he said. "here, without fixed design or stability of 
purpose, like some miser who has hidden his own hoard so deep within 
the bowels of the earth he cannot hope that he shall ever again be able 
to bring them to the light of day. i hover around this spot which i 
feel--which i know--contains my treasure, though i cannot lay my hand 
upon it, or exult in its glisten beauty." 

even as he spoke he cower down like some guilty thing, for he heard a 
faint footstep upon the garden path. so light, so fragile was the step, 
that, in the light of day, the very hum of summer insect would have 
drown the noise; but he heard it, that man of crime--of unholy and 
awful impulses. he heard it, and he shrunk down among the shrub and 
flower till he was hidden completely from observation amid a world of 
fragrant essences. 

was it some one stealthy in that place even as he was, unwelcome or 
unknown? or was it one who had observe him intrude upon the privacy of 
those now unhappy precincts, and who was coming to deal upon him that 
death which, vampyre though he might be, he was yet susceptible of from 
mortal hands? 

the footstep advanced, and lower down he shrunk until his coward-heart 
beat against the very earth itself. he knew that he was unarmed, a 
circumstance rare with him, and only to be account for by the 
disturbance of his mind consequent upon the visit of that strange man to 
his house, whose presence had awaken so many conflict emotions. 

near and near still came that light footstep, and his deep-seated 
fear would not let him perceive that it was not the step of caution or 
of treachery, but owe its lightness to the natural grace and freedom of 
movement of its owner. 

the moon must have arisen, although obscure by clouds, through which it 
cast but a dim radiance, for the night had certainly grown lighter; so 
that although there were no strong shadow cast, a more diffuse 
bright was about all things, and their outline look not so 
dancing, and confuse the one with the other. 

he strained his eyes in the direction whence the sound proceeded, and 
then his fear for his personal safety vanished, for he saw it was a 
female form that was slow advance towards him. 

his first impulse was to rise, for with the transient glimpse he got of 
it, he knew that it must be flora bannerworth; but a second thought, 
probably one of intense curiosity to know what could possibly have 
brought her to such a spot at such a time, restrained him, and he was 
quiet. but if the surprise of sir francis varney was great to see flora 
bannerworth at such a time in such a place, we have no doubt, that with 
the knowledge which our reader have of her, their astonishment would 
more than fully equal his; and when we come to consider, that since that 
eventful period when the sanctity of her chamber had been so violate by 
that fearful midnight visitant, it must appear somewhat strange that she 
could gather courage sufficient to wander forth alone at such an hour. 

had she no dread of meeting that unearthly being? did the possibility 
that she might fall into his ruthless grasp, not come across her mind 
with a shudder consciousness of its probability? had she no 
reflection that each step she took, was taking her further and further 
from those who would aid her in all extremities? it would seem not, for 
she walk onward, unheeding, and apparently unthinking of the presence, 
possible or probable, of that bane of her existence. 

but let us look at her again. how strange and spectral-like she move 
along; there seem no speculation in her countenance, but with a strange 
and gliding step, she walk like some dim shadow of the past in that 
ancient garden. she is very pale, and on her brow there is the stamp of 
suffering; her dress is a morning robe, she hold it lightly round her, 
and thus she move forward towards that summer-house which probably to 
her was sanctify by have witness those vow of pure affection, 
which came from the lip of charles holland, about whose fate there now 
hung so great a mystery. 

has madness really seize upon the brain of that beautiful girl? has the 
strong intellect really sunk beneath the oppression to which it has 
been subjected? do she now walk forth with a disorder intellect, the 
queen of some fantastic realm, view the material world with eyes that 
are not of earth; shun perhaps that which she should have sought, 
and, perchance, in her frenzy, seek that which in a happy frame of 
mind she would have shunned. 

[illustration] 

such might have been the impression of any one who had look upon her 
for a moment, and who knew the disastrous scene through which she had 
so recently passed; but we can spare our reader the pang of such a 
supposition. we have bespoken their love for flora bannerworth, and we 
are certain that she has it; therefore would we spare them, even for a 
few brief moments, from imagine that cruel destiny had done its worst, 
and that the fine and beautiful spirit we have so much commend had 
lost its power of rational reflection. no; thank heaven, such is not the 
case. flora bannerworth is not mad, but under the strong influence of 
some eccentric dream, which has picture to her mind image which have 
no home but in the airy realm of imagination. she has wander forth 
from her chamber to that sacred spot where she had met him she loved, 
and heard the noblest declaration of truth and constancy that ever 
flow from human lips. 

yes, she is sleeping; but, with a precision such as the somnambulist so 
strange exerts, she trod the well-known path slowly, but surely, 
toward that summer's bower, where her dream had not told her lay 
crouch that most hideous spectre of her imagination, sir francis 
varney. he who stood between her and her heart's best joy; he who had 
destroy all hope of happiness, and who had convert her dearest 
affection into only so many cause of greater disquietude than the 
blessing they should have been to her. 

oh! could she have imagine but for one moment that he was there, with 
what an eager of terror would she have flown back again to the 
shelter of those walls, where at least was to be found some protection 
from the fearful vampyre's embrace, and where she would be within hail 
of friendly hearts, who would stand bold between her and every thought 
of harm. 

but she knew it not, and onwards she went until the very hem of her 
garment touched the face of sir francis varney. 

and he was terrified--he dare not move--he dare not speak! the idea 
that she had died, and that this was her spirit, come to wreak some 
terrible vengeance upon him, for a time possessed him, and so paralyse 
with fear was he, that he could neither move nor speak. 

it had been well if, during that trance of indecision in which his 
coward heart placed him, flora had left the place, and again sought her 
home; but unhappily such an impulse came not over her; she sat upon that 
rustic seat, where she had repose when charles had clasp her to his 
heart, and through her very dream the remembrance of that pure affection 
came across her, and in the tenderest and most melodious accents, she 
said,-- 

"charles! charles! and do you love me still? no--no; you have not 
forsaken me. save me, save me from the vampyre!" 

she shuddered, and sir francis varney heard her weeping. 

"fool that i am," he muttered, "to be so terrified. she sleeps. this is 
one of the phase which a disorder imagination oft put on. she 
sleeps, and perchance this may be an opportunity of further increase 
the dread of my visitation, which shall make bannerworth hall far too 
terrible a dwelling-place for her; and well i know, if she goes, they 
will all go. it will become a desert house, and that is what i want. a 
house, too, with such an evil reputation, that none but myself, who have 
create that reputation, will venture within its walls:--a house, which 
superstition will point out as the abode of evil spirits;--a house, as 
it were, by general opinion, cede to the vampyre. yes, it shall be my 
own; fit dwelling-place for a while for me. i have sworn it shall be 
mine, and i will keep my oath, little such as i have to do with vows." 

he rose, and move slow to the narrow entrance of the summer-house; a 
movement he could make, without at all disturb flora, for the rustic 
seat, on which she sat, was at its further extremity. and there he 
stood, the upper part of his gaunt and hideous form clearly define upon 
the now much lighter sky, so that if flora bannerworth had not been in 
that trance of sleep in which she really was, one glance upward would 
let her see the hideous companion she had, in that once much-loved 
spot--a spot hitherto sacred to the best and noblest feelings, but now 
doom for ever to be associate with that terrific spectre of despair. 

but she was in no state to see so terrible a sight. her hand were over 
her face, and she was weeping still. 

"surely, he love me," she whispered; "he has said he love me, and he 
do not speak in vain. he love me still, and i shall again look upon 
his face, a heaven to me! charles! charles! you will come again? surely, 
they sin against the divinity of love, who would tell me that you love 
me not!" 

"ha!" mutter varney, "this passion is her first, and take a strong 
hold on her young heart--she love him--but what are human affection to 
me? i have no right to count myself in the great muster-roll of 
humanity. i look not like an inhabitant of the earth, and yet am on it. 
i love no one, expect no love from any one, but i will make humanity a 
slave to me; and the lip-service of them who hate me in their hearts, 
shall be as pleasant jingle music to my ear, as if it were quite 
sincere! i will speak to this girl; she is not mad--perchance she may 
be." 

there was a diabolical look of concentrated hatred upon varney's face, 
as he now advanced two pace towards the beautiful flora. 




chapter xxxiv. 

the threat.--its consequences.--the rescue, and sir francis varney's 
danger. 


[illustration] 

sir francis varney now pause again, and he seem for a few moments to 
gloat over the helpless condition of her whom he had so determined to 
make his victim; there was no look of pity in his face, no one touch of 
human kindness could be found in the whole expression of those 
diabolical features; and if he delay making the attempt to strike 
terror into the heart of that unhappy, but beautiful being, it could not 
be from any relent feeling, but simply, that he wish for a few 
moments to indulge his imagination with the idea of perfect his 
villany more effectually. 

alas! and they who would have flown to her rescue,--they, who for her 
would have chance all accidents, ay, even life itself, were sleeping, 
and knew not of the love one's danger. she was alone, and far enough 
from the house, to be driven to that totter verge where sanity ends, 
and the dream of madness, with all its terrors, commences. 

but still she slept--if that half-waking sleep could indeed be 
considered as any thing akin to ordinary slumber--still she slept, and 
call mournful upon her lover's name; and in tender, beseech 
accents, that should have melt even the stubbornest hearts, did she 
express her soul's conviction that he love her still. 

the very repetition of the name of charles dutch seem to be gall 
to sir francis varney. he made a gesture of impatience, as she again 
utter it, and then, step forward, he stood within a pace of where 
she sat, and in a fearful distinct voice he said,-- 

"flora bannerworth, awake! awake! and look upon me, although the sight 
blast and drive you to despair. awake! awake!" 

it was not the sound of the voice which arouse her from that strange 
slumber. it is said that those who sleep in that eccentric manner, are 
insensible to sounds, but that the lightest touch will arouse them in an 
instant; and so it was in this case, for sir francis varney, as he 
spoke, laid upon the hand of flora two of his cold, corpse-like look 
fingers. a shriek burst from her lips, and although the confusion of her 
memory and conception was immense, yet she was awake, and the 
somnambulistic trance had left her. 

"help, help!" she cried. "gracious heavens! where am i?" 

varney spoke not, but he spread out his long, thin arms in such a manner 
that he seem almost to encircle her, while he touched her not, so that 
escape became a matter of impossibility, and to attempt to do so, must 
have been to have thrown herself into his hideous embrace. 

she could obtain but a single view of the face and figure of him who 
oppose her progress, but, slight as that view was, it more than 
sufficed. the very extremity of fear came across her, and she sat like 
one paralysed; the only evidence of existence she gave consist in the 
words,-- 

"the vampyre--the vampyre!" 

"yes," said varney, "the vampyre. you know me, flora 
bannerworth--varney, the vampyre; your midnight guest at that feast of 
blood. i am the vampyre. look upon me well; shrink not from my gaze. you 
will do well not to shun me, but to speak to me in such a shape that i 
may learn to love you." 

flora shook as in a convulsion, and she look as white as any marble 
statue. 

"this is horrible!" she said. "why do not heaven grant me the death i 
pray for?" 

"hold!" said varney. "dress not up in the false colours of the 
imagination that which in itself is sufficient terrific to need none 
of the allurement of romance. flora bannerworth, you are 
persecuted--persecuted by me, the vampyre. it is my fate to persecute 
you; for there are law to the invisible as well as the visible creation 
that force even such a being as i am to play my part in the great drama 
of existence. i am a vampyre; the sustenance that support this frame 
must be drawn from the life-blood of others." 

"oh, horror--horror!" 

"but most i do affect the young and beautiful. it is from the vein of 
such as thou art, flora bannerworth, that i would seek the sustenance 
i'm compel to obtain for my own exhaust energies. but never yet, in 
all my long career--a career extend over century of time--never yet 
have i felt the soft sensation of human pity till i look on thee, 
exquisite piece of excellence. even at the moment when the revive 
fluid from the gushing fountain of your vein was warm at my heart, i 
pity and i love you. oh, flora! even i can now feel the pang of being 
what i am!" 

there was a something in the tone, a touch of sad in the manner, and 
a deep sincerity in these words, that in some measure disabuse flora of 
her fears. she sob hysterically, and a gush of tear came to her 
relief, as, in almost inarticulate accents, she said,-- 

"may the great god forgive even you!" 

"i have need of such a prayer," exclaim varney--"heaven know i have 
need of such a prayer. may it ascend on the wings of the night air to 
the throne of heaven. may it be soft whisper by minister angel 
to the ear of divinity. god know i have need of such a prayer!" 

"to hear you speak in such a strain," said flora, "calms the excited 
fancy, and strip even your horrible presence of some of its maddening 
influence." 

"hush," said the vampire, "you must hear more--you must know more ere 
you speak of the matter that have of late exercise an influence of 
terror over you." 

"but how came i here?" said flora, "tell me that. by what more than 
earthly power have you brought me to this spot? if i am to listen to 
you, why should it not be at some more likely time and place?" 

"i have powers," said varney, assume from flora's words, that she 
would believe such arrogance--"i have powers which suffice to bend many 
purpose to my will--powers incidental to my position, and therefore is 
it i have brought you here to listen to that which should make you 
happy than you are." 

"i will attend," said flora. "i do not shudder now; there's an icy 
cold through my veins, but it is the night air--speak, i will attend 
you." 

"i will. flora bannerworth, i am one who has witness time's mutation 
on man and on his works, and i have pity neither; i have seen the fall 
of empires, and sigh not that high reach ambition was topple to 
the dust. i have seen the grave close over the young and the 
beautiful--those whom i have doom by my insatiable thirst for human 
blood to death, long ere the usual span of life was past, but i never 
love till now." 

"can such a being as you," said flora "be susceptible of such an earthly 
passion?" 

"and wherefore not?" 

"love is either too much of heaven, or too much of earth to find a home 
with thee." 

"no, flora, no! it may be that the feeling is born of pity. i will save 
you--i will save you from a continuance of the horrors that are 
assail you." 

"oh! then may heaven have mercy in your hour of need!" 

"amen!" 

"may you even yet know peace and joy above." 

"it is a faint and straggle hope--but if achieved, it will be through 
the interposition of such a spirit as thine, flora, which has already 
exercise so benign an influence upon my torture soul, as to produce 
the wish within my heart, to do a least one unselfish action." 

"that wish," said flora, "shall be father to the deed. heaven has 
boundless mercy yet." 

"for thy sweet sake, i will believe so much, flora bannerworth; it is a 
condition with my hateful race, that if we can find one human heart to 
love us, we are free. if, in the face of heaven, you will consent to be 
mine, you will snatch me from a continuance of my frightful doom, and 
for your pure sake, and on your merits, shall i yet know heavenly 
happiness. will you be mine?" 

a cloud swept from off the face of the moon, and a slant ray fell upon 
the hideous features of the vampire. he look as if just rescue from 
some charnel-house, and endow for a space with vitality to destroy all 
beauty and harmony in nature, and drive some benighted soul to madness. 

"no, no, no!" shriek flora, "never!" 

"enough," said varney, "i am answered. it was a bad proposal. i am a 
vampyre still." 

"spare me! spare me!" 

"blood!" 

flora sank upon her knees, and uplift her hand to heaven. "mercy, 
mercy!" she said. 

"blood!" said varney, and she saw his hideous, fang-like teeth. "blood! 
flora bannerworth, the vampyre's motto. i have ask you to love me, and 
you will not--the penalty be yours." 

"no, no!" said flora. "can it be possible that even you, who have 
already spoken with judgment and precision, can be so unjust? you must 
feel that, in all respects, i have been a victim, most gratuitously--a 
sufferer, while there exist no just cause that i should suffer; one 
who has been tortured, not from personal fault, selfishness, lapse of 
integrity, or honourable feelings, but because you have found it 
necessary, for the prolongation of your terrific existence, to attack me 
as you have done. by what plea of honour, honesty, or justice, can i be 
blame for not embrace an alternative which is beyond all human 
control?--i cannot love you." 

"then be content to suffer. flora bannerworth, will you not, even for a 
time, to save yourself and to save me, become mine?" 

"horrible proposition!" 

"then am i doom yet, perhaps, for many a cycle of years, to spread 
misery and desolate around me; and yet i love you with a feeling which 
has in it more of grateful and unselfish than ever yet found a 
home within my breast. i would fain have you, although you cannot save 
me; there may yet be a chance, which shall enable you to escape from the 
persecution of my presence." 

"oh! glorious chance!" said flora. "which way can it come? tell me how i 
may embrace it, and such grateful feelings as a heart-stricken mourner 
can offer to him who has rescue her from her deep affliction, shall yet 
be yours." 

"hear me, then, flora bannerworth, while i state to you some particulars 
of mysterious existence, of such being as myself, which never yet have 
been breathe to mortal ears." 

flora look intent at him, and listened, while, with a serious 
earnest of manner, he detailed to her something of the physiology of 
the singular class of being which the concurrence of all circumstances 
tend to make him appear. 

"flora," he said, "it is not that i am so enamoured of an existence to 
be prolonged only by such frightful means, which induce me to become a 
terror to you or to others. believe me, that if my victims, those whom 
my insatiable thirst for blood make wretched, suffer much, i, the 
vampyre, am not without my moments of unutterable agony. but it is a 
mysterious law of our nature, that as the period approach when the 
exhaust energy of life require a new support from the warm, gushing 
fountain of another's veins, the strong desire to live grow upon us, 
until, in a paroxysm of wild insanity, which will recognise no 
obstacles, human or divine, we seek a victim." 

"a fearful state!" said flora. 

"it is so; and, when the dreadful repast is over, then again the pulse 
beat healthfully, and the waste energy of a strange kind of vitality 
are restore to us, we become calm again, but with that calm come 
all the horror, all the agony of reflection, and we suffer far more than 
tongue can tell." 

"you have my pity," said flora; "even you have my pity." 

"i might well demand it, if such a feeling held a place within your 
breast. i might well demand your pity, flora bannerworth, for never 
crawl an abject wretch upon the earth's rotundity, so pitiable as i." 

"go on, go on." 

"i will, and with such brief conclusion as i may. have once attack 
any human being, we feel a strange, but terribly impulsive desire again 
to seek that person for more blood. but i love you, flora; the small 
amount of sensibility that still linger about my preternatural 
existence, acknowledge in you a pure and better spirit. i would fain 
save you." 

"oh! tell me how i may escape the terrible infliction." 

"that can only be done by flight. leave this place, i implore you! leave 
it as quick as the movement may be made. linger not--cast not one 
regretful look behind you on your ancient home. i shall remain in this 
locality for years. let me lose sight of you, i will not pursue you; 
but, by force of circumstances, i am myself compel to linger here. 
flight is the only means by which you may avoid a doom as terrific as 
that which i endure." 

"but tell me," said flora, after a moment's pause, during which she 
appear to be endeavour to gather courage to ask some fearful 
question; "tell me if it be true that those who have once endure the 
terrific attack of a vampyre, become themselves, after death, one of 
that dread race?" 

"it is by such means," said varney, "that the frightful brood increases; 
but time and circumstances must aid the development of the new and 
horrible existence. you, however, are safe." 

"safe! oh! say that word again." 

"yes, safe; not once or twice will the vampyre's attack have sufficient 
influence on your mortal frame, as to induce a susceptibility on your 
part to become coexistent with such as he. the attack must be often 
repeated, and the termination of mortal existence must be a consequence 
essential, and direct from those attacks, before such a result may be 
anticipated." 

"yes, yes; i understand." 

"if you were to continue my victim from year to year, the energy of 
life would slow waste away, and, till like some faint taper's gleam, 
consume more sustenance than it received, the veriest accident would 
extinguish your existence, and then, flora bannerworth, you might become 
a vampyre." 

"oh! horrible! most horrible!" 

"if by chance, or by design, the least glimpse of the cold moonbeam 
rest on your apparently lifeless remains, you would rise again and be 
one of us--a terror to yourself and a desolate to all around." 

"oh! i will fly from here," said flora. "the hope of escape from so 
terrific and dreadful a doom shall urge me onward; if flight can save 
me--flight from bannerworth hall, i will pause not until continent and 
ocean divide us." 

"it is well. i'm able now thus calm to reason with you. a few short 
month more and i shall feel the languor of death creep over me, and 
then will come that mad excitement of the brain, which, were you hidden 
behind triple door of steel, would tempt me again to seek your 
chamber--again to seize you in my full embrace--again to draw from your 
vein the means of prolonged life--again to convulse your very soul with 
terror." 

"i need no incentives," said flora, with a shudder, "in the shape of 
description of the past, to urge me on." 

"you will fly from bannerworth hall?" 

"yes, yes!" said flora, "it shall be so; its very chambers now are 
hideous with the recollection of scene enact in them. i will urge my 
brothers, my mother, all to leave, and in some distant clime we will 
find security and shelter. there even we will learn to think of you with 
more of sorrow than of anger--more pity than reproach--more curiosity 
than loathing." 

"be it so," said the vampyre; and he clasp his hands, as if with a 
thankful that he had done so much towards restore peace at least 
to one, who, in consequence of his acts, had felt such exquisite 
despair. "be it so; and even i will hope that the feelings which have 
induce so desolate and so isolated a being as myself to endeavour to 
bring peace to one human heart, will plead for me, trumpet-tongued, to 
heaven!" 

"it will--it will," said flora. 

"do you think so?" 

"i do; and i will pray that the thought may turn to certainty in such a 
cause." 

the vampyre appear to be much affected; and then he added,-- 

"flora, you know that this spot has been the scene of a catastrophe 
fearful to look back upon, in the annals of your family?" 

"it has," said flora. "i know to what you allude; 'tis a matter of 
common knowledge to all--a sad theme to me, and one i would not court." 

"nor would i oppress you with it. your father, here, on this very spot, 
committed that desperate act which brought him uncall for to the 
judgment seat of god. i have a strange, wild curiosity upon such 
subjects. will you, in return for the good that i have try to do you, 
gratify it?" 

"i know not what you mean," said flora. 

"to be more explicit, then, do you remember the day on which your father 
breathe his last?" 

"too well--too well." 

"did you see him or converse with him shortly before that desperate act 
was committed?" 

"no; he shut himself up for some time in a solitary chamber." 

"ha! what chamber?" 

"the one in which i slept myself on the night--" 

"yes, yes; the one with the portrait--that speak portrait--the eyes 
of which seem to challenge an intruder as he enter the apartment." 

"the same." 

"for hour shut up there!" add varney, musingly; "and from thence he 
wander to the garden, where, in this summer-house, he breathe his 
last?" 

"it was so." 

"then, flora, ere i bid you adieu--" 

these words were scarcely uttered, when there was a quick, hasty 
footstep, and henry bannerworth appear behind varney, in the very 
entrance of the summer-house. 

"now," he cried, "for revenge! now, foul being, blot upon the earth's 
surface, horrible imitation of humanity, if mortal arm can do aught 
against you, you shall die!" 

a shriek came from the lip of flora, and fling herself past varney, 
who step aside, she clung to her brother, who made an unavailing pass 
with his sword at the vampyre. it was a critical moment; and had the 
presence of mind of varney desert him in the least, unarmed as he was, 
he must have fallen beneath the weapon of henry. to spring, however, up 
the seat which flora had vacated, and to dash out some of the flimsy and 
rotten wood-work at the back of the summer-house by the propulsive power 
of his whole frame, was the work of a moment; and before henry could 
free himself from the clinging embrace of flora, varney, the vampyre was 
gone, and there was no greater chance of his capture than on a former 
occasion, when he was pursue in vain from the hall to the wood, in the 
intricacy of which he was so entire lost. 




chapter xxxv. 

the explanation.--marchdale's advice.--the project removal, and the 
admiral's anger. 


[illustration] 

this extremely sudden movement on the part of varney was certainly as 
unexpected as it was decisive. henry had imagined, that by taking 
possession of the only entrance to the summer-house, he must come into 
personal conflict with the being who had work so much evil for him and 
his; and that he should so sudden have create for himself another 
mode of exit, certainly never occur to him. 

"for heaven's sake, flora," he said, "unhand me; this is a time for 
action." 

"but, henry, henry, hear me." 

"presently, presently, dear flora; i will yet make another effort to 
arrest the headlong flight of varney." 

he shook her off, perhaps with not more roughness than was necessary to 
induce her to forego her grasp of him, but in a manner that fully show 
he intended to be free; and then he sprang through the same aperture 
whence varney had disappeared, just as george and mr. marchdale arrive 
at the door of the summer-house. 

it was nearly morning, so that the field were brighten up with the 
faint radiance of the coming day; and when henry reach a point which 
he knew command an extensive view, he paused, and ran his eye eager 
along the landscape, with a hope of discover some trace of the 
fugitive. 

such, however, was not the case; he saw nothing, heard nothing of sir 
francis varney; and then he turned, and call loud to george to join 
him, and was immediately reply to by his brother's presence, 
accompany by marchdale. 

before, however, they could exchange a word, a rattling discharge of 
fire-arms took place from one of the windows, and they heard the 
admiral, in a loud voice, shouting,-- 

"broadside to broadside! give it them again, jack! hit them between wind 
and water!" 

then there was another rattling discharge, and henry exclaimed,-- 

"what is the meaning of that firing?" 

"it come from the admiral's room," said marchdale. "on my life, i think 
the old man must be mad. he has some six or eight pistol range in a 
row along the window-sill, and all loaded, so that by the aid of a match 
they can be pretty well discharge as a volley, which he consider the 
only proper means of fire upon the vampyre." 

"it is so," reply george; "and, no doubt, hearing an alarm, he has 
commence operation by fire into the enemy." 

"well, well," said henry; "he must have his way. i have pursue varney 
thus far, and that he has again retreat to the wood, i cannot doubt. 
between this and the full light of day, let us at least make an effort 
to discover his place of retreat. we know the locality as well as he can 
possibly, and i propose now that we commence an active search." 

"come on, then," said marchdale. "we are all armed; and i, for one, 
shall feel no hesitation in taking the life, if it be possible to do so, 
of that strange being." 

"of that possibility you doubt?" said george, as they hurried on across 
the meadows. 

"indeed i do, and with reason too. i'm certain that when i fire at him 
before i hit him; and besides, flora must have shot him upon the 
occasion when we were absent, and she use your pistol henry, to defend 
herself and her mother." 

"it would seem so," said henry; "and disregard all present 
circumstances, if i do meet him, i will put to the proof whether he be 
mortal or not." 

the distance was not great, and they soon reach the margin of the 
wood; they then separate agree to meet within it, at a well-spring, 
familiar to them all: previous to which each was to make his best 
endeavour to discover if any one was hidden among the bush-wood or in 
the hollow of the ancient tree they should encounter on their line of 
march. 

the fact was, that henry finding that he was likely to pass an 
exceedingly disturbed, restless night, through agitation of spirits, 
had, after toss to and fro on his couch for many hours, wise at 
length risen, and determined to walk abroad in the garden belong to 
the mansion, in preference to continue in such a state of fever and 
anxiety, as he was in, in his own chamber. 

since the vampyre's dreadful visit, it had been the custom of both the 
brothers, occasionally, to tap at the chamber door of flora, who, at her 
own request, now that she had change her room, and dispense with any 
one sitting up with her, wish occasional to be communicate with by 
some member of the family. 

henry, then, after rapid dressing, as he pass the door of her 
bedroom, was about to tap at it, when to his surprise he found it open, 
and upon hasty enter it he observe that the bed was empty, and a 
hasty glance round the apartment convinced him that flora was not there. 

alarm took possession of him, and hasty arm himself, he rouse 
marchdale and george, but without wait for them to be ready to 
accompany him, he sought the garden, to search it thorough in case she 
should be anywhere there concealed. 

thus it was he had come upon the conference so strange and so 
unexpected held between varney and flora in the summer-house. with 
what occur upon that discovery the reader are acquainted. 

flora had promise george that she would return immediately to the 
house, but when, in compliance with the call of henry, george and 
marchdale had left her alone, she felt so agitate and faint that she 
began to cling to the trellis work of the little building for a few 
moments before she could gather strength to reach the mansion. 

two or three minutes might thus have elapsed, and flora was in such a 
state of mental bewilder with all that had occurred, that she could 
scarce believe it real, when sudden a slight sound attract her 
attention, and through the gap which had been made in the wall of the 
summer-house, with an appearance of perfect composure, again appear 
sir francis varney. 

"flora," he said, quiet resume the discourse which had been broken 
off, "i am quite convinced now that you will be much the happy for the 
interview." 

"gracious heaven!" said flora, "whence have you come from?" 

"i have never left," said varney. 

"but i saw you fly from this spot." 

"you did; but it was only to another immediately outside the summer 
house. i had no idea of break off our conference so abruptly." 

"have you anything to add to what you have already stated?" 

"absolutely nothing, unless you have a question to propose to me--i 
should have thought you had, flora. is there no other circumstance 
weigh heavy upon your mind, as well as the dreadful visitation i 
have subject you to?" 

"yes," said flora. "what has become of charles holland?" 

"listen. do not discard all hope; when you are far from here you will 
meet with him again." 

"but he has left me." 

"and yet he will be able, when you again encounter him, so far to 
extenuate his seeming perfidy, that you shall hold him as untouched in 
honour as when first he whisper to you that he love you." 

"oh, joy! joy!" said flora; "by that assurance you have rob 
misfortune of its sting, and richly compensate me for all that i have 
suffered." 

"adieu!" said the vampyre. "i shall now proceed to my own home by a 
different route to that taken by those who would kill me." 

"but after this," said flora, "there shall be no danger; you shall be 
held harmless, and our departure from bannerworth hall shall be so 
quick, that you will soon be release from all apprehension of vengeance 
from my brother, and i shall taste again of that happiness which i 
thought had flee from me for ever." 

"farewell," said the vampire; and fold his cloak close around him, 
he strode from the summer-house, soon disappear from her sight behind 
the shrub and ample vegetation with which that garden abounded. 

flora sunk upon her knees, and utter a brief, but heartfelt 
thanksgiving to heaven for this happy change in her destiny. the hue of 
health faint again visit her cheeks, and as she now, with a feeling 
of more energy and strength than she had been capable of exert for 
many days, walk towards the house, she felt all that delightful 
sensation which the mind experience when it is shake off the trammels 
of some serious evil which it delight now to find that the imagination 
has attire in far worse colours than the fact deserved. 

it is scarcely necessary, after this, to say that the search in the wood 
for sir francis varney was an unproductive one, and that the morning 
dawn upon the labour of the brother and of mr. marchdale, without 
their have discover the least indication of the presence of varney. 
again puzzle and confounded, they stood on the margin of the wood, and 
look sadly towards the brighten window of bannerworth hall, which 
were now reflect with a golden radiance the slant ray of the morning 
sun. 

"foiled again," remark henry, with a gesture of impatience; "foiled 
again, and as completely as before. i declare that i will fight this 
man, let our friend the admiral say what he will against such a measure 
i will meet him in mortal combat; he shall consummate his triumph over 
our whole family by my death, or i will rid the world and ourselves of 
so frightful a character." 

"let us hope," said marchdale, "that some other course may be adopted, 
which shall put an end to these proceedings." 

"that," exclaim henry, "is to hope against all probability; what other 
course can be pursued? be this varney man or devil, he has evidently 
marked us for his prey." 

[illustration] 

"indeed, it would seem so," remark george; "but yet he shall find that 
we will not fall so easily; he shall discover that if poor flora's 
gentle spirit has been crush by these frightful circumstances, we are 
of a stern mould." 

"he shall," said henry; "i for one will dedicate my life to this matter. 
i will know no more rest than is necessary to recruit my frame, until i 
have succeed in overcome this monster; i will seek no pleasure here, 
and will banish from my mind, all else that may interfere with that one 
fixed pursuit. he or i must fall." 

"well spoken," said marchdale; "and yet i hope that circumstances may 
occur to prevent such a necessity of action, and that probably you will 
yet see that it will be wise and prudent to adopt a mild and a safe 
course." 

"no, marchdale, you cannot feel as we feel. you look on more as a 
spectator, sympathise with the affliction of either, than feeling the 
full sting of those affliction yourself." 

"do i not feel acute for you? i'm a lonely man in the world, and i 
have taught myself now to centre my affection in your family; my 
recollection of early years assist me in so doing. believe me, both of 
you, that i am no idle spectator of your griefs, but that i share them 
fully. if i advise you to be peaceful, and to endeavour by the gentlest 
means possible to accomplish your aims, it is not that i would counsel 
you cowardice; but have seen so much more of the world than either of 
you have had time or opportunity of seeing, i do not look so 
enthusiast upon matters, but, with a cooler, calm judgment, i do 
not say a better, i proffer to you my counsel." 

"we thank you," said henry; "but this is a matter in which action seem 
specially call for. it is not to be borne that a whole family is to be 
oppress by such a fiend in human shape as that varney." 

"let me," said marchdale, "counsel you to submit to flora's decision in 
this business; let her wish constitute the rule of action. she is the 
greatest sufferer, and the one most deep interested in the termination 
of this fearful business. moreover she has judgment and decision of 
character--she will advise you rightly, be assured." 

"that she would advise us honourably," said henry, "and that we should 
feel every disposition in the world to defer to her wish our 
proposition, is not to be doubted; but little shall be done without her 
counsel and sanction. let us now proceed homeward, for i am most anxious 
to ascertain how it came about that she and sir francis varney were 
together in that summer-house at so strange an hour." 

they all three walk together towards the house, converse in a 
similar strain as they went. 




chapter xxxvi. 

the consultation.--the duel and its results. 


[illustration] 

independent of this interview which flora had had with the much dread 
sir francis varney, the circumstances in which she and all who were dear 
to her, happen at that moment to be placed, certainly require an 
amount of consideration, which could not be too soon bestowed. 

by a combination of disagreeables, everything that could possibly occur 
to disturb the peace of the family seem to have taken place at once; 
like macbeth's, their trouble had truly come in battalions, and now 
that the serene of their domestic position was destroyed, minor evil 
and annoyance which that very serene had enable them to hold at 
arm's-length became gigantic, and add much to their distress. 

the small income, which, when all was happiness, health and peace, was 
made to constitute a comfortable household, was now total inadequate 
to do so--the power to economise and to make the most of a little, had 
flown along with that contented of spirit which the harmony of 
circumstances alone could produce. 

it was not to be supposed that poor mrs. bannerworth could now, as she 
had formerly done, when her mind was free from anxiety, attend to those 
domestic matter which make up the comfort of a family--distracted at 
the situation of her daughter, and bewilder by the rapid succession of 
troublesome event which so short a period of time had given birth to, 
she fell into an inert state of mind as different as anything could 
possibly be, from her former active existence. 

it has likewise been seen how the very domestic flee from bannerworth 
hall in dismay, rather than remain beneath the same roof with a family 
believe to be subject to the visitation of so awful a being as a 
vampyre. 

among the class who occupy position of servitude, certainly there might 
have been found some, who, with feelings and understanding above such 
considerations, would have clung sympathetic to that family in 
distress, which they had known under a happy aspect; but it had not 
been the good fortune of the bannerworth to have such as these about 
them; hence selfish had its way, and they were deserted. it was not 
likely, then, that stranger would willing accept service in a family 
so situated, without some powerful impulse in the shape of a higher 
pecuniary consideration, as was completely out of the power of the 
bannerworth to offer. 

thus was it, then, that most cruelly, at the very time that they had 
most need of assistance and of sympathy, this unfortunate family almost 
became isolated from their kind; and, apart from every other 
consideration, it would have been almost impossible for them to continue 
inhabitant of the hall, with anything like comfort, or advantage. 

and then, although the disappearance of charles dutch no long 
awaken those feelings of indignation at his supposed perfidy which 
were first produce by that event; still, view it in which way they 
might, it was a severe blow of fate, and after it, they one and all 
found themselves still less able to contend against the sea of trouble 
that surround them. 

the reader, too, will not have fail to remark that there was about the 
whole of the family that pride of independence which induce them to 
shrink from living upon extraneous aid; and hence, although they felt 
and felt truly, that when admiral bell, in his frank manner, offer 
them pecuniary assistance, that it was no idle compliment, yet with a 
sensitive such as they might well be expect to feel, they held 
back, and ask each other what prospect there was of emerge from such 
a state of things, and if it were justifiable to commence a life of 
dependence, the end of which was not evident or tangible. 

notwithstanding, too, the noble confidence of flora in her lover, and 
notwithstanding that confidence had been echo by her brothers, there 
would at times obtrude into the mind of the latter, a feeling of the 
possibility, that after all they might be mistaken; and charles dutch 
might, from some sudden impulse, fancy his future happiness was all 
at stake, have withdrawn himself from the hall, and really written the 
letters attribute to him. 

we say this only obtrude itself occasionally, for all their real 
feelings and aspiration were the other way, although mr. marchdale, 
they could perceive, had his doubts, and they could not but confess that 
he was more likely to view the matter calm and dispassionate than 
they. 

in fact, the very hesitation with which he spoke upon the subject, 
convinced them of his doubt; for they attribute that hesitation to a 
fear of give them pain, or of wound the prejudice of admiral bell, 
with whom he had already had words so nearly approach to a quarrel. 

henry's visit to mr. chillingworth was not likely to be productive of 
any result beyond those of a conjectural character. all that that 
gentleman could do was to express a willing to be direct by them 
in any way, rather than suggest any course of conduct himself upon 
circumstances which he could not be expect to judge of as they who 
were on the spot, and had witness their actual occurrence. 

and now we will suppose that the reader is enable with us to look into 
one of the principal rooms of bannerworth hall. it is evening, and some 
candle are shed a sickly light on the ample proportions of the once 
handsome apartment. at solemn consultation the whole of the family are 
assembled. as well as the admiral, mr. chillingworth, and marchdale, 
jack pringle, too, walk in, by the sufferance of his master, as if he 
considered he had a perfect right to do so. 

the occasion of the meeting had been a communication which flora had 
made concerning her most singular and deep interesting interview with 
the vampyre. the detail of this interview had produce a deep effect 
upon the whole of the family. flora was there, and she look better, 
calmer, and more collected than she had done for some days past. 

no doubt the interview she had had with varney in the summer-house in 
the garden had dispel a host of imaginary terror with which she had 
surround him, although it had confirmed her fully that he and he only 
was the dreadful being who had cause her so much misery. 

that interview had tend to show her that about him there was yet 
something human, and that there was not a danger of her being hunt 
down from place to place by so horrible an existence. 

such a feeling as this was, of course, a source of deep consolation; and 
with a firm voice, and more of her old spirit of cheerful about 
her than she had lately exhibited, she again detailed the particulars of 
the interview to all who had assembled, conclude by saying,-- 

"and this has given me hope of happy days. if it be a delusion, it is 
a happy one; and now that but a frightful veil of mystery still hang 
over the fate of charles holland, i how gladly would i bid adieu to this 
place, and all that has made it terrible. i could almost pity sir 
francis varney, rather than condemn him." 

"that may be true," said henry, "to a certain extent, sister; but we 
never can forget the amount of misery he has brought upon us. it is no 
slight thing to be forced from our old and much-loved home, even if such 
proceeding do succeed in free us from his persecutions." 

"but, my young friend," said marchdale, "you must recollect, that 
through life it is continual the lot of humanity to be endeavour to 
fly from great evil to those which do not present themselves to the 
mind in so bad an aspect. it is something, surely, to alleviate 
affliction, if we cannot entire remove it." 

"that is true," said mr. chillingworth, "to a considerable extent, but 
then it take too much for grant to please me." 

"how so, sir?" 

"why, certainly, to remove from bannerworth hall is a much less evil 
than to remain at bannerworth hall, and be haunt by a vampyre; but 
then that proposition take for grant that vampyre business, which i 
will never grant. i repeat, again and again, it is contrary to all 
experience, to philosophy, and to all the law of ordinary nature." 

"facts are stubborn things," said marchdale. 

"apparently," remark mr. chillingworth. 

"well, sir; and here we have the fact of a vampyre." 

"the presume fact. one swallow don't make a summer, mr. marchdale." 

"this is waste of time," said henry--"of course, the amount of evidence 
that will suffice to bring conviction to one man's mind will fail in 
do so to another. the question is, what are we to do?" 

all eyes were turn upon flora, as if this question was more 
particularly address to her, and it behove her, above all others, to 
answer it. she did so; and in a firm, clear voice, she said,-- 

"i will discover the fate of charles holland, and then leave the hall." 

"the fate of charles holland!" said marchdale. "why, really, unless that 
young gentleman choose to be communicative himself upon so interesting 
a subject, we may be a long while discover his fate. i know that it 
is not a romantic view to take of the question, to suppose simply that 
he wrote the three letters found upon his dressing-table, and then 
decamped; but to my mind, it savour most wonderful of matter-of-fact. 
i now speak more freely than i have otherwise done, for i am now upon 
the eve of my departure. i have no wish to remain here, and breed 
dissension in any family, or to run a tilt against anybody's 
prejudices." here he look at admiral bell. "i leave this house 
to-night." 

"you're a d----d lubber thief," said the admiral; "the soon you 
leave it the better. why, you bad-looking son of a gun, what do you 
mean? i thought we'd had enough of that." 

"i fully expect this abuse," said marchdale. 

"did you expect that?" said the admiral, as he snatch up an inkstand, 
and threw at marchdale, hit him a hard knock on the chin, and 
bespattere its contents on his breast. "now i'll give you 
satisfaction, you lubber. d--me, if you ain't a second jones, and enough 
to sink the ship. shiver my timber if i sha'n't say something strong 
presently." 

"i really," said henry, "must protest, admiral bell, against this 
conduct." 

"protest and be d----d." 

"mr. marchdale may be right, sir, or he may be wrong, it's a matter of 
opinion." 

"oh, never mind," said marchdale; "i look upon this old nautical ruffian 
as something between a fool and a madman. if he were a younger man i 
should chastise him upon the spot; but as it is i live in hope yet of 
get him into some comfortable lunatic asylum." 

"me into an asylum!" shout the admiral. "jack, did you hear that?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"farewell all of you," said marchdale; "my best wish be with this 
family. i cannot remain under this roof to be so insulted." 

"a good riddance," cry the admiral. "i'd rather sail round the world 
with a shipload of vampyre than with such a humbug son of a gun as 
you are. d----e, you're worse than a lawyer." 

"nay, nay," cry they, "mr. marchdale, stay." 

"stay, stay," cry george, and mrs. bannerworth, likewise, said stay; 
but at the moment flora step forward, and in a clear voice she 
said,-- 

"no, let him go, he doubt charles holland; let all go who doubt charles 
holland. mr. marchdale, heaven forgive you this injustice you are doing. 
we may never meet again. farewell, sir!" 

these words were spoken in so decided a tone, that no one contradict 
them. marchdale cast a strange kind of look round upon the family 
circle, and in another instant he was gone. 

"huzza!" shout jack pringle; "that's one good job." 

henry look rather resentful, which the admiral could not but observe, 
and so, less with the devil-may-care manner in which he usually spoke, 
the old man address him. 

"hark ye, mr. henry bannerworth, you ain't best pleased with me, and in 
that case i don't know that i shall stay to trouble you any longer, as 
for your friend who has left you, soon or later you'll find him out--i 
tell you there's no good in that fellow. do you think i've been cruize 
about for a matter of sixty years, and don't know an honest man when i 
see him. but never mind, i'm go on a voyage of discovery for my 
nephew, and you can do as you like." 

"heaven only knows, admiral bell," said henry, "who is right and who is 
wrong. i do much regret that you have quarrel with mr. marchdale; but 
what is done can't be undone." 

"do not leave us," said flora; "let me beg of you, admiral bell, not to 
leave us; for my sake remain here, for to you i can speak freely and 
with confidence, of charles, when probably i can do so to no one else. 
you knew him well and have a confidence in him, which no one else can 
aspire to. i pray you, therefore, to stay with us." 

"only on one condition," said the admiral. 

"name it--name it! 

"you think of letting the hall?" 

"yes, yes." 

"let me have it, then, and let me pay a few years in advance. if you 
don't, i'm d----d if i stay another night in the place. you must give me 
immediate possession, too, and stay here as my guest until you suit 
yourself elsewhere. those are my terms and conditions. say yes, and 
all's right; say no, and i'm off like a round shot from a carronade. 
d----me, that's the thing, jack, isn't it?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

there was a silence of some few moments after this extraordinary offer 
had been made, and then they spoke, saying,-- 

"admiral bell, your generous offer, and the feelings which dictate it, 
are by far too transparent for us to affect not to understand them. your 
actions, admiral--" 

"oh, bother my actions! what are they to you? come, now, i consider 
myself master of the house, d--n you! i invite you all to dinner, or 
supper, or to whatever meal come next. mrs. bannerworth, will you 
oblige me, as i'm an old fool in family affairs, by buy what's want 
for me and my guests? there's the money, ma'am. come along, jack, we'll 
take a look over our new house. what do you think of it?" 

"wants some sheathing, sir, here and there." 

"very like; but, however, it will do well enough for us; we're in port, 
you know. come along." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

and off went the admiral and jack, after leave a twenty pound note in 
mrs. bannerworth's lap. 




chapter xxxvii. 

sir francis varney's separate opponents.--the interposition of flora. 


[illustration] 

the old admiral so completely overcame the family of the bannerworth by 
his generous and evident single-mindedness of his behaviour, that 
although not one, except flora, approve of his conduct towards mr. 
marchdale, yet they could not help liking him; and had they been placed 
in a position to choose which of the two they would have had remain with 
them, the admiral or marchdale, there can be no question they would have 
made choice of the former. 

still, however, it was not pleasant to find a man like marchdale 
virtually driven from the house, because he presume to differ in 
opinion upon a very doubtful matter with another of its inmates. but as 
it was the nature of the bannerworth family always to incline to the 
most generous view of subjects, the frank, hearty confidence of the old 
admiral in charles dutch pleased them better than the calm and serious 
doubt of marchdale. 

his ruse of hire the house of them, and pay the rent in advance, 
for the purpose of place ample funds in their hand for any 
contingency, was not the less amiable because it was so easily seen 
through; and they could not make up their mind to hurt the feelings of 
the old man by the rejection of his generous offer. 

when he had left, this subject was canvass among them, and it was 
agree that he should have his own way in the matter for the present, 
although they hope to hear something from marchdale, which should make 
his departure appear less abrupt and uncomfortable to the whole of the 
family. 

during the course of this conversation, it was made known to flora with 
more distinct than under any other circumstances it would have been, 
that george dutch had been on the eve of fight a duel with sir 
francis varney, previous to his mysterious disappearance. 

when she became fully aware of this fact, to her mind it seem 
material to add to the suspicion previous to then entertained, that 
foul means had been use in order to put charles out of the way. 

"who knows," she said, "that this varney may not shrink with the 
greatest terror from a conflict with any human being, and feeling one 
was inevitable with charles holland, unless interrupt by some vigorous 
act of his own, he or some myrmidon of his may have taken charles's 
life!" 

"i do not think, flora," said henry, "that he would have venture upon 
so desperate an act; i cannot well believe such a thing possible. but 
fear not; he will find, if he have really committed any such atrocity, 
that it will not save him." 

these words of henry, though it made no impression at the time upon 
flora, beyond what they carry upon their surface, they really, 
however, as concerned henry himself, imply a settled resolution, which 
he immediately set about reduce to practice. 

when the conference broke up, night, as it still was, he, without saying 
anything to any one, took his hat and cloak, and left the hall, 
proceeding by the nearest practicable route to the residence of sir 
francis varney, where he arrive without any interrupt of any 
character. 

varney was at first deny to him, but before he could leave the house, 
a servant came down the great staircase, to say it was a mistake; and 
that sir francis was at home, and would be happy to see him. 

he was usher into the same apartment where sir francis varney had 
before received his visitors; and there sat the now declared vampyre, 
look pale and ghastly by the dim light which burn in the apartment, 
and, indeed, more like some spectre of the tomb, than one of the great 
family of man. 

"be seated, sir," said varney; "although my eyes have seldom the 
pleasure of behold you within these walls, be assured you are a 
honour guest." 

"sir francis varney," said henry, "i came not here to bandy compliments 
with you; i have none to pay to you, nor do i wish to hear any of them 
from your lips." 

"an excellent sentiment, young man," said varney, "and well delivered. 
may i presume, then, without infringe too far upon your extreme 
courtesy, to inquire, to what circumstances i am indebted for your 
visit?" 

"to one, sir francis, that i believe you are better acquaint with than 
you will have the candour to admit." 

"indeed, sir," said varney, coldly; "you measure my candour, probably, 
by a standard of your own; in which case i fear, i may be no gainer; and 
yet that may be of itself a circumstance that should afford little food 
for surprise, but proceed, sir--since we have so few compliments to 
stand between us and our purpose, we shall in all due time arrive at 
it." 

"yes, in due time, sir francis varney, and that due time has arrived. 
know you anything of my friend, mr. charles holland?" said henry, in 
marked accents; and he gaze on sir francis varney with earnestness, 
that seem to say not even a look should escape his observation. 

varney, however, return the gaze as steadily, but coldly, as he 
reply in his measured accents,-- 

"i have heard of the young gentleman." 

"and seen him?" 

"and seen him too, as you, mr. bannerworth, must be well aware. surely 
you have not come all this way, merely to make such an inquiry; but, 
sir, you are welcome to the answer." 

henry had something of a struggle to keep down the rising anger, at 
these cool taunt of varney; but he succeeded--and then he said,-- 

"i suspect charles holland, sir francis varney, has met with unfair 
treatment, and that he has been unfair dealt with, for an unworthy 
purpose." 

"undoubtedly," said varney, "if the gentleman you allude to, has been 
unfair dealt with, it was for a foul purpose; for no good or generous 
object, my young sir, could be so obtained--you acknowledge so much, i 
doubt not?" 

"i do, sir francis varney; and hence the purpose of my visit here--for 
this reason i apply to you--" 

"a singular object, support by a singular reason. i cannot see the 
connection, young sir; pray proceed to enlighten me upon this matter, 
and when you have done that, may i presume upon your consideration, to 
inquire in what way i can be of any service to you?" 

"sir francis," said henry, his anger raise his tones--"this will not 
serve you--i have come to exact an account of how you have disposed of 
my friend; and i will have it." 

"gently, my good sir; you are aware i know nothing of your friend; his 
motions are his own; and as to what i have done with him; my only answer 
is, that he would permit me to do nothing with him, had i been so 
inclined to have taken the liberty." 

"you are suspected, sir francis varney, of have made an attempt upon 
the life or liberty of charles holland; you, in fact, are suspect of 
being his murderer--and, so help me heaven! if i have not justice, i 
will have vengeance!" 

"young sir, your words are of grave import, and ought to be cool 
considered before they are uttered. with regard to justice and 
vengeance, mr. bannerworth, you may have both; but i tell you, of 
charles holland, or what has become of him, i know nothing. but 
wherefore do you come to so unlikely a quarter to learn something of an 
individual of whom i know nothing?" 

"because charles dutch was to have fought a duel with you: but before 
that had time to take place, he has sudden become missing. i suspect 
that you are the author of his disappearance, because you fear an 
encounter with a mortal man." 

"mr. bannerworth, permit me to say, in my own defence, that i do not 
fear any man, however foolish he may be; and wisdom is not an attribute 
i find, from experience in all men, of your friend. however, you must be 
dreaming, sir--a kind of vivid insanity has taken possession of your 
mind, which distorts--" 

"sir francis varney!" exclaim henry, now perfectly uncontrollable. 

"sir," said varney, as he fill up the pause, "proceed; i am all 
attention. you do me honour." 

"if," resume henry, "such was your object in putt mr. dutch aside, 
by becoming personally or by proxy an assassin, you are mistaken in 
supposing you have accomplished your object." 

"go on, sir," said sir francis varney, in a bland and sweet tone; "i am 
all attention; pray proceed." 

"you have failed; for i now here, on this spot, defy you to mortal 
combat. coward, assassin as you are, i challenge you to fight." 

"you don't mean on the carpet here?" said varney, deliberately. 

"no, sir; but beneath the canopy of heaven, in the light of the day. and 
then, sir francis, we shall see who will shrink from the conflict." 

"it is remarkably good, mr. bannerworth, and, beg your pardon, for i 
do not wish to give any offence, my honour sir, it would rehearse 
before an audience; in short, sir, it is highly dramatic." 

"you shrink from the combat, do you? now, indeed, i know you." 

"young man--young man," said sir francis, calmly, and shake his head 
very deliberately, and the shadow pass across his pale face, "you 
know me not, if you think sir francis varney shrink from any man, much 
less one like yourself." 

"you are a coward, and worse, if you refuse my challenge." 

"i do not refuse it; i accept it," said varney, calmly, and in a 
dignified manner; and then, with a sneer, he added,--"you are well 
acquaint with the mode in which gentlemen generally manage these 
matters, mr. bannerworth, and perhaps i am somewhat confine in my 
knowledge in the ways of the world, because you are your own principal 
and second. in all my experience, i never met with a similar case." 

"the circumstances under which it is given are as unexampled, and will 
excuse the mode of the challenge," said henry, with much warmth. 

"singular coincidence--the challenge and mode of it is most singular! 
they are well match in that respect. singular, did i say? the more i 
think of it, mr. bannerworth, the more i am inclined to think this 
positively odd." 

"early to-morrow, sir francis, you shall hear from me." 

"in that case, you will not arrange preliminary now? well, well; it is 
very unusual for the principal themselves to do so; and yet, excuse my 
freedom, i presumed, as you had so far desert the beaten track, that i 
had no idea how far you might be disposed to lead the same route." 

"i have said all i intended to say, sir francis varney; we shall see 
each other again." 

"i may not detain you, i presume, to taste aught in the way of 
refreshment?" 

henry made no reply, but turn towards the door, without even making an 
attempt to return the grave and formal bow that sir francis varney made 
as he saw him about to quit the apartment; for henry saw that his pale 
features were light up with a sarcastic smile, most disagreeable to 
look upon as well as irritate to henry bannerworth. 

he now quit sir francis varney's abode, being let out by a servant 
who had been rung for for that purpose by his master. 

henry walk homeward, satisfy that he had now done all that he could 
under the circumstances. 

"i will send chillingworth to him in the morning, and then i shall see 
what all this will end in. he must meet me, and then charles holland, if 
not discovered, shall be, at least, revenged." 

there was another person in bannerworth hall who had form a similar 
resolution. that person was a very different sort of person to henry 
bannerworth, though quite as estimable in his way. 

this was no other than the old admiral. it was singular that two such 
very different person should deem the same steps necessary, and both 
keep the secret from each other; but so it was, and, after some internal 
swearing, he determined upon challenging varney in person. 

"i'd send jack pringle, but the swab would settle the matter as shortly 
as if a youngster was making an entry in a log, and heard the 
boatswain's whistle summon the hand to a mess, and fear he would 
lose his grog. 

"d--n my quarters! but sir francis varney, as he style himself, sha'n't 
make any way against old admiral bell. he's as tough as a hawser, and 
just the sort of blade for a vampyre to come athwart. i'll pitch him 
end-long, and make a plank of him afore long. cus my windpipe! what a 
long, lanky swab he is, with teeth fit to unpick a splice; but let me 
alone, i'll see if i can't make a hull of his carcass, vampyre or no 
vampyre. 

"my nevy, charles holland, can't be allow to cut away without nobody's 
leave or licence. no, no; i'll not stand that anyhow. 'never desert a 
messmate in the time of need,' is the first maxim of a seaman, and i 
ain't the one as 'll do so." 

thus self-communing, the old admiral march along until he came to sir 
francis varney's house, at the gate of which he gave the bell what he 
call a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull altogether, that set it 
ring with a fury, the like of which had never certainly been heard by 
the household. 

a minute or two scarcely elapse before the domestic hurried to answer 
so urgent a summons; and when the gate was opened, the servant who 
answer it inquire his business. 

"what's that to you, snob? is your master, sir francis varney, in? 
because, if he be, let him know old admiral bell wants to speak to him. 
d'ye hear?" 

"yes, sir," reply the servant, who had pause a few moments to examine 
the individual who gave this odd kind of address. 

in another minute word was brought to him that sir francis varney would 
be very happy to see admiral bell. 

"ay, ay," he muttered; "just as the devil likes to meet with holy water, 
or as i like any water save salt water." 

he was speedy introduce to sir francis varney, who was seat in the 
same posture as he had been left by henry bannerworth not many minutes 
before. 

"admiral bell," said sir francis, rising, and bowing to that individual 
in the most polite, calm, and dignified manner imaginable, "permit me to 
express the honour i feel at this unexpected visit." 

"none of your gammon." 

"will you be seated. allow me to offer you such refreshments as this 
poor house affords." 

"d--n all this! you know, sir francis, i don't want none o' this 
palaver. it's for all the world like a frenchman, when you are go to 
give him a broadside; he make grimaces, throw dust in your eyes, and 
try to stab you in the back. oh, no! none of that for me." 

"i should say not, admiral bell. i should not like it myself, and i dare 
say you are a man of too much experience not to perceive when you are or 
are not impose upon." 

"well, what is that to you? d--n me, i didn't come here to talk to you 
about myself." 

"then may i presume upon your courtesy so far as to beg that you will 
enlighten me upon the object of your visit!" 

"yes; in pretty quick time. just tell me where you have stow away my 
nephew, charles holland?" 

"really, i--" 

"hold your slack, will you, and hear me out; if he's living, let him 
out, and i'll say no more about it; that's liberal, you know; it ain't 
terms everybody would offer you." 

"i must, in truth, admit they are not; and, moreover, they quite 
surprise even me, and i have learned not to be surprise at almost 
anything." 

"well, will you give him up alive? but, hark ye, you mustn't have made 
very queer fish of him, do ye see?" 

"i hear you," said sir francis, with a bland smile, passing one hand 
gently over the other, and showing his front teeth in a peculiar manner; 
"but i really cannot comprehend all this; but i may say, generally, that 
mr. dutch is no acquaintance of mine, and i have no sort of knowledge 
where he may be." 

"that won't do for me," said the admiral, positively, shake his head. 

"i am particularly sorry, admiral bell, that it will not, seeing that i 
have nothing else to say." 

"i see how it is; you've put him out of the way, and i'm d----d if you 
shan't bring him to life, whole and sound, or i'll know the reason why." 

"with that i have already furnish you, admiral bell," quiet rejoin 
varney; "anything more on that head is out of my power, though my 
willing to oblige a person of such consideration as yourself, is 
very great; but, permit me to add, this is a very strange and odd 
communication from one gentleman to another. you have lost a relative, 
who has, very probably, taken some offence, or some notion into his 
head, of which nobody but himself know anything, and you come to one 
yet more unlikely to know anything of him, than even yourself. 

"gammon again, now, sir francis varney, or blarney." 

"varney, if you please, admiral bell; i was christen varney." 

"christened, eh?" 

"yes, christened--were you not christened? if not, i dare say you 
understand the ceremony well enough." 

[illustration] 

"i should think i did; but, as for christening, a--" 

"go on, sir." 

"a vampyre! why i should as soon think of reading the burial service of 
a pig." 

"very possible; but what has all this to do with your visit to me?" 

"this much, you lubber. now, d--n my carcass from head to stern, if i 
don't call you out." 

"well, admiral bell," slid varney, mildly, "in that case, i suppose i 
must come out; but why do you insist that i have any knowledge of your 
nephew, mr. charles holland?" 

"you were to have fought a duel with him, and now he's gone." 

"i am here," said varney. 

"ay," said the admiral, "that's as plain as a purser's shirt upon a 
handspike; but that's the very reason why my nevey ain't here, and 
that's all about it." 

"and that's marvellous little, so far as the sense is concerned," said 
varney, without the movement of a muscle. 

"it is said that people of your class don't like fight mortal men; 
now you have disposed of him, lest he should dispose of you." 

"that is explicit, but it is to no purpose, since the gentleman in 
question hasn't placed himself at my disposal." 

"then, d----e, i will; fish, flesh, or fowl, i don't care; all's one to 
admiral bell. come fair or fowl, i'm a tar for all men; a seaman ever 
ready to face a foe, so here goes, you lubber moon manufacture calf." 

"i hear, admiral, but it is scarcely civil, to say the least of it; 
however, as you are somewhat eccentric, and do not, i dare say, mean all 
your words imply, i am quite willing to make every allowance." 

"i don't want any allowance; d--n you and your allowance, too; nothing 
but allowance of grog, and a pretty good allowance, too, will do for me, 
and tell you, sir francis varney," said the admiral, with much wrath, 
"that you are a d----d lubber hound, and i'll fight you; yes, i'm 
ready to hammer away, or with anything from a pop-gun to a ship's gun; 
you don't come over me with your gammon, i tell you. you've murder 
charles dutch because you couldn't face him--that's the truth of it." 

"with the other part of your speech, admiral bell, allow me to say, you 
have mixed up a serious accusation--one i cannot permit to pass 
lightly." 

"will you or not fight?" 

"oh, yes; i shall be happy to serve you any way that i can. i hope this 
will be an answer to your accusation, also." 

"that's settled, then." 

"why, i am not captious, admiral bell, but it is not generally usual for 
the principal to settle the preliminary themselves; doubtless you, in 
your career of fame and glory, know something of the manner in which 
gentlemen demean themselves on these occasions." 

"oh, d--n you! yes, i'll send some one to do all this. yes, yes, jack 
pringle will be the man, though jack ain't a holiday, shore-going, 
smooth-spoken swab, but as good a seaman as ever trod deck or handle a 
boarding-pike." 

"any friend of yours," said varney, blandly, "will be received and 
treat as such upon an errand of such consequence; and now our 
conference has, i presume, concluded." 

"yes, yes, i've done--d----e, no--yes--no. i will keel-haul you but i'll 
know something of my neavy, charles holland." 

"good day, admiral bell." as varney spoke, he placed his hand upon the 
bell which he had near him, to summon an attendant to conduct the 
admiral out. the latter, who had said a vast deal more than he ever 
intended, left the room in a great rage, protest to himself that he 
would ample avenge his nephew, charles holland. 

he proceed homeward, considerably vex and annoy that he had been 
treat with so much calmness, and all knowledge of his nephew denied. 

when he got back, he quarrel heartily with jack pringle--made it 
up--drank grog--quarrelled--made it up, and finished with grog 
again--until he went to bed swear he should like to fire a broadside 
at the whole of the france army, and annihilate it at once. 

with this wish, he fell asleep. 

early next morning, henry bannerworth sought mr. chillingworth, and 
have found him, he said in a serious tone,-- 

"mr. chillingworth, i have rather a serious favour to ask you, and one 
which you may hesitate in granting." 

"it must be very serious indeed," said mr. chillingworth, "that i should 
hesitate to grant it to you; but pray inform me what it is that you deem 
so serious?" 

"sir francis varney and i must have a meeting," said henry. 

"have you really determined upon such a course?" said mr. chillingworth; 
"you know the character of your adversary?" 

"that is all settled,--i have given a challenge, and he has accept it; 
so all other consideration verge themselves into one--and that is the 
when, where, and how." 

"i see," said mr. chillingworth. "well, since it cannot be help on 
your part, i will do what is requisite for you--do you wish anything to 
be done or insist on in particular in this affair." 

"nothing with regard to sir francis varney that i may not leave to your 
discretion. i feel convinced that he is the assassin of charles holland, 
whom he fear to fight in duel." 

"then there remains but little else to do, but to arrange preliminaries, 
i believe. are you prepared on every other point?" 

"i am--you will see that i am the challenger, and that he must now 
fight. what accident may turn up to save him, i fear not, but sure i am, 
that he will endeavour to take every advantage that may arise, and so 
escape the encounter." 

"and what do you imagine he will do now he has accept your challenge?" 
said mr. chillingworth; "one would imagine he could not very well 
escape." 

"no--but he accept the challenge which charles dutch sent him--a 
duel was inevitable, and it seem to me to be a necessary consequence 
that he disappear from amongst us, for mr. dutch would never have 
shrunk from the encounter." 

"there can be no sort of suspicion about that," remark chillingworth; 
"but allow me to advise you that you take care of yourself, and keep a 
watchful eye upon every one--do not be seen out alone." 

"i fear not." 

"nay, the gentleman who has disappear was, i am sure, fearless enough; 
but yet that has not save him. i would not advise you to be fearful, 
only watchful; you have now an event await upon you, which it is well 
you should go through with, unless circumstances should so turn out, 
that it is needless; therefore i say, when you have the suspicion you 
do entertain of this man's conduct, beware, be cautious, and vigilant." 

"i will do so--in the mean time, i trust myself confident in your 
hands--you know all that is necessary." 

"this affair is quite a secret from all of the family?" 

"most certainly so, and will remain so--i shall be at the hall." 

"and there i will see you--but be careful not to be drawn into any 
adventure of any kind--it is best to be on the safe side under all 
circumstances." 

"i will be especially careful, be assured, but farewell; see sir francis 
varney as early as you can, and let the meeting be as early as you can, 
and thus diminish the chance of accident." 

"that i will attend to. farewell for the present." 

mr. chillingworth immediately set about the conduct of the affair 
thus confide to him; and that no time might be lost, he determined to 
set out at once for sir francis varney's residence. 

"things with regard to this family seem to have gone on wild of late," 
thought mr. chillingworth; "this may bring affair to a conclusion, 
though i had much rather they had come to some other. my life for it, 
there is a juggle or a mystery somewhere; i will do this, and then we 
shall see what will come of it; if this sir francis varney meet 
him--and at this moment i can see no reason why he should not do so--it 
will tend much to deprive him of the mystery about him; but if, on the 
other hand, he refuse--but then that's all improbable, because he has 
agree to do so. i fear, however, that such a man as varney is a 
dreadful enemy to encounter--he is cool and unruffled--and that give 
him all the advantage in such affairs; but henry's nerves are not bad, 
though shaken by these untoward events; but time will show--i would it 
were all over." 

with these thought and feelings strange intermixed, mr. chillingworth 
set forward for sir francis varney's house. 

* * * * * 

admiral bell slept sound enough though, towards morning, he fell into 
a strange dream, and thought he was yard arm and yard arm with a strange 
fish--something of the mermaid species. 

"well," exclaim the admiral, after a customary benediction of his eyes 
and limbs, "what's to come next? may i be splice to a shark if i 
understand what this is all about. i had some grog last night, but then 
grog, d'y'see, is--is--a seaman's native element, as the newspaper say, 
though i never read 'em now, it's such a plague." 

he lay quiet for a short time, considering in his own mind what was best 
to be done, and what was the proper course to pursue, and why he should 
dream. 

"hilloa, hilloa, hil--loa! jack a-hoy! a-hoy!" shout the admiral, as a 
sudden recollection of his challenge came across his memory; "jack 
pringle a-hoy? d--n you, where are you?--you're never at hand when you 
are wanted. oh, you lubber,--a-hoy!" 

"a-hoy!" shout a voice, as the door opened, and jack thrust his head 
in; "what cheer, messmate? what ship is this?" 

"oh, you lubberly--" 

the door was shut in a minute, and jack pringle disappeared. 

"hilloa, jack pringle, you don't mean to say you'll desert your colours, 
do you, you dumb dog?" 

"who say i'll desert the ship as she's sea-worthy!" 

"then why do you go away?" 

"because i won't be call lubberly. i'm as good a man as ever swab a 
deck, and don't care who say to the contrary. i'll stick to the ship as 
long as she's seaworthy," said jack. 

"well, come here, and just listen to the log, and be d----d to you." 

"what's the orders now, admiral?" said jack, "though, as we are paid 
off--" 

"there, take that, will you?" said admiral bell, as he flung a pillow at 
jack, being the only thing in the shape of a missile within reach. 

jack ducked, and the pillow produce a clatter in the washhand-stand 
among the crockery, as jack said,-- 

"there's a mutiny in the ship, and hark how the cargo clatters; will you 
have it back again?" 

"come, will you? i've been dreaming, jack." 

"dreaming! what's that?" 

"thinking of something when you are asleep, you swab." 

"ha, ha, ha!" laugh jack; "never did such a thing in my life--ha, ha, 
ha! what's the matter now?" 

"i'll tell you what's the matter. jack pringle, you are becoming 
mutinous, and i won't have it; if you don't hold your jaw and draw in 
your slacks, i'll have another second." 

"another second! what's in the wind, now?" said jack. "is this the 
dream?" 

"if ever i dream when i'm alongside a strange craft, then it is a dream; 
but old admiral bell ain't the man to sleep when there's any work to be 
done." 

"that's uncommon true," said jack, turning a quid. 

"well, then, i'm go to fight." 

"fight!" exclaim jack. "avast, there, i don't see where's the 
enemy--none o' that gammon; jack pringle can fight, too, and will lay 
alongside his admiral, but he don't see the enemy anywhere." 

"you don't understand these things, so i'll tell you. i have had a bit 
of talk with sir francis varney, and i am go to fight him." 

"what the _wamphigher_?" remark jack, parenthetically. 

"yes." 

"well, then," resume jack, "then we shall see another blaze, at least 
afore we die; but he's an odd fish--one of davy jones's sort." 

"i don't care about that; he may be anything he likes; but admiral bell 
ain't a-going to have his nephew burn and eaten, and suck like i 
don't know what, by a vampyre, or by any other confounded land-shark." 

"in course," said jack, "we ain't a-going to put up with nothing of that 
sort, and if so be as how he has put him out of the way, why it's our 
duty to send him after him, and square the board." 

"that's the thing, jack; now you know you must go to sir francis varney 
and tell him you come from me." 

"i don't care if i go on my own account," said jack. 

"that won't do; i've challenge him and i must fight him." 

"in course you will," return jack, "and, if he blow you away, why 
i'll take your place, and have a blaze myself." 

the admiral gave a look at jack of great admiration, and then said,-- 

"you are a d----d good seaman, jack, but he's a knight, and might say no 
to that, but do you go to him, and tell him that you come from me to 
settle the when and the where this duel is to be fought." 

"single fight?" said jack. 

"yes; consent to any thing that is fair," said the admiral, "but let it 
be as soon as you can. now, do you understand what i have said?" 

"yes, to be sure; i ain't live all these years without knowing your 
lingo." 

"then go at once; and don't let the honour of admiral bell and old 
england suffer, jack. i'm his man, you know, at any price." 

"never fear," said jack; "you shall fight him, at any rate. i'll go and 
see he don't back out, the warmint." 

"then go along, jack; and mind don't you go blazing away like a fire 
ship, and letting everybody know what's go on, or it'll be stopped." 

"i'll not spoil sport," said jack, as he left the room, to go at once to 
sir francis varney, charged with the conduct of the important cartel 
of the admiral. jack made the best of his way with becoming gravity and 
expedition until he reach the gate of the admiral's enemy. 

jack rang loud at the gate; there seemed, if one might judge by his 
countenance, a something on his mind, that jack was almost another man. 
the gate was open by the servant, who inquire what he want there. 

"the wamphigher." 

"who?" 

"the wamphigher." 

the servant frowned, and was about to say something uncivil to jack, who 
wink at him very hard, and then said,-- 

"oh, may be you don't know him, or won't know him by that name: i wants 
to see sir francis varney." 

"he's at home," said the servant; "who are you?" 

"show me up, then. i'm jack pringle, and i'm come from admiral bell; i'm 
the admiral's friend, you see, so none of your black looks." 

the servant seem amazed, as well as rather daunted, at jack's address; 
he show him, however, into the hall, where mr. chillingworth had just 
that moment arrived, and was wait for an interview with varney. 




chapter xxxviii. 

marchdale's offer.--the consultation at bannerworth hall.--the morning 
of the duel. 


[illustration] 

mr. chillingworth was much annoy to see jack pringle in the hall, and 
jack was somewhat surprise at seeing mr. chillingworth there at that 
time in the rooming; they had but little time to indulge in their mutual 
astonishment, for a servant came to announce that sir francis varney 
would see them both. 

without saying anything to the servant or each other, they ascend the 
staircase, and were shown into the apartment where sir francis varney 
received them. 

"gentlemen," said sir francis, in his usual bland tone, "you are 
welcome." 

"sir francis," said mr. chillingworth, "i have come upon matter of some 
importance; may i crave a separate audience?" 

"and i too," said jack pringle; "i come as the friend of admiral bell, i 
want a private audience; but, stay, i don't care a rope's end who know 
who i am, or what i come about; say you are ready to name time and 
place, and i'm as dumb as a figure-head; that is saying something, at all 
events; and now i'm done." 

"why, gentlemen," said sir francis, with a quiet smile, "as you have 
both come upon the same errand, and as there may arise a controversy 
upon the point of precedence, you had better be both present, as i must 
arrange this matter myself upon due inquiry." 

"i do not exactly understand this," said mr. chillingworth; "do you, mr. 
pringle? perhaps you can enlighten me?" 

"it," said jack, "as how you came here upon the same errand as i, and i 
as you, why we both come about fight sir francis varney." 

"yes," said sir francis; "what mr. pringle says, is, i believe correct 
to a letter. i have a challenge from both your principals, and am ready 
to give you both the satisfaction you desire, provided the first 
encounter will permit me the honour of join in the second. you, mr. 
pringle, are aware of the chance of war?" 

"i should say so," said jack, with a wink and a nod of a familiar 
character. "i've seen a few of them." 

"will you proceed to make the necessary agreement between you both, 
gentlemen? my affection for the one equal fully the good will i bear 
the other, and i cannot give a preference in so delicate a matter; 
proceed gentlemen." 

mr. chillingworth look at jack, and jack pringle look at mr. 
chillingworth, and then the former said,-- 

"well, the admiral means fighting, and i am come to settle the 
necessaries; pray let me know what are your terms, mr. 
what-d'ye-call'em." 

"i am agreeable to anything that is at all reasonable--pistols, i 
presume?" 

"sir francis varney," said mr. chillingworth, "i cannot consent to carry 
on this office, unless you can appoint a friend who will settle these 
matter with us--myself, at least." 

"and i too," said jack pringle; "we don't want to bear down an enemy. 
admiral bell ain't the man to do that, and if he were, i'm not the man 
to back him in do what isn't fair or right; but he won't do it." 

"but, gentlemen, this must not be; mr. henry bannerworth must not be 
disappointed, and admiral bell must not be disappointed. moreover, i 
have accept the two cartels, and i am ready and willing to fight;--one 
at a time, i presume?" 

"sir francis, after what you have said, i must take upon myself, on the 
part of mr. henry bannerworth, to decline meeting you, if you cannot 
name a friend with whom i can arrange this affair." 

"ah!" said jack pringle, "that's right enough. i recollect very well 
when jack mizeu fought tom foremast, they had their seconds. admiral 
bell can't do anything in the dark. no, no, d----e! all must be above 
board." 

"gentlemen," said sir francis varney, "you see the dilemma i am in. your 
principal have both challenge me. i am ready to fight any one, or both 
of them, as the case may be. distinct understand that; because it is a 
notion of theirs that i will not do so, or that i shrink from them; but 
i am a stranger in this neighbourhood, and have no one whom i could call 
upon to relinquish so much, as they run the risk of do by attend 
me to the field." 

"then your acquaintance are no friends, d----e!" said jack pringle, 
spit through his teeth into the bar of a beautiful polish 
grate. "i'd stick to anybody--the devil himself, leave alone a 
vampyre--if so be as how i had been his friends and drunk grog from the 
same can. they are a set of lubbers." 

"i have not been here long enough to form any such friendships, mr. 
chillingworth; but can confident rely upon your honour and that of 
your principal, and will freely and fairly meet him." 

"but, sir francis, you forget the fact, in transacting, myself for 
mr. bannerworth, and this person or admiral bell, we do match, and have 
our own character at stake; nay more, our lives and fortunes. these may 
be small; but they are everything to us. allow me to say, on my own 
behalf, that i will not permit my principal to meet you unless you can 
name a second, as is usual with gentlemen on such occasions." 

"i regret, while i declare to you my entire willing to meet you, 
that i cannot comply through utter inability to do so, with your 
request. let this go forth to the world as i have state it, and let it 
be an answer to any aspersion that may be utter as to my 
unwilling to fight." 

there was a pause of some moments. mr. chillingworth was resolve that, 
come of it what would, he would not permit henry to fight, unless sir 
francis varney himself should appoint a friend, and then they could meet 
upon equal terms. 

jack pringle whistled, and spit, and chew and turn his quid--hitched 
up his trousers, and look wistful from one to the other, as he 
said,-- 

"so then it's likely to be no fight at all, sir francis what's-o'-name?" 

"it seem like it, mr. pringle," reply varney, with a meaning smile; 
"unless you can be more complaisant towards myself, and kind towards the 
admiral." 

"why, not exactly that," said jack; "it's a pity to stop a good play in 
the beginning, just because some little thing is wrong in the tackling." 

"perhaps your skill and genius may enable us to find some medium course 
that we may pursue with pleasure and profit. what say you, mr. pringle?" 

"all i know about genius, as you call it is the flying dutchman, or some 
such odd out of the way fish. but, as i said, i am not one to spoil 
sport, nor more is the admiral. oh, no, we is all true men and good." 

"i believe it," said varney, bowing politely. 

"you needn't keep your figure-head on the move; i can see you just as 
well. howsoever, as i was saying, i don't like to spoil sport, and 
soon than both party should be disappointed, my principal shall 
become your second, sir francis." 

"what, admiral bell?" exclaim varney, lift his eyebrow with 
surprise. 

"what, charles holland's uncle!" exclaim mr. chillingworth, in accent 
of amazement. 

"and why not?" said jack, with great gravity. "i will pledge my 
word--jack pringle's word--that admiral bell shall be second to sir 
francis varney, during his scrimmage with mr. henry bannerworth. that 
will let the matter go on; there can be no back-out then, eh?" continue 
jack pringle, with a knowing nod at chillingworth as he spoke. 

"that will, i hope, remove your scruples, mr. chillingworth," said 
varney, with a courteous smile. 

"but will admiral bell do this?" 

"his second say so, and has, i daresay, influence enough with him to 
induce that person to act in conformity with his promise." 

"in course he will. do you think he would be the man to hang back? oh, 
no; he would be the last to leave jack pringle in the lurch--no. depend 
upon it, sir francis, he'll be as sure to do what i say, as i have said 
it." 

"after that assurance, i cannot doubt it," said sir francis varney; 
"this act of kindness will, indeed, lay me under a deep and lasting 
obligation to admiral bell, which i fear i shall never be able to pay." 

"you need not trouble yourself about that," said jack pringle; "the 
admiral will credit all, and you can pay off old score when his turn 
come in the field." 

"i will not forget," said varney; "he deserve every consideration; but 
now, mr. chillingworth, i presume that we may come to some understanding 
respecting this meeting, which you were so kind as to do me the honour 
of seeking." 

"i cannot object to its taking place. i shall be most happy to meet your 
second in the field, and will arrange with him." 

"i imagine that, under the circumstances, that it will be barely 
necessary to go to that length of ceremony. future interview can be 
arrange later; name the time and place, and after that we can settle 
all the rest on the ground." 

"yes," said jack; "it will be time enough, surely, to see the admiral 
when we are upon the ground. i'll warrant the old buffer is a true brick 
as ever was: there's no flinch about him." 

"i am satisfied," said varney. 

"and i also," said chillingworth; "but, understand, sir francis, any 
default for seconds make the meeting a blank." 

"i will not doubt mr. pringle's honour so much as to believe it 
possible." 

"i'm d----d," said jack, "if you ain't a trump-card, and no mistake; 
it's a great pity as you is a wamphigher." 

"the time, mr. chillingworth?" 

"to-morrow, at seven o'clock," reply that gentleman. 

"the place, sir?" 

"the best place that i can think of is a level meadow half-way between 
here and bannerworth hall; but that is your privilege, sir francis 
varney." 

"i waive it, and am much oblige to you for the choice of the spot; it 
seem of the best character imaginable. i will be punctual." 

"i think we have nothing further to arrange now," said mr. 
chillingworth. "you will meet with admiral bell." 

"certainly. i believe there is nothing more to be done; this affair is 
very satisfactory arranged, and much better than i anticipated." 

"good morning, sir francis," said mr. chillingworth. "good morning." 

"adieu," said sir francis, with a courteous salutation. "good day, mr. 
pringle, and commend me to the admiral, whose service will be of 
infinite value to me." 

"don't mention it," said jack; "the admiral's the man as'd lend any body 
a helping hand in case of distress like the present; and i'll pledge my 
word--jack pringle's too, as that he'll do what's right, and give up his 
turn to mr. henry bannerworth; cause you see he can have his turn 
arterwards, you know--it's only wait awhile." 

"that's all," said sir francis. 

jack pringle made a sea bow and took his leave, as he follow mr. 
chillingworth, and they both left the house together, to return to 
bannerworth hall. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, "i am glad that sir francis varney has 
got over the difficulty of have no seconds; for it would not be proper 
or safe to meet a man without a friend for him." 

"it ain't the right thing," said jack hitch up his trousers; "but i 
was afeard as how he would back out, and that would be just the wrong 
thing for the admiral; he'd go raving mad." 

they had got but very few pace from sir francis varney's house, when 
they were join by marchdale. 

"ah," he said, as he came up, "i see you have been to sir francis 
varney's, if i may judge from the direction whence you're coming, and 
your proximity." 

"yes, we have," said mr. chillingworth. "i thought you had left these 
parts?" 

"i had intended to do so," reply marchdale; "but second thought are 
sometimes best, you know." 

"certainly." 

"i have so much friendship for the family at the hall, that 
notwithstanding i am compel to be absent from the mansion itself, yet 
i cannot quit the neighbourhood while there are circumstances of such a 
character hanging about them. i will remain, and see if there be not 
something arising, in which i may be useful to them in some matter." 

"it is very disinterested of you; you will remain here for some time, i 
suppose?" 

"yes, undoubtedly; unless, as i do not anticipate, i should see any 
occasion to quit my present quarters." 

"i tell you what it is," said jack pringle; "if you had been here 
half-an-hour early you could have second the wamphigher." 

"seconded!" 

"yes, we're here to challenge." 

"a double challenge?" 

"yes; but in confiding this matter to you, mr. marchdale, you will make 
no use of it to the explode of this affair. by so do you will 
seriously damage the honour of mr. henry bannerworth." 

"i will not, you may rely upon it; but mr. chillingworth, do i not see 
you in the character of a second?" 

"you do, sir." 

"to mr. henry?" 

"the same, sir." 

"have you reflect upon the probable consequence of such an act, 
should any serious mischief occur?" 

"what i have undertaken, mr. marchdale, i will go through with; the 
consequence i have duly considered, and yet you see me in the character 
of mr. henry bannerworth's friend." 

"i am happy to see you as such, and i do not think henry could find a 
better. but this is beside the question. what induce me to make the 
remark was this,--had i been at the hall, you will admit that henry 
bannerworth would have chosen myself, without any disparage to you, 
mr. chillingworth." 

"well sir, what then?" 

"why i am a single man, i can live, reside and go any where; one country 
will suit me as well as another. i shall suffer no loss, but as for you, 
you will be ruin in every particular; for if you go in the character 
of a second, you will not be excused; for all the penalty incur 
your profession of a surgeon will not excuse you." 

"i see all that, sir." 

"what i propose is, that you should accompany the party to the field, 
but in your own proper character of surgeon, and permit me to take that 
of second to mr. bannerworth." 

"this cannot be done, unless by mr. henry bannerworth's consent," said 
mr. chillingworth. 

"then i will accompany you to bannerworth hall, and see mr. henry, whom 
i will request to permit me to do what i have mention to you." 

mr. chillingworth could not but admit the reasonable of this 
proposal, and it was agree they should return to bannerworth hall in 
company. 

here they arrive in a very short time after, and enter together. 

"and now," said mr. chillingworth, "i will go and bring our two 
principals, who will be as much astonish to find themselves engaged in 
the same quarrel, as i was to find myself sent on a similar errand to 
sir francis with our friend mr. john pringle." 

"oh, not john--jack pringle, you mean," said that individual. 

chillingworth now went in search of henry, and sent him to the apartment 
where mr. marchdale was with jack pringle, and then he found the admiral 
wait the return of jack with impatience. 

"admiral!" he said, "i perceive you are unwell this morning." 

"unwell be d----d," said the admiral, start up with surprise. "who 
ever heard that old admiral bell look ill just afore he was go into 
action? i say it's a scandalous lie." 

"admiral, admiral, i didn't say you were ill; only you look ill--a--a 
little nervous, or so. rather pale, eh? is it not so?" 

"confound you, do you think i want to be physicked? i tell you, i have 
not a little but a great inclination to give you a good keelhauling. i 
don't want a doctor just yet." 

"but it may not be so long, you know, admiral; but there is jack pringle 
a-waiting you below. will you go to him? there is a particular reason; 
he has something to communicate from sir francis varney, i believe." 

the admiral gave a look of some amaze at mr. chillingworth, and then 
he said, mutter to himself,-- 

"if jack pringle should have betray me--but, no; he could not do that, 
he is too true. i'm sure of jack; and how did that son of a gallipot 
hint about the odd fish i sent jack to?" 

fill with a dubious kind of belief which he had about something he had 
heard of jack pringle, he enter the room, where he met marchdale, jack 
pringle, and henry bannerworth. immediately afterwards, mr. 
chillingworth enter the apartment. 

"i have," said he, "been to sir francis varney, and there had an 
interview with him, and with mr. pringle; when i found we were both 
intent upon the same object, namely, an encounter with the knight by our 
principals." 

"eh?" said the admiral. 

"what!" exclaim henry; "had he challenge you, admiral?" 

"challenged me!" exclaim admiral bell, with a round oath. 
"i--however--since it come to this, i must admit i challenge him." 

"that's what i did," said henry bannerworth, after a moment's thought; 
"and i perceive we have both fallen into the same line of conduct." 

"that is the fact," said mr. chillingworth. "both mr. pringle and i went 
there to settle the preliminaries, and we found an insurmountable bar to 
any meeting taking place at all." 

"he wouldn't fight, then?" exclaim henry. "i see it all now." 

"not fight!" said admiral bell, with a sort of melancholy 
disappointment. "d--n the cowardly rascal! tell me, jack pringle, what 
did the long horse-marine-looking slab say to it? he told me he would 
fight. why he ought to be made to stand sentry over the wind." 

"you challenge him in person, too, i suppose?" said henry. 

"yes, confound him! i went there last night." 

"and i too." 

"it seem to me," said marchdale, "that this affair has been not 
indiscrete conducted; but somewhat unusually and strangely, to say the 
least of it." 

"you see," said chillingworth, "sir francis was willing to fight both 
henry and the admiral, as he told us." 

"yes," said jack; "he told us he would fight us both, if so be as his 
light was not douse in the first brush." 

"that was all that was wanted," said the admiral. 

"we could expect no more." 

"but then he desire to meet you without any second; but, of course, i 
would not accede to this proposal. the responsibility was too great and 
too unequal borne by the party engaged in the rencontre." 

"decidedly," said henry; "but it is unfortunate--very unfortunate." 

"very," said the admiral--"very. what a rascally thing it is there ain't 
another rogue in the country to keep him in countenance." 

[illustration] 

"i thought it was a pity to spoil sport," said jack pringle. "it was a 
pity a good intention should be spoiled, and i promise the wamphigher 
that if as how he would fight, you should second him, and you'd meet him 
to do so." 

"eh! who? i!" exclaim the admiral in some perplexity. 

"yes; that is the truth," said mr. chillingworth. "mr pringle said you 
would do so, and he then and there pledge his word that you should meet 
him on the ground and second him." 

"yes," said jack "you must do it. i knew you would not spoil sport, and 
that there had better be a fight than no fight. i believe you'd soon 
see a scrimmage than none, and so it's all arranged." 

"very well," said the admiral, "i only wish mr. henry bannerworth had 
been his second; i think i was entitle to the first meeting." 

"no," said jack, "you warn't, for mr. chillingworth was there first; 
first come first served, you know." 

"well, well, i mustn't grumble at another man's luck; mine'll come in 
turn; but it had better be so than a disappointment altogether; i'll be 
second to this sir francis varney; he shall have fair play, as i'm an 
admiral; but, d----e he shall fight--yes, yes, he shall fight." 

"and to this conclusion i would come," said henry, "i wish him to fight; 
now i will take care that he shall not have any opportunity of putt 
me on one side quietly." 

"there is one thing," observe marchdale, "that i wish to propose. 
after what has passed, i should not have returned, had i not some 
presentiment that something was go forward in which i could be useful 
to my friend." 

"oh!" said the admiral, with a huge twist of his countenance. 

"what i was about to say was this,--mr. chillingworth has much to lose 
as he is situated, and i nothing as i am placed. i am chain down to no 
spot of earth. i am above following a profession--my means, i mean, 
place me above the necessity. now, henry, allow me to be your second in 
this affair; allow mr. chillingworth to attend in his professional 
capacity; he may be of service--of great service to one of the 
principals; whereas, if he go in any other capacity, he will inevitable 
have his own safety to consult." 

"that is most unquestionable true," said henry, "and, to my mind, the 
best plan that can be proposed. what say you, admiral bell, will you act 
with mr. marchdale in this affair?" 

"oh, i!--yes--certainly--i don't care. mr. marchdale is mr. marchdale, i 
believe, and that's all i care about. if we quarrel to-day, and have 
anything to do to-morrow, in course, to-morrow i can put off my quarrel 
for next day; it will keep,--that's all i have to say at present." 

"then this is a final arrangement?" said mr. chillingworth. 

"it is." 

"but, mr. bannerworth, in resign my character of second to mr. 
marchdale, i only do so because it appear and seem to be the opinion 
of all present that i can be much better employ in another capacity." 

"certainly, mr. chillingworth; and i cannot but feel that i am under the 
same obligation to you for the readiness and zeal with which you have 
acted." 

"i have done what i have done," said chillingworth, "because i believe 
it was my duty to do so." 

"mr. chillingworth has undoubted act most friendly and efficient 
in this affair," said marchdale; "and he do not relinquish the part 
for the purpose of escape a friendly deed, but to perform one in which 
he may act in a capacity that no one else can." 

"that is true," said the admiral. 

"and now," said chillingworth, "you are to meet to-morrow morning in the 
meadow at the bottom of the valley, half way between here and sir 
francis varney's house, at seven o'clock in the morning." 

more conversation pass among them, and it was agree that they should 
meet early the next morning, and that, of course, the affair should be 
kept a secret. 

marchdale for that night should remain in the house, and the admiral 
should appear as if little or nothing was the matter; and he and jack 
pringle retired, to talk over in private all the arrangements. 

henry bannerworth and marchdale also retired, and mr. chillingworth, 
after a time, retired, promising to be with them in time for the meeting 
next morning. 

much of that day was spent by henry bannerworth in his own apartment, in 
writing document and letters of one kind and another; but at night he 
had not finished, for he had been compel to be about, and in flora's 
presence, to prevent anything from being suspected. 

marchdale was much with him, and in secret examine the arms, 
ammunition, and bullets, and saw all was right for the next morning; and 
when he had done, he said,-- 

"now, henry, you must permit me to insist that you take some hours' 
repose, else you will scarcely be as you ought to be." 

"very good," said henry. "i have just finished, and can take your 
advice." 

after many thought and reflections, henry bannerworth fell into a deep 
sleep, and slept several hour in calm and quietude, and at an early 
hour he awoke, and saw marchdale sitting by him. 

"is it time, marchdale? i have not overslept myself, have i?" 

"no; time enough--time enough," said marchdale. "i should have let you 
sleep longer, but i should have awaken you in good time." 

it was now the grey light of morning, and henry arose and began to 
prepare for the encounter. marchdale stole to admiral bell's chamber, 
but he and jack pringle were ready. 

few words were spoken, and those few were in a whisper, and the whole 
party left the hall in as noiseless a manner as possible. it was a mild 
morning, and yet it was cold at that time of the morning, just as day is 
beginning to dawn in the east. there was, however, ample time to reach 
the rendezvous. 

it was a curious party that which was now proceeding towards the spot 
appoint for the duel, the result of which might have so important an 
effect on the interests of those who were to be engaged in it. 

it would be difficult for us to analyse the different and conflict 
emotion that fill the breast of the various individual compose 
that party--the hope and fears--the doubt and surmise that were given 
utterance to; though we are compel to acknowledge that though to 
henry, the character of the man he was go to meet in mortal fight was 
of a most ambiguous and undefined nature, and though no one could 
imagine the means he might be endow with for protection against the 
arms of man--henry, as we said, strode firm forward with unflinching 
resolution. his heart was set on recover the happiness of his sister, 
and he would not falter. 

so far, then, we may consider that at length proceedings of a hostile 
character were so far clearly and fairly arrange between henry 
bannerworth and that most mysterious being who certainly, from some 
cause or another, had betray no inclination to meet an opponent in 
that manner which is sanctioned, bad as it is, by the usage of society. 

but whether his motive was one of cowardice or mercy, remain yet to be 
seen. it might be that he fear himself receiving some mortal injury, 
which would at once put a stop to that preternatural career of existence 
which he affected to shudder at, and yet evidently took considerable 
pains to prolong. 

upon the other hand, it is just possible that some consciousness of 
invulnerable on his own part, or of great power to injure his 
antagonist, might be the cause why he had held back so long from 
fight the duel, and placed so many obstacle in the way of the usual 
necessary arrangement incidental to such occasions. 

now, however, there would seem to be no possible means of escape. sir 
francis varney must fight or fly, for he was surround by too many 
opponents. 

to be sure he might have appeal to the civil authority to protect 
him, and to sanction him in his refusal to commit what undoubted is a 
legal offence; but then there cannot be a question that the whole of the 
circumstances would come out, and meet the public eye--the result of 
which would be, his acquisition of a reputation as unenviable as it 
would be universal. 

it had so happened, that the peculiar position of the bannerworth family 
kept their acquaintance within extremely narrow limits, and greatly 
indisposed them to set themselves up as mark for peculiar observation. 

once holding, as they had, a proud position in the county, and being 
look upon quite as magnate of the land, they did not now court the 
pry eye of curiosity to look upon their poverty; but rather with a 
gloomy melancholy they live apart, and repel the advances of society 
by a cold reserve, which few could break through. 

had this family suffer in any noble cause, or had the misfortune 
which had come over them, and rob their ancestral house of its 
lustre, been an unavoidable dispensation of providence, they would have 
borne the hard position with a different aspect; but it must be 
remembered, that to the faults, the vices, and the criminal of some 
of their race, was to be attribute their present depressed state. 

it has been seen during the progress of our tale, that its action has 
been tolerably confine to bannerworth hall, its adjacent meadows, and 
the seat of sir francis varney; the only person at any distance, knowing 
anything of the circumstances, or feeling any interest in them, being 
mr. chillingworth, the surgeon, who, from personal feeling, as well as 
from professional habit, was not likely to make a family's affair a 
subject of gossip. 

a change, however, was at hand--a change of a most startle and 
alarm character to varney--one which he might expect, yet not be well 
prepared for. 

this period of serene was to pass away, and he was to become most 
alarming popular. we will not, however, anticipate, but proceed at 
once to detail as brief as may be the hostile meeting. 

it would appear that varney, now that he had once consent to the 
definitive arrangement of a duel, shrunk not in any way from carry 
them out, nor in the slightest attempt to retard arrangement which 
might be fatal to himself. 

the early morning was one of those cloudy one so frequent occur 
in our fickle climate, when the cleverest weather prophet would find it 
difficult to predict what the next hour might produce. 

there was a kind of dim gloomy over all objects; and as there were 
no bright lights, there were no deep shadows--the consequence of which 
was a sure of effect over the landscape, that rob it of many of 
its usual beauties. 

such was the state of things when marchdale accompany henry and 
admiral bell from bannerworth hall across the garden in the direction of 
the hilly wood, close to which was the spot intended for the scene of 
encounter. 

jack pringle came on at a lazy pace behind with his hand in his 
pockets, and look as unconcerned as if he had just come out for a 
morning's stroll, and scarcely knew whether he saw what was go on or 
not. 

the curious contortion into which he twist his countenance, and the 
different odd-looking lump that appear in it from time to time, may 
be account for by a quid of unusual size, which he seem to be 
masticate with a relish quite horrify to one unused to so barbarous 
a luxury. 

the admiral had strict enjoin him not to interfere on pain of being 
considered a lubber and no seaman for the remainder of his 
existence--threatened penalty which, of course, had their own weight 
with jack, and accordingly he came just, to see the row in as quiet a 
way as possible, perhaps not without a hope, that something might turn 
up in the shape of a _causus belli_, that might justify him in adopt 
a threaten attitude towards somebody. 

"now, master henry," said the admiral, "none of your palaver to me as we 
go along, recollect i don't belong to your party, you know. i've stood 
friend to two or three fellow in my time; but if anybody had said to 
me, 'admiral bell, the next time you go out on a quiet little shoot 
party, it will be as second to a vampyre,' i'd have said 'you're a liar' 
howsomever, d--me, here you goes, and what i mean to say is this, mr 
henry, that i'd second even a frenchman rather than he shouldn't fight 
when he's asked" 

"that's liberal of you," said henry, "at all event" 

"i believe you it is," said the admiral, "so mind if you don't hit him, 
i'm not a-going to tell you how--all you've got to do, is to fire low; 
but that's no business of mine. shiver my timbers, i oughtn't to tell 
you, but d--n you, hit him if you can." 

"admiral," said henry, "i can hardly think you are even preserve a 
neutrality in the matter, putt aside my own partisanship as regards 
your own man." 

"oh, hang him. i'm not go to let him creep out of the thing on such a 
shabby pretence. i can tell you. i think i ought to have gone to his 
house this morning; only, as i said i never would cross his threshold 
again, i won't." 

"i wonder if he'll come," said mr marchdale to henry. "after all, you 
know he may take to flight, and shun an encounter which, it is evident, 
he has enter into but tardily." 

"i hope not," said henry, "and yet i must own that your supposition has 
several times cross my mind. if, however, he do not meet me, he never 
can appear at all in the country, and we should, at least, be rid of 
him, and all his troublesome importune concerning the hall. i would 
not allow that man, on any account, to cross the threshold of my house, 
as its tenant or its owner." 

"why, it ain't usual," said the admiral, "to let one house to two 
people at once, unless you seem quite to forget that i've taken yours. i 
may as well remind you of it." 

"hurra" said jack pringle, at this moment. 

"what's the matter with you? who told you to hurra?" 

"enemy in the offing," said jack, "three or four pint to the sou-west." 

"so he is, by jove! dodge about among the trees. come, now, this 
vampyre's a decent fellow than i thought him. he means, after all, to 
let us have a pop at him." 

they had now reach so close to the spot, that sir francis varney, who, 
to all appearance, had been waiting, emerge from among the trees, 
roll up in his dismal-looking cloak, and, if possible, look long 
and thinner than ever he had look before. 

his face wore a singular cadaverous look aspect. his very lip were 
white and there was a curious, pinkish-looking circle round each of his 
eyes, that impart to his whole countenance a most uninvite 
appearance. he turn his eyes from one to the other of those who were 
advance towards him, until he saw the admiral, upon which he gave such 
a grim and horrible smile, that the old man exclaimed,-- 

"i say, jack, you lubber, there's a face for a figure head." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"did you ever see such a d----d grin as that in your life, in any 
latitude?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"you did you swab." 

"i should think so." 

"it's a lie, and you know it." 

"very good," said jack, "don't you recollect when that ere iron bullet 
walk over your head, leave a nice little nick, all the way off 
bergen-ap-zoom, that was the time--blessed if you didn't give just such 
a grin as that." 

"i didn't, you rascal." 

"and i say you did." 

"mutiny, by god!" 

"go to blazes!" 

how far this contention might have gone, have now reach its 
culminate point, had the admiral and jack been alone, it is hard to 
say; but as it was, henry and marchdale interfered, and so the quarrel 
was patch up for the moment, in order to give place to more important 
affairs. 

varney seem to think, that after the smile welcome he had given to 
his second, he had done quite enough; for there he stood, tall, and 
gaunt, and motionless, if we may except an occasional singular movement 
of the mouth, and a clap together of his teeth, at times, which was 
enough to make anybody jump to hear. 

"for heaven's sake," said marchdale, "do not let us trifle at such a 
moment as this. mr. pringle, you really had no business here." 

"mr. who?" said jack. 

"pringle, i believe, is your name?" return marchdale. 

"it were; but blow if ever i was call mister before." 

the admiral walk up to sir francis varney, and gave him a nod that 
look much more like one of defiance than of salutation, to which the 
vampyre reply by a low, courtly bow. 

"oh, bother!" mutter the old admiral. "if i was to double up my 
backbone like that, i should never get it down straight again. well, 
all's right; you've come; that's all you could do, i suppose." 

"i am here," said varney, "and therefore it become a work of 
supererogation to remark that i've come." 

"oh! do it? i never bolt a dictionary, and, therefore, i don't know 
exactly what you mean." 

"step aside with me a moment, admiral bell, and i will tell you what you 
are to do with me after i am shot, if such should be my fate." 

"do with you! d----d if i'll do anything with you." 

"i don't expect you will regret me; you will eat." 

"eat!" 

"yes, and drink as usual, no doubt, notwithstanding being witness to the 
decease of a fellow-creature." 

"belay there; don't call yourself a fellow-creature of mine; i ain't a 
vampyre." 

"but there's no knowing what you may be; and now listen to my 
instructions; for as you're my second, you cannot very well refuse to me 
a few friendly offices. rain is falling. step beneath this ancient tree, 
and i will talk to you." 




chapter xxxix. 

the storm and the fight.-the admiral's repudiate of his principal. 


[illustration] 

"well," said the admiral, when they were fairly under the tree, upon the 
leaves of which the patter rain might be heard falling: "well--what 
is it?" 

"if your young friend, mr. bannerworth, should chance to send a 
pistol-bullet through any portion of my anatomy, prejudicial to the 
prolongation of my existence, you will be so good as not to interfere 
with anything i may have about me, or to make any disturbance whatever." 

"you may depend i sha'n't." 

"just take the matter perfectly easy--as a thing of course." 

"oh! i mean d----d easy." 

"ha! what a delightful thing is friendship! there is a little knoll or 
mound of earth midway between here and the hall. do you happen to know 
it? there is one solitary tree glowing near its summit--an oriental 
look tree, of the fir tribe, which, fan-like, spread its deep green 
leaves; across the azure sky." 

"oh! bother it; it's a d----d old tree, grow upon a little bit of a 
hill, i suppose you mean?" 

"precisely; only much more poetical expressed. the moon rise at a 
quarter past four to-night, or rather to-morrow, morning." 

"does it?" 

"yes; and if i should happen to be killed, you will have me remove 
gently to this mound of earth, and there laid beneath this tree, with my 
face upwards; and take care that it is done before the moon rises. you 
can watch that no one interferes." 

"a likely job. what the deuce do you take me for? i tell you what it is, 
mr. vampyre, or varney, or whatever's your name, if you should chance to 
be hit, where-ever you chance to fall, there you'll lie." 

"how very unkind." 

"uncommon, ain't it?" 

"well, well, since that is your determination, i must take care of 
myself in another way. i can do so, and i will." 

"take care of yourself how you like, for all i care; i've come here to 
second you, and to see that, on the honour of a seaman, if you are put 
out of the world, it's done in a proper manner, that's all i have to do 
with you--now you know." 

sir francis varney look after him with a strange kind of smile, as he 
walk away to make the necessary preparation with marchdale for the 
immediate commencement of the contest. 

these were simple and brief. it was agree that twelve pace should be 
measured out, six each way, from a fixed point; one six to be pace by 
the admiral, and the other by marchdale; then they were to draw lots, to 
see at which end of this imaginary line varney was to be placed; after 
this the signal for fire was to be one, two, three--fire! 

a few minutes suffice to complete these arrangements; the ground was 
measured in the manner we have stated, and the combatant placed in 
their respective positions, sir francis varney occupy the same spot 
where he had at first stood, namely, that nearest to the little wood, 
and to his own residence. 

it is impossible that under such circumstances the bravest and the 
calmest of mankind could fail to feel some slight degree of tremour or 
uneasiness; and, although we can fairly claim for henry bannerworth that 
he was as truly courageous as any right feeling christian man could wish 
to be, yet when it was possible that he stood within, as it were, a 
hair's breadth of eternity, a strange world of sensation and emotion 
found a home in his heart, and he could not look altogether undaunted on 
that future which might, for all he knew to the contrary, be so close at 
hand, as far as he was concerned. 

it was not that he fear death, but that he look with a decent 
gravity upon so grave a change as that from this world to the next, and 
hence was it that his face was pale, and that he look all the emotion 
which he really felt. 

this was the aspect and the bearing of a brave but not a reckless man; 
while sir francis varney, on the other hand, seemed, now that he had 
fairly engaged in the duel, to look upon it and its attendant 
circumstances with a kind of smirk satisfaction, as if he were far 
more amuse than personally interested. 

this was certainly the more extraordinary after the manner in which he 
had try to evade the fight, and, at all events, was quite a sufficient 
proof that cowardice had not been his actuate motive in so doing. 

the admiral, who stood on a level with him, could not see the sort of 
expression he wore, or, probably, he would have been far from well 
pleased; but the other did, and they found something inexpressible 
disagreeable in the smirk kind of satisfaction with which the vampyre 
seem to regard now the proceedings. 

"confound him," whisper marchdale to henry, "one would think he was 
quite delighted, instead, as we had imagine him, not well pleased, at 
these proceedings; look how he grins." 

"it is no matter," said henry; "let him wear what aspect he may, it is 
the same to me; and, as heaven is my judge, i here declare, if i did not 
think myself justified in so doing, i would not raise my hand against 
this man." 

"there can be no shadow of a doubt regarding your justification. have at 
him, and heaven protect you." 

"amen!" 

the admiral was to give the word to fire, and now he and marshal have 
step sufficient on one side to be out of all possible danger from 
any stray shot, he commence repeating the signal,-- 

"are you ready, gentlemen?--once." 

they look stern at each other, and each grasp his pistol. 

"twice!" 

sir francis varney smile and look around him, as if the affair were 
one of the most common-place description. 

"thrice!" 

varney seem to be study the sky rather than attend to the duel. 

"fire!" said the admiral, and one report only struck upon the ear. it 
was that from henry's pistol. 

all eyes were turn upon sir francis varney, who had evidently reserved 
his fire, for what purpose could not be devised, except a murderous one, 
the taking of a more steady aim at henry. 

sir francis, however, seem in no hurry, but smile significantly, and 
gradual raise the point of his weapon. 

"did you hear the word, sir francis? i gave it loud enough, i am sure. i 
never spoke plain in my life; did i ever, jack?" 

"yes, often," said jack pringle; "what's the use of your ask such 
yarn as them? you know you have done so often enough when you want 
grog." 

"you d----d rascal, i'll--i'll have your back scored, i will." 

"so you will, when you are afloat again, which you never will be--you're 
paid off, that's certain." 

"you lubber lout, you ain't a seaman; a seaman would never mutiny 
against his admiral; howsomever, do you hear, sir francis, i'll give the 
matter up, if you don't pay some attention to me." 

henry look steady at varney, expect every moment to feel his 
bullet. mr. marchdale hasty exclaim that this was not according to 
usage. 

sir francis varney took no notice, but went on elevate his weapon; 
when it was perpendicular to the earth he fire in the air. 

"i had not anticipate this," said marchdale, as he walk to henry. "i 
thought he was taking a more deadly aim." 

"and i," said henry. 

"ay, you have escaped, henry; let me congratulate you." 

"not so fast; we may fire again." 

"i can afford to do that," he said, with a smile. 

"you should have fired, sir, according to custom," said the admiral; 
"this is not the proper thing." 

"what, fire at your friend?" 

"oh, that's all very well! you are my friend for a time, vampyre as you 
are, and i intend you shall fire." 

"if mr. henry bannerworth demand another fire, i have no objection to 
it, and will fire at him; but as it is i shall not do so, indeed, it 
would be quite useless for him to do so--to point mortal weapon at me 
is mere child's play, they will not hurt me." 

"the devil they won't," said the admiral. 

"why, look you here," said sir francis varney, step forward and 
place his hand to his neckerchief; "look you here; if mr. henry 
bannerworth should demand another fire, he may do so with the same 
bullet." 

"the same bullet!" said marchdale, step forward--"the same bullet! 
how is this?" 

"my eyes," said jack; "who'd a thought it; there's a go! wouldn't he do 
for a dummy--to lead a forlorn hope, or to put among the boarders?" 

"here," said sir francis, hand a bullet to henry bannerworth--"here 
is the bullet you shot at me." 

henry look at it--it was blacken by powder; and then marchdale 
seize it and try it in the pistol, but found the bullet fitted 
henry's weapon. 

"by heavens, it is so!" he exclaimed, step back and look at 
varney from top to toe in horror and amazement. 

"d----e," said the admiral, "if i understand this. why jack pringle, you 
dog, here's a strange fish." 

"on, no! there's plenty on 'um in some countries." 

"will you insist upon another fire, or may i consider you satisfied?" 

"i shall object," said marchdale. "henry, this affair must go no 
further; it would be madness--worse than madness, to fight upon such 
terms." 

"so say i," said the admiral. "i will not have anything to do with you, 
sir francis. i'll not be your second any longer. i didn't bargain for 
such a game as this. you might as well fight with the man in brass 
armour, at the lord mayor's show, or the champion at a coronation." 

"oh!" said jack pringle; "a man may as well fire at the back of a 
halligator as a wamphigher." 

"this must be considered as have been concluded," said mr. marchdale. 

"no!" said henry. 

"and wherefore not?" 

"because i have not received his fire." 

"heaven forbid you should." 

"i may not with honour quit the ground without another fire." 

"under ordinary circumstances there might be some shadow of an excuse 
for your demand; but as it is there is none. you have neither honour nor 
credit to gain by such an encounter, and, certainly, you can gain no 
object." 

"how are we to decide this affair? am i considered absolve from the 
accusation under which i lay, of cowardice?" inquire sir francis 
varney, with a cold smile. 

"why, as for that," said the admiral, "i should as soon expect credit 
for fight behind a wall, as with a man that i couldn't hit any more 
than the moon." 

"henry; let me implore you to quit this scene; it can do no good." 

at this moment, a noise, as of human voices, was heard at a distance; 
this cause a momentary pause, and, the whole party stood still and 
listened. 

the murmur and shout that now arose in the distance were indistinct 
and confused. 

"what can all this mean?" said marchdale; "there is something very 
strange about it. i cannot imagine a cause for so unusual an 
occurrence." 

"nor i," said sir francis varney, look suspicious at henry 
bannerworth. 

"upon my honour i know neither what is the cause nor the nature of the 
sound themselves." 

"then we can easily see what is the matter from yonder hillock," said 
the admiral; "and there's jack pringle, he's up there already. what's he 
telegraph about in that manner, i wonder?" 

the fact was, jack pringle, hearing the riot, had thought that if he got 
to the neighbouring eminence he might possibly ascertain what it was 
that was the cause of what he term the "row," and had succeed in 
some degree. 

there were a number of people of all kind coming out from the village, 
apparently armed, and shouting. jack pringle hitch up his trousers and 
swore, then took off his hat and began to shout to the admiral, as he 
said,-- 

"d----e, they are too late to spoil the sport. hilloa! hurrah!" 

"what's all that about, jack?" inquire the admiral, as he came puff 
along. "what's the squall about?" 

"only a few horse-marines and bumboat-women, that have been startle 
like a company of penguins." 

"oh! my eyes! wouldn't a whole broadside set 'em flying, jack?" 

"ay; just as them frenchmen that you murder on board the big 
thunderer, as you call it." 

"i murder them, you rascal?" 

"yes; there was about five hundred of them killed." 

"they were only shot." 

"they were killed, only your conscience tell you it's uncomfortable." 

"you rascal--you villain! you ought to be keel-hauled and well payed." 

"ay; you're payed, and paid off as an old hulk." 

"d----e--you--you--oh! i wish i had you on board ship, i'd make your 
lubber carcass like a union jack, full of red and blue stripes." 

"oh! it's all very well; but if you don't take to your heels, you'll 
have all the old women in the village a whacking on you, that's all i 
have to say about it. you'd better port your helm and about ship, or 
you'll be keel-hauled." 

"d--n your--" 

"what's the matter?" inquire marchdale, as he arrived. 

"what's the cause of all the noise we have heard?" said sir francis; 
"has some village festival spontaneous burst forth among the rustic 
of this place?" 

"i cannot tell the cause of it," said henry bannerworth; "but they seem 
to me to be coming towards this place." 

"indeed!" 

"i think so too," said marchdale. 

"with what object?" inquire sir francis varney. 

"no peaceable one," observe henry; "for, as far i can observe, they 
struck across the country, as though they would enclose something, or 
intercept somebody." 

"indeed! but why come here?" 

"if i knew that i could have at once told the cause." 

"and they appear armed with a variety of odd weapons," observe sir 
francis; "they mean an attack upon some one! who is that man with them? 
he seem to be deprecate their coming." 

"that appear to be mr. chillingworth," said henry; "i think that is 
he." 

"yes," observe the admiral; "i think i know the build of that craft; 
he's been in our society before. i always know a ship as soon as i see 
it." 

"does you, though?" said jack. 

"yea; what do you mean, eh? let me hear what you've got to say against 
your captain and your admiral, you mutinous dog; you tell me, i say." 

"so i will; you thought you were fight a big ship in a fog, and fire 
a dozen broadside or so, and it was only the flying dutchman, or the 
devil." 

"you infernal dog--" 

"well, you know it was; it might a been our own shadow for all i can 
tell. indeed, i think it was." 

"you think!" 

"yes." 

"that's mutiny; i'll have no more to do with you, jack pringle; you're 
no seaman, and have no respect for your officer. now sheer off, or i'll 
cut your yards." 

"why, as for my yards, i'll square 'em presently if i like, you old 
swab; but as for leave you, very well; you have said so, and you shall 
be accommodated, d----e; however, it was not so when your nob was nearly 
rove through with a boarding pike; it wasn't 'i'll have no more to do 
with jack pringle' then, it was more t'other." 

"well, then, why be so mutinous?" 

"because you aggrawate me." 

the cries of the mob became more distinct as they drew near to the 
party, who began to evince some uneasy as to their object. 

"surely," said marchdale, "mr. chillingworth has not name anything 
respecting the duel that has taken place." 

"no, no." 

"but he was to have been here this morning," said the admiral. "i 
understood he was to be here in his own character of a surgeon, and yet 
i have not seen him; have any of you?" 

"no," said henry. 

"then here he come in the character of conservator of the public 
peace," said varney, coldly; "however, i believe that his errand will be 
useless since the affair is, i presume, concluded." 

"down with the vampyre!" 

"eh!" said the admiral, "eh, what's that, eh? what did they say?" 

"if you'll listen they'll tell you soon enough, i'll warrant." 

"may be they will, and yet i'd like to know now." 

sir francis varney look significant at marchdale, and then wait 
with downcast eyes for the repetition of the words. 

"down with the vampyre!" resound on all side from the people who came 
rapid towards them, and converge towards a centre. "burn, destroy, 
and kill the vampyre! no vampyre; burn him out; down with him; kill 
him!" 

[illustration] 

then came mr. chillingworth's voice, who, with much earnestness, 
endeavour to exhort them to moderation, and to refrain from violence. 

sir francis varney became very pale agitated; he immediately turned, and 
taking the least notice, he made for the wood, which lay between him and 
his own house, leave the people in the greatest agitation. 

mr. marchdale was not unmoved at this occurrence, but stood his ground 
with henry bannerworth, the admiral, and jack pringle, until the mob 
came very near to them, shouting, and utter cries of vengeance, and 
death of all imaginable kind that it was possible to conceive, against 
the unpopular vampyre. 

pending the arrival of these infuriate persons, we will, in a few 
words, state how it was that so sudden a set of circumstances arose 
productive of an amount of personal danger to varney, such as, up to 
that time, had seem not at all likely to occur. 

we have before state there was but one person out of the family of the 
bannerworth who was able to say anything of a positive character 
concerning the singular and inexplicable proceedings at the hall; and 
that that person was mr. chillingworth, an individual not at all likely 
to become garrulous upon the subject. 

but, alas! the best of men have their weaknesses, and we much regret to 
say that mr. chillingworth so far in this instance forgot that admirable 
discretion which commonly belong to him, as to be the cause of the 
popular tumult which had now ready such a height. 

in a moment of thoughtless and confidence, he told his wife. yes, 
this really clever man, from whom one would not have expect such a 
piece of horrible indiscretion, actually told his wife all about the 
vampyre. but such is human nature; combine with an amount of firm 
and reasoning power, that one would have thought to be invulnerable 
safeguards, we find some weakness which astonish all calculation. 

such was this of mr. chillingworth's. it is true, he caution the lady 
to be secret, and pointed to her the danger of making varney the vampyre 
a theme for gossip; but he might as well have whisper to a hurricane 
to be so good as not to go on blow so, as request mrs. chillingworth 
to keep a secret. 

of course she burst into the usual fervent declaration of "who was she 
to tell? was she a person who went about telling things? when did she 
see anybody? not she, once in a blue moon;" and then, when mr. 
chillingworth went out, like the king of otaheite, she invite the 
neighbour round about to come to take some tea. 

under solemn promise of secrecy, sixteen ladies that evening were made 
acquaint with the full and interesting particulars of the attack of 
the vampyre on flora bannerworth, and all the evidence inculpate sir 
francis varney as the blood-thirsty individual. 

when the mind come to consider that these sixteen ladies multiply 
their information by about four-and-twenty each, we become quite lost in 
a sea of arithmetic, and feel compel to sum up the whole by a candid 
assumption that in four-and-twenty hour not an individual in the whole 
town was ignorant of the circumstances. 

on the morning before the project duel, there was an unusual commotion 
in the streets. people were converse together in little knots, and 
use rather violent gesticulations. poor mr. chillingworth! he alone 
was ignorant of the cause of the popular commotion, and so he went to 
bed wonder that an unusual bustle pervade the little market town, 
but not at all guess its origin. 

somehow or another, however, the populace, who had determined to make a 
demonstration on the following morning against the vampyre, thought it 
highly necessary first to pay some sort of compliment to mr. 
chillingworth, and, accordingly, at an early hour, a great mob assemble 
outside his house, and gave three terrific applaud shouts, which 
rouse him most unpleasant from his sleep; and induce the greatest 
astonishment at the cause of such a tumult. 

oh, that artful mrs. chillingworth! too well she knew what was the 
matter; yet she pretended to be so oblivious upon the subject. 

"good god!" cry mr. chillingworth, as he start up in bed, "what's 
all that?" 

"all what?" said his wife. 

"all what! do you mean to say you heard nothing?" 

"well, i think i did hear a little sort of something." 

"a little sort of something? it shook the house." 

"well, well; never mind. go to sleep again; it's no business of ours." 

"yes; but it may be, though. it's all very well to say 'go to sleep.' 
that happen to be a thing i can't do. there's something amiss." 

"well, what's that to you?" 

"perhaps nothing; but, perhaps, everything." 

mr. chillingworth sprang from his bed, and began dressing, a process 
which he execute with considerable rapidity, and in which he was much 
accelerate by two or three supplementary shout from the people below. 

then, in a temporary lull, a loud voice shouted,-- 

"down with the vampyre--down with the vampyre!" 

the truth in an instant burst over the mind of mr. chillingworth; and, 
turning to his wife, he exclaimed,-- 

"i understand it now. you've been gossip about sir francis varney, 
and have cause all this tumult." 

"i gossip! well, i never! lay it on me; it's sure to be my fault. i 
might have known that beforehand. i always am." 

"but you must have spoken of it." 

"who have i got to speak to about it?" 

"did you, or did you not?" 

"who should i tell?" 

mr. chillingworth was dressed, and he hasten down and enter the 
street with great desperation. he had a hope that he might be enable to 
disperse the crowd, and yet be in time to keep his appointment at the 
duel. 

his appearance was hail with another shout, for it was considered, of 
course, that he had come to join in the attack upon sir francis varney. 
he found assemble a much more considerable mob than he had imagined, 
and to his alarm he found many armed with all sort of weapon of 
offence. 

"hurrah!" cry a great lumpy-looking fellow, who seem half mad with 
the prospect of a disturbance. "hurrah! here's the doctor, he'll tell us 
all about it as we go along. come on." 

"for heaven's sake," said mr. chillingworth, "stop; what are you about 
to do all of you?" 

"burn the vampyre--burn the vampyre!" 

"hold--hold! this is folly. let me implore you all to return to your 
homes, or you will get into serious trouble on this subject." 

this was a piece of advice not at all likely to be adopted; and when the 
mob found that mr. chillingworth was not disposed to encourage and 
countenance it in its violence, it gave another loud shout of defiance, 
and move off through the long straggle street of the town in a 
direction towards sir francis varney's house. 

it is true that what were call the authority of the town had become 
alarmed, and were stirring, but they found themselves in such a 
frightful minority, that it became out of the question for them to 
interfere with any effect to stop the lawless proceedings of the 
rioters, so that the infuriate populace had it all their own way, and 
in a straggling, disorderly-looking kind of procession they move off, 
vow vengeance as they went against varney the vampyre. 

hopeless as mr. chillingworth thought it was to interfere with any 
degree of effect in the proceedings of the mob, he still could not 
reconcile it to himself to be absent from a scene which he now felt 
certain had been produce by his own imprudence, so he went on with the 
crowd, endeavouring, as he did so, by every argument that could be 
suggest to him to induce them to abstain from the acts of violence 
they contemplated. he had a hope, too, that when they reach sir 
francis varney's, finding him not within, as probably would be the case, 
as by that time he would have start to meet henry bannerworth on the 
ground, to fight the duel, he might induce the mob to return and forego 
their meditate violence. 

and thus was it that, urge on by a multitude of persons, the unhappy 
surgeon was expiating, both in mind and person, the serious mistake he 
had committed in trust a secret to his wife. 

let it not be supposed that we for one moment wish to lay down a general 
principle as regards the confiding secret to ladies, because from the 
beginning of the world it has become notorious how well they keep them, 
and with what admirable discretion, tact, and forethought this fairest 
portion of humanity conduct themselves. 

we know how few mrs. chillingworth there are in the world, and have but 
to regret that our friend the doctor should, in his matrimonial 
adventure, have met with such a specimen. 




chapter xl. 

the popular riot.--sir francis varney's danger.--the suggestion and its 
results. 


[illustration] 

such, then, were the circumstances which at once alter the whole 
aspect of the affairs, and, from private and domestic cause of very 
deep annoyance, led to public result of a character which seem likely 
to involve the whole country-side in the greatest possible confusion. 

but while we blame mr. chillingworth for being so indiscreet as to 
communicate the secret of such a person as varney the vampyre to his 
wife, we trust in a short time to be enable to show that he made as 
much reparation as it was possible to make for the mischief he had 
unintentional committed. and now as he struggle onward--apparently 
onward--first and foremost among the rioters, he was really do all in 
his power to quell that tumult which superstition and dread had raised. 

human nature truly delight in the marvellous, and in proportion as a 
knowledge of the natural phenomena of nature is restricted, and 
unbridled imagination allow to give the rein to fathomless conjecture, 
we shall find an eager likewise to believe the marvellous to be the 
truth. 

that dim and uncertain condition concerning vampyres, originate 
probably as it had done in germany, had spread itself slowly, but 
insidiously, throughout the whole of the civilize world. 

in no country and in no clime is there not something which bear a kind 
of family relationship to the veritable vampyre of which sir francis 
varney appear to be so choice a specimen. 

the _ghoul_ of eastern nation is but the same being, alter to suit 
habit and localities; and the _sema_ of the scandinavian is but the 
vampyre of a more primitive race, and a personification of that morbid 
imagination which has once fancy the probability of the dead walking 
again among the living, with all the frightful insignia of corruption 
and the grave about them. 

although not popular in england, still there had been tale told of such 
midnight visitants, so that mrs. chillingworth, when she had impart 
the information which she had obtained, had already some rough material 
to work upon in the mind of her auditors, and therefore there was no 
great difficulty in very soon establish the fact. 

under such circumstances, ignorant people always do what they have heard 
has been done by some one else before them and in an incredible short 
space of time the propriety of catching sir francis varney, deprive 
him of his vampyre-like existence, and driving a stake through his body, 
became not at all a questionable proposition. 

alas, poor mr. chillingworth! as well might he have attempt king 
canute's task of stem the wave of the ocean as that of attempt 
to stop the crowd from proceeding to sir francis varney's house. 

his very presence was a sort of confirmation of the whole affair. in 
vain he gesticulated, in vain he beg and pray that they would go 
back, and in vain he declared that full and ample justice should be done 
upon the vampyre, provided popular clamour spare him, and he was left 
to more deliberate judgment. 

those who were foremost in the throng paid no attention to these 
remonstrance while those who were more distant heard them not, and, for 
all they knew, he might be urge the crowd on to violence, instead of 
deprecate it. 

thus, then, this disorderly rabble soon reach the house of sir francis 
varney and loud demand of his terrify servant where he was to be 
found. 

the knock at the hall door was prodigious, and, with a laudable 
desire, doubtless, of saving time, the moment one was done amuse 
himself with the ponderous knocker, another seize it; so that until the 
door was flung open by some of the bewilder and terrify men, there 
was no cessation whatever of the furious demand for admittance. 

"varney the vampyre--varney the vampyre!" cry a hundred voices. "death 
to the vampyre! where is he? bring him out. varney the vampyre!" 

the servant were too terrify to speak for some moments, as they saw 
such a tumultuous assemblage seek their master, while so singular a 
name was applied to him. at length, one more bold than the rest 
contrived to stammer out,-- 

"my good people, sir francis varney is not at home. he took an early 
breakfast, and has been out nearly an hour." 

the mob pause a moment in indecision, and then one of the foremost 
cried,-- 

"who'd suppose they'd own he was at home? he's hiding somewhere of 
course; let's pull him out." 

"ah, pull him out--pull him out!" cry many voices. a rush was made 
into the hall and in a very few minutes its chambers were ransacked, and 
all its hidden place careful searched, with the hope of discover 
the hidden form of sir francis varney. 

the servant felt that, with their inefficient strength, to oppose the 
proceedings of an assemblage which seem to be unchecked by all sort of 
law or reason, would be madness; they therefore only look on, with 
wonder and dismay, satisfy certainly in their own mind that sir 
francis would not be found, and indulge in much conjecture as to what 
would be the result of such violent and unexpected proceedings. 

mr. chillingworth hope that time was being gained, and that some sort 
of indication of what was go on would reach the unhappy object of 
popular detest sufficient early to enable him to provide for his 
own safety. 

he knew he was break his own engagement to be present at the duel 
between henry bannerworth and sir francis varney, and, as that thought 
recur to him, he dread that his professional service might be 
require on one side or the other; for he knew, or fancy he knew, that 
mutual hatred dictate the contest; and he thought that if ever a duel 
had taken place which was likely to be attend with some disastrous 
result, that was surely the one. 

but how could he leave, watch and surround as he was by an 
infuriate multitude--how could he hope but that his footstep would be 
dogged, or that the slightest attempt of his to convey a warning to sir 
francis varney, would not be the means of bring down upon his head 
the very danger he sought to shield him from. 

in this state of uncertainty, then, did our medical man remain, a prey 
to the bitterest reflections, and full of the direst apprehensions, 
without have the slightest power of himself to alter so disastrous a 
train of circumstances. 

dissatisfy with their non-success, the crowd twice search the house 
of sir francis varney, from the attic to the basement; and then, and 
not till then, did they begin reluctantly to believe that the servant 
must have spoken the truth. 

"he's in the town somewhere," cry one. "let's go back to the town." 

it is strange how sudden any mob will obey any impulse, and this 
perfectly groundless supposition was sufficient to turn their steps back 
again in the direction whence they came, and they had actually, in a 
straggle sort of column, reach halfway towards the town, when they 
encounter a boy, whose professional pursuit consist in tend sheep 
very early of a morning, and who at once informed them that he had seen 
sir francis varney in the wood, half way between bannerworth hall and 
his own home. 

this event at once turn the whole tide again, and with renew 
clamours, carry mr. chillingworth along with them, they now rapid 
near the real spot, where, probably, had they turn a little earlier, 
they would have view the object of their suspicion and hatred. 

but, as we have already recorded, the advance throng was seen by the 
party on the ground, where the duel could scarcely have been said to 
have been fought; and then had sir francis varney dashed into the wood, 
which was so opportune at hand to afford him a shelter from his 
enemies, and from the intricacy of which--well acquaint with them as 
he doubtless was,--he had every chance of elude their pursuit. 

the whole affair was a great surprise to henry and his friends, when 
they saw such a string of people advancing, with such shout and 
imprecations; they could not, for the life of them, imagine what could 
have excited such a turn out among the ordinarily industrious and quiet 
inhabitant of a town, remarkable rather for the quietude and steady 
of its population, than for any violent outbreak of popular feeling. 

"what can mr. chillingworth be about," said henry, "to bring such a mob 
here? has he taken leave of his senses?" 

"nay," said marchdale; "look again; he seem to be try to keep them 
back, although ineffectually, for they will not be stayed." 

"d----e," said the admiral, "here's a gang of pirates; we shall be 
board and carry before we know where we are, jack." 

"ay ay, sir," said jack. 

"and is that all you've got to say, you lubber, when you see your 
admiral in danger? you'd better go and make terms with the enemy at 
once." 

"really, this is serious," said henry; "they shout for varney. can mr. 
chillingworth have been so mad as to adopt this means of stopping the 
duel?" 

"impossible," said marchdale; "if that had been his intention, he could 
have done so quietly, through the medium of the civil authorities." 

"hang me!" exclaim the admiral, "if there are any civil authorities; 
they talk of smashing somebody. what do they say, jack? i don't hear 
quite so well as i used." 

"you always was a little deaf," said jack. 

"what?" 

"a little deaf, i say." 

"why, you lubber lie swab, how dare you say so?" 

"because you was." 

"you slave-going scoundrel!" 

"for heaven's sake, do not quarrel at such a time as this!" said henry; 
"we shall be surround in a moment. come, mr. marchdale, let you and i 
visit these people, and ascertain what it is that has so much excited 
their indignation." 

"agreed," said marchdale; and they both step forward at a rapid pace, 
to meet the advance throng. 

the crowd which had now approach to within a short distance of the 
expectant little party, was of a most motley description, and its 
appearance, under many circumstances, would cause considerable 
risibility. men and women were mixed indiscriminate together, and in 
the shouting, the latter, if such a thing were possible, exceed the 
former, both in discordance and energy. 

every individual compose that mob carry some weapon calculate for 
defence, such as flails, scythes, sickles, bludgeons, &c., and this mode 
of arm cause them to wear a most formidable appearance; while the 
passion that superstition had call up was strong depict in their 
inflamed features. their fury, too, had been excited by their 
disappointment, and it was with concentrated rage that they now pressed 
onward. 

the calm and steady advance of henry and mr. marchdale to meet the 
advance throng, seem to have the effect of retard their progress 
a little, and they came to a parley at a hedge, which separate them 
from the meadow in which the duel had been fought. 

"you seem to be advance towards us," said henry. "do you seek me or 
any of my friends; and if so, upon what errand? mr. chillingworth, for 
heaven's sake, explain what is the cause of all this assault. you seem 
to be at the head of it." 

"seem to be," said mr. chillingworth, "without being so. you are not 
sought, nor any of your friends?" 

"who, then?" 

"sir francis varney," was the immediate reply. 

"indeed! and what has he done to excite popular indignation? of private 
wrong i can accuse him; but i desire no crowd to take up my cause, or to 
avenge my quarrels." 

"mr. bannerworth, it has become known, through my indiscretion, that sir 
francis varney is suspect of being a vampyre." 

"is this so?" 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. "down with the vampyre! hurrah! where is he? 
down with him!" 

"drive a stake through him," said a woman; "it's the only way, and the 
humanest. you've only to take a hedge stake and sharpen it a bit at one 
end, and char it a little in the fire so as there mayt'n't be no 
splinter to hurt, and then poke it through his stomach." 

the mob gave a great shout at this humane piece of advice, and it was 
some time before henry could make himself heard at all, even to those 
who were nearest to him. 

when he did succeed in so doing, he cried, with a loud voice,-- 

"hear me, all of you. it is quite needless for me to inquire how you 
became possessed of the information that a dreadful suspicion hang over 
the person of sir francis varney; but if, in consequence of hearing such 
news, you fancy this public demonstration will be agreeable to me, or 
likely to relieve those who are nearest or dearest to me from the state 
of misery and apprehension into which they have fallen, you are much 
mistaken." 

"hear him, hear him!" cry mr. marchdale; "he speak both wisdom and 
truth." 

"if anything," pursue henry, "could add to the annoyance of vexation 
and misery we have suffered, it would assured be the being made 
subject of every-day gossip, and every-day clamour." 

"you hear him?" said mr. marchdale. 

"yes, we does," said a man; "but we come out to catch a vampyre, for 
all that." 

"oh, to be sure," said the humane woman; "nobody's feelings is nothing 
to us. are we to be woke up in the night with vampyre suck our 
blood while we've got a stake in the country?" 

"hurrah!" shout everybody. "down with the vampyre! where is he?" 

"you are wrong. i assure you, you are all wrong," said mr. 
chillingworth, imploringly; "there is no vampyre here, you see. sir 
francis varney has not only escaped, but he will take the law of all of 
you." 

this was an argument which appear to stagger a few, but the bold 
spirits pushed them on, and a suggestion to search the wood have been 
made by some one who was more cunning than his neighbours, that measure 
was at once proceed with, and execute in a systematic manner, which 
made those who knew it to be the hiding-place of sir francis varney 
tremble for his safety. 

it was with a strange mixture of feeling that henry bannerworth wait 
the result of the search for the man who but a few minutes before had 
been oppose to him in a contest of life or death. 

the destruction of sir francis varney would certainly have been an 
effectual means of prevent him from continue to be the incubus he 
then was upon the bannerworth family; and yet the generous nature of 
henry shrank with horror from seeing even such a creature as varney 
sacrifice at the shrine of popular resentment, and murder by an 
infuriate populace. 

he felt as great an interest in the escape of the vampyre as if some 
great advantage to himself had been contingent upon such an event; and, 
although he spoke not a word, while the echo of the little wood were 
all awaken by the clamorous manner in which the mob search for their 
victim, his feelings could be well read upon his countenance. 

the admiral, too, without possess probably the fine feelings of henry 
bannerworth, took an unusually sympathetic interest in the fate of the 
vampyre; and, after place himself in various attitude of intense 
excitement, he exclaimed,-- 

"d--n it, jack, i do hope, after all, the vampyre will get the better of 
them. it's like a whole flotilla attack one vessel--a lubber 
proceeding at the best, and i'll be hang if i like it. i should like 
to pour in a broadside into those fellows, just to let them see it 
wasn't a proper english mode of fighting. shouldn't you, jack?" 

"ay, ay, sir, i should." 

"shiver me, if i see an opportunity, if i don't let some of those 
rascal know what's what." 

scarcely had these words escape the lip of the old admiral than there 
arose a loud shout from the interior of the wood. it was a shout of 
success, and seem at the very least to herald the capture of the 
unfortunate varney. 

"by heaven!" exclaim henry, "they have him." 

"god forbid!" said mr. marchdale; "this grow too serious." 

"bear a hand, jack," said the admiral: "we'll have a fight for it yet; 
they sha'n't murder even a vampyre in cold blood. load the pistol and 
send a flying shot or two among the rascals, the moment they appear." 

"no, no," said henry; "no more violence, at least there has been 
enough--there has been enough." 

even as he spoke there came rush from among the trees, at the corner 
of the wood, the figure of a man. there need but one glance to assure 
them who it was. sir francis varney had been seen, and was flying before 
those implacable foe who had sought his life. 

he had divest himself of his huge cloak, as well as of his low 
slouch hat, and, with a speed which nothing but the most absolute 
desperation could have enable him to exert, he rush onward, beating 
down before him every obstacle, and bound over the meadow at a rate 
that, if he could have continue it for any length of time, would have 
set pursuit at defiance. 

"bravo!" shout the admiral, "a stern chase is a long chase, and i wish 
them joy of it--d----e, jack, did you ever see anybody get along like 
that?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"you never did, you scoundrel." 

"yes, i did." 

"when and where?" 

"when you ran away off the sound." 

the admiral turn nearly blue with anger, but jack look perfectly 
imperturbable, as he added,-- 

"you know you ran away after the france frigate who wouldn't stay to 
fight you." 

"ah! that indeed. there he goes, putt on every stitch of canvass, 
i'll be bound." 

"and there they come," said jack, as he pointed to the corner of the 
wood, and some of the more active of the vampyre's pursuer show 
themselves. 

it would appear as if the vampyre had been start from some 
hiding-place in the interior of the wood, and had then thought it 
expedient altogether to leave that retreat, and make his way to some 
more secure one across the open country, where there would be more 
obstacle to his discovery than perseverance could overcome. probably, 
then, among the brushwood and trees, for a few moments he had been again 
lost sight of, until those who were closest upon his track had emerge 
from among the dense foliage, and saw him scour across the country at 
such headlong speed. these were but few, and in their extreme anxiety 
themselves to capture varney, whose precipate and terrify flight 
brought a firm conviction to their mind of his being a vampyre, they 
did not stop to get much of a reinforcement, but plunge on like 
greyhound in his track. 

"jack," said the admiral, "this won't do. look at that great lubber 
fellow with the queer smock-frock." 

"never saw such a figure-head in my life," said jack. 

"stop him." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

the man was coming on at a prodigious rate, and jack, with all the 
deliberation in the world, advanced to meet him; and when they got 
sufficient close together, that in a few moments they must encounter 
each other, jack made himself into as small a bundle as possible, and 
present his shoulder to the advance countryman in such a way, that 
he flew off it at a tangent, as if he had run against a brick wall, and 
after rolling head over heel for some distance, safe deposit 
himself in a ditch, where he disappear completely for a few moments 
from all human observation. 

"don't say i hit you," said jack. "curse yer, what did yer run against 
me for? sarve you right. lubber as don't know how to steer, in course 
runs agin things." 

"bravo," said the admiral; "there's another of them." 

the pursuer of varney the vampyre, however, now came too thick and fast 
to be so easily disposed of, and as soon as his figure could be seen 
coursing over the meadows, and spring over road and ditch with an 
agile almost frightful to look upon, the whole rabble rout was in 
pursuit of him. 

by this time, the man who had fallen into the ditch had succeed in 
making his appearance in the visible world again, and as he crawl up 
the bank, look a thing of mire and mud, jack walk up to him with 
all the careless in the world, and said to him,-- 

"any luck, old chap?" 

"oh, murder!" said the man, "what do you mean? who are you? where am i? 
what's the matter? old muster fowler, the fat crowner, will set upon me 
now." 

"have you caught anything?" said jack. 

"caught anything?" 

"yes; you've been in for eels, haven't you?" 

"d--n!" 

"well, it is odd to me, as some people can't go a fishing without 
get out of temper. have it your own way; i won't interfere with 
you;" and away jack walked. 

the man clear the mud out of his eyes, as well as he could, and look 
after him with a powerful suspicion that in jack he saw the very cause 
of his mortal mishap: but, somehow or other, his immersion in the not 
over limpid stream had wonderful cool his courage, and casting one 
despairing look upon his begrime apparel, and another at the last of 
the straggle who were pursue sir francis varney across the fields, 
he thought it prudent to get home as fast he could, and get rid of the 
disagreeable result of an adventure which had turn out for him 
anything but auspicious or pleasant. 

mr. chillingworth, as though by a sort of impulse to be present in case 
sir francis varney should really be run down and with a hope of saving 
him from personal violence, had follow the foremost of the riot in 
the wood, found it now quite impossible for him to carry on such a chase 
as that which was being undertaken across the field after sir francis 
varney. 

his person was unfortunately but ill qualified for the continuance of 
such a pursuit, and, although with the greatest reluctance, he at last 
felt himself compel to give it up. 

in making his way through the intricacy of the wood, he had been 
seriously incommode by the thick undergrowth, and he had accidental 
encounter several miry pools, with which he had involuntary made a 
close acquaintance than was at all conducive either to his personal 
appearance or comfort. the doctor's temper, though, generally speaking, 
one of the most even, was at last affected by his mishaps, and he could 
not restrain from an execrate upon his want of prudence in letting his 
wife have a knowledge of a secret that was not his own, and the 
produce an unlooked for circumstance, the termination of which might 
be of a most disastrous nature. 

tired, therefore, and nearly exhaust by the exertion he had already 
taken, he emerge now alone from the wood, and near the spot where stood 
henry bannerworth and his friends in consultation. 

the jaded look of the surgeon was quite sufficient indication of the 
trouble and turmoil he had gone through, and some expression of 
sympathy for his condition were drop by henry, to whom he replied,-- 

"nay, my young friend, i deserve it all. i have nothing but my own 
indiscretion to thank for all the turmoil and tumult that has arisen 
this morning." 

"but to what possible cause can we attribute such an outrage?" 

"reproach me as much as you will, i deserve it. a man may prate of his 
own secret if he like, but he should be careful of those of other 
people. i trust yours to another, and am properly punished." 

"enough," said henry; "we'll say no more of that, mr. chillingworth. 
what is done cannot be undone, and we had better spend our time in 
reflection of how to make the best of what is, than in useless 
lamentation over its causes. what is to be done?" 

"nay, i know not. have you fought the duel?" 

"yes; and, as you perceive, harmlessly." 

"thank heaven for that." 

"nay, i had my fire, which sir francis varney refuse to return; so the 
affair had just ended, when the sound of approach tumult came upon 
our ears." 

[illustration] 

"what a strange mixture," exclaim marchdale, "of feelings and passion 
this varney appear to be. at one moment acting with the apparent 
greatest malignity; and another, seeming to have awaken in his mind a 
romantic generous which know no bounds. i cannot understand him." 

"nor i, indeed," said henry; "but yet i somehow tremble for his fate, 
and i seem to feel that something ought to be done to save him from the 
fearful consequence of popular feeling. let us hasten to the town, and 
procure what assistance we may: but a few persons, well organised and 
properly armed, will achieve wonders against a desultory and 
ill-appointed multitude. there may be a chance of saving him, yet, from 
the imminent danger which surround him." 

"that's proper," cry the admiral. "i don't like to see anybody run 
down. a fair fight's another thing. yard arm and yard arm--stink pot 
and pipkins--broadside to broadside--and throw in your bodies, if you 
like, on the lee quarter; but don't do anything shabby. what do you 
think of it, jack?" 

"why, i means to say as how if varney only keeps on sail as he's been 
doing, that the devil himself wouldn't catch him in a gale." 

"and yet," said henry, "it is our duty to do the best we can. let us at 
once to the town, and summons all the assistance in our power. come 
on--come on!" 

his friends need no further urging, but, at a brisk pace, they all 
proceed by the nearest footpath towards the town. 

it puzzle his pursuer to think in what possible direction sir francis 
varney expect to find sustenance or succour, when they saw how 
curious he took his flight across the meadows. instead of 
endeavouring, by any circuitous path, to seek the shelter of his own 
house, or to throw himself upon the care of the authority of the town, 
who must, to the extent of their power, have protect him, he struck 
across the fields, apparently without aim or purpose, seemingly intent 
upon nothing but to distance his pursuer in a long chase, which might 
possibly tire them, or it might not, according to their or his powers of 
endurance. 

we say this seem to be the case, but it was not so in reality. sir 
francis varney had a deep purpose, and it was scarcely to be supposed 
that a man of his subtle genius, and, apparently, far-seeing and 
reflect intellect, could have so far overlook the many danger of 
his position as not to be fully prepared for some such contingency as 
that which had just now occurred. 

holding, as he did, so strange a place in society--living among men, and 
yet possess so few attribute in common with humanity--he must all 
along have felt the possibility of drawing upon himself popular 
violence. 

he could not wholly rely upon the secrecy of the bannerworth family, 
much as they might well be supposed to shrink from give publicity to 
circumstances of so fearful strange and perilous a nature as those 
which had occur amongst them. the merest accident might, at any 
moment, make him the town's talk. the overhear of a few chance words 
by some gossip domestic--some ebullition of anger or annoyance by 
some member of the family--or a communication from some friend who had 
been treat with confidence--might, at any time, awaken around him some 
such a storm as that which now rage at his heels. 

varney the vampire must have calculate this. he must have felt the 
possibility of such a state of things; and, as a matter of course, 
politic provided himself with some place of refuge. 

after about twenty minutes of hard chase across the fields, there 
could be no doubt of his intentions. he had such a place of refuge; and, 
strange a one as it might appear, he sped towards it in as direct a line 
as ever a well-sped arrow flew towards its mark. 

that place of refuge, to the surprise of every one, appear to be the 
ancient ruin, of which we have before spoken, and which was so well 
known to every inhabitant of the county. 

truly, it seem like some act of mere desperation for sir francis 
varney to hope there to hide himself. there remain within, of what had 
once been a stately pile, but a few grey crumble walls, which the 
hunt have would have pass unheeded, knowing that not for one instant 
could he have baffle his pursuer by seek so inefficient a refuge. 

and those who follow hard and fast upon the track of sir francis 
varney felt so sure of their game, when they saw whither he was 
speeding, that they relax in their haste considerably, calling loud 
to each other that the vampire was caught at last, for he could be 
easily surround among the old ruins, and drag from amongst its 
moss-grown walls. 

in another moment, with a wild dash and a cry of exultation, he sprang 
out of sight, behind an angle, form by what had been at one time one 
of the principal support of the ancient structure. 

then, as if there was still something so dangerous about him, that only 
by a great number of hand could he be hope to be secured, the 
infuriate peasantry gather in a dense circle around what they 
considered his temporary place of refuge, and as the sun, which had now 
climb above the tree tops, and dispersed, in a great measure, many of 
the heavy cloud of morning, shone down upon the excited group, they 
might have been supposed there assemble to perform some superstitious 
rite, which time had hallow as an association of the crumble ruin 
around which they stood. 

by the time the whole of the stragglers, who had persist in the chase, 
had come up, there might have been about fifty or sixty resolute men, 
each intent upon secure the person of one whom they felt, while in 
existence, would continue to be a terror to all the weak and dear 
portion of their domestic circles. 

there was a pause of several minutes. those who had come the fleetest 
were gathering breath, and those who had come up last were look to 
their more forward companion for some information as to what had 
occur before their arrival. 

all was profound still within the ruin, and then suddenly, as if by 
common consent, there arose from every throat a loud shout of 
"down with the vampyre! down with the vampyre!" 

the echo of that shout die away, and then all was still as before, 
while a superstitious feeling crept over even the boldest. it would 
almost seem as if they had expect some kind of response from sir 
francis varney to the shout of defiance with which they had just greet 
him; but the very calmness, repose, and absolute quiet of the ruin, and 
all about it, alarm them, and they look the one at the other as if 
the adventure after all were not one of the pleasantest description, and 
might not fall out so happily as they had expected. 

yet what danger could there be? there were they, more than half a 
hundred stout, strong men, to cope with one; they felt convinced that he 
was completely in their power; they knew the ruins could not hide him, 
and that five minutes time given to the task, would suffice to explore 
every nook and corner of them. 

and yet they hesitated, while an unknown terror shook their nerves, and 
seemingly from the very fact that they had run down their game 
successfully, they dread to secure the trophy of the chase. 

one bold spirit was wanting; and, if it was not a bold one that spoke at 
length, he might be compliment as being comparatively such. it was one 
who had not been foremost in the chase, perchance from want of physical 
power, who now stood forward, and exclaimed,-- 

"what are you wait for, now? you can have him when you like. if you 
want your wives and children to sleep quiet in their beds, you will 
secure the vampyre. come on--we all know he's here--why do you hesitate? 
do you expect me to go alone and drag him out by the ears?" 

any voice would have suffice to break the spell which bound them. this 
did so; and, with one accord, and yell of imprecation, they rush 
forward and plunge among the old wall of the ruin. 

less time than we have before remark would have enable any one to 
explore the totter fabric sufficient to bring a conviction to their 
mind that, after all, there might have been some mistake about the 
matter, and sir francis varney was not quite caught yet. 

it was astonish how the fact of not finding him in a moment, again 
rouse all their angry feelings against him, and dispel every feeling 
of superstitious awe with which he had been surrounded; rage gave place 
to the sort of shudder horror with which they had before contemplate 
his immediate destruction, when they had believe him to be virtually 
within their very grasp. 

over and over again the ruins were searched--hastily and impatient by 
some, careful and deliberate by others, until there could be no 
doubt upon the mind of every one individual, that somehow or somewhere 
within the shadow of those walls, sir francis varney had disappear 
most mysteriously. 

then it would have been a strange sight for any indifferent spectator to 
have seen how they shrunk, one by one, out of the shadow of those ruins; 
each seeming to be afraid that the vampyre, in some mysterious manner, 
would catch him if he happen to be the last within their sombre 
influence; and, when they had all collected in the bright, open space, 
some little distance beyond, they look at each other and at the ruins, 
with dubious expression of countenance, each, no doubt, wish that 
each would suggest something of a consolatory or practicable character. 

"what's to be done, now?" said one. 

"ah! that's it," said another, sententiously. "i'll be hang if i 
know." 

"he's given us the slip," remark a third. 

"but he can't have given us the slip," said one man, who was 
particularly famous for a dogmatic spirit of argumentation; "how is it 
possible? he must be here, and i say he is here." 

"find him, then," cry several at once. 

"oh! that's nothing to do with the argument; he's here, whether we find 
him or not." 

one very cunning fellow laid his finger on his nose, and beckon to a 
comrade to retire some paces, where he deliver himself of the 
following very oracular sentiment:-- 

"my good friend, you must know sir francis varney is here or he isn't." 

"agreed, agreed." 

"well, if he isn't here it's no use trouble our head any more about 
him; but, otherwise, it's quite another thing, and, upon the whole, i 
must say, that i rather think he is." 

all look at him, for it was evident he was big with some suggestion. 
after a pause, he resumed,-- 

"now, my good friends, i propose that we all appear to give it up, and 
to go away; but that some one of us shall remain and hide among the 
ruins for some time, to watch, in case the vampyre make his appearance 
from some hole or corner that we haven't found out." 

"oh, capital!" said everybody. 

"then you all agree to that?" 

"yes, yes." 

"very good; that's the only way to nick him. now, we'll pretend to give 
it up; let's all of us talk loud about go home." 

they did all talk loud about go home; they swore that it was not 
worth the trouble of catching him, that they gave it up as a bad job; 
that he might go to the deuce in any way he liked, for all they cared; 
and then they all walk off in a body, when, the man who had made the 
suggestion, sudden cried,-- 

"hilloa! hilloa!--stop! stop! you know one of us is to wait?" 

"oh, ay; yes, yes, yes!" said everybody, and still they move on. 

"but really, you know, what's the use of this? who's to wait?" 

that was, indeed, a knotty question, which induce a serious 
consultation, ending in their all, with one accord, pitch upon the 
author of the suggestion, as by far the best person to hide in the ruins 
and catch the vampyre. 

they then all set off at full speed; but the cunning fellow, who 
certainly had not the slightest idea of so practically carry out his 
own suggestion, scamper off after them with a speed that soon brought 
him in the midst of the throng again, and so, with fear in their looks, 
and all the evidence of fatigue about them, they reach the town to 
spread fresh and more exaggerate account of the mysterious conduct of 
varney the vampyre. 




chapter xliv. 

varney's danger, and his rescue.--the prisoner again, and the 
subterranean vault. 


[illustration] 

we have before slightly mention to the reader, and not unadvisedly, 
the existence of a certain prisoner, confine in a gloomy dungeon, into 
whose sad and blacken recess but few and faint glimmer ray of 
light ever penetrated; for, by a diabolical ingenuity, the narrow 
loophole which serve for a window to that subterraneous abode was so 
constructed, that, let the sun be at what point it might, during its 
diurnal course, but a few reflect beam of light could ever find their 
way into that abode of sorrow. 

the prisoner--the same prisoner of whom we before spoke--is there. 
despair is in his looks, and his temple are still bound with those 
cloths, which seem now for many days to have been sop in blood, 
which has become encrust in their folds. 

he still lives, apparently incapable of movement. how he has live so 
long seem to be a mystery, for one would think him scarcely in a state, 
even were nourishment placed to his lips, to enable him to swallow it. 

it may be, however, that the mind has as much to do with that apparent 
absolute prostration of all sort of physical energy as those bodily 
wound which he has received at the hand of the enemy who have 
reduce him to his present painful and hopeless situation. 

occasional a low groan burst from his lips; it seem to come from the 
very bottom of his heart, and it sound as if it would carry with it 
every remnant of vitality that was yet remain to him. 

then he move restlessly, and repeat in hurried accent the name of 
some who are dear to him, and far away--some who may, perchance, be 
mourning him, but who know not, guess not, aught of his present 
sufferings. 

as he thus moves, the rustle of a chain among the straw on which he lie 
give an indication, that even in that dungeon it has not been 
considered prudent to leave him master of his own actions, lest, by too 
vigorous an effort, he might escape from the thraldom in which he is 
held. 

the sound reach his own ears, and for a few moments, in the deep 
impatience of his wound spirit, he heap malediction on the head of 
those who have reduce him to his present state. 

but soon a better nature seem to come over him, and gentle words fall 
from his lips. he preach patience to himself--he talks not of revenge, 
but of justice, and in accent of more hopeful than he had before 
spoken, he call upon heaven to succour him in his deep distress. 

then all is still, and the prisoner appear to have resigned himself 
once more to the calm of expectation or of despair; but hark! his 
sense of hearing, render doubly acute by lie so long alone in nearly 
darkness, and in positive silence, detect sound which, to ordinary 
mortal powers of perception, would have been by far too indistinct to 
produce any tangible effect upon the senses. 

it is the sound of feet--on, on they come; far overhead he hear them; 
they beat the green earth--that sweet, verdant sod, which he may never 
see again--with an impatient tread. near and near still; and now 
they pause; he listen with all the intensity of one who listen for 
existence; some one comes; there is a lumber noise--a hasty footstep; 
he hear some one labour for breath--panting like a hunt hare; his 
dungeon door is opened, and there totter in a man, tall and gaunt; he 
reel like one intoxicated; fatigue has done more than the work of 
inebriation; he cannot save himself, and he sink exhaust by the side 
of that lonely prisoner. 

the captive raise himself as far as his chain will allow him; he 
clutches the throat of his enervate visitor. 

"villain, monster, vampyre!" he shrieks, "i have thee now;" and lock 
in a deadly embrace, they roll upon the damp earth, struggle for life 
together. 

* * * * * 

it is mid-day at bannerworth hall, and flora is look from the 
case anxious expect the arrival of her brothers. she had seen, 
from some of the topmost window of the hall, that the whole 
neighbourhood had been in a state of commotion, but little did she guess 
the cause of so much tumult, or that it in any way concerned her. 

she had seen the peasantry forsake their work in the field and the 
gardens, and apparently intent upon some object of absorbing interest; 
but she fear to leave the house, for she had promise henry that she 
would not do so, lest the former pacific conduct of the vampyre should 
have been but a new snare, for the purpose of drawing her so far from 
her home as to lead her into some danger when she should be far from 
assistance. 

and yet more than once was she tempt to forget her promise, and to 
seek the open country, for fear that those she love should be 
encounter some danger for her sake, which she would willing either 
share with them or spare them. 

the solicitation, however, of her brother kept her comparatively quiet; 
and, moreover, since her last interview with varney, in which, at all 
events, he had shown some feeling for the melancholy situation to which, 
he had reduce her, she had been more able to reason calmly, and to meet 
the suggestion of passion and of impulse with a sober judgment. 

about midday, then, she saw the domestic party returning--that party, 
which now consist of her two brothers, the admiral, jack pringle, and 
mr. chillingworth. as for mr. marchdale, he had given them a polite 
adieu on the confines of the grounds of bannerworth hall, stating, that 
although he had felt it to be his duty to come forward and second henry 
bannerworth in the duel with the vampyre, yet that circumstance by no 
means obliterate from his memory the insult he had received from 
admiral bell, and, therefore, he decline go to bannerworth hall, and 
bade them a very good morning. 

to all this, admiral bell reply that he might go and be d----d, if he 
liked, and that he considered him a swab and a humbug, and appeal to 
jack pringle whether he, jack, ever saw such a sanctify look prig 
in his life. 

"ay, ay," say jack. 

this answer, of course, produce the usual contention, which last them 
until they got fairly in the house, where they swore at each other to an 
extent that was enough to make any one's hair stand on end, until henry 
and mr. chillingworth interfered, and really beg that they would 
postpone the discussion until some more fitting opportunity. 

the whole of the circumstances were then related to flora; who, while 
she blame her brother much for fight the duel with the vampyre, 
found in the conduct of that mysterious individual, as regard the 
encounter, yet another reason for believe him to be strict sincere 
in his desire to save her from the consequence of his future visits. 

her desire to leave bannerworth hall consequently became more and more 
intense, and as the admiral really now considered himself the master of 
the house, they offer no amount of opposition to the subject, but 
merely said,-- 

"my dear flora, admiral bell shall decide in all these matters, now. we 
know that he is our sincere friend; and that whatever he say we ought 
to do, will be dictate by the best possible feelings towards us." 

"then i appeal to you, sir," said flora, turning to the admiral. 

"very good," reply the old man; "then i say--" 

"nay, admiral," interrupt mr. chillingworth; "you promise me, but a 
short time since, that you would come to no decision whatever upon this 
question, until you had heard some particulars which i have to relate to 
you, which, in my humble opinion, will sway your judgment." 

"and so i did," cry the admiral; "but i had forgotten all about it. 
flora, my dear, i'll be with you in an hour or two. my friend, the 
doctor, here, has got some sow by the ear, and fancies it's the right 
one; however, i'll hear what he has got to say, first, before we come to 
a conclusion. so, come along, mr. chillingworth, and let's have it out 
at once." 

"flora," said henry, when the admiral had left the room, "i can see that 
you wish to leave the hall." 

"i do, brother; but not to go far--i wish rather to hide from varney 
than to make myself inaccessible by distance." 

"you still cling to this neighbourhood?" 

"i do, i do; and you know with what hope i cling to it." 

"perfectly; you still think it possible that charles dutch may be 
united to you." 

"i do, i do." 

"you believe his faith." 

"oh, yes; as i believe in heaven's mercy." 

"and i, flora; i would not doubt him now for worlds; something even now 
seem to whisper to me that a bright sun of happiness will yet dawn 
upon us, and that, when the mists which at present enshroud ourselves 
and our fortune pass away, they will disclose a landscape full of 
beauty, the future of which shall know no pangs." 

"yes, brother," exclaim flora, enthusiastically; "this, after all, may 
be but some trial, grievous while it lasts, but yet tend eventually 
only to make the future look more bright and beautiful. heaven may yet 
have in store for us all some great happiness, which shall spring 
clearly and decidedly from out these misfortunes." 

"be it so, and may we ever thus banish despair by such hopeful 
propositions. lean on my arm, flora; you are safe with me. come, 
dearest, and taste the sweet of the morning air." 

there was, indeed now, a hopeful about the manner in which henry 
bannerworth spoke, such as flora had not for some weary month had the 
pleasure of listen to, and she eager rose to accompany him into the 
garden, which was glowing with all the beauty of sunshine, for the day 
had turn out to be much fine than the early morning had at all 
promise it would be. 

"flora," he said, when they had taken some turn to and fro in the 
garden, "notwithstanding all that has happened, there is no convincing 
mr. chillingworth that sir francis varney is really what to us he 
appears." 

"indeed!" 

"it is so. in the face of all evidence, he neither will believe in 
vampyre at all, nor that varney is anything but some mortal man, like 
ourselves, in his thoughts, talents, feelings, and mode of life; and 
with no more power to do any one an injury than we have." 

"oh, would that i could think so!" 

"and i; but, unhappily, we have by far too many, and too conclusive 
evidence to the contrary." 

"we have, indeed, brother." 

"and though, while we respect that strength of mind in our friend which 
will not allow him, even almost at the last extremity, to yield to what 
appear to be stern facts, we may not ourselves be so obdurate, but may 
feel that we know enough to be convinced." 

"you have no doubt, brother?" 

"most reluctantly, i must confess, that i feel compel to consider 
varney as something more than mortal." 

"he must be so." 

"and now, sister, before we leave the place which has been a home to us 
from earliest life, let us for a few moments consider if there be any 
possible excuse for the notion of mr. chillingworth, to the effect that 
sir francis varney wants possession of the house for some purpose still 
more inimical to our peace and prosperity than any he has yet 
attempted." 

"has he such an opinion?" 

"he has." 

"'tis very strange." 

"yes, flora; he seem to gather from all the circumstances, nothing but 
an overwhelming desire on the part of sir francis varney to become the 
tenant of bannerworth hall." 

"he certainly wish to possess it." 

"yes; but can you, sister, in the exercise of any possible amount of 
fancy, imagine any motive for such an anxiety beyond what he alleges?" 

"which is merely that he is fond of old houses." 

"precisely so. that is the reason, and the only one, that can be got 
from him. heaven only know if it be the true one." 

"it may be, brother." 

"as you say, it may; but there's a doubt, nevertheless, flora. i much 
rejoice that you have had an interview with this mysterious being, for 
you have certainty, since that time, been happy and more compose than 
i ever hope to see you again." 

"i have indeed." 

"it is sufficient perceivable." 

"somehow, brother, since that interview, i have not had the same sort of 
dread of sir francis varney which before made the very sound of his name 
a note of terror to me. his words, and all he said to me during that 
interview which took place so strange between us, indeed how i know 
not, tend altogether rather to make him, to a certain extent, an 
object of my sympathies rather than my abhorrence." 

"that is very strange." 

"i own that it is strange, henry; but when we come for but a brief 
moment to reflect upon the circumstances which have occurred, we shall, 
i think, be able to find some cause even to pity varney the vampyre." 

"how?" 

"thus, brother. it is said--and well may i who have been subject to an 
attack of such a nature, tremble to repeat the saying--that those who 
have been once subject to the visitation of a vampyre, are themselves 
in a way to become one of the dreadful and maddening fraternity." 

"i have heard so much, sister," reply henry. 

"yes; and therefore who know but that sir francis varney may, at one 
time, have been as innocent as we are ourselves of the terrible and 
fiendish propensity which now make him a terror and a reproach to all 
who know him, or are in any way obnoxious to his attacks." 

"that is true." 

"there may have been a time--who shall say there was not?--when he, like 
me, would have shrunk, with a dread as great as any one could have 
experienced, from the contamination of the touch even of a vampyre." 

"i cannot, sister, deny the sound of your reasoning," said henry, 
with a sigh; "but i still no not see anything, even from a full 
conviction that varney is unfortunate, which should induce us to 
tolerate him." 

"nay, brother, i said not tolerate. what i mean is, that even with the 
horror and dread we must naturally feel at such a being, we may afford 
to mingle some amount of pity, which shall make us rather seek to shun 
him, than to cross his path with a resolution of do him an injury." 

"i perceive well, sister, what you mean. rather than remain here, and 
make an attempt to defy sir francis varney, you would fly from him, and 
leave him undisputed master of the field." 

"i would--i would." 

"heaven forbid that i or any one should thwart you. you know well, 
flora, how dear you are to me; you know well that your happiness has 
ever been to us all a matter which has assume the most important of 
shapes, as regard our general domestic policy. it is not, therefore, 
likely now, dear sister, that we should thwart you in your wish to 
remove from here." 

"i know, henry, all you would say," remark flora, as a tear start to 
her eyes. "i know well all you think, and, in your love for me, i 
likewise know well i rely for ever. you are attach to this place, as, 
indeed, we all are, by a thousand happy and pleasant associations; but 
listen to me further, henry, i do not wish to wander far." 

"not far, flora?" 

"no. do i not still cling to a hope that charles may yet appear? and if 
he do so, it will assured be in this neighbourhood, which he know is 
native and most dear to us all." 

"true." 

"then do i wish to make some sort of parade, in the way of publicity, of 
our leave the hall." 

"yes, yes." 

"and yet not go far. in the neighbouring town, for example, surely we 
might find some means of living entire free from remark or observation 
as to who or what we were." 

"that, sister, i doubt. if you seek for that species of solitude which 
you contemplate, it is only to be found in a desert." 

"a desert?" 

"yes; or in a large city." 

"indeed!" 

"ay, flora; you may well believe me, that it is so. in a small community 
you can have no possible chance of evade an amount of scrutiny which 
would very soon pierce through any disguise you could by any possibility 
assume." 

"then there is no resource. we must go far." 

"nay, i will consider for you, flora; and although, as a general 
principle, what i have said i know to be true, yet some more special 
circumstance may arise that may point a course that, while it enable 
us, for charles holland's sake, to remain in this immediate 
neighbourhood, yet will procure to us all the secrecy we may desire." 

"dear--dear brother," said flora, as she flung herself upon henry's 
neck, "you speak cheering to me, and, what is more, you believe in 
charles's faithful and truth." 

"as heaven is my judge, i do." 

"a thousand, thousand thanks for such an assurance. i know him too well 
to doubt, for one moment, his faith. oh, brother! could he--could 
charles holland, the soul of honour, the abode of every noble impulse 
that can adorn humanity--could he have written those letters? no, no! 
perish the thought!" 

"it has perished." 

"thank god!" 

"i only, upon reflection, wonder how, misle for the moment by the 
concurrence of a number of circumstances, i could ever have suspect 
him." 

"it is like your generous nature, brother to say so; but you know as 
well as i, that there has been one here who has, far from feeling any 
sort of anxiety to think as well as possible of poor charles holland, 
has done all that in him lay to take the worst view of his mysterious 
disappearance, and induce us to do the like." 

"you allude to mr. marchdale?" 

"i do." 

"well, flora, at the same time that i must admit you have cause for 
speak of mr. marchdale as you do, yet when we come to consider all 
things, there may be found for him excuses." 

"may there?" 

"yes, flora; he is a man, as he himself says, past the meridian of life, 
and the world is a sad as well as a bad teacher, for it soon--too soon, 
alas! deprive us of our trust confidence in human nature." 

"it may be so; but yet, he, knowing as he did so very little of charles 
holland, judge him hasty and harshly." 

"you rather ought to say, flora, that he did not judge him generously." 

"well, be it so." 

"and you must recollect, when you say so, that marchdale did not love 
charles holland." 

"nay, now," said flora, while there flash across her cheek, for a 
moment, a heighten colour, "you are commence to jest with me, and, 
therefore, we will say no more. you know, dear henry, all my hopes, my 
wishes, and my feelings, and i shall therefore leave my future destiny 
in your hands, to dispose of as you please. look yonder!" 

"where?" 

"there. do you not see the admiral and mr. chillingworth walking among 
the trees?" 

"yes, yes; i do now." 

"how very serious and intent they are upon the subject of their 
discourse. they seem quite lost to all surrounding objects. i could not 
have imagine any subject that would so completely have absorb the 
attention of admiral bell." 

"mr. chillingworth had something to relate to him or to propose, of a 
nature which, perchance, has had the effect of enchain all his 
attention--he call him from the room." 

"yes; i saw that he did. but see, they come towards us, and now we 
shall, probably, hear what is the subject-matter of their discourse and 
consultation." 

"we shall." 

admiral bell had evidently seen henry and his sister, for now, suddenly, 
as if not from have for the first moment observe them, and, in 
consequence, broken off their private discourse, but as if they arrive 
at some point in it which enable them to come to a conclusion to be 
communicative, the admiral came towards the brother and sister. 

"well," said the bluff old admiral, when they were sufficient near to 
exchange words, "well, miss flora, you are look a thousand times 
better than you were." 

"i thank you, admiral, i am much better." 

"oh, to be sure you are; and you will be much better still, and no sort 
of mistake. now, here's the doctor and i have both been agree upon 
what is best for you." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, to be sure. have we not, doctor?" 

"we have, admiral." 

"good; and what, now, miss flora, do you suppose it is?" 

"i really cannot say." 

"why, it's change of air, to be sure. you must get away from here as 
quick as you can, or there will be no peace for you." 

"yes," add mr. chillingworth, advancing; "i am quite convinced that 
change of scene and change of place, and habits, and people, will tend 
more to your complete recovery than any other circumstances. in the most 
ordinary case of indisposition we always find that the invalid recover 
much soon away from the scene of his indisposition, than by remain 
in it, even though its general salubr be much greater than the place 
to which he may be removed." 

"good," said the admiral. 

"then we are to understand," said henry, with a smile, "that we are no 
long to be your guests, admiral bell?" 

"belay there!" cry the admiral; "who told you to understand any such 
thing, i should like to know?" 

"well, but we shall look upon this house as yours, now; and, that being 
the case, if we remove from it, of course we cease to be your guest any 
longer." 

"that's all you know about it. now, hark ye. you don't command the 
fleet, so don't pretend to know what the admiral is go to do. i have 
made money by knock about some of the enemy of old england, and 
that's the most gratifying manner in the world of making money, so far 
as i am concerned." 

[illustration] 

"it is an honourable mode." 

"of course it is. well, i am go to--what the deuce do you call it?" 

"what?" 

"that's just what i want to know. oh, i have it now. i am go to what 
the lawyer call invest it." 

"a prudent step, admiral, and one which it is to be hoped, before now, 
has occur to you." 

"perhaps it has and perhaps it hasn't; however, that's my business, and 
no one's else's. i am go to invest my spare cash in taking houses; 
so, as i don't care a straw where the house may be situated, you can 
look out for one somewhere that will suit you, and i'll take it; so, 
after all, you will be my guest there just the same as you are here." 

"admiral," said henry, "it would be imposing upon a generous as rare 
as it is noble, were we to allow you to do so much for us as you 
contemplate." 

"very good." 

"we cannot--we dare not." 

"but i say you shall. so you have had your say, and i've had mine, after 
which, if you please, master henry bannerworth, i shall take upon myself 
to consider the affair as altogether settled. you can commence 
operation as soon as you like. i know that miss flora, here--bless her 
sweet eyes--don't want to stay at bannerworth hall any long than she 
can help it." 

"indeed i was urge upon henry to remove," said flora; "but yet i 
cannot help feeling with him, admiral, that we are imposing upon your 
goodness." 

"go on imposing, then." 

"but--" 

"psha! can't a man be impose upon if he likes? d--n it, that's a poor 
privilege for an englishman to be forced to make a row about. i tell you 
i like it. i will be impose upon, so there's an end of that; and now 
let's come in and see what mrs. bannerworth has got ready for luncheon." 

* * * * * 

it can hardly be supposed that such a popular ferment as had been 
create in the country town, by the singular report concerning varney 
the vampyre, should readily, and without abundant satisfaction, subside. 

an idea like that which had lent so powerful an impulse to the popular 
mind, was one far easy to set go than to deprecate or extinguish. 
the very circumstances which had occur to foil the excited mob in 
their pursuit of sir francis varney, were of a nature to increase the 
popular superstition concerning him, and to make him and his acts appear 
in still more dreadful colours. 

mob do not reason very close and clearly; but the very fact of the 
frantic flight of sir francis varney from the project attack of the 
infuriate multitude, was seize hold of as proof positive of the 
reality of his vampyre-like existence. 

then, again, had he not disappear in the most mysterious manner? had 
he not sought refuge where no human being would think of seek refuge, 
namely, in that old, dilapidated ruin, where, when his pursuer were so 
close upon his track, he had succeed in elude their grasp with a 
facility which look as if he had vanish into thin air, or as if the 
very earth had open to receive him bodily within its cold embraces? 

it is not to be wonder at, that the few who flee so precipitate from 
the ruin, lost nothing of the wonderful story they had to tell, in the 
carry it from that place to the town. when they reach their 
neighbours, they not only told what had really occurred, but they add 
to it all their own surmises, and the fanciful creation of all their own 
fears, so that before mid-day, and about the time when henry bannerworth 
was converse so quiet in the garden of the hall with his beautiful 
sister, there was an amount of popular ferment in the town, of which 
they had no conception. 

all business was suspended, and many persons, now that once the idea had 
been start concerning the possibility that a vampyre might have been 
visiting some of the house in the place, told how, in the dead of the 
night, they had heard strange noises. how children had shriek from no 
apparent cause--doors open and shut without human agency; and window 
rattle that never had been known to rattle before. 

some, too, went so far as to declare that they had been awaken out of 
their sleep by noise incidental to an effort made to enter their 
chambers; and other had seen dusky form of gigantic proportions 
outside their windows, tamper with their fastenings, and only 
disappear when the light of day mock all attempt at concealment. 

these tale flew from mouth to mouth, and all listen to them with such 
an eager interest, that none thought it worth while to challenge their 
inconsistencies, or to express a doubt of their truth, because they had 
not been mention before. 

the only individual, and he was a remarkably clever man, who made the 
slightest remark upon the subject of a practical character, hazard a 
suggestion that made confusion worse confounded. 

he knew something of vampyres. he had travelled abroad, and had heard of 
them in germany, as well as in the east, and, to a crowd of wonder 
and aghast listeners, he said,-- 

"you may depend upon it, my friends, this has been go on for some 
time; there have been several mysterious and sudden death in the town 
lately; people have waste away and die nobody knew how or wherefore." 

"yes--yes," said everybody. 

"there was miles, the butcher; you know how fat he was, and then how fat 
he wasn't." 

a general assent was given to the proposition; and then, elevate one 
arm in an oratorical manner, the clever fellow continued,-- 

"i have not a doubt that miles, the butcher, and every one else who has 
die sudden lately, have been victim of the vampyre; and what's more, 
they'll all be vampyres, and come and suck other people's blood, till at 
last the whole town will be a town of vampyres." 

"but what's to be done?" cry one, who tremble so excessive that he 
could scarcely stand under his apprehension. 

"there is but one plan--sir francis varney must be found, and put out of 
the world in such a manner that he can't come back to it again; and all 
those who are dead that we have any suspicion of, should be taken up out 
of their grave and look at, to see if they're rot or not; if they 
are it's all right; but, if they look fresh and much, as usual, you may 
depend they're vampyres, and no mistake." 

this was a terrific suggestion thrown amongst a mob. to have caught sir 
francis varney and immolate him at the shrine of popular fury, they 
would not have shrunk from; but a desecrate of the grave of those 
whom they had known in life was a matter which, however much it had to 
recommend it, even the boldest stood aghast at, and felt some qualm of 
irresolution. 

there are many ideas, however, which, like the first plunge into a cold 
bath, are rather uncomfortable for the moment; but which, in a little 
time, we become so familiarize with, that they become strip of their 
disagreeable concomitants, and appear quite pleasing and natural. 

so it was with this notion of exhume the dead body of those 
townspeople who had recently die from what was call a decay of 
nature, and such other failure of vitality as bore not the tangible 
name of any understood disease. 

from mouth to mouth the awful suggestion spread like wildfire, until at 
last it grew into such a shape that it almost seem to become a duty, 
at all events, to have up mile the butcher, and see how he looked. 

there is, too, about human nature a natural craving curiosity concerning 
everything connected with the dead. there is not a man of education or 
of intellectual endowment who would not travel many mile to look upon 
the exhume of the remains of some one famous in his time, whether 
for his vices, his virtues, his knowledge, his talents, or his heroism; 
and, if this feeling exist in the mind of the educated and refined in a 
sublimate shape, which lend to it grace and dignity, we may look for 
it among the vulgar and the ignorant, taking only a gross and mean 
form, in accordance with their habit of thought. the rude materials, of 
which the highest and noblest feelings of educated mind are formed, 
will be found amongst the most grovel and base; and so this vulgar 
curiosity, which, combine with other feelings, prompt an ignorant and 
illiterate mob to exhume miles, the once fat butcher, in a different 
form tempt the philosophical hamlet to moralise upon the skull of 
yorick. 

and it was wonderful to see how, when these people had made up their 
mind to carry out the singularly interesting, but, at the same, 
fearful, suggestion, they assume to themselves a great virtue in so 
doing--told each other what an absolute necessity there was, for the 
public good, that it should be done; and then, with loud shout and 
cries concerning the vampyre, they proceed in a body to the village 
churchyard, where had been lain, with a hope of repose in peace, the 
bone of their ancestors. 

a species of savage ferocity now appear to have seize upon the crowd, 
and the people, in making up their mind to do something which was 
striking at variance with all their preconceived notions of right and 
wrong, appear to feel that it was necessary, in order that they might 
be consistent, to cast off many of the decencies of life, and to become 
riotous and reckless. 

as they proceed towards the graveyard, they amuse themselves by 
break the window of the tax-gatherers, and do what passing 
mischief they could to the habitation of all who held any official 
situation or authority. 

this was something like a proclamation of war against those who might 
think it their duty to interfere with the lawless proceedings of an 
ignorant multitude. a public-house or two, likewise, _en route_, was 
sack of some of its inebriate contents, so that, what with the 
madness of intoxication, and the general excitement consequent upon the 
very nature of the business which took them to the churchyard, a more 
wild and infuriate multitude than that which pause at two iron gate 
which led into the sanctuary of that church could not be imagined. 

those who have never seen a mob placed in such a situation as to have 
cast off all moral restraint whatever, at the same time that it feel 
there is no physical power to cope with it, can form no notion of the 
mass of terrible passion which lie slumber under what, in ordinary 
cases, have appear harmless bosoms, but which now run riot, and 
overcame every principle of restraint. it is a melancholy fact, but, 
nevertheless, a fact, despite its melancholy, that, even in a civilise 
country like this, with a generally well-educated population, nothing 
but a well-organised physical force keeps down, from the commission of 
the most outrageous offences, hundred and thousand of persons. 

we have said that the mob pause at the iron gate of the churchyard, 
but it was more a pause of surprise than one of vacillation, because 
they saw that those iron gate were closed, which had not been the case 
within the memory of the oldest among them. 

at the first building of the church, and the enclosure of its graveyard, 
two pair of these massive gate had been present by some munificent 
patron; but, after a time, they hung idle upon their hinges, ornamental 
certainly, but useless, while a couple of turnstiles, to keep cattle 
from stray within the sacred precincts, did duty instead, and 
established, without trouble, the regular thoroughfare, which long habit 
had dictate as necessary, through the place of sepulture. 

but now those gate were closed, and for once were do duty. heaven 
only know how they had been move upon their rusty and time-worn 
hinges. the mob, however, was checked for the moment, and it was clear 
that the ecclesiastical authority were resolve to attempt something 
to prevent the desecrate of the tombs. 

those gate were sufficient strong to resist the first vigorous shake 
which was given to them by some of the foremost among the crowd, and 
then one fellow start the idea that they might be open from the 
inside, and volunteer to clamber over the wall to do so. 

hoist up upon the shoulder of several, he grasp the top of the 
wall, and raise his head above its level, and then something of a 
mysterious nature rose up from the inside, and dealt him such a whack 
between the eyes, that down he went sprawl among his coadjutors. 

now, nobody had seen how this injury had been inflicted, and the policy 
of those in the garrison should have been certainly to keep up the 
mystery, and leave the invade in ignorance of what sort of person it 
was that had so foil them. man, however, is prone to indulge in vain 
glorification, and the secret was exploded by the triumphant wave of 
the long staff of the beadle, with the gilt knob at the end of it, just 
over the parapet of the wall, in token of victory. 

"it's waggles! it's waggles!" cry everybody "it's waggles, the 
beadle!" 

"yes," said a voice from within, "it's waggles, the beadle; and he 
think as he had yer there rather; try it again. the church isn't in 
danger; oh, no. what do you think of this?" 

the staff was flourish more vigorous than ever, and in the secure 
position that waggle occupy it seem not only impossible to attack 
him, but that he possessed wonderful powers of resistance, for the staff 
was long and the knob was heavy. 

it was a boy who hit upon the ingenious expedient of throw up a great 
stone, so that it just fell inside the wall, and hit waggle a great 
blow on the head. 

the staff was flourish more vigorous than ever, and the mob, in the 
ecstasy at the fun which was go on, almost forgot the errand which 
had brought them. 

perhaps after all the affair might have pass off jestingly, had not 
there been some really mischievous person among the throng who were 
determined that such should not be the case, and they incite the 
multitude to commence an attack upon the gates, which in a few moments 
must have produce their entire demolition. 

suddenly, however, the boldest drew back, and there was a pause, as the 
well-known form of the clergyman appear advance from the church 
door, attire in full canonicals. 

"there's mr. leigh," said several; "how unlucky he should be here." 

"what is this?" said the clergyman, approach the gates. "can i 
believe my eyes when i see before me those who compose the worship 
at this church armed, and attempt to enter for the purpose of 
violence to this sacred place! oh! let me beseech you, lose not a 
moment, but return to your homes, and repent of that which you have 
already done. it is not yet too late; listen, i pray you, to the voice 
of one with whom you have so often join in prayer to the throne of the 
almighty, who is now look upon your actions." 

this appeal was heard respectfully, but it was evidently very far from 
suiting the feelings and the wish of those to whom it was addressed; 
the presence of the clergyman was evidently an unexpected circumstance, 
and the more especially too as he appear in that costume which they 
had been accustomed to regard with a reverence almost amount to 
veneration. he saw the favourable effect he had produced, and anxious to 
follow it up, he added,-- 

"let this little ebullition of feeling pass away, my friends; and, 
believe me, when i assure you upon my sacred word, that whatever ground 
there may be for complaint or subject for inquiry, shall be fully and 
fairly met; and that the greatest exertion shall be made to restore 
peace and tranquill to all of you." 

"it's all about the vampyre!" cry one fellow--"mr. leigh, how should 
you like a vampyre in the pulpit?" 

"hush, hush! can it be possible that you know so little of the works of 
that great being whom you all pretend to adore, as to believe that he 
would create any class of being of a nature such as those you ascribe 
to that terrific word! oh, let me pray of you to get rid of these 
superstitions--alike disgraceful to yourself and afflict to me." 

the clergyman had the satisfaction of seeing the crowd rapid thin 
from before the gates, and he believe his exhortation were have all 
the effect he wished. it was not until he heard a loud shout behind him, 
and, upon hasty turning, saw that the churchyard had been scale at 
another place by some fifty or sixty persons, that his heart sunk within 
him, and he began to feel that what he had dread would surely come to 
pass. 

even then he might have done something in the way of pacific exertion, 
but for the interference of waggles, the beadle, who spoilt everything. 




chapter xlv. 

the open graves.--the dead bodies.--a scene of terror. 


[illustration] 

we have said waggle spoilt everything, and so he did, for before mr. 
leigh could utter a word more, or advance two steps towards the rioters, 
waggle charged them staff in hand, and there soon ensue a riot of a 
most formidable description. 

a kind of desperation seem to have seize the beadle, and certainly, 
by his sudden and unexpected attack, he achieve wonders. when, however, 
a dozen hand got hold of the staff, and it was wrench from him, and 
he was knock down, and half-a-dozen people roll over him, waggle 
was not near the man he had been, and he would have been very well 
content to have lain quiet where he was; this, however, he was not 
permit to do, for two or three, who had felt what a weighty 
instrument of warfare the parochial staff was, lift him bodily from 
the ground, and cant him over the wall, without much regard to whether 
he fell on a hard or a soft place on the other side. 

this feat accomplished, no further attention was paid to mr. leigh, who, 
finding that his exhortation were quite unheeded, retired into the 
church with an appearance of deep affliction about him, and lock 
himself in the vestry. 

the crowd now had entire possession--without even the sort of control 
that an exhortation assume over them--of the burying-ground, and soon 
in a dense mass were these desperate and excited people collected round 
the well-known spot where lay the mortal remains of miles, the butcher. 

"silence!" cry a loud voice, and every one obey the mandate, look 
towards the speaker, who was a tall, gaunt-looking man, attire in a 
suit of fade black, and who now pressed forward to the front of the 
throng. 

"oh!" cry one, "it's fletcher, the ranter. what do he do here?" 

"hear him! hear him!" cry others; "he won't stop us." 

"yes, hear him," cry the tall man, wave his arms about like the 
sail of a windmill. "yes, hear him. son of darkness, you're all 
vampyres, and are continual suck the life-blood from each other. no 
wonder that the evil one has power over you all. you're as men who walk 
in the dark when the sunlight invite you, and you listen to the 
words of humanity when those of a diviner origin are offer to your 
acceptance. but there shall be miracle in the land, and even in this 
place, set apart with a pretended piety that is in itself most damnable, 
you shall find an evidence of the true light; and the proof that those 
who will follow me the true path to glory shall be found here within 
this grave. dig up miles, the butcher!" 

"hear, hear, hear, hurra!" said every body. "mr. fletcher's not such a 
fool, after all. he means well." 

"yes, you sinners," said the ranter, "and if you find miles, the 
butcher, decaying--even as men are expect to decay whose mortal 
tabernacle are placed within the bowels of the earth--you shall gather 
from that a great omen, and a sign that if you follow me you seek the 
lord; but i you find him look fresh and healthy, as if the warm blood 
was still within his veins, you shall take that likewise as a 
signification that what i say to you shall be as the gospel, and that by 
coming to the chapel of the little boozlehum, ye shall achieve a great 
salvation." 

"very good," said a brawny fellow, advance with a spade in his hand; 
"you get out of the way, and i'll soon have him up. here goes, like blue 
blazes!" 

the first shovelful of earth he took up, he cast over his head into the 
air, so that it fell in a shower among the mob, which of course raise a 
shout of indignation; and, as he continue so to dispose of the 
superfluous earth, a general row seem likely to ensue. mr. fletcher 
open his mouth to make a remark, and, as that feature of his face was 
rather a capacious one, a descend lump of mould, of a clayey 
consistency, fell into it, and got so wedged among his teeth, that in 
the process of extract it he nearly brought some of those essential 
portion of his anatomy with it. 

this was a state of things that could not last long, and he who had been 
so liberal with his spadesful of mould was speedy disarmed, and yet he 
was a popular favourite, and had done the thing so good-humouredly, that 
nobody touched him. six or eight others, who had brought spade and 
pickaxes, now pushed forward to the work, and in an incredible short 
space of time the grave of miles, the butcher, seem to be very nearly 
excavated. 

work of any kind or nature whatever, is speedy execute when done with 
a wish to get through it; and never, perhaps, within the memory of man, 
was a grave open in that churchyard with such a wonderful celerity. 
the excitement of the crowd grew intense--every available spot from 
which a view of the grave could be got, was occupied; for the last few 
minutes scarcely a remark had been uttered, and when, at last, the spade 
of one of those who were digging struck upon something that sound like 
wood, you might have heard a pin drop, and each one there present drew 
his breath more shortly than before. 

"there he is," said the man, whose spade struck upon the coffin. 

those few words broke the spell, and there was a general murmur, while 
every individual present seem to shift his position in his anxiety to 
obtain a better view of what was about to ensue. 

the coffin now have been once found, there seem to be an increase 
impetus given to the work; the earth was thrown out with a rapid that 
seem almost the quick result of the working of some machine; and those 
closest to the grave's brink crouch down, and, intent as they were 
upon the progress of events, heed not the damp earth that fell upon 
them, nor the frail brittle and humid remains of humanity that 
occasional roll to their feet. 

it was, indeed, a scene of intense excitement--a scene which only want 
a few prominent features in its foreground of a more intellectual and 
higher cast than compose the mob, to make it a fit theme for a painter 
of the highest talent. 

and now the last few shovelful of earth that hid the top of the coffin 
were cast from the grave, and that narrow house which contained the 
mortal remains of him who was so well known, while in life, to almost 
every one then present, was brought to the gaze of eyes which never had 
seem likely to have look upon him again. 

the cry was now for ropes, with which to raise the cumbrous mass; but 
these were not to be had, no one thought of providing himself with such 
appliances, so that by main strength, only, could the coffin be raise 
to the brink. 

the difficulty of do this was immense, for there was nothing tangible 
to stand upon; and even when the mould from the side was sufficient 
clear away, that the handle of the coffin could be laid hold of, they 
came away immediately in the grasp of those who did so. 

but the more trouble that present itself to the accomplishment of the 
designs of the mob, the more intent that body seem upon carry out 
to the full extent their original designs. 

finding it quite impossible by bodily strength to raise the coffin of 
the butcher from the position in which it had got imbed by excessive 
rains, a boy was hasty despatch to the village for ropes, and never 
did boy run with such speed before, for all his own curiosity was 
excited in the issue of an adventure, that to his young imagination was 
appalling interesting. 

as impatient as mob usually are, they had not time, in this case, for 
the exercise of that quality of mind before the boy came back with the 
necessary means of exert quite a different species of power against 
the butcher's coffin. 

strong ropes were slid under the inert mass, and twenty hand at once 
ply the task of raise that receptacle of the dead from what had been 
presume to be its last resting-place. the ropes strained and creaked, 
and many thought that they would burst asunder soon than raise the 
heavy coffin of the defunct butcher. 

it is singular what reason people find for backing their opinion. 

"you may depend he's a vampyre," said one, "or it wouldn't be so 
difficult to get him out of the grave." 

"oh, there can be no mistake about that," said one; "when did a natural 
christian's coffin stick in the mud in that way?" 

"ah, to be sure," said another; "i knew no good would come of his goings 
on; he never was a decent sort of man like his neighbours, and many 
queer things have been said of him that i have no doubt are true enough, 
if we did but know the rights of them." 

"ah, but," said a young lad, thrust his head between the two who were 
talking, "if he is a vampyre, how do he get out of his coffin of a 
night with all that weight of mould a top of him?" 

one of the men considered for a moment, and then finding no rational 
answer occur to him, he gave the boy a box on the ear, saying,-- 

"i should like to know what business that is of yours? boys, now-a-days, 
ain't like the boys in my time; they think nothing now of putt their 
spoke in grown-up people's wheels, just as if their opinion were of 
any consequence." 

now, by a vigorous effort, those who were tug at the ropes succeed 
in moving the coffin a little, and that first step was all the 
difficulty, for it was loosen from the adhesive soil in which it lay, 
and now came up with considerable facility. 

there was a half shout of satisfaction at this result, while some of the 
congregation turn pale, and tremble at the prospect of the sight 
which was about to present itself; the coffin was drag from the 
grave's brink fairly among the long rank grass that flourish in the 
churchyard, and then they all look at it for a time, and the men who 
had been most earnest in raise it wipe the perspiration from their 
brows, and seem to shrink from the task of opening that receptacle of 
the dead now that it was fairly in their power so to do. 

each man look anxious in his neighbour's face, and several audible 
wonder why somebody else didn't open the coffin. 

"there's no harm in it," said one; "if he's a vampyre, we ought to know 
it; and, if he ain't, we can't do any hurt to a dead man." 

"oughtn't we to have the service for the dead?" said one. 

"yes," said the impertinent boy who had before received the knock on the 
head, "i think we ought to have that read backwards." 

this ingenious idea was recompense by a great many kicks and cuffs, 
which ought to have been sufficient to have warn him of the great 
danger of being a little before his age in wit. 

"where's the use of shirk the job?" cry he who had been so active 
in shovel the mud upon the multitude; "why, you cowardly sneaking set 
of humbugs, you're half afraid, now." 

"afraid--afraid!" cry everybody: "who's afraid." 

"ah, who's afraid?" said a little man, advancing, and assume an heroic 
attitude; "i always notice, if anybody's afraid, it's some big fellow, 
with more bone than brains." 

at this moment, the man to whom this reproach was more particularly 
levelled, raise a horrible shout of terror, and cry out, in frantic 
accents,-- 

"he's a-coming--he's a-coming!" 

the little man fell at once into the grave, while the mob, with one 
accord, turn tail, and flee in all directions, leave him alone with 
the coffin. such a fighting, and kicking, and scramble ensue to get 
over the wall of the grave-yard, that this great fellow, who had cause 
all the mischief, burst into such peal of laughter that the majority of 
the people became aware that it was a joke, and came creep back, 
look as sheepish as possible. 

some got up very faint sort of laugh, and said "very good," and swore 
they saw what big dick meant from the first, and only ran to make the 
other run. 

"very good," said dick, "i'm glad you enjoy it, that's all. my eye, 
what a scamper there was among you. where's my little friend, who was 
so infernal cunning about bone and brains?" 

with some difficulty the little man was extricate from the grave, and 
then, oh, for the consistency of a mob! they all laugh at him; those 
very people who, heedless of all the amenity of existence, had been 
trample upon each other, and roaring with terror, actually had the 
impudence to laugh at him, and call him a cowardly little rascal, and 
say it serve him right. 

but such is popularity! 

"well, if nobody won't open the coffin," said big dick, "i will, so here 
goes. i know the old fellow when he was alive, and many a time he's 
d----d me and i've d----d him, so i ain't a-going to be afraid of him 
now he's dead. we was very intimate, you see, 'cos we was the two 
heaviest men in the parish; there's a reason for everything." 

"ah, dick's the fellow to do it," cry a number of persons; "there's 
nobody like dick for opening a coffin; he's the man as don't care for 
nothing." 

"ah, you snivel curs," said dick, "i hate you. if it warn't for my 
own satisfaction, and all for to prove that my old friend, the butcher, 
as weigh seventeen stone, and stood six feet two and-a-half on his own 
sole, i'd see you all jolly well--" 

"d----d first," said the boy; "open the lid, dick, let's have a look." 

"ah, you're a rum un," said dick, "arter my own heart. i sometimes 
think as you must be a nevy, or some sort of relation of mine. 
howsomdever, here goes. who'd a thought that i should ever had a look at 
old fat and thunder again?--that's what i use to call him; and then he 
use to request me to go down below, where i needn't turn round to light 
my blessed pipe." 

"hell--we know," said the boy; "why don't you open the lid, dick?" 

"i'm a going," said dick; "kim up." 

he introduce the corner of a shovel between the lid and the coffin, and 
give it a sudden wrench, he loosen it all down one side. 

a shudder pervade the multitude, and, popularly speaking, you might 
have heard a pin drop in that crowded churchyard at that eventful 
moment. 

dick then proceed to the other side, and execute the same manoeuvre. 

"now for it," he said; "we shall see him in a moment, and we'll think we 
seed him still." 

"what a lark!" said the boy. 

"you hold yer jaw, will yer? who axed you for a remark, blow yer? what 
do you mean by squat down there, like a cock-sparrow, with a pain in 
his tail, hanging yer head, too, right over the coffin? did you never 
hear of what they call a fluvifium coming from the dead, yer ignorant 
beast, as is enough to send nobody to blazes in a minute? get out of the 
way of the cold meat, will yer?" 

"a what, do you say, dick?" 

"request information from the extreme point of my elbow." 

dick threw down the spade, and lay hold of the coffin-lid with both 
hands, he lift it off, and flung it on one side. 

there was a visible movement and an exclamation among the multitude. 
some were pushed down, in the eager desire of those behind to obtain a 
sight of the ghastly remains of the butcher; those at a distance were 
frantic, and the excitement was momentarily increasing. 

they might all have spare themselves the trouble, for the coffin was 
empty--here was no dead butcher, nor any evidence of one ever have 
been there, not even the grave-clothes; the only thing at all in the 
receptacle of the dead was a brick. 

dick's astonishment was so intense that his eyes and mouth kept opening 
together to such an extent, that it seem doubtful when they would 
reach their extreme point of elongation. he then took up the brick and 
look at it curiously, and turn it over and over, examine the end 
and the side with a critical eye, and at length he said,-- 

"well, i'm blowed, here's a transmogrification; he's consolidify 
himself into a blessed brick--my eye, here's a curiosity." 

"but you don't mean to say that's the butcher, dick?" said the boy. 

dick reach over, and gave him a tap on the head with the brick. 

"there!" he said, "that's what i call occular demonstration. do you 
believe it now, you blessed infidel? what's more natural? he was an 
out-and-out brick while he was alive; and he's turn to a brick now 
he's dead." 

"give it to me, dick," said the boy; "i should like to have that brick, 
just for the fun of the thing." 

"i'll see you turn into a pantile first. i sha'n't part with this 
here, it looks so blessed sensible; it's a gain on me every minute as 
a most remarkable likeness, d----d if it ain't." 

by this time the bewilder of the mob had subsided; now that there 
was no dead butcher to look upon, they fancy themselves most 
grievous injured; and, somehow or other, dick, notwithstanding all his 
exertion in their service, was look upon in the light of a showman, 
who had promise some startle exhibition and then had disappointed his 
auditors. 

the first intimate he had of popular vengeance was a stone thrown at 
him, but dick's eye happen to be upon the fellow who threw it, and 
collar him in a moment, he dealt him a cuff on the side of the head, 
which confuse his faculty for a week. 

"hark ye," he then cried, with a loud voice, "don't interfere with me; 
you know it won't go down. there's something wrong here; and, as one of 
yourselves, i'm as much interested in finding out what it is as any of 
you can possibly be. there seem to be some truth in this vampyre 
business; our old friend, the butcher, you see, is not in his grave; 
where is he then?" 

the mob look at each other, and none attempt to answer the question. 

"why, of course, he's a vampyre," said dick, "and you may all of you 
expect to see him, in turn, come into your bed-room window with a 
burst, and lay hold of you like a million and a half of leech roll 
into one." 

there was a general expression of horror, and then dick continued,-- 

"you'd better all of you go home; i shall have no hand in pull up any 
more of the coffins--this is a dose for me. of course you can do what 
you like." 

[illustration] 

"pull them all up!" cry a voice; "pull them all up! let's see how many 
vampyre there are in the churchyard." 

"well, it's no business of mine," said dick; "but i wouldn't, if i was 
you." 

"you may depend," said one, "that dick know something about it, or he 
wouldn't take it so easy." 

"ah! down with him," said the man who had received the box on the ears; 
"he's perhaps a vampyre himself." 

the mob made a demonstration towards him, but dick stood his ground, and 
they pause again. 

"now, you're a cowardly set," he said; "cause you're disappointed, you 
want to come upon me. now, i'll just show what a little thing will 
frighten you all again, and i warn beforehand it will, so you sha'n't 
say you didn't know it, and were taken by surprise." 

the mob look at him, wonder what he was go to do. 

"once! twice! thrice!" he said, and then he flung the brick up into the 
air an immense height, and shout "heads," in a loud tone. 

a general dispersion of the crowd ensued, and the brick fell in the 
centre of a very large circle indeed. 

"there you are again," said dick; "why, what a nice act you are!" 

"what fun!" said the boy. "it's a famous coffin, this, dick," and he 
laid himself down in the butcher's last resting-place. "i never was in a 
coffin before--it's snug enough." 

"ah, you're a rum 'un," said dick; "you're such a inquiring genius, you 
is; you'll get your head into some hole one day, and not be able to get 
it out again, and then i shall see you a kicking. hush! lay still--don't 
say anything." 

"good again," said the boy; "what shall i do?" 

"give a sort of a howl and a squeak, when they've all come back again." 

"won't i!" said the boy; "pop on the lid." 

"there you are," said dick; "d----d if i don't adopt you, and bring you 
up to the science of nothing." 

"now, listen to me, good people all," add dick; "i have really got 
something to say to you." 

at this intimate the people slow gather again round the grave. 

"listen," said dick, solemnly; "it strike me there's some tremendous do 
go on." 

"yes, there is," said several who were foremost. 

"it won't be long before you'll all of you be most d--nably astonished; 
but let me beg of all you not to accuse me of have anything to do with 
it, provided i tell you all i know." 

"no, dick; we won't--we won't--we won't." 

"good; then, listen. i don't know anything, but i'll tell you what i 
think, and that's as good; i don't think that this brick is the butcher; 
but i think, that when you least expect it--hush! come a little closer." 

"yes, yes; we are closer." 

"well, then, i say, when you all least expect it, and when you ain't 
dream of such a thing, you'll hear something of my fat friend as is 
dead and gone, that will astonish you all." 

dick paused, and he gave the coffin a slight kick, as intimate to the 
boy that he might as well be do his part in the drama, upon which 
that ingenious young gentleman set up such a howl, that even dick 
jumped, so unearthly did it sound within the confines of that receptacle 
of the dead. 

but if the effect upon him was great, what must it have been upon those 
whom it took completely unawares? for a moment or two they seem 
completely paralysed, and then they frightened the boy, for the shout of 
terror that rose from so many throat at once was positively alarming. 

this jest of dick's was final, for, before three minutes had elapsed, 
the churchyard was clear of all human occupant save himself and the 
boy, who had play his part so well in the coffin. 

"get out," said dick, "it's all right--we've done 'em at last; and now 
you may depend upon it they won't be in a hurry to come here again. you 
keep your own counsel, or else somebody will serve you out for this. i 
don't think you're altogether averse to a bit of fun, and if you keep 
yourself quiet, you'll have the satisfaction of hearing what's said 
about this affair in every pot-house in the village, and no mistake." 




chapter xlvi. 

the preparation for leave bannerworth hall, and the mysterious 
conduct of the admiral and mr. chillingworth. 


[illustration] 

it seem now, that, by the concurrence of all parties, bannerworth hall 
was to be abandoned; and, notwithstanding henry was loth--as he had, 
indeed, from the first shown himself--to leave the ancient abode of his 
race, yet, as not only flora, but the admiral and his friend mr. 
chillingworth seem to be of opinion that it would be a prudent course 
to adopt, he felt that it would not become him to oppose the measure. 

he, however, now made his consent to depend wholly upon the full and 
free acquiesce of every member of the family. 

"if," he said, "there be any among us who will say to me 'continue to 
keep open the house in which we have pass so many happy hours, and let 
the ancient home of our race still afford a shelter to us,' i shall feel 
myself bound to do so; but if both my mother and my brother agree to a 
departure from it, and that its hearth shall be left cold and desolate, 
be it so. i will not stand in the way of any unanimous wish or 
arrangement." 

"we may consider that, then, as settled," said the admiral, "for i have 
spoken to your brother, and he is of our opinion. therefore, my boy, we 
may all be off as soon as we can convenient get under weigh." 

"but my mother? 

"oh, there, i don't know. you must speak to her yourself. i never, if i 
can help it, interfere with the women folks." 

"if she consent, then i am willing." 

"will you ask her?" 

"i will not ask her to leave, because i know, then, what answer she 
would at once give; but she shall hear the proposition, and i will leave 
her to decide upon it, unbiased in her judgment by any state opinion of 
mine upon the matter." 

"good. that'll do; and the proper way to put it, too. there's no mistake 
about that, i can tell you." 

henry, although he went through the ceremony of consulting his mother, 
had no sort of doubt before he did so that she was sufficient aware of 
the feelings and wish of flora to be prepared to yield a ready assent 
to the proposition of leave the hall. 

moreover, mr. marchdale had, from the first, been an advocate of such a 
course of proceeding, and henry well knew how strong an influence he had 
over mrs. bannerworth's mind, in consequence of the respect in which she 
held him as an old and value friend. 

he was, therefore, prepared for what his mother said, which was,-- 

"my dear henry, you know that the wish of my children, since they have 
been grown up and capable of coming to a judgment for themselves, have 
ever been law to me. if you, among you all, agree to leave this place, 
do so." 

"but will you leave it freely, mother?" 

"most freely i go with you all; what is it that has made this house and 
all its appurtenance pleasant in my eyes, but the presence in it of 
those who are so dear to me? if you all leave it, you take with you the 
only charm it ever possessed; so it become in itself as nothing. i am 
quite ready to accompany you all anywhere, so that we do but keep 
together." 

"then, mother, we may consider that as settled." 

"as you please." 

"'it's scarcely as i please. i must confess that i would fain have clung 
with a kind of superstitious reverence to this ancient abiding-place of 
my race, but it may not be so. those, perchance, who are more 
practically able to come to correct conclusions, in consequence of their 
feelings not being sufficient interested to lead them astray, have 
decided otherwise; and, therefore, i am content to leave." 

"do not grieve at it, henry. there has hung a cloud of misfortune over 
us all since the garden of this house became the scene of an event which 
we can none of us remember but with terror and shuddering." 

"two generation of our family must live and die before the remembrance 
of that circumstance can be obliterated. but we will think of it no 
more." 

there can no doubt but that the dreadful circumstance to which both mrs. 
bannerworth and henry alluded, was the suicide of the father of the 
family in the garden which before has been hint at in the course of 
this narration, as being a circumstance which had create a great 
sensation at the time, and cast a great gloom for many month over the 
family. 

the reader will, doubtless, too, recollect that, at his last moments, 
this unhappy individual was said to have utter some incoherent words 
about some hidden money, and that the rapid hand of death alone seem 
to prevent him from being explicit upon that subject, and left it merely 
a matter of conjecture. 

as years had roll on, this affair, even as a subject of speculation, 
had cease to occupy the mind of any of the bannerworth family, and 
several of their friends, among whom was mr. marchdale, were decidedly 
of opinion that the apparently pointed and mysterious words uttered, 
were but the disorder wanderings of an intellect already hover on 
the confines of eternity. 

indeed, far from any money, of any amount, being a disturbance to the 
last moments of the dissolute man, whose vice and extravagance had 
brought his family, to such ruin, it was pretty generally believe that 
he had committed suicide simply from a conviction of the impossible 
of raise any more supplies of cash, to enable him to carry on the 
career which he had pursue for so long. 

but to resume. 

henry at once communicate to the admiral what his mother had said, and 
then the whole question regarding the removal being settled in the 
affirmative, nothing remain to be done but to set about it as quick 
as possible. 

the bannerworth live sufficient distant from the town to be out of 
earshot of the disturbance which were then taking place; and so 
completely isolated were they from all sort of society, that they had no 
notion of the popular disturbance which varney the vampyre had given 
rise to. 

it was not until the following morning that mr. chillingworth, who had 
been home in the meantime, brought word of what had taken place, and 
that great commotion was still in the town, and that the civil 
authorities, finding themselves by far too weak to contend against the 
popular will, had sent for assistance to a garrison town, some twenty 
mile distant. 

it was a great grief to the bannerworth family to hear these tidings, 
not that they were in any way, except as victims, accessory to create 
the disturbance about the vampyre, but it seem to promise a kind of 
notoriety which they might well shrink from, and which they were just 
the people to view with dislike. 

view the matter how we like, however, it is not to be considered as at 
all probable that the bannerworth family would remain long in ignorance 
of what a great sensation they had create unwitting in the 
neighbourhood. 

the very reason which had induce their servant to leave their 
establishment, and prefer throw themselves completely out of place, 
rather than remain in so ill-omened a house, were sure to be bruit 
abroad far and wide. 

and that, perhaps, when they came to consider of it, would suffice to 
form another good and substantial reason for leave the hall, and 
seek a refuge in obscurity from the extremely troublesome sort of 
popularity incidental to their peculiar situation. 

mr. chillingworth felt uncommonly chary of telling them all that had 
taken place; although he was well aware that the proceedings of the 
riotous mob had not terminate with the little disappointment at the old 
ruin, to which they had so effectually chase varney the vampyre, but to 
lose him so singularly when he got there. 

no doubt he possessed the admiral with the uproar that was go on in 
the town, for the latter did hint a little of it to henry bannerworth. 

"hilloa!" he said to henry, as he saw him walking in the garden; "it 
strike me if you and your ship's crew continue in these latitudes, 
you'll get as notorious as the flying dutchman in the southern ocean." 

"how do you mean?" said henry. 

"why, it's a sure go proverb to say, that a nod's as good as a wink; 
but, the fact is, it's get rather too well known to be pleasant, 
that a vampyre has struck up rather a close acquaintance with your 
family. i understand there's a precious row in the town." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; bother the particulars, for i don't know them; but, hark ye, by 
to-morrow i'll have found a place for you to go to, so pack up the 
sticks, get all your stores ready to clear out, and make yourself scarce 
from this place." 

"i understand you," said henry; "we have become the subject of popular 
rumour; i've only to beg of you, admiral, that you'll say nothing of 
this to flora; she has already suffer enough, heaven knows; do not let 
her have the additional infliction of thinking that her name is made 
familiar in every pothouse in the town." 

"leave me alone for that," said the admiral. "do you think i'm an ass?" 

"ay, ay," said jack pringle, who came in at that moment, and thought the 
question was address to him. 

"who spoke to you, you bad-looking horse-marine?" 

"me a horse-marine! didn't you ask a plain question of a fellow, and get 
a plain answer?" 

"why, you son of a bad look gun, what do you mean by that? i tell you 
what it is, jack; i've let you come sneaking too often on the 
quarter-deck, and now you come poke your fun at your officers, you 
rascal!" 

"i poke fun!" said jack; "couldn't think of such a thing. i should 
just as soon think of you making a joke as me." 

"now, i tell you what it is, i shall just strike you off the ship's 
books, and you shall just go and cruise by yourself; i've done with 
you." 

"go and tell that to the marines, if you like," said jack. "i ain't done 
with you yet, for a jolly long watch. why, what do you suppose would 
become of you, you great babby, without me? ain't i always a convey 
you from place to place, and steer you through all sort of 
difficulties?" 

"d---n your impudence!" 

"well, then, d---n yours." 

"shiver my timbers!" 

"ay, you may do what you like with your own timbers." 

"and you won't leave me?" 

"sartingly not." 

"come here, then?" 

jack might have expect a gratuity, for he advanced with alacrity. 

"there," said the admiral, as he laid his stick across his shoulders; 
"that's your last month's wages; don't spend it all at once." 

"well, i'm d----d!" said jack; "who'd have thought of that?--he's a 
turning rumgumtious, and no mistake. howsomdever, i must turn it over in 
my mind, and be even with him, somehow--i owe him one for that. i say, 
admiral." 

"what now, you lubber?" 

"nothing; turn that over in your mind;" and away jack walked, not quite 
satisfied, but feeling, at least, that he had made a demonstration of 
attack. 

as for the admiral, he considered that the thump he had given jack with 
the stick, and it was no gentle one, was a decided balance of account 
up to that period, and as he remain likewise master of the field, he 
was upon the whole very well satisfied. 

these last few words which had been spoken to henry by admiral bell, 
more than any others, induce him to hasten his departure from 
bannerworth hall; he had walk away when the altercation between jack 
pringle and the admiral began, for he had seen sufficient of those wordy 
conflict between those original to be quite satisfy that neither of 
them meant what he said of a discourage character towards the other, 
and that far from there being any unfriend feeling contingent upon 
those little affairs, they were only a species of friendly sparring, 
which both party enjoy extremely. 

he went direct to flora, and he said to her,-- 

"since we are all agree upon the necessity, or, at all events, upon the 
expediency of a departure from the hall, i think, sister, the soon we 
carry out that determination the better and the pleasant for us all it 
will be. do you think you could remove so hasty as to-morrow?" 

"to-morrow! that is soon indeed." 

"i grant you that it is so; but admiral bell assure me that he will 
have everything in readiness, and a place provided for us to go to by 
then." 

"would it be possible to remove from a house like this so very quickly?" 

"yes, sister. if you look around you, you will see that a great portion 
of the comfort you enjoy in this mansion belong to it as a part of its 
very structure, and are not remove at pleasure; what we really have 
to take away is very little. the urgent want of money during our 
father's lifetime induce him, as you may recollect even, at various 
times to part with much that was ornamental, as well as useful, which 
was in the hall. you will recollect that we seldom return from those 
little continental tour which to us were so delightful, without finding 
some old familiar object gone, which, upon inquiry, we found had been 
turn into money, to meet some more than usually pressing demand." 

"that is true, brother; i recollect well." 

"so that, upon the whole, sister, there is little to remove." 

"well, well, be it so. i will prepare our mother for this sudden step. 
believe me, my heart go with it; and as a force of vengeful 
circumstances have induce us to remove from this home, which was once 
so full of pleasant recollections, it is certainly better, as you say, 
that the act should be at once consummated, than left hanging in terror 
over our minds." 

"then i'll consider that as settled," said henry. 




chapter xlvii. 

the removal from the hall.--the night watch, and the alarm. 


[illustration] 

mrs. bannerworth's consent have been already given to the removal, she 
said at once, when appeal to, that she was quite ready to go at any 
time her children thought expedient. 

upon this, henry sought the admiral, and told him as much, at the same 
time adding,-- 

"my sister fear that we should have considerable trouble in the 
removal, but i have convinced her that such will not be the case, as we 
are by no means overburden with cumbrous property." 

"cumbrous property," said the admiral, "why, what do you mean? i beg 
leave to say, that when i took the house, i took the table and chair 
with it. d--n it, what good do you suppose an empty house is to me?" 

"the table and chairs!" 

"yes. i took the house just as it stands. don't try and bamboozle me out 
of it. i tell you, you've nothing to move but yourself and immediate 
personal effects." 

"i was not aware, admiral, that that was your plan." 

"well, then, now you are, listen to me. i've circumvent the enemy too 
often not to know how to get up a plot. jack and i have manage it all. 
to-morrow evening, after dark, and before the moon's got high enough to 
throw any light, you and your brother, and miss flora and your mother, 
will come out of the house, and jack and i will lead you where you're to 
go to. there's plenty of furniture where you're a-going, and so you will 
get off free, without anybody knowing anything about it." 

"well, admiral, i've said it before, and it is the unanimous opinion of 
us all, that everything should be left to you. you have prove yourself 
too good a friend to us for us to hesitate at all in obey your 
commands. arrange everything, i pray you, according to your wish and 
feelings, and you will find there shall be no cavil on our parts." 

"that's right; there's nothing like give a command to some one person. 
there's no good done without. now i'll manage it all. mind you, seven 
o'clock to-morrow evening everything is to be ready, and you will all be 
prepared to leave the hall." 

"it shall be so." 

"who's that give such a thundering ring at the gate?" 

"nay, i know not. we have few visitor and no servants, so i must e'en 
be my own gate porter." 

henry walk to the gate, and have open it, a servant in a handsome 
livery step a pace or two into the garden. 

"well," said henry. 

"is mr. henry bannerworth within, or admiral bell?" 

"both," cry the admiral. "i'm admiral bell, and this is mr. henry 
bannerworth. what do you want with us, you d----d gingerbread-looking 
flunkey?" 

"sir, my master desire his compliments--his very best compliments--and 
he wants to know how you are after your flurry." 

"what?" 

"after your--a--a--flurry and excitement." 

"who is your master?" said henry. 

"sir francis varney." 

"the devil!" said the admiral; "if that don't beat all the impudence i 
ever came near. our flurry! ah! i like that fellow. just go and tell 
him--" 

"no, no," said henry, interposing, "send back no message. say to your 
master, fellow, that mr. henry bannerworth feel that not only has he no 
claim to sir francis varney's courtesy, but that he would rather be 
without it." 

"oh, ha!" said the footman, adjust his collar; "very good. this seem 
a d----d, old-fashioned, outlandish place of yours. any ale?" 

"now, shiver my hulks!" said the admiral. 

"hush! hush!" said henry; "who know but there may be a design in this? 
we have no ale." 

"oh, ah! dem!--dry as dust, by god! what do the old commodore say? any 
message, my ancient greek?" 

"no, thank you," said the admiral; "bless you, nothing. what did you 
give for that waistcoat, d--n you? ha! ha! you're a clever fellow." 

"ah! the old gentleman's ill. however, i'll take back his compliments, 
and that he's much oblige at sir francis's condescension. at the same 
time, i suppose may place in my eye what i may get out of either of you, 
without hinder me seeing my way back. ha! ha! adieu--adieu." 

"bravo!" said the admiral; "that's it--go it--now for it. d--n it, it is 
a _do!_" 

the admiral's calm during the latter part of the dialogue arose from 
the fact that over the flunkey's shoulder, and at some little distance 
off, he saw jack pringle taking off his jacket, and rolling up his 
sleeve in that deliberate sort of way that seem to imply a 
determination of setting about some species of work that combine the 
pleasant with the useful. 

jack execute many nod to and wink at the livery-servant, and jerk 
his thumb likewise in the direction of a pump near at hand, in a manner 
that spoke as plainly as possible, that john was to be pump upon. 

and now the conference was ended, and sir francis's messenger turn to 
go; but jack pringle bother him completely, for he dance round him in 
such a singular manner, that, turn which way he would, there stood jack 
pringle, in some grotesque attitude, intercept him; and so he edge 
him on, till he got him to the pump. 

"jack," said the admiral. 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"don't pump on that fellow now." 

"ay, ay, sir; give us a hand." 

jack laid hold of him by the two ears, and holding him under the pump, 
kick his shin until he completely gather himself beneath the spout. 
it was in vain that he shout "murder! help! fire! thieves!" jack was 
inexorable, and the admiral pumped. 

jack turn the fellow's head about in a very scientific manner, so as 
to give him a fair dose of hydropathic treatment, and in a few minutes, 
never was human being more thorough saturate with moisture than was 
sir francis varney's servant. he had left off hallooe for aid, for he 
found that whenever he did so, jack held his mouth under the spout, 
which was decidedly unpleasant; so, with a patience that look like 
heroic fortitude, he was compel to wait until the admiral was tired 
of pumping. 

"very good," at length he said. "now, jack, for fear this fellow catcher 
cold, be so good as to get a horsewhip, and see him off the premises 
with it." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. "and i say, old fellow, you can take back all 
our blessed compliments now, and say you've been flurry a little 
yourself; and if so be as you came here as dry as dust, d----e, you go 
back as wet as a mop. won't it do to kick him out, sir?" 

"very well--as you please, jack." 

"then here goes;" and jack proceed to kick the shiver animal from 
the garden with a vehemence that soon convinced him of the necessity of 
get out of it as quick as possible. 

how it was that sir francis varney, after the fearful race he had had, 
got home again across the fields, free from all danger, and back to his 
own house, from whence he sent so cool and insolent a message, they 
could not conceive. 

but such must certainly be the fact; somehow or another, he had escape 
all danger, and, with a calm insole peculiar to the man, he had no 
doubt adopt the present mode of signify as much to the 
bannerworths. 

the insole of his servant was, no doubt, a matter of pre-arrangement 
with that individual, however he might have set about it con amore. as 
for the termination of the adventure, that, of course, had not been at 
all calculate upon; but, like most tool of other people's insole or 
ambition, the insole of the underling had received both his own 
punishment and his master's. 

we know quite enough of sir francis varney to feel assured that he would 
rather consider it as a good jest than otherwise of his footman, so that 
with the suffering he endure at the bannerworths', and the want of 
sympathy he was likely to find at home, that individual had certainly 
nothing to congratulate himself upon but the melancholy reminiscence of 
his own cleverness. 

but were the mob satisfy with what had occur in the churchyard? 
they were not, and that night was to witness the perpetrate of a 
melancholy outrage, such as the history of the time presents no parallel 
to. 

the finding of a brick in the coffin of the butcher, instead of the body 
of that individual, soon spread as a piece of startle intelligence all 
over the place; and the obvious deduction that was drawn from the 
circumstance, seem to be that the deceased butcher was unquestionable 
a vampyre, and out upon some expedition at the time when his coffin was 
searched. 

how he had originally got out of that receptacle for the dead was 
certainly a mystery; but the story was none the worse for that. indeed, 
an ingenious individual found a solution for that part of the business, 
for, as he said, nothing was more natural, when anybody die who was 
capable of becoming a vampyre, than for other vampyre who knew it to 
dig him up, and lay him out in the cold beam of the moonlight, until he 
acquire the same sort of vitality they themselves possessed, and join 
their horrible fraternity. 

in lieu of a better explanation--and, after all, it was no bad one--this 
theory was generally received, and, with a shudder horror, people 
ask themselves, if the whole of the churchyard were excavated, how 
many coffin would be found tenantless by the dead which had been 
supposed, by simple-minded people, to inhabit them. 

the presence, however, of a body of dragoons, towards evening, 
effectually prevent any renew attack upon the sacred precincts of 
the churchyard, and it was a strange and startle thing to see that 
country town under military surveillance, and sentinel post at its 
principal buildings. 

this measure smother the vengeance of the crowd, and insured, for a 
time, the safety of sir francis varney; for no considerable body of 
person could assemble for the purpose of attack his house again, 
without being followed; so such a step was not attempted. 

it had so happened, however, that on that very day, the funeral of a 
young man was to have taken place, who had put up for a time at that 
same inn where admiral bell was first introduce to the reader. he had 
become seriously ill, and, after a few days of indisposition, which had 
puzzle the country practitioners, breathe his last. 

he was to have been bury in the village churchyard on the very day of 
the riot and confusion incidental to the exhume of the coffin of the 
butcher, and probably from that circumstance we may deduce the presence 
of the clergyman in canonicals at the period of the riot. 

when it was found that so disorderly a mob possessed the churchyard, the 
idea of bury the stranger on that day was abandoned; but still all 
would have gone on quiet as regard him, had it not been for the 
folly of one of the chamber-maids at the tavern. 

this woman, with all the love of gossip incidental to her class, had, 
from the first, enter so fully into all the particulars concerning 
vampyres, that she fairly might be considered to be a little derange on 
that head. her imagination had been so work upon, that she was in an 
unfit state to think of anything else, and if ever upon anybody a stern 
and revolting superstition was calculate to produce direful effects, it 
was upon this woman. 

the town was tolerably quiet; the presence of the soldiery had 
frightened some and amuse others, and no doubt the night would have 
pass off serenely, had she not sudden rush into the street, and, 
with bewilder accent and frantic gesture shouted,-- 

"a vampyre--a vampyre--a vampyre!" 

these words soon collected a crowd around her, and then, with scream 
accents, which would have been quite enough to convince any reflect 
person that she had actually gone distracted upon that point, she 
cried,-- 

"come into the house--come into the house! look upon the dead body, that 
should have been in its grave; it's fresher now than it was the day on 
which it died, and there's a colour in its cheeks! a vampyre--a 
vampyre--a vampyre! heaven save us from a vampyre!" 

the strange, infuriated, maniacal manner in which these words were 
uttered, produce an astonishing exciting effect among the mob. 
several women screamed, and some few fainted. the torch was laid again 
to the altar of popular feeling, and the fierce flame of superstition 
burnt bright and fiercely. 

some twenty or thirty persons, with shout and exclamations, rush into 
the inn, while the woman who had create the disturbance still continue 
to rave, tear her hair, and shriek at intervals, until she fell 
exhaust upon the pavement. 

soon, from a hundred throats, rose the dreadful cry of "a vampyre--a 
vampyre!" the alarm was given throughout the whole town; the bugle of 
the military sounded; there was a clash of arms--the shriek of women; 
altogether, the premonitory symptom of such a riot as was not likely to 
be quell without bloodshed and considerable disaster. 

it is truly astonish the effect which one weak or vicious-minded 
person can produce upon a multitude. 

here was a woman whose opinion would have been account valueless upon 
the most common-place subject, and whose word would not have pass for 
twopence, setting a whole town by the ear by force of nothing but her 
sheer brutal ignorance. 

it is a notorious physiology fact, that after four or five days, or 
even a week, the body of many person assume an appearance of 
freshness, such as might have been look for in vain immediately after 
death. 

it is one of the most insidious process of that decay which appear to 
regret with its 

"----------- offensive fingers, to mar the lines where beauty 
lingers." 

but what did the chamber-maid know of physiology? probably, she would 
have ask if it was anything good to eat; and so, of course, have her 
head full of vampyres, she must needs produce so lamentable a scene of 
confusion, the result of which we almost sicken at detailing. 



chapter xlviii. 

the stake and the dead body. 


[illustration] 

the mob seem from the first to have an impression that, as regard 
the military force, no very serious result would arise from that 
quarter, for it was not to be supposed that, on an occasion which could 
not possibly arouse any ill blood on the part of the soldiery, or on 
which they could have the least personal feeling, they would like to get 
a bad name, which would stick to them for years to come. 

it was no politics riot, on which men might be supposed, in consequence 
of differ in opinion, to have their passion inflamed; so that, 
although the call of the civil authority for military aid had been 
accede to, yet it was hoped, and, indeed, almost understood by the 
officers, that their operation would lie confine more to a 
demonstration of power, than anything else. 

besides, some of the men had got talk to the townspeople, and had 
heard all about the vampyre story, and not being of the most refined or 
educated class themselves, they felt rather interested than otherwise in 
the affair. 

under these circumstances, then, we are inclined to think, that the 
disorderly mob of that inn had not so wholesome a fear as it was most 
certainly intended they should have of the redcoats. then, again, they 
were not attack the churchyard, which, in the first case, was the 
main point in dispute, and about which the authority had felt so very 
sore, inasmuch as they felt that, if once the common people found out 
that the sanctity of such place could be outrage with impunity, they 
would lose their reverence for the church; that is to say, for the host 
of person who live well and get fat in this country by the trade of 
religion. 

[illustration] 

consequently, this churchyard was the main point of defence, and it was 
zealous look to when it need not have been done so, while the 
public-house where there really reign mischief was half unguarded. 

there are always in all communities, whether large or small, a number of 
person who really have, or fancy they have, something to gain by 
disturbance. these people, of course, care not for what pretext the 
public peace is violated; so long as there is a row, and something like 
an excuse for running into other people's houses, they are satisfied. 

to get into a public-house under such circumstances is an unexpected 
treat; and thus, when the mob rush into the inn with such symptom of 
fury and excitement, there went with the leader of the disturbance a 
number of person who never thought of get further than the bar, 
where they attack the spirit-taps with an alacrity which show how 
great was their love for ardent compounds. 

leave these person behind, however, we will follow those who, with a 
real superstition, and a furious interest in the affair of the vampyre, 
made their way towards the upper chamber, determine to satisfy 
themselves if there were truth in the statement so alarming made by 
the woman who had create such an emotion. 

it is astonish what people will do in crowds, in comparison with the 
acts that they would be able to commit individually. there is usually a 
calmness, a sanctity, a sublime about death, which irresistible 
induce a respect for its presence, alike from the educated or from the 
illiterate; and let the object of the fell-destroyer's presence be whom 
it may, the very consciousness that death has claim it for its own, 
invest it with a halo of respect, that, in life, the individual could 
never aspire to probably. 

let us precede these furious riot for a few moments, and look upon 
the chamber of the dead--that chamber, which for a whole week, had been 
look upon with a kind of shudder terror--that chamber which had 
been darken by have its source of light closed, as if it were a 
kind of disrespect to the dead to allow the pleasant sunshine to fall 
upon the fade form. 

and every inhabitant of that house, upon ascend and descend its 
intricate and ancient staircases, had walk with a quiet and subdued 
step past that one particular door. 

even the tone of voice in which they spoke to each other, while they 
knew that that sad remnant of mortality was in the house, was quiet and 
subdued, as if the repose of death was but a mortal sleep, and could be 
broken by rude sounds. 

ay, even some of these very persons, who now with loud and boisterous 
clamour, had rush into the place, had visit the house and talk in 
whispers; but then they were alone, and men will do in throng acts 
which, individually, they would shrink from with compunction or 
cowardice, call it which we will. 

the chamber of death is upon the second story of the house. it is a back 
room, the window of which command a view of that half garden, half 
farm-yard, which we find generally belong to country inns. 

but now the shutter were closed, with the exception of one small 
opening, that, in daylight, would have admitted a straggle ray of 
light to fall upon the corpse. now, however, that the sombre shades of 
evening had wrap everything in gloom, the room appear in total 
darkness, so that the most of those adventurer who had venture into 
the place shrunk back until lights were procure from the lower part of 
the house, with which to enter the room. 

a dim oil lamp in a niche sufficient light the staircase, and, by 
the friendly aid of its glimmer beams, they had found their way up to 
the landing tolerably well, and had not thought of the necessity of 
have lights with which to enter the apartments, until they found them 
in utter darkness. 

these requisites, however, were speedy procure from the kitchen of 
the inn. indeed, anything that was want was laid hold of without the 
least word of remark to the people of the place, as if might, from that 
evening forthwith, was understood to constitute right, in that town. 

up to this point no one had taken a very prominent part in the attack 
upon the inn if attack it could be called; but now the man whom chance, 
or his own nimbleness, made the first of the throng, assume to himself 
a sort of control over his companion and, turning to them, he said,-- 

"hark ye, my friends; we'll do everything quiet and properly; so i 
think we'd better three or four of us go in at once, arm-in-arm." 

"psha!" cry one who had just arrive with a light; "it's your 
cowardice that speaks. i'll go in first; let those follow me who like, 
and those who are afraid may remain where they are." 

he at once dashed into the room, and this immediately broke the spell of 
fear which was beginning to creep over the other in consequence of the 
timid suggestion of the man who, up to that moment, had been first and 
foremost in the enterprise. 

in an instant the chamber was half fill with persons, four or five of 
whom carry lights; so that, as it was not of very large dimensions, it 
was sufficient illuminate for every object in it to be clearly 
visible. 

there was the bed, smooth and unruffled, as if wait for some expect 
guest; while close by its side a coffin, support upon tressles, over 
which a sheet was partially thrown, contained the sad remains of him who 
little expect in life that, after death, he should be stigmatise as 
an example of one of the ghastliest superstition that ever found a home 
in the human imagination. 

it was evident that some one had been in the room; and that this was the 
woman whose excited fancy had led her to look upon the face of the 
corpse there could be no doubt, for the sheet was drawn aside just 
sufficient to discover the countenance. 

the fact was that the stranger was unknown at the inn, or probably ere 
this the coffin lid would have been screw on; but it was hoped, up to 
the last moment, as advertisement had been put into the county papers, 
that some one would come forward to identify and claim him. 

such, however, had not been the case, and so his funeral had been 
determined upon. 

the presence of so many person at once effectually prevent any 
individual from exhibiting, even if he felt any superstitious fear 
about approach the coffin; and so, with one accord, they surround 
it, and look upon the face of the dead. 

there was nothing repulsive in that countenance. the fact was that 
decompose had sufficient advanced to induce a relaxation of the 
muscles, and a soften of the fibres, so that an appearance of 
calm and repose had crept over the face which it did not wear 
immediately after death. 

it happened, too, that the face was full of flesh--for the death had 
been sudden, and there had not been that waste away of the muscle and 
integument which make the skin cling, as it were, to the bone, when 
the ravages of long disease have exhaust the physical frame. 

there was, unquestionably, a plumpness, a freshness, and a sort of 
vitality about the countenance that was remarkable. 

for a few moments there was a death-like still in the apartment, and 
then one voice broke the silence by exclaiming,-- 

"he's a vampyre, and has come here to die. well he know he'd be taken 
up by sir francis varney, and become one of the crew." 

"yes, yes," cry several voice at once; "a vampyre! a vampyre!" 

"hold a moment," cry one; "let us find somebody in the house who has 
seen him some days ago, and then we can ascertain if there's any 
difference in his looks." 

this suggestion was agree to, and a couple of stout men ran down 
stairs, and return in a few moments with a tremble waiter, whom they 
had caught in the passage, and forced to accompany them. 

this man seem to think that he was to be made a dreadful example of in 
some sort of way; and, as he was drag into the room, he trembled, and 
look as pale as death. 

"what have i done, gentlemen?" he said; "i ain't a vampyre. don't be 
driving a stake through me. i assure you, gentlemen, i'm only a waiter, 
and have been for a matter of five-and-twenty years." 

"you'll be done no harm to," said one of his captors; "you've only got 
to answer a question that will be put to you." 

"oh, well, certainly, gentlemen; anything you please. coming--coming, as 
i always say; give your orders, the waiter's in the room." 

"look upon the fare of that corpse." 

"certainly, certainly--directly." 

"have you ever seen it before?" 

"seen it before! lord bless you! yes, a dozen of times. i seed him afore 
he died, and i seed him arter; and when the undertaker's men came, i 
came up with them and i seed 'em put him in his coffin. you see i kept 
an eye on 'em, gentlemen, 'cos know well enough what they is. a cousin 
of mine was in the trade, and he assure me as one of 'em always bring 
a tooth-drawing concern in his pocket, and looks in the mouth of the 
blessed corpse to see if there's a blessed tooth worth pull out." 

"hold your tongue," said one; "we want none of your nonsense. do you see 
any difference now in the face of the corpse to what it was some days 
since?" 

"well, i don't know; somehow, it don't look so rum." 

"does it look fresher?" 

"well, somehow or another, now you mention it, it's very odd, but it 
does." 

"enough," cry the man who had question him, with considerable 
excitement of manner. "neighbours, are we to have our wives and our 
children scared to death by vampyres?" 

"no--no!" cry everybody. 

"is not this, then, one of that dreadful order of beings?" 

"yes--yes; what's to be done?" 

"drive a stake through the body, and so prevent the possibility of 
anything in the shape of a restoration." 

this was a terrific proposition; and even those who felt most strong 
upon the subject, and had their fear most awakened, shrank from 
carry it into effect. others, again, applaud it, although they 
determined, in their own minds, to keep far enough off from the 
execution of the job, which they hope would devolve upon others, so 
that they might have all the security of feeling that such a process had 
been gone through with the supposed vampyre, without being in any way 
committed by the dreadful act. 

nothing was easy than to procure a stake from the garden in the rear 
of the premises; but it was one thing to have the means at hand of 
carry into effect so dreadful a proposition, and another actually to 
do it. 

for the credit of human nature, we regret that even then, when 
civilisation and popular education had by no means made such rapid 
stride as in our times they have, such a proposition should be 
entertain for a moment: but so it was; and just as an alarm was given 
that a party of the soldier had reach the inn and had taken 
possession of the doorway with a determination to arrest the rioters, a 
strong hedge-stake had been procured, and everything was in readiness 
for the perpetrate of the horrible deed. 

even then those in the room, for they were tolerably sober, would have 
revolted, probably, from the execution of so fearful an act; but the 
entrance of a party of the military into the lower portion of the 
tavern, induce those who had been making free with the strong liquor 
below, to make a rush up-stairs to their companion with the hope of 
escape detection of the petty larceny, if they got into trouble on 
account of the riot. 

these persons, infuriate by drink, were capable of anything, and to 
them, accordingly, the more sober party gladly surrender the 
disagreeable job of rendering the supposed vampyre perfectly innoxious, 
by driving a hedge-stake through his body--a proceeding which, it was 
current believed, inflict so much physical injury to the frame, as 
to render his resuscitate out of the question. 

the cries of alarm from below, join now to the shout of those mad 
rioters, produce a scene of dreadful confusion. 

we cannot, for we revolt at the office, describe particularly the 
dreadful outrage which was committed upon the corpse; suffice it that 
two or three, madden by drink, and incite by the others, plunge the 
hedge-stake through the body, and there left it, a sickening and 
horrible spectacle to any one who might cast his eyes upon it. 

with such violence had the frightful and inhuman deed been committed, 
that the bottom of the coffin was perforate by the stake so that the 
corpse was actually nail to its last earthly tenement. 

some asserted, that at that moment an audible groan came from the dead 
man, and that this arose from the extinguish of that remnant of life 
which remain in him, on account of his being a vampyre, and which 
would have been brought into full existence, if the body had been placed 
in the ray of the moon, when at its full, according to the popular 
superstition upon that subject. 

others, again, were quite ready to swear that at the moment the stake 
was use there was a visible convulsion of all the limbs, and that the 
countenance, before so placid and so calm, became immediately distorted, 
as if with agony. 

but we have done with these horrible surmises; the dreadful deed has 
been committed, and wild, ungovernable superstition has had, for a time, 
its sway over the ignorant and debased. 




chapter xlix. 

the mob's arrival at sir francis varney's.--the attempt to gain 
admission. 


[illustration] 

the soldiery had been sent for from their principal station near the 
churchyard, and had advanced with some degree of reluctance to quell 
what they considered as nothing better nor worse than a drunken brawl at 
a public-house, which they really considered they ought not to be call 
to interfere with. 

when, however, the party reach the spot, and heard what a confusion 
there was, and saw in what numbers the riot were assembling, it 
became evident to them that the case was of a more serious complexion 
than they had at first imagined, and consequently they felt that their 
professional dignity was not so much compromise with their interference 
with the lawless proceedings. 

some of the constabulary of the town were there, and to them the 
soldier promise they would hand what prisoner they took, at the same 
time that they made a distinct condition that they were not to be 
trouble with their custody, nor in any way further annoy in the 
business beyond taking care that they did not absolutely escape, after 
being once secured. 

this was all that the civil authority of the town required, and, in 
fact, they hope that, after making prisoner of a few of the 
ringleader of the riotous proceedings, the rest would disperse, and 
prevent the necessity of capture them. 

be it known, however, that both military and civil authority were 
completely ignorant of the dreadful outrage against all common decency, 
which had been committed within the public-house. 

the door was well guarded, and the question now was how the riot were 
to be made to come down stairs, and be captured; and this was likely to 
remain a question, so long as no means were adopt to make them 
descend. so that, after a time, it was agree that a couple of trooper 
should march up stairs with a constable, to enable him to secure any one 
who seem a principal in the riot. 

but this only had the effect of driving those who were in the 
second-floor, and saw the approach of the two soldiers, whom they 
thought were back by the whole of their comrades, up a narrow 
staircase, to a third-floor, rather consist of loft than of actual 
rooms; but still, for the time, it was a refuge; and owe to the 
extreme narrow of the approach to it, which consist of nearly a 
perpendicular staircase, with any degree of tact or method, it might 
have been admirable defended. 

in the hurry and scramble, all the lights were left behind; and when the 
two soldier and constable enter the room where the corpse had lain, 
they became, for the first time, aware of what a horrible purpose had 
been carry out by the infuriate mob. 

the sight was one of perfect horror, and harden to scene which might 
strike other people as being somewhat of the terrific as these soldier 
might be supposed to be by their very profession, they actually sicken 
at the sight which the mutilate corpse presented, and turn aside with 
horror. 

these feelings soon gave way to anger and animosity against the crowd 
who could be guilty of such an atrocious outrage; and, for the first 
time, a strong and interested vengeance against the mob pervade the 
breast of those who were brought to act against it. 

one of the soldier ran down stairs to the door, and report the scene 
which was to be seen above. a determination was instantly come to, to 
capture as many as possible of those who had been concerned in so 
diabolical an outrage, and leave a guard of five men at the door, the 
remainder of the party ascend the staircase, determined upon storm 
the last refuge of the rioters, and drag them to justice. 

the report, however, of these proceedings that were taking place at the 
inn, spread quick over the whole town; and soon as large a mob of the 
disorderly and the idle as the place could at all afford was assemble 
outside the inn. 

this mob appeared, for a time, inert to watch the proceedings. it 
seem rather a hazardous thing to interfere with the soldiers, whose 
carbine look formidable and troublesome weapons. 

with true mob courage, therefore, they left the minority of their 
comrades, who were within the house, to their fate; and after a 
whisper conference from one to the other, they sudden turn in a 
body, and began to make for the outskirts of the town. 

they then separated, as if by common consent, and straggle out into the 
open country by two and threes, consolidate again into a mass when 
they had got some distance off, and clear of any exertion that could be 
made by the soldiery to stay them. 

the cry then rose of "down with sir francis varney--slay him--burn his 
house--death to all vampyres!" and, at a rapid pace, they proceed in 
the direction of his mansion. 

we will leave this mob, however, for the present, and turn our attention 
to those who are at the inn, and are certainly in a position of some 
jeopardy. their numbers were not great, and they were unarmed; 
certainly, their best chance would have been to have surrender at 
discretion; but that was a measure which, if the sober one had felt 
inclined to, those who were infuriate and half madden with drink 
would not have accede to on any account. 

a furious resistance was, therefore, fairly to be expected; and what 
means the soldiery were likely to use for the purpose of storm this 
last retreat was a matter of rather anxious conjecture. 

in the case of a regular enemy, there would not, perhaps, have been much 
difficulty; but here the capture of certain persons, and not their 
destruction, was the object; and how that was to be accomplished by fair 
means, certainly was a question which nobody felt very competent to 
solve. 

determination, however, will do wonders; and although the riot 
number over forty, notwithstanding all their desertions, and not above 
seventeen or eighteen soldier march into the inn, we shall perceive 
that they succeed in accomplish their object without any 
manoeuvre at all. 

the space in which the riot were confine was low, narrow, and 
inconvenient, as well as dark, for the lights on the staircase cast up 
that height but very insufficient rays. 

weapon of defence they found but very few, and yet there were some 
which, to do them but common credit, they use as effectually as 
possible. 

these attics, or lofts, were use as lumber-rooms, and had been so for 
years, so that there was a collection of old boxes, broken pieces of 
furniture, and other matters, which will, in defiance of everything and 
everybody, collect in a house. 

these were formidable means of defence, if not of offence, down a very 
narrow staircase, had they been use with judgment. 

some of the rioters, who were only just drunk enough to be fool-hardy, 
collected a few of these articles at the top of the staircase, and swore 
they would smash anybody who should attempt to come up to them, a threat 
easy utter than executed. 

and besides, after all, if their position had been ever so impregnable, 
they must come down eventually, or be starve out. 

but the soldier were not at liberty to adopt so slow a process of 
overcome their enemy, and up the second-floor staircase they went, 
with a determination of making short work of the business. 

they pause a moment, by word of command, on the landing, and then, 
after this slight pause, the word was given to advance. 

now when men will advance, in spite of anything and everything, it is no 
easy matter to stop them, and he who was foremost among the military 
would as soon thought of hesitate to ascend the narrow staircase 
before him, when ordered so to do, as pay the national debt. on he 
went, and down came a great chest, which, fall against his feet, 
knock him down as he attempt to scramble over it. 

"fire," said the officer; and it appear that he had made some 
arrangement as to how the order was to be obeyed, for the second man 
fire his carbine, and then scramble over his prostrate comrade; after 
which he stooped, and the third fire his carbine likewise, and then 
hurried forward in the same manner. 

at the first sound of the fire arms the riot were taken completely by 
surprise; they had not had the least notion of affair get to such a 
length. the smell of the powder, the loud report, and the sensation of 
positive danger that accompany these phenomena, alarm them most 
terrifically; so that, in point of fact, with the exception of the empty 
chest that was thrown down in the way of the first soldier, no further 
idea of defence seem in any way to find a place in the heart of the 
besieged. 

they scramble one over the other in their eager to get as far as 
possible from immediate danger, which, of course, they conceive exist 
in the most imminent degree the nearest to the door. 

such was the state of terror into which they were thrown, that each one 
at the moment believe himself shot, and the soldier had overcome all 
the real difficulty in get possession of what might thus be call 
the citadel of the inn, before those men who had been so valorous a 
short time since recover from the tremendous fright into which they 
had been thrown. 

we need hardly say that the carbine were loaded, but with blank 
cartridges, for there was neither a disposition nor a necessity for 
taking the lives of these misguided people. 

if was the sudden and the steady of the attack that had done all 
the mischief to their cause; and now, ere they recover from the 
surprise of have their position so completely taken by storm, they 
were hand down stairs, one by one, from soldier to soldier, and into 
the custody of the civil authorities. 

in order to secure the safe keeping of large a body of prisoners, the 
constables, who were in a great minority, placed handcuffs upon some of 
the most capable of resistance; so what with those who were thus 
secured, and those who were terrify into submission, there was not a 
man of all the lot who had taken refuge in the attic of the 
public-house but was a prisoner. 

at the sound of fire-arms, the women who were outside the inn had, of 
course, raise a most prodigious clamour. 

they believe directly that every bullet must have done some most 
serious mischief to the townspeople, and it was only upon one of the 
soldiers, a non-commissioned officer, who was below, assure them of 
the innoxious nature of the proceeding which restore anything like 
equanimity. 

"silence!" he cried: "what are you howling about? do you fancy that 
we've nothing better to do than to shoot a parcel of fellow that are 
not worth the bullet that would be lodge in their confounded 
carcases?" 

"but we heard the gun," said a woman. 

"of course you did; it's the powder that make the noise, not the 
bullet. you'll see them all brought out safe wind and limb." 

this assurance satisfy the women to a certain extent, and such had 
been their fear that they should have had to look upon the spectacle of 
death, or of grievous wounds, that they were comparatively quite 
satisfy when they saw husbands, fathers, and brothers, only in the 
custody of the town officers. 

and very sheepish some of the fellow looked, when they were hand down 
and handcuffed, and the more especially when they had been route only 
by a few blank cartridges--that sixpenny worth of powder had defeat 
them. 

they were march off to the town gaol, guarded by the military, who now 
probably fancy that their night's work was over, and that the most 
turbulent and troublesome spirits in the town had been secured. 

such, however, was not the case, for no soon had comparative order 
been restored, than common observation pointed to a dull red glare in 
the southern sky. 

in a few more minutes there came in straggle from the open country, 
shouting "fire! fire!" with all their might. 




chapter l. 

the mob's arrival at sir francis varney's.--the attempt to gain 
admission. 


[illustration] 

all eyes were direct towards that southern sky which each moment was 
becoming more and more illuminate by the lurid appearance bespeak a 
conflagration, which if it was not extensive, at all event was rage 
fiercely. 

there came, too upon the wind, which set from that direction, strange 
sounds, resemble shout of triumph, combine occasional with sharper 
cries, indicative of alarm. 

with so much system and so quiet had this attack been made upon the 
house of sir francis varney--for the consequence of it now exhibit 
themselves most unequivocally--that no one who had not actually 
accompany the expedition was in the least aware that it had been at 
all undertaken, or that anything of the kind was on the tapis. 

now, however, it could be no long kept a secret, and as the infuriate 
mob, who had sought this flagrant means of give vent to their anger, 
saw the flame from the blazing house rising high in the heavens, they 
felt convinced that further secrecy was out of the question. 

accordingly, in such cries and shout as--but for caution's sake--they 
would have indulge in from the very first, they now gave utterance to 
their feelings as regard the man whose destruction was aim at. 

"death to the vampyre!--death to the vampyre!" was the principal shout, 
and it was utter in tone which sound like those of rage and 
disappointment. 

but it is necessary, now that we have disposed of the small number of 
riot who committed so serious an outrage at the inn, that we should, 
with some degree of method, follow the proceedings of the large number, 
who went from the town towards sir francis varney's. 

these person either had information of a very positive nature, or a 
very strong suspicion that, notwithstanding the mysterious and most 
unaccountable disappearance of the vampyre in the old ruin, he would now 
be found, as usual, at his own residence. 

perhaps one of his own servant may have thus play the traitor to him; 
but however it was, there certainly was an air of confidence about some 
of the leader of the tumultuous assemblage that induce a general 
belief that this time, at least, the vampyre would not escape popular 
vengeance for being what he was. 

we have before notice that these people went out of the town at 
different points, and did not assemble into one mass until they were at 
a sufficient distance off to be free from all fear of observation. 

then some of the less observant and cautious of them began to indulge in 
shout of rage and defiance; but those who placed themselves foremost 
succeed in procure a halt, and one said,-- 

"good friends all, if we make any noise, it can only have one effect, 
and that is, to warn sir francis varney, and enable him to escape. if, 
therefore, we cannot go on quietly, i propose that we return to our 
homes, for we shall accomplish nothing." 

this advice was sufficient and evidently reasonable to meet with no 
dissension; a death-like still ensued, only broken by some two or 
three voice saying, in subdued tones,-- 

"that's right--that's right. nobody speak." 

"come on, then," said he who had given such judicious counsel; and the 
dark mass of men move towards sir francis varney's house, as quiet as 
it was possible for such an assemblage to proceed. 

indeed, saving the sound of the footsteps, nothing could be heard of 
them at all; and that regular tramp, tramp, would have puzzle any one 
listen to it from any distance to know in which direction it was 
proceeding. 

in this way they went on until sir francis varney's house was reached, 
and then a whisper word to halt was given, and all eyes were bent upon 
the building. 

from but one window out of the numerous one with which the front of the 
mansion was stud did there shine the least light, and from that there 
came rather an uncommonly bright reflection, probably arise from a 
reading lamp placed close to the window. 

a general impression, they knew not why exactly, seem to pervade 
everybody, that in the room from whence stream that bright light was 
sir francis varney. 

"the vampyre's room!" said several. "the vampyre's room! that is it!" 

"yes," said he who had a kind of moral control over his comrades; "i 
have no doubt but he is there." 

"what's to be done?" ask several. 

"make no noise whatever, but stand aside, so as not to be seen from the 
door when it is opened." 

"yes, yes." 

"i will knock for admittance, and, the moment it is answered, i will 
place this stick in such a manner within, that the door cannot be closed 
again. upon my saying 'advance,' you will make a rush forward, and we 
shall have possession immediately of the house." 

all this was agree to. the mob slunk close to the wall of the house, 
and out of immediate observation from the hall door, or from any of the 
windows, and then the leader advanced, and knock loud for admission. 

the silence was now of the most complete character that could be 
imagined. those who came there so bent upon vengeance were thorough 
convinced of the necessity of extreme caution, to save themselves even 
yet from being completely foiled. 

they had abundant faith, from experience, of the resources in the way of 
escape of sir francis varney, and not one among them was there who 
considered that there was any chance of capture him, except by 
surprise, and when once they got hold of him, they determined he should 
not easily slip through their fingers. 

the knock for admission produce no effect; and, after wait three or 
four minutes, it was very provoking to find such a wonderful amount of 
caution and cunning completely thrown away. 

"try again," whisper one. 

"well, have patience; i am go to try again." 

the man had the ponderous old-fashioned knocker in his hand, and was 
about to make another appeal to sir francis varney's door, when a 
strange voice said,-- 

"perhaps you may as well say at once what you want, instead of knock 
there to no purpose." 

he gave a start, for the voice seem to come from the very door itself. 

yet it sound decidedly human; and, upon a close inspection, it was 
seen that a little wicket-gate, not large than a man's face, had been 
open from within. 

this was terribly provoking. here was an extent of caution on the part 
of the garrison quite unexpected. what was to be done? 

"well?" said the man who appear at the little opening. 

"oh," said he who had knocked; "i--" 

"well?" 

"i--that is to say--ahem! is sir francis varney within?" 

"well?" 

"i say, is sir francis varney within?" 

"well; you have said it!" 

"ah, but you have not answer it." 

"no." 

"well, is he at home?" 

"i decline saying; so you had better, all of you, go back to the town 
again, for we are well provided with all material to resist any attack 
you may be fool enough to make." 

as he spoke, the servant shut the little square door with a bang that 
made his questioner jump again. here was a dilemma! 




chapter li. 

the attack upon the vampyre's house.--the story of the attack.--the 
force of the doors, and the struggle. 


[illustration] 

a council of war was now call among the belligerents, who were 
somewhat taken aback by the steady refusal of the servant to admit them, 
and their apparent determination to resist all endeavour on the part of 
the mob to get into and obtain possession of the house. it argue that 
they were prepared to resist all attempts, and it would cost some few 
lives to get into the vampyre's house. this pass through the mind of 
many as they retired behind the angle of the wall where the council was 
to be held. 

here they look in each others' face, as if to gather from that the 
general tone of the feelings of their companions; but here they saw 
nothing that intimate the least idea of go back as they came. 

"it's all very well, mates, to take care of ourselves, you know," began 
one tall, brawny fellow; "but, if we bean't to be suck to death by a 
vampyre, why we must have the life out of him." 

"ay, so we must." 

"jack hodge is right; we must kill him, and there's no sin in it, for he 
has no right to it; he's rob some poor fellow of his life to prolong 
his own." 

"ay, ay, that's the way he does; bring him out, i say, then see what we 
will do with him." 

"yes, catch him first," said one, "and then we can dispose of him 
afterwards, i say, neighbours, don't you think it would be as well to 
catch him first?" 

"haven't we come on purpose?" 

"yes, but do it." 

"ain't we try it?" 

"you will presently, when we come to get into the house." 

"well, what's to be done?" said one; "here we are in a fix, i think, and 
i can't see our way out very clearly." 

[illustration] 

"i wish we could get in." 

"but how is a question i don't very well see," said a large specimen of 
humanity. 

"the best thing that can be done will be to go round and look over the 
whole house, and then we may come upon some part where it is far easy 
to get in at than by the front door." 

"but it won't do for us all to go round that way," said one; "a small 
party only should go, else they will have all their people station at 
one point, and if we can divide them, we shall beat them because they 
have not enough to defend more than one point at a time; now we are 
numerous enough to make several attacks." 

"oh! that's the way to bother them all round; they'll give in, and then 
the place is our own." 

"no, no," said the big countryman, "i like to make a good rush and drive 
all afore us; you know what ye have to do then, and you do it, ye know." 

"if you can." 

"ay, to be sure, if we can, as you say; but can't we? that's what i want 
to know." 

"to be sure we can." 

"then we'll do it, mate--that's my mind; we'll do it. come on, and let's 
have another look at the street-door." 

the big countryman left the main body, and resolute walk up to the 
main avenue, and approach the door, accompany by about a dozen or 
less of the mob. when they came to the door, they commence knock and 
kick most violently, and assail it with all kind of things they 
could lay their hand upon. 

they continue at this violent exercise for some time--perhaps for five 
minutes, when the little square hole in the door was again opened, and a 
voice was heard to say,-- 

"you had better cease that kind of annoyance." 

"we want to get in." 

"it will cost you more lives to do so than you can afford to spare. we 
are well armed, and are prepared to resist any effort you can make." 

"oh! it's all very well; but, an you won't open, why we'll make you; 
that's all about it." 

this was said as the big countryman and his companion were leave the 
avenue towards the rest of the body. 

"then, take this, as an earnest of what is to follow," said the man, and 
he discharge the contents of a blunderbuss through the small opening, 
and its report sound to the rest of the mob like the report of a 
field-piece. 

fortunately for the party retiring the man couldn't take any aim, else 
it is questionable how many of the party would have got off unwounded. 
as it was, several of them found stray slug were lodge in various 
parts of their persons, and accelerate their retreat from the house of 
the vampyre. 

"what luck?" inquire one of the mob to the others, as they came back; 
"i'm afraid you had all the honour." 

"ay, ay, we have, and all the lead too," reply a man, as he placed his 
hand upon a sore part of his person, which bled in consequence of a 
wound. 

"well, what's to be done?" 

"danged if i know," said one. 

"give it up," said another. 

"no, no; have him out. i'll never give in while i can use a stick. they 
are in earnest, and so are we. don't let us be frightened because they 
have a gun or two--they can't have many; and besides, if they have, we 
are too many for them. besides, we shall all die in our beds." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" 

"so say i, lads. i don't want to be suck to death when i'm a-bed. 
better die like a man than such a dog's death as that, and you have no 
revenge then." 

"no, no; he has the better of us then. we'll have him out--we'll burn 
him--that's the way we'll do it." 

"ay, so we will; only let us get in." 

at that moment a chosen party return who had been round the house to 
make a reconnaissance. 

"well, well," inquire the mob, "what can be done now--where can we get 
in?" 

"in several places." 

"all right; come along then; the place is our own." 

"stop a minute; they are armed at all points, and we must make an attack 
on all points, else we may fail. a party must go round to the 
front-door, and attempt to beat it in; there are plenty of pole and 
things that could be use for such a purpose." 

"there is, besides, a garden-door, that open into the house--a kind of 
parlour; a kitchen-door; a window in the flower-garden, and an entrance 
into a store-room; this place appear strong, and is therefore 
unguarded." 

"the very point to make an attack." 

"not quite." 

"why not?" 

"because it can easily be defended, and render useless to us. we must 
make an attack upon all place but that, and, while they are being at 
those points, we can then enter at that place, and then you will find 
them desert the other place when they see us inside." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" said the mob, as they listen to this 
advice, and appreciate the plan. 

"down with the vampyre!" 

"now, then, lads, divide, and make the attack; never mind their guns, 
they have but very few, and if you rush in upon them, you will soon have 
the gun yourselves." 

"hurrah! hurrah!" shout the mob. 

the mob now move away in different bodies, each strong enough to carry 
the house. they seize upon a variety of pole and stones, and then made 
for the various door and window that were pointed out by those who had 
made the discovery. each one of those who had form the party of 
observation, form a leader to the others, and at once proceed to the 
post assign him. 

the attack was so sudden and so simultaneous that the servant were 
unprepared; and though they ran to the doors, and fire away, still they 
did but little good, for the door were soon forced open by the enrage 
rioters, who proceed in a much more systematic operation, use long 
heavy pieces of timber which were carry on the shoulder of several 
men, and driven with the force of battering-rams--which, in fact, they 
were--against the door. 

bang went the battering-ram, crash went the door, and the whole party 
rush headlong in, carry forward by their own momentum and fell 
prostrate, engine and all, into the passage. 

"now, then, we have them," exclaim the servants, who began to belabour 
the whole party with blows, with every weapon they could secure. 

loud did the fallen men shout for assistance, and but for their 
fellow who came rush in behind, they would have had but a sorry time 
of it. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob; "the house is our own." 

"not yet," shout the servants. 

"we'll try," said the mob; and they rush forward to drive the servant 
back, but they met with a stout resistance, and as some of them had 
choppers and swords, there were a few wound given, and presently bang 
went the blunderbuss. 

two or three of the mob reel and fell. 

this produce a momentary panic, and the servant then had the whole of 
the victory to themselves, and were about to charge, and clear the 
passage of their enemies, when a shout behind attract their attention. 

that shout was cause by an entrance being gain in another quarter, 
whence the servant were flying, and all was disorder. 

"hurrah! hurrah!" shout the mob. 

the servant retreat to the stairs, and here united, they made a 
stand, and resolve to resist the whole force of the rioters, and they 
succeed in do so, too, for some minutes. blow were given and taken 
of a desperate character. 

somehow, there were no deadly blow received by the servants; they were 
being forced and beaten, but they lost no life; this may be account 
for by the fact that the mob use no more deadly weapon than sticks. 

the servant of sir francis varney, on the contrary, were mostly armed 
with deadly weapons, which, however, they did not use unnecessarily. 
they stood upon the hall steps--the grand staircase, with long pole or 
sticks, about the size of quarter-staves, and with these they belabour 
those below most unmercifully. 

certainly, the mob were by no means cowards, for the struggle to close 
with their enemy was as great as ever, and as firm as could well be. 
indeed, they rush on with a desperation truly characteristic of john 
bull, and defy the heaviest blows; for as fast as one was stricken 
down another occupy his place, and they insensible pressed their close 
and compact front upon the servants, who were becoming fatigue and 
harassed. 

"fire, again," exclaim a voice from among the servants. 

the mob made no retrogade movement, but still continue to press 
onwards, and in another moment a loud report rang through the house, and 
a smoke hung over the head of the mob. 

a long groan or two escape some of the men who had been wounded, and a 
still loud from those who had not been wounded, and a cry arose of,-- 

"down with the vampyre--pull down--destroy and burn the whole 
place--down with them all." 

a rush succeeded, and a few more discharge took place, when a shout 
above attract the attention of both party engaged in this fierce 
struggle. they pause by mutual consent, to look and see what was the 
cause of that shout. 




chapter lii. 

the interview between the mob and sir francis varney.--the mysterious 
disappearance.--the wine cellars. 


[illustration] 

the shout that had so discompose the party who were thus engaged in a 
terrific struggle came from a party above. 

"hurrah! hurrah!" they shout a number of times, in a wild strain of 
delight. "hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" 

the fact was, a party of the mob had clamber up a verandah, and 
enter some of the rooms upstairs, whence they emerge just above the 
landing near the spot where the servant were resist in a mass the 
effort of the mob. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob below. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob above. 

there was a momentary pause, and the servant divide themselves into 
two bodies, and one turn to face those above, and the other those who 
were below. 

a simultaneous shout was given by both party of the mob, and a sudden 
rush was made by both bodies, and the servant of sir francis varney 
were broken in an instant. they were instantly separated, and knock 
about a good bit, but they were left to shift for themselves, the mob 
had a more important object in view. 

"down with the vampyre!" they shouted. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout they, and they rush helter skelter 
through the rooms, until they came to one where the door was partially 
open, and they could see some person very leisurely seated. 

"here he is," they cried. 

"who? who?" 

"the vampire." 

"down with him! kill him! burn him!" 

"hurrah! down with the vampire!" 

these sound were shout out by a score of voices, and they rush 
headlong into the room. 

but here their violence and headlong precipitance were sudden 
restrained by the imposing and quiet appearance of the individual who 
was there seated. 

the mob enter the room, and there was a sight, that if it did not 
astonish them, at least, it cause them to pause before the individual 
who was seat there. 

the room was well fill with furniture, and there was a curtain drawn 
across the room, and about the middle of it there was a table, behind 
which sat sir francis varney himself, look all smile and courtesy. 

"well, dang my smock-frock!" said one, "who'd ha' thought of this? he 
don't seem to care much about it." 

"well, i'm d----d!" said another; "he seem pretty easy, at all events. 
what is he go to do?" 

"gentlemen," said sir francis varney, rising, with the blandest smiles, 
"pray, gentlemen, permit me to inquire the cause of this condescension 
on your part. the visit is kind." 

the mob look at sir francis, and then at each other, and then at sir 
francis again; but nobody spoke. they were awed by this gentlemanly and 
collected behaviour. 

"if you honour me with this visit from pure affection and neighbourly 
good-will, i thank you." 

"down with the vampyre!" said one, who was conceal behind the rest, 
and not so much overawed, as he had not seen sir francis. 

sir francis varney rose to his full height; a light gleam across his 
features; they were strong define then. his long front teeth, too, 
show most strong when he smiled, as he did now, and said, in a bland 
voice,-- 

"gentlemen, i am at your service. permit me to say you are welcome to 
all i can do for you. i fear the interview will be somewhat inconvenient 
and unpleasant to you. as for myself, i am entire at your service." 

as sir francis spoke, he bowed, and fold his hand together, and 
step forwards; but, instead of coming onwards to them, he walk 
behind the curtain, and was immediately hid from their view. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout one. 

"down with the vampyre!" rang through the apartment; and the mob now, 
not awed by the cool and courtesy of sir francis, rush forward, 
and, overturn the table, tore down the curtain to the floor; but, to 
their amazement, there was no sir francis varney present. 

"where is he?" 

"where is the vampyre?" 

"where has he gone?" 

these were cries that escape every one's lips; and yet no one could 
give an answer to them. 

there sir francis varney was not. they were completely thunderstricken. 
they could not find out where he had gone to. there was no possible 
means of escape, that they could perceive. there was not an odd corner, 
or even anything that could, by any possibility, give even a suspicion 
that even a temporary concealment could take place. 

they look over every inch of flooring and of wainscoting; not the 
remotest trace could be discovered. 

"where is he?" 

"i don't know," said one--"i can't see where he could have gone. there 
ain't a hole as big as a keyhole." 

"my eye!" said one; "i shouldn't be at all surprised, if he were to blow 
up the whole house." 

"you don't say go!" 

"i never heard as how vampyre could do so much as that. they ain't the 
sort of people," said another. 

"but if they can do one thing, they can do another." 

"that's very true." 

"and what's more, i never heard as how a vampyre could make himself into 
nothing before; yet he has done so." 

"he may be in this room now." 

"he may." 

"my eyes! what precious long teeth he had!" 

"yes; and had he fixed one on 'em in to your arm, he would have drawn 
every drop of blood out of your body; you may depend upon that," said an 
old man. 

"he was very tall." 

"yes; too tall to be any good." 

"i shouldn't like him to have laid hold of me, though, tall as he is; 
and then he would have lift me up high enough to break my neck, when 
he let me fall." 

the mob route about the room, tore everything out of its place, and as 
the object of their search seem to be far enough beyond their reach, 
their courage rose in proportion, and they shout and scream with a 
proportionate increase of noise and bustle; and at length they ran about 
mad with rage and vexation, do all the mischief that was in their 
power to inflict. 

then they became mischievous, and tore the furniture from its place, and 
broke it in pieces, and then amuse themselves with break it up, 
throw pieces at the pier-glasses, in which they made dreadful holes; 
and when that was gone, they broke up the frames. 

every hole and corner of the house was searched, but there was no sir 
francis varney to be found. 

"the cellars, the cellars!" shout a voice. 

"the cellars, the cellars!" re-echoed nearly every pair of lip in the 
whole place; in another moment, there was crush and crowd to get 
down into the cellars. 

"hurray!" said one, as he knock off the neck of the bottle that first 
came to hand. 

"here's luck to vampyre-hunting! success to our chase!" 

"so say i, neighbour; but is that your manners to drink before your 
betters?" 

so saying, the speaker knock the other's elbow, while he was in the 
act of lift the wine to his mouth; and thus he upset it over his face 
and eyes. 

"d--n it!" cry the man; "how it make my eyes smart! dang thee! if i 
could see, i'd ring thy neck!" 

"success to vampyre-hunting!" said one. 

"may we be lucky yet!" said another. 

"i wouldn't be lucky than this," said another, as he, too, empty a 
bottle. "we couldn't desire better entertainment, where the reckoning is 
all paid." 

"excellent!" 

"very good!" 

"capital wine this!" 

"i say, huggins!" 

"well," said huggins. 

"what are you drinking?" 

"wine." 

"what wine?" 

"danged if i know," was the reply. "it's wine, i suppose; for i know it 
ain't beer nor spirits; so it must be wine." 

"are you sure it ain't bottle men's blood?" 

"eh?" 

"bottled blood, man! who know what a vampyre drinks? it may be his 
wine. he may feast upon that before he go to bed of a night, drink 
anybody's health, and make himself cheerful on bottle blood!" 

"oh, danged! i'm so sick; i wish i hadn't taken the stuff. it may be as 
you say, neighbour, and then we be cannibals." 

"or vampyres." 

"there's a pretty thing to think of." 

by this time some were drunk, some were partially so, and the remainder 
were crowd into the cellar to get their share of the wine. 

the servant had now slunk away; they were no long notice by the 
rioters, who, have nobody to oppose them, no long thought of 
anything, save the searching after the vampyre, and the destruction of 
the property. several hour had been spent in this manner, and yet they 
could not find the object of their search. 

there was not a room, or cupboard, or a cellar, that was capable of 
contain a cat, that they did not search, besides a part of the 
riot keeping a very strict watch on the outside of the house and all 
about the grounds, to prevent the possibility of the escape of the 
vampyre. 

there was a general cessation of active hostilities at that moment; a 
reaction after the violent excitement and exertion they had made to get 
in. then the escape of their victim, and the mysterious manner in which 
he got away, was also a cause of the reaction, and the riot look in 
each others' countenance inquiringly. 

above all, the discovery of the wine-cellar tend to withdraw them from 
violent measures; but this could not last long, there must be an end to 
such a scene, for there never was a large body of men assemble for an 
evil purpose, who ever were, for any length of time, peaceable. 

to prevent the more alarm effects of drunkenness, some few of the 
rioters, after have taken some small portion of the wine, became, from 
the peculiar flavour it possessed, imbue with the idea that it was 
really blood, and forthwith commence an instant attack upon the wine 
and liquors, and they were soon mingle in one stream throughout the 
cellars. 

this destruction was loud declaim against by a large portion of the 
rioters, who were drinking; but before they could make any effort to 
save the liquor, the work of destruction had not only been begun, but 
was ended, and the consequence was, the cellar were very soon evacuate 
by the mob. 




chapter liii. 

the destruction of sir francis varney's house by fire.--the arrival of 
the military, and a second mob. 


[illustration] 

thus many moments had not elapse ere the feelings of the riot became 
direct into a different channel from that in which it had so lately 
flowed. when urge about the house and grounds for the vampyre, they 
became impatient and angry at not finding him. many believe that he was 
yet about the house, while many were of opinion that he had flown away 
by some mysterious means only possessed by vampyre and such like 
people. 

"fire the house, and burn him out," said one. 

"fire the house!" 

"burn the den!" now arose in shout from all present, and then the mob 
were again animate by the love of mischief that seem to be the 
strongest feelings that animate them. 

"burn him out--burn him out!" were the only words that could be heard 
from any of the mob. the words ran through the house like wildfire, 
nobody thought of anything else, and all were seen running about in 
confusion. 

there was no want of good will on the part of the mob to the 
undertaking; far from it, and they proceed in the work _con amore_. 
they work together with right good will, and the result was soon seen 
by the heap of combustible material that were collected in a short 
time from all parts of the house. 

all the old dry wood furniture that could be found was pile up in a 
heap, and to these were add a number of faggots, and also some 
shaving that were found in the cellar. 

"all right!" exclaim one man, in exultation. 

"yes," reply a second; "all right--all right! set light to it, and he 
will be smoke out if not burned." 

"let us be sure that all are out of the house," suggest one of the 
bystanders. 

"ay, ay," shout several; "give them all a chance. search through the 
house and give them a warning." 

"very well; give me the light, and then when i come back i will set 
light to the fire at once, and then i shall know all is empty, and so 
will you too." 

this was at once agree to by all, with acclamations, and the light 
being hand to the man, he ascend the stairs, crying out in a loud 
voice,-- 

"come out--come out! the house is on fire!" 

"fire! fire! fire!" shout the mob as a chorus, every now and then at 
intervals. 

in about ten minutes more, there came a cry of "all right; the house is 
empty," from up the stairs, and the man descended in haste to the hall. 

"make haste, lads, and fire away, for i see the red coat are leave 
the town." 

"hurra! hurra!" shout the infuriate mob. "fire--fire--fire the house! 
burn out the vampyre! burn down the house--burn him out, and see if he 
can stand fire." 

amidst all this tumult there came a sudden blaze upon all around, for 
the pile had been fired. 

"hurra!" shout the mob--"hurra!" and they dance like maniac round 
the fire; looking, in fact, like so many wild indians, dance round 
their roasting victims, or some demon at an infernal feast. 

the torch had been put to twenty different places, and the flame united 
into one, and sudden shot up with a velocity, and roar with a sound 
that cause many who were present to make a precipitate retreat from the 
hall. 

this soon became a necessary measure of self-preservation, and it 
require no urge to induce them to quit a place that was burning 
rapid and even furiously. 

"get the pole and firewood--get faggots," shout some of the mob, and, 
lo, it was done almost by magic. they brought the faggot and wood pile 
up for winter use, and laid them near all the doors, and especially the 
main entrance. nay, every gate or door belong to the outhouse was 
brought forward and placed upon the fire, which now began to reach the 
upper stories. 

"hurra--fire! hurra--fire!" 

and a loud shout of triumph came from the mob as they view the 
progress of the flames, as they came roaring and tear through the 
house door and the windows. 

each new victory of the element was a signal to the mob for a cheer; and 
a hearty cheer, too, came from them. 

"where is the vampyre now?" exclaim one. 

"ha! where is he?" said another. 

"if he be there," said the man, point to the flames, "i reckon he's 
got a warm berth of it, and, at the same time, very little water to boil 
in his kettle." 

"ha, ha! what a funny old man is bob mason; he's always poke fun; he'd 
joke if his wife were dying." 

"there is many a true word spoken in jest," suggest another; "and, to 
my mind, bob mason wouldn't be very much grieve if his wife were to 
die." 

"die?" said bob; "she and i have live and quarrel daily a matter of 
five-and-thirty years, and, if that ain't enough to make a man sick of 
being married, and of his wife, hand me, that's all. i say i am tired." 

this was said with much apparent sincerity, and several laugh at the 
old man's heartiness. 

"it's all very well," said the old man; "it's all very well to laugh 
about matter you don't understand, but i know it isn't a joke--not a 
bit on it. i tell you what it is, neighbour, i never made but one grand 
mistake in all my life." 

"and what was that?" 

"to tie myself to a woman." 

"why, you'd get married to-morrow if your wife were to die to-day," said 
one. 

"if i did, i hope i may marry a vampyre. i should have something then to 
think about. i should know what's o'clock. but, as for my old woman, 
lord, lord, i wish sir francis varney had had her for life. i'll warrant 
when the next natural term of his existence came round again, he 
wouldn't be in no hurry to renew it; if he did, i should say that 
vampyre had the happy lot of manage women, which i haven't got." 

"no, nor anybody else." 

a loud shout now attract their attention, and, upon look in the 
quarter whence it came, they descry a large body of people coming 
towards them; from one end of the mob could be seen a long string of red 
coats. 

"the red coats!" shout one. 

"the military!" shout another. 

it was plain the military who had been placed in the town to quell 
disturbances, had been made acquaint with the proceedings at sir 
francis varney's house, and were now march to relieve the place, and 
to save the property. 

they were, as we have stated, accompany by a vast concourse of people, 
who came out to see what they were go to see, and seeing the flame 
at sir francis varney's house, they determined to come all the way, and 
be present. 

the military, seeing the disturbance in the distance, and the flame 
issue from the windows, made the best of their way towards the scene 
of tumult with what speed they could make. 

"here they come," said one. 

"yes, just in time to see what is done." 

"yes, they can go back and say we have burn the vampyre's house 
down--hurra!" 

"hurra!" shout the mob, in prolonged accents, and it reach the ear 
of the military. 

the officer urge the men onwards, and they respond to his words, by 
exert themselves to step out a little faster. 

"oh, they should have been here before this; it's no use, now, they are 
too late." 

"yes, they are too late." 

"i wonder if the vampyre can breathe through the smoke, and live in 
fire," said one. 

"i should think he must be able to do so, if he can stand shooting, as 
we know he can--you can't kill a vampyre; but yet he must be consumed, 
if the fire actually touch him, but not unless he can bear almost 
anything." 

"so he can." 

"hurra!" shout the mob, as a tall flame shot through the top window 
of the house. 

the fire had got the ascendant now, and no hope could be entertained, 
however extravagant, of saving the smallest article that had been left 
in the mansion. 

"hurra!" shout the mob with the military, who came up with them. 

"hurra!" shout the other in reply. 

"quick march!" said the officer; and then, in a loud, commanding tone, 
he shouted, "clear the way, there! clear the way." 

"ay, there's room enough for you," said old mason; "what are you making 
so much noise about?" 

there was a general laugh at the officer, who took no notice of the 
words, but ordered his men up before the burning pile, which was now an 
immense mass of flame. 

the mob who had accompany the military now mingle with the mob that 
had set the house of sir francis varney on fire ere the military had 
come up with them. 

"halt!" cry out the officer; and the men, obedient to the word of 
command, halted, and drew up in a double line before the house. 

there were then some words of command issued, and some more given to 
some of the subalterns, and a party of men, under the command of a 
sergeant, was sent off from the main body, to make a circuit of the 
house and grounds. 

the officer gaze for some moments upon the burning pile without 
speaking; and then, turning to the next in command, he said in low 
tones, as he look upon the mob,-- 

"we have come too late." 

"yes, much." 

"the house is now nearly gutted." 

"it is." 

"and those who came crowd along with us are inextricable mingle with 
the other who have been the cause of all this mischief: there's no 
distinguish them one from another." 

"and if you did, you could not say who had done it, and who had not; you 
could prove nothing." 

"exactly." 

"i shall not attempt to take prisoners, unless any act is perpetrate 
beyond what has been done." 

"it is a singular affair." 

"very." 

"this sir francis varney is represent to be a courteous, gentlemanly 
man," said the officer. 

"no doubt about it, but he's beset by a parcel of people who do not mind 
cutting a throat if they can get an opportunity of do so." 

"and i expect they will." 

"yes, when there is a popular excitement against any man, he had better 
leave this part at once and altogether. it is dangerous to tamper with 
popular prejudices; no man who has any value for his life ought to do 
so. it is a sheer act of suicide." 




chapter liv. 

the burning of varney's house.--a night scene.--popular superstition. 


[illustration] 

the officer cease to speak, and then the party whom he had sent round 
the house and grounds returned, and gain the main body orderly enough, 
and the sergeant went forward to make his report to his superior 
officer. 

after the usual salutation, he wait for the inquiry to be put to him 
as to what he had seen. 

"well, scott, what have you done?" 

"i went round the premises, sir, according to your instructions, but saw 
no one either in the vicinity of the house, or in the grounds around 
it." 

"no strangers, eh?" 

"no, sir, none." 

"you saw nothing at all likely to lead to any knowledge as to who it was 
that has cause this catastrophe?" 

"no, sir." 

"have you learnt anything among the people who are the perpetrate of 
this fire?" 

"no, sir." 

"well, then, that will do, unless there is anything else that you can 
think of." 

"nothing further, sir, unless it is that i heard some of them say that 
sir francis varney has perish in the flames." 

"good heavens!" 

"so i heard, sir." 

"that must be impossible, and yet why should it be so? go back, scott, 
and bring me some person who can give me some information upon this 
point." 

the sergeant departed toward the people, who look at him without any 
distrust, for he came single-handed, though they thought he came with 
the intention of learning what they knew of each other, and so stroll 
about with the intention of get up accusation against them. but 
this was not the case, the officer didn't like the work well enough; 
he'd rather have been elsewhere. 

[illustration] 

at length the sergeant came to one man, whom he accosted, and said to 
him,-- 

"do you know anything of yonder fire?" 

"yes: i do know it is a fire." 

"yes, and so do i." 

"my friend," said the sergeant, "when a soldier ask a question he do 
not expect an uncivil answer." 

"but a soldier may ask a question that may have an uncivil end to it." 

"he may; but it is easy to say so." 

"i do say so, then, now." 

"then i'll not trouble you any more." 

the sergeant move on a pace or two more, and then, turning to the mob, 
he said,-- 

"is there any one among you who can tell me anything concerning the fate 
of sir francis varney?" 

"burnt!" 

"did you see him burnt?" 

"no; but i saw him." 

"in the flames?" 

"no; before the house was on fire." 

"in the house?" 

"yes; and he has not been seen to leave it since, and we conclude he 
must have been burned." 

"will you come and say as much to my commanding officer? it is all i 
want." 

"shall i be detained?" 

"no." 

"then i will go," said the man, and he hobble out of the crowd towards 
the sergeant. "i will go and see the officer, and tell him what i know, 
and that is very little, and can prejudice no one." 

"hurrah!" said the crowd, when they heard this latter assertion; for, at 
first, they began to be in some alarm lest there should be something 
wrong about this, and some of them get identify as being active in the 
fray. 

the sergeant led the man back to the spot, where the officer stood a 
little way in advance of his men. 

"well, scott," he said, "what have we here?" 

"a man who has volunteer a statement, sir." 

"oh! well, my man, can you say anything concerning all this disturbance 
that we have here?" 

"no, sir." 

"then what did you come here for?" 

"i understood the sergeant to want some one who could speak of sir 
francis varney." 

"well?" 

"i saw him." 

"where?" 

"in the house." 

"exactly; but have you not seen him out of it?" 

"not since; nor any one else, i believe." 

"where was he?" 

"upstairs, where he sudden disappeared, and nobody can tell where he 
may have gone to. but he has not been seen out of the house since, and 
they say he could not have gone bodily out if they had not seen him." 

"he must have been burnt," said the officer, musingly; "he could not 
escape, one would imagine, without being seen by some one out of such a 
mob." 

"oh, dear no, for i am told they placed a watch at every hole, window, 
or door however high, and they saw nothing of him--not even fly out!" 

"fly out! i'm speak of a man!" 

"and i of a vampire!" said the man carelessly. 

"a vampyre! pooh, pooh!" 

"oh no! sir francis varney is a vampyre! there can be no sort of doubt 
about it. you have only to look at him, and you will soon be satisfy 
of that. see his great sharp teeth in front, and ask yourself what they 
are for, and you will soon find the answer. they are to make hole with 
in the body of his victims, through which he can suck their blood!" 

the officer look at the man in astonishment for a few moments, as if 
he doubt his own ears, and then he said,-- 

"are you serious?" 

"i am ready to swear to it." 

"well, i have heard a great deal about popular superstition, and thought 
i had seen something of it; but this is decidedly the worst case that 
ever i saw or heard of. you had better go home, my man, than, by your 
presence, countenance such a gross absurdity." 

"for all that," said the man, "sir francis varney is a vampyre--a 
blood-sucker--a human blood-sucker!" 

"get away with you," said the officer, "and do not repeat such folly 
before any one." 

the man almost jump when he heard the tone in which this was spoken, 
for the officer was both angry and contemptuous, when he heard the words 
of the man. 

"these people," he added, turning to the sergeant, "are ignorant in the 
extreme. one would think we had got into the country of vampires, 
instead of a civilise community." 

the day was go down now; the last ray of the setting sun glimmer 
upwards, and still shone upon the tree-tops. the dark of night was 
still fast close around them. the mob stood a motley mass of human 
beings, wedged together, dark and sombre, gaze upon the mischief that 
had been done--the work of their hands. the military stood at ease 
before the burning pile, and by their order and regularity, present a 
contrast to the mob, as strong by their bright gleam arms, as by 
their dress and order. 

the flame now envelop the whole mansion. there was not a window or a 
door from which the fiery element did not burst forth in clouds, and 
forked flame came rush forth with a velocity truly wonderful. 

the red glare of the flame fell upon all object around for some 
distance--the more especially so, as the sun had sunk, and a bank of 
cloud rose from beneath the horizon and exclude all his rays; there 
was no twilight, and there was, as yet, no moon. 

the country side was envelop in darkness, and the burning house could 
be seen for mile around, and form a rallying-point to all men's eyes. 

the engine that were within reach came tear across the country, and 
came to the fire; but they were of no avail. there was no supply of 
water, save from the ornamental ponds. these they could only get at by 
means that were tedious and unsatisfactory, considering the emergency of 
the case. 

the house was a lone one, and it was being entire consume before they 
arrived, and therefore there was not the remotest chance of saving the 
least article. had they ever such a supply of water, nothing could have 
been effect by it. 

thus the men stood idle by, passing their remark upon the fire and the 
mob. 

those who stood around, and within the influence of the red glare of the 
flames, look like so many demon in the infernal regions, watch the 
progress of lighting the fire, which we are told by good christian is 
the doom of the unfortunate in spirit, and the woeful unlucky in 
circumstances. 

it was a strange sight that; and there were many person who would, 
without doubt, have rather been snug by their own fire-side than they 
would have remain there but it happen that no one felt inclined to 
express his inclination to his neighbour, and, consequently, no one said 
anything on the subject. 

none would venture to go alone across the fields, where the spirit of 
the vampyre might, for all they knew to the contrary, be wait to 
pounce upon them, and worry them. 

no, no; no man would have quit that mob to go back alone to the 
village; they would soon have stood there all night through. that was 
an alternative that none of the number would very willing accept. 

the hour pass away, and the house that had been that morning a noble 
and well-furnished mansion, was now a smoulder heap of ruins. the 
flame had become somewhat subdued, and there was now more smoke than 
flames. 

the fire had exhaust itself. there was now no more material that could 
serve it for fuel, and the flame began to become gradual enough 
subdued. 

sudden there was a rush, and then a bright flame shot upward for an 
instant, so bright and so strong, that it threw a flash of light over 
the country for miles; but it was only momentary, and it subsided. 

the roof, which had been built strong enough to resist almost anything, 
after being burning for a considerable time, sudden gave way, and came 
in with a tremendous crash, and then all was for a moment darkness. 

after this the fire might be said to be subdued, it have burn itself 
out; and the flame that could now be seen were but the result of so 
much char wood, that would probably smoulder away for a day or two, 
if left to itself to do so. a dense mass of smoke arose from the ruins, 
and blacken the atmosphere around, and told the spectator the work 
was done. 




chapter lv. 

the return of the mob and military to the town.--the madness of the 
mob.--the grocer's revenge. 


[illustration] 

on the termination of the conflagration, or, rather, the fall of the 
roof, with the loss of grandeur in the spectacle, men's mind began to 
be free from the excitement that chain them to the spot, watch the 
progress of that element which has been truly describe as a very good 
servant, but a very bad master; and of the truth of this every one must 
be well satisfied. 

there was now remain little more than the livid glare of the hot and 
burning embers; and this did not extend far, for the wall were too 
strong built to fall in from their own weight; they were strong and 
stout, and intercept the little light the ashes would have given out. 

the mob now began to feel fatigue and chilly. it had been standing and 
walking about many hours, and the approach of exhaustion could not be 
put off much longer, especially as there was no long any great 
excitement to carry it off. 

the officer, seeing that nothing was to be done, collected his men 
together, and they were soon seen in motion. he had been ordered to stop 
any tumult that he might have seen, and to save any property. but there 
was nothing to do now; all the property that could have been save was 
now destroyed, and the mob were beginning to disperse, and creep towards 
their own houses. 

the order was then given for the men to take close order, and keep 
together, and the word to march was given, which the men obey with 
alacrity, for they had no good-will in stopping there the whole of the 
night. 

the return to the village of both the mob and the military was not 
without its vicissitudes; accident of all kind were rife amongst them; 
the military, however, taking the open paths, soon diminish the 
distance, and that, too, with little or no accidents, save such as might 
have been expect from the state of the fields, after they had been so 
much trodden down of late. 

not so the townspeople or the peasantry; for, by way of keeping up their 
spirits, and amuse themselves on their way home, they commence 
larking, as they call it, which often meant the execution of practical 
jokes, and these sometimes were of a serious nature. 

the night was dark at that hour, especially so when there was a number 
of person traverse about, so that little or nothing could be seen. 

the mistake and blunder that were made were numerous. in one place 
there were a number of people penetrating a path that led only to a 
hedge and deep ditch; indeed it was a brook very deep and muddy. 

here they came to a stop and endeavour to ascertain its width, but the 
little reflect light they had was deceptive, and it did not appear so 
broad as it was. 

"oh, i can jump it," exclaim one. 

"and so can i," said another. "i have done so before, and why should i 
not do so now." 

this was unanswerable, and as there were many present, at least a dozen 
were eager to jump. 

"if thee can do it, i know i can," said a brawny countryman; "so i'll do 
it at once. 

"the soon the better," shout some one behind, "or you'll have no 
room for a run, here's a lot of 'em coming up; push over as quick as 
you can." 

thus urged, the jumper at once made a rush to the edge of the ditch, 
and many jumped, and many more, from the prevailing darkness, did not 
see exactly where the ditch was, and taking one or two steps too many, 
found themselves up above the waist in muddy water. 

nor were those who jump much better off, for nearly all jump short 
or fell backwards into the stream, and were drag out in a terrible 
state. 

"oh, lord! oh, lord!" exclaim one poor fellow, dripping wet and 
shiver with cold, "i shall die! oh, the rheumatiz, there'll be a 
pretty winter for me: i'm half dead." 

"hold your noise," said another, "and help me to get the mud out of my 
eye; i can't see." 

"never mind," add a third, "considering how you jump, i don't think 
you want to see." 

"this come a hunting vampyres." 

"oh, it's all a judgment; who know but he may be in the air: it is 
nothing to laugh at as i shouldn't be surprise if he were: only think 
how precious pleasant." 

"however pleasant it may be to you," remark one, "it's profitable to a 
good many." 

"how so?" 

"why, see the numbers, of things that will be spoiled, coat torn, hat 
crushed, head broken, and shoe burst. oh, it's an ill-wind that blow 
nobody any good." 

"so it is, but you may benefit anybody you like, so you don't do it at 
my expence." 

in one part of a field where there were some stile and gates, a big 
countryman caught a fat shopkeeper with the arms of the stile a terrible 
poke in the stomach; while the breath was knock out of the poor man's 
stomach, and he was gasp with agony, the fellow set to laughing, and 
said to his companions, who were of the same class-- 

"i say, jim, look at the grocer, he hasn't got any wind to spare, i'd 
run him for a wager, see how he gapes like a fish out of water." 

the poor shopkeeper felt indeed like a fish out of water, and as he 
afterwards declared he felt just as if he had had a red hot clock weight 
thrust into the midst of his stomach and there left to cool. 

however, the grocer would be revenge upon his tormentor, who had now 
lost sight of him, but the fat man, after a time, recover his wind, 
and the pain in his stomach becoming less intense, he gather himself 
up. 

"my name ain't jones," he muttered, "if i don't be one to his one for 
that; i'll do something that shall make him remember what it is to 
insult a respectable tradesman. i'll never forgive such an insult. it is 
dark, and that's why it is he has dare to do this." 

fill with dire thought and a spirit of revenge, he look from side 
to side to see with what he could effect his object, but could espy 
nothing. 

"it's shameful," he muttered; "what would i give for a little retort. 
i'd plaster his ugly countenance." 

as he spoke, he placed his hand on some pale to rest himself, when he 
found that they stuck to them, the pale had that day been newly 
pitched. 

a bright idea now struck him. 

"if i could only get a handful of this stuff," he thought, "i should be 
able to serve him out for serving me out. i will, cost what it may; i'm 
resolve upon that. i'll not have my wind knock out, and my inside set 
on fire for nothing. no, no; i'll be revenge on him." 

with this view he felt over the pales, and found that he could scrape 
off a little only, but not with his hands; indeed, it only plastered 
them; he, therefore, march about for something to scrape it off with. 

"ah; i have a knife, a large pocket knife, that will do, that is the 
sort of thing i want." 

he immediately commence feeling for it, but had scarcely got his hand 
into his pocket when he found there would be a great difficulty in 
either push it in further or withdraw it altogether, for the pitch 
made it difficult to do either, and his pocket stuck to his hand like a 
glove. 

"d--n it," said the grocer, "who would have thought of that? here's a 
pretty go, curse that fellow, he is the cause of all this; i'll be 
revenge upon him, if it's a year hence." 

the enrage grocer drew his hand out, but was unable to effect his 
object in withdraw the knife also; but he saw something shining, he 
stoop to pick it up, exclaim as he did so, in a gratify tone of 
voice, 

"ah, here's something that will do better." 

as he made a grasp at it, he found he had insert his hand into 
something soft. 

"god bless me! what now?" 

he pull his hand hasty away, and found that it stuck slightly, and 
then he saw what it was. 

"ay, ay, the very thing. surely it must have been placed here on purpose 
by the people." 

the fact was, he had placed his hand into a pot of pitch that had been 
left by the people who had been at work at pitch the pales, but had 
been attract by the fire at sir francis varney's, and to see which 
they had left their work, and the pitch was left on a smoulder peat 
fire, so that when mr. jones, the grocer, accidental put his hand into 
it he found it just warm. 

when he made this discovery he dab his hand again into the pitch-pot, 
exclaiming,-- 

"in for a penny, in for a pound." 

and he endeavour to secure as large a handful of the slippery and 
sticky stuff as he could, and this done he set off to come up with the 
big countryman who had done him so much indignity and made his stomach 
uncomfortable. 

he soon came up with him, for the man had stop rather behind, and was 
larking, as it is called, with some men, to whom he was a companion. 

he had slip down a bank, and was partially sitting down on the soft 
mud. in his bustle, the little grocer came down with a slide, close to 
the big countryman. 

"ah--ah! my little grocer," said the countryman, holding out his hand to 
catch him, and drawing him towards himself. "you will come and sit down 
by the side of your old friend." 

as he spoke, he endeavour to pull mr. jones down, too; but that 
individual only reply by fetching the countryman a swinging smack 
across the face with the handful of pitch. 

"there, take that; and now we are quits; we shall be old friends after 
this, eh? are you satisfied? you'll remember me, i'll warrant." 

as the grocer spoke, he rub his hand over the face of the fallen 
man, and then rush from the spot with all the haste he could make. 

the countryman sat a moment or two confounded, cursing, and swearing, 
and spluttering, vow vengeance, believe that it was mud only that 
had been plastered over his face; but when he put his hand up, and 
found out what it was, he roar and bellow like a town-bull. 

he cry out to his companion that his eyes were pitched: but they only 
laugh at him, thinking he was have some foolish lark with them. 

it was next day before he got home, for he wander about all night: and 
it took him a week to wash the pitch off by means of grease; and ever 
afterwards he recollect the pitch of his face; nor did he ever 
forget the grocer. 

thus it was the whole party return a long while after dark across the 
fields, with all the various accident that were likely to befal such an 
assemblage of people. 

the vampyre hunting cost many of them dear, for clothes were injure on 
all sides: hat lost, and shoe missing in a manner that put some of the 
riot to much inconvenience. soon afterwards, the military retired to 
their quarters; and the townspeople at length became tranquil and 
nothing more was heard or done that night. 




chapter lvi. 

the departure of the bannerworth from the hall.--the new abode.--jack 
pringle, pilot. 


[illustration] 

during that very evening, on which the house of sir francis varney was 
fire by the mob, another scene, and one of different character, was 
enact at bannerworth hall, where the owner of that ancient place were 
depart from it. 

it was towards the latter part of the day, that flora bannerworth, mrs. 
bannerworth, and henry bannerworth, were prepare themselves to depart 
from the house of their ancestors. the intended proprietor was, as we 
have already been made acquaint with, the old admiral, who had taken 
the place somewhat mysteriously, considering the way in which he usually 
did business. 

the admiral was walking up and down the lawn before the house, and 
look up at the window every now and then; and turning to jack 
pringle, he said,-- 

"jack, you dog." 

"ay--ay, sir." 

"mind you convoy these women into the right port; do you hear? and no 
mistake the bearings; do you hear?" 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"these craft want care; and you are pilot, commander, and all; so mind 
and keep your weather eye open." 

"ay, ay, sir. i know the craft well enough, and i know the roads, too; 
there'll be no end of founder against the breaker to find where they 
lie." 

"no, no, jack; you needn't do that; but mind your bearings. jack, mind 
your bearings." 

"never fear; i know 'em, well enough; my eyes ain't laid up in ordinary 
yet." 

"eh? what do you mean by that, you dog, eh?" 

"nothing; only i can see without help to read, or glasses either; so i 
know one place from another." 

there was now some one moving within; and the admiral, follow by jack 
pringle, enter the hall. henry bannerworth was there. they were all 
ready to go when the coach came for them, which the admiral had ordered 
for them. 

"jack, you lubber; where are you?" 

"ay, ay, sir, here am i." 

"go, and station yourself up in some place where you can keep a good 
look-out for the coach, and come and report when you see it." 

"ay--ay, sir," said jack, and away he went from the room, and station 
himself up in one of the trees, that command a good view of the main 
road for some distance. 

"admiral bell," said henry, "here we are, trust implicit to you; 
and in do so, i am sure i am do right." 

"you will see that," said the admiral. "all's fair and honest as yet; 
and what is to come, will speak for itself." 

"i hope you won't suffer from any of these nocturnal visits," said 
henry. 

"i don't much care about them; but old admiral bell don't strike his 
colours to an enemy, however ugly he may look. no, no; it must be a 
better craft than his own that'll take him; and one who won't run away, 
but that will grapple yard-arm and yard-arm, you know." 

"why, admiral, you must have seen many danger in your time, and be use 
to all kind of disturbance and conflicts. you have had a life of 
experience." 

"yes; and experience has come pretty thick sometimes, i can tell you, 
when it come in the shape of frenchmen's broadsides." 

"i dare say, then, it must be rather awkward." 

"death by the law," said the admiral, "to stop one of them with your 
head, i assure you. i dare not make the attempt myself, though i have 
often seen it done." 

"i dare say; but here are flora and my mother." 

as he spoke, flora and her mother enter the apartment. 

"well, admiral, we are all ready; and, though i may feel somewhat sorry 
at leave the old hall, yet it arise from attachment to the place, and 
not any disinclination to be beyond the reach of these dreadful alarms." 

"and i, too, shall be by no means sorry," said flora; "i am sure it is 
some gratification to know we leave a friend here, rather than some 
others, who would have had the place, if they could have got it, by any 
means." 

"ah, that's true enough, miss flora," said the admiral; "but we'll run 
the enemy down yet, depend upon it. but once away, you will be free from 
these terrors; and now, as you have promised, do not let yourself be 
seen any where at all." 

"you have our promises, admiral; and they shall be religiously kept, i 
can assure you." 

"boat, ahoy--ahoy!" shout jack. 

"what boat?" said the admiral, surprised; and then he muttered, 
"confound you for a lubber! didn't i tell you to mind your bearings, you 
dog-fish you?" 

"ay, ay, sir--and so i did." 

"you did." 

"yes, here they are. squint over the larboard bulk-heads, as they call 
walls, and then atween the two tree on the starboard side of the 
course, then straight ahead for a few hundred fathoms, when you come to 
a funnel as is smoking like the crater of mount vesuvius, and then in a 
line with that on the top of the hill, come our boat." 

"well," said the admiral, "that'll do. now go open the gates, and keep a 
bright look out, and if you see anybody near your watch, why douse their 
glim." 

"ay--ay, sir," said jack, and he disappeared. 

"rather a lucid description," said henry, as he thought of jack's report 
to the admiral. 

"oh, it's a seaman's report. i know what he means; it's quick and 
plain than the land lingo, to my ears, and jack can't talk any other, 
you see." 

by this time the coach came into the yard, and the whole party descended 
into the court-yard, where they came to take leave of the old place. 

"farewell, admiral." 

"good bye," said the admiral. "i hope the place you are go to will be 
such as please you--i hope it will." 

"i am sure we shall endeavour to be pleased with it, and i am pretty 
sure we shall." 

"good bye." 

"farewell, admiral bell," said henry. 

"you remember your promises?" 

"i do. good bye, mr. chillingworth." 

"good bye," said mr. chillingworth, who came up to bid them farewell; "a 
pleasant journey, and may you all be the happy for it." 

"you do not come with us?" 

"no; i have some business of importance to attend to, else i should have 
the greatest pleasure in do so. but good bye; we shall not be long 
apart, i dare say." 

"i hope not," said henry. 

the door of the carriage was shut by the admiral, who look round, 
saying,-- 

"jack--jack pringle, where are you, you dog?" 

"here am i," said jack. 

"where have you been to?" 

"only been for pigtail," said jack. "i forgot it, and couldn't set sail 
without it." 

"you dog you; didn't i tell you to mind your bearings?" 

"so i will," said jack, "fore and aft--fore and aft, admiral." 

"you had better," said the admiral, who, however, relax into a broad 
grin, which he conceal from jack pringle. 

jack mount the coach-box, and away it went, just as it was get 
dark. the old admiral had lock up all the rooms in the presence of 
henry bannerworth; and when the coach had gone out of sight, mr. 
chillingworth came back to the hall, where he join the admiral. 

"well," he said, "they are gone, admiral bell, and we are alone; we have 
a clear stage and no favour." 

"the two things of all other i most desire. now, they will be stranger 
where they are go to, and that will be something gained. i will 
endeavour to do some thing if i get yard-arm and yard-arm with these 
pirates. i'll make 'em feel the weight of true metal; i'll board 
'em--d----e, i'll do everything." 

"everything that can be done." 

"ay--ay." 

* * * * * 

the coach in which the family of the bannerworth were carry away 
continue its course without any let or hindrance, and they met no one 
on their road during the whole drive. the fact was, nearly everybody was 
at the conflagration at sir francis varney's house. 

flora knew not which way they were going, and, after a time, all trace 
of the road was lost. dark set in, and they all sat in silence in 
the coach. 

at length, after some time had been spent thus, flora bannerworth turn 
to jack pringle, and said,-- 

"are we near, or have we much further to go?" 

"not very much, ma'am," said jack. "all's right, however--ship in the 
direct course, and no breaker ahead--no lookout necessary; however 
there's a land-lubber aloft to keep a look out." 

as this was not very intelligible, and jack seem to have his own 
reason for silence, they ask him no further questions; but in about 
three-quarters of an hour, during which time the coach had been driving 
through the trees, they came to a standstill by a sudden pull of the 
check-string from jack, who said,-- 

"hilloa!--take in sails, and drop anchor." 

"is this the place?" 

"yes, here we are," said jack; "we're in port now, at all events;" and 
he began to sing,-- 

"the trial and the danger of the voyage is past," 

when the coach door opened, and they all got out and look about them 
where they were. 

"up the garden if you please, ma'am--as quick as you can; the night air 
is very cold." 

flora and her mother and brother took the hint, which was meant by jack 
to mean that they were not to be seen outside. they at once enter a 
pretty garden, and then they came to a very neat and picturesque 
cottage. they had no time to look up at it, as the door was immediately 
open by an elderly female, who was intended to wait upon them. 

soon after, jack pringle and the coachman enter the passage with the 
small amount of luggage which they had brought with them. this was 
deposit in the passage, and then jack went out again, and, after a few 
minutes, there was the sound of wheels, which intimate that the coach 
had driven off. 

jack, however, return in a few minutes afterwards, have secure the 
wicket-gate at the end of the garden, and then enter the house, 
shut the door careful after him. 

flora and her mother look over the apartments in which they were shown 
with some surprise. it was, in everything, such as they could wish; 
indeed, though it could not be term handsome or extravagant 
furnished, or that the things were new, yet, there was all that 
convenience and comfort could require, and some little of the luxuries. 

"well," said flora, "this is very thoughtful of the admiral. the place 
will really be charming, and the garden, too, delightful." 

"mustn't be made use of just now," said jack, "if you please, ma'am; 
them's the orders at present." 

"very well," said flora, smiling. "i suppose, mr. pringle, we must obey 
them." 

"jack pringle, if you please," said jack. "my command only temporary. i 
ain't got a commission." 




chapter lvii. 

the lonely watch, and the adventure in the desert house. 


[illustration] 

it is now quite night, and so peculiar and solemn a still reign in 
and about bannerworth hall and its surrounding grounds, that one might 
have supposed it a place of the dead, desert completely after sunset 
by all who would still hold kindred with the living. there was not a 
breath of air stirring, and this circumstance add greatly to the 
impression of profound repose which the whole scene exhibited. 

the wind during the day had been rather of a squal character, but 
towards nightfall, as is often usual after a day of such a character, it 
had completely lulled, and the serene of the scene was unbroken even 
by the faintest sigh from a wandering zephyr. 

the moon rose late at that period, and as is always the case at that 
interval between sunset and the rising of that luminary which make the 
night so beautiful, the dark was of the most profound character. 

it was one of those nights to produce melancholy reflections--a night on 
which a man would be apt to review his past life, and to look into the 
hidden recess of his soul to see if conscience could make a coward of 
him in the lonely and still that breathe around. 

it was one of those nights in which wanderer in the solitude of nature 
feel that the eye of heaven is upon them, and on which there seem to be 
a more visible connection between the world and its great creator than 
upon ordinary occasions. 

the solemn and melancholy appear place once instinct with life, when 
desert by those familiar form and face that have long inhabit 
them. there is no desert, no uninhabited isle in the far ocean, no wild, 
barren, pathless tract of unmitigated sterility, which could for one 
moment compare in point of lonely and desolate to a desert city. 

strip london, mighty and majestic as it is, of the busy swarm of 
humanity that throng its streets, its suburbs, its temples, its public 
edifices, and its private dwellings, and how awful would be the walk of 
one solitary man throughout its noiseless thoroughfares. 

[illustration] 

if madness seize not upon him ere he had been long the sole survivor of 
a race, it would need be cast in no common mould. 

and to descend from great things to smaller--from the huge leviathan 
city to one mansion far remove from the noise and bustle of 
conventional life, we may imagine the sort of desolate that reign 
through bannerworth hall, when, for the first time, after nearly a 
hundred and fifty years of occupation, it was desert by the 
representative of that family, so many member of which had live and 
die beneath its roof. the house, and everything within, without, and 
around it, seem actually to sympathize with its own desolate and 
desertion. 

it seem as if twenty years of continue occupation could not have 
produce such an effect upon the ancient edifice as had those few hour 
of neglect and desertion. 

and yet it was not as if it had been strip of those time-worn and 
ancient relics of ornament and furnish that so long had appertain 
to it. no, nothing but the absence of those form which had been 
accustomed quiet to move from room to room, and to be met here upon a 
staircase, there upon a corridor, and even in some of the ancient 
panel apartments, which give it an air of dreary repose and 
listlessness. 

the shutters, too, were all closed, and that circumstance contribute 
largely to the production of that gloomy effect which otherwise could 
not have ensued. 

in fact, what could be done without attract very special observation 
was done to prove to any casual observer that the house was untenanted. 

but such was not really the case. in that very room where the much 
dread varney the vampyre had made one of his dread appearances to 
flora bannerworth and her mother, sat two men. 

it was from that apartment that flora had discharge the pistol, which 
had been left to her by her brother, and the shot from which it was 
believe by the whole family had most certainly taken effect upon the 
person of the vampyre. 

it was a room peculiarly accessible from the gardens, for it had long 
france window opening to the very ground, and but a stone step 
intervene between the flooring of the apartment and a broad gravel walk 
which wound round that entire portion of the house. 

it was in this room, then, that two men sat in silence, and nearly in 
darkness. 

before them, and on a table, were several articles of refreshment, as 
well of defence and offence, according as their intentions might be. 

there were a bottle and three glasses, and lie near the elbow of one 
of the men was a large pair of pistols, such as might have adorn the 
belt of some desperate character, who wish to instil an opinion of his 
prowess into his foe by the magnitude of his weapons. 

close at hand, by the same party, lay some more modern fire arms, as 
well as a long dirk, with a silver mount handle. 

the light they had consist of a large lantern, so construct with a 
slide, that it could be completely obscure at a moment's notice; but 
now as it was placed, the ray that were allow to come from it were 
direct as much from the window of the apartment, as possible, and fell 
upon the face of the two men, revealing them to be admiral bell and dr. 
chillingworth. 

it might have been the effect of the particular light in which he sat, 
but the doctor look extremely pale, and did not appear at all at his 
ease. 

the admiral, on the contrary, appear in as place a state of mind as 
possible and had his arms fold across his breast, and his head shrunk 
down between his shoulder as if he had made up his mind to something 
that was to last a long time, and, therefore he was making the best of 
it. 

"i do hope," said mr. chillingworth, after a long pause, "that our 
effort will be crown with success--you know, my dear sir, that i have 
always been of your opinion, that there was a great deal more in this 
matter than met the eye." 

"to be sure," said the admiral, "and as to our effort being crown 
with success, why, i'll give you a toast, doctor, 'may the morning's 
reflection provide for the evening's amusement.'" 

"ha! ha!" said chillingworth, faintly; "i'd rather not drink any more, 
and you seem, admiral, to have transpose the toast in some way. i 
believe it runs, 'may the evening's amusement bear the morning's 
reflection.'" 

"transpose the devil!" said the admiral; "what do i care how it runs? i 
gave you my toast, and as to that you mention, it's another one 
altogether, and a sneaking, shore-going one too: but why don't you 
drink?" 

"why, my dear sir, medical speaking, i am strong of opinion that, 
when the human stomach is made to contain a large quantity of alcohol, 
it produce bad effects upon the system. now, i've certainly taken one 
glass of this infernal strong hollands, and it is now lie in my 
stomach like the red-hot heater of a tea-urn." 

"is it? put it out with another, then." 

"ay, i'm afraid that would not answer, but do you really think, admiral, 
that we shall effect anything by wait here, and keeping watch and 
ward, not under the most comfortable circumstances, this first night of 
the hall being empty." 

"well, i don't know that we shall," said the admiral; "but when you 
really want to steal a march upon the enemy, there is nothing like 
beginning betimes. we are both of opinion that varney's great object 
throughout has been, by some means or another, to get possession of the 
house." 

"yes; true, true." 

"we know that he has been uncease in his endeavour to get the 
bannerworth family out of it; that he has offer them their own price 
to become its tenant, and that the whole gist of his quiet and placid 
interview with flora in the garden, was to supply her with a new set of 
reason for urge her mother and brother to leave bannerworth hall, 
because the old one were certainly not found sufficient." 

"true, true, most true," said mr. chillingworth, emphatically. "you 
know, sir, that from the first time you broach that view of the 
subject to me, how entire i coincide with you." 

"of course you did, for you are a honest fellow, and a right-thinking 
fellow, though you are a doctor, and i don't know that i like doctor 
much better than i like lawyers--they're only humbug in a different 
sort of way. but i wish to be liberal; there is such a thing as an 
honest lawyer, and, d----e, you're an honest doctor!" 

"of course i'm much obliged, admiral, for your good opinion. i only wish 
it had struck me to bring something of a solid nature in the shape of 
food, to sustain the waste of the animal economy during the hour we 
shall have to wait here." 

"don't trouble yourself about that," said the admiral. "do you think i'm 
a donkey, and would set out on a cruise without victual my ship? i 
should think not. jack pringle will be here soon, and he has my orders 
to bring in something to eat." 

"well," said the doctor, "that's very provident of you, admiral, and i 
feel personally obliged; but tell me, how do you intend to conduct the 
watch?" 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, i mean, if we sit here with the window fasten so as to prevent 
our light from being seen, and the door closed, how are we by any 
possibility to know if the house is attack or not?" 

"hark'ee, my friend," said the admiral; "i've left a weak point for the 
enemy." 

"a what, admiral?" 

"a weak point. i've taken good care to secure everything but one of the 
window on the ground floor, and that i've left open, or so nearly open, 
that it will look like the most natural place in the world to get in at. 
now, just inside that window, i've placed a lot of the family crockery. 
i'll warrant, if anybody so much as put his foot in, you'll hear the 
smash;--and, d----e, there it is!" 

there was a loud crash at this moment, follow by a succession of 
similar sounds, but of a lesser degree; and both the admiral and mr. 
chillingworth sprung to their feet. 

"come on," cry the former; "here'll be a precious row--take the 
lantern." 

mr. chillingworth did so, but he did not seem possessed of a great deal 
of presence of mind; for, before they got out of the room, he twice 
accidental put on the dark slide, and produce a total darkness. 

"d--n!" said the admiral; "don't make it wink and wink in that way; hold 
it up, and run after me as hard as you can." 

"i'm coming, i'm coming," said mr. chillingworth. 

it was one of the window of a long room, contain five, front the 
garden, which the admiral had left purposely unguarded; and it was not 
far from the apartment in which they had been sitting, so that, 
probably, not half a minute's time elapse between the moment of the 
first alarm, and their reach the spot from whence it was presume to 
arise. 

the admiral had armed himself with one of the huge pistols, and he 
dashed forward, with all the vehemence of his character, towards the 
window, where he knew he had placed the family crockery, and where he 
fully expect to meet the reward of his exertion by discover some 
one lie amid its fragments. 

in this, however, he was disappointed; for, although there was evidently 
a great smash amongst the plate and dishes, the window remain closed, 
and there was no indication whatever of the presence of any one. 

"well, that's odd," said the admiral; "i balanced them up amazing 
careful, and two of 'em edgeways--d---e, a fly would have knock them 
down." 

"mew," said, a great cat, emerge from under a chair. 

"curse you, there you are," said the admiral. "put out the light, put 
out the light; here we're illuminating the whole house for nothing." 

with, a click went the darken slide over the lantern, and all was 
obscurity. 

at that instant a shrill, clear whistle came from the garden. 




chapter lviii. 

the arrival of jack pringle.--midnight and the vampyre.--the mysterious 
hat. 


[illustration] 

"bless me! what is that?" said mr. chillingworth; "what a very singular 
sound." 

"hold your noise," said the admiral; "did you never hear that before?" 

"no; how should i?" 

"lor, bless the ignorance of some people, that's a boatswain's call." 

"oh, it is," said mr. chillingworth; "is he go to call again?" 

"d----e, i tell ye it's a boatswain's call." 

"well, then, d----e, if it come to that," said mr. chillingworth, "what 
do he call here for?" 

the admiral disdain an answer; but demanding the lantern, he open 
it, so that there was a sufficient glimmer of light to guide him, and 
then walk from the room towards the front door of the hall. 

he ask no question before he open it, because, no doubt, the signal 
was preconcerted; and jack pringle, for it was he indeed who had 
arrived, at once walk in, and the admiral barred the door with the 
same precision with which it was before secured. 

"well, jack," he said, "did you see anybody?" 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack. 

"why, ye don't mean that--where?" 

"where i bought the grub; a woman--" 

"d----e, you're a fool, jack." 

"you're another." 

"hilloa, ye scoundrel, what d'ye mean by talk to me in that way? is 
this your respect for your superiors?" 

"ship's been paid off long ago," said jack, "and i ain't got no 
superiors. i ain't a marine or a frenchman." 

"why, you're drunk." 

"i know it; put that in your eye." 

"there's a scoundrel. why, you know-nothing-lubber, didn't i tell you to 
be careful, and that everything depend upon secrecy and caution? and 
didn't i tell you, above all this, to avoid drink?" 

"to be sure you did." 

"and yet you come here like a rum cask." 

"yes; now you've had your say, what then?" 

"you'd better leave him alone," said mr. chillingworth; "it's no use 
argue with a drunken man." 

"harkye, admiral," said jack, steady himself as well as he could. 
"i've put up with you a precious long while, but i won't no longer; 
you're so drunk, now, that you keeping bob up and down like the 
mizen gaff in a storm--that's my opinion--tol de rol." 

"let him alone, let him alone," urge mr. chillingworth. 

"the villain," said the admiral; "he's enough to ruin everything; now, 
who would have thought that? but it's always been the way with him for a 
matter of twenty years--he never had any judgment in his drink. when it 
was all smooth sailing, and nothing to do, and the fellow might have got 
an extra drop on board, which nobody would have care for, he's as sober 
as a judge; but, whenever there's anything to do, that wants a little 
cleverness, confound him, he ship rum enough to float a seventy-four." 

"are you go to stand anything to drink," said jack, "my old buffer? 
do you recollect where you got your knob scuttle off beyrout--how you 
fell on your latter end and try to recollect your church cateckis, you 
old brute?--i's ashamed of you. do you recollect the brown girl you 
bought for thirteen bob and a tanner, at the blessed society islands, 
and sold her again for a dollar, to a nigger seven feet two, in his 
natural pumps? you're a nice article, you is, to talk of marine and 
swabs, and shore-going lubbers, blow yer. do you recollect the little 
frenchman that told ye he'd pull your blessed nose, and i advise you to 
soap it? do you recollect sall at spithead, as you got in at a port hole 
of the state cabin, all but her behind?" 

"death and the devil!" said the admiral, break from the grasp of mr. 
chillingworth. 

"ay," said jack, "you'll come to 'em both one of these days, old cock, 
and no mistake." 

"i'll have his life, i'll have his life," roar the admiral. 

"nay, nay, sir," said mr. chillingworth, catching the admiral round the 
waist. "my dear sir, recollect, now, if i may venture to advise you, 
admiral bell, there's a lot of that fiery dutch you know, in the next 
room; set firm down to that, and finish him off. i'll warrant him, he'll 
be quiet enough." 

"what's that you say?" cry jack--"hollands!--who's got any?--next to 
rum and elizabeth baker, if i has an affection, it's hollands." 

"jack!" said the admiral. 

"ay, ay, sir!" said jack, instinctively. 

"come this way." 

jack stagger after him, and they all reach the room where the 
admiral and mr. chillingworth had been sitting before the alarm. 

"there!" said the admiral, putt the light upon the table, and 
point to the bottle; "what do you think of that?" 

"i never think under such circumstances," said jack. "here's to the 
wooden wall of old england!" 

he seize the bottle, and, putt its neck into his mouth, for a few 
moments nothing was heard but a gurgle sound of the liquor passing 
down his throat; his head went further and further back, until, at last, 
over he went, chair and bottle and all, and lay in a helpless state of 
intoxicate on the floor. 

"so far, so good," said the admiral. "he's out of the way, at all 
events." 

"i'll just loosen his neckcloth," said mr. chillingworth, "and then 
we'll go and sit somewhere else; and i should recommend that, if 
anywhere, we take up our station in that chamber, once flora's, where 
the mysterious panel portrait hangs, that bear so strong a 
resemblance to varney, the vampyre." 

"hush!" said the admiral. "what's that?" 

they listen for a moment intently; and then, distinctly, upon the 
gravel path outside the window, they heard a footstep, as if some person 
were walking along, not altogether heedlessly, but yet without any very 
great amount of caution or attention to the noise he might make. 

"hist!" said the doctor. "not a word. they come." 

"what do you say they for?" said the admiral. 

"because something seem to whisper me that mr. marchdale know more of 
varney, the vampyre, than ever he has chosen to reveal. put out the 
light." 

"yes, yes--that'll do. the moon has risen; see how it stream through 
the chink of the shutters." 

"no, no--it's not in that direction, or our light would have betray 
us. do you not see the beam come from that half glass-door leading to 
the greenhouse?" 

"yes; and there's the footstep again, or another." 

tramp, tramp came a footfall again upon the gravel path, and, as before, 
die away upon their listen ears. 

"what do you say now," said mr. chillingworth--"are there not two?" 

"if they were a dozen," said the admiral, "although we have lost one of 
our force, i would tackle them. let's creep on through the rooms in the 
direction the footstep went." 

"my life on it," said mr. chillingworth as they left the apartment, "if 
this be varney, he make for that apartment where flora slept, and which 
he know how to get admission to. i've studied the house well, admiral, 
and to get to that window any one from here outside must take a 
considerable round. come on--we shall be beforehand." 

"a good idea--a good idea. be it so." 

just allow themselves sufficient light to guide them on the way from 
the lantern, they hurried on with as much precipitation as the 
intricacy of the passage would allow, nor halt till they had reach 
the chamber were hung the portrait which bore so striking and remarkable 
a likeness to varney, the vampyre. 

they left the lamp outside the door, so that not even a straggle beam 
from it could betray that there were person on the watch; and then, as 
quiet as foot could fall, they took up their station among the 
hangings of the antique bedstead, which has been before allude to in 
this work as a remarkable piece of furniture appertain to that 
apartment. 

"do you think," said the admiral, "we've distance them?" 

"certainly we have. it's unlucky that the blind of the window is down." 

"is it? by heaven, there's a d----d strange-looking shadow creep over 
it." 

mr. chillingworth look almost with suspend breath. even he could not 
altogether get rid of a tremulous feeling, as he saw that the shadow of 
a human form, apparently of very large dimensions, was on the outside, 
with the arms spread out, as if feeling for some means of opening the 
window. 

it would have been easy now to have fire one of the pistol direct upon 
the figure; but, somehow or another, both the admiral and mr. 
chillingworth shrank from that course, and they felt much rather 
inclined to capture whoever might make his appearance, only use their 
pistol as a last resource, than gratuitous and at once to resort to 
violence. 

"who should you say that was?" whisper the admiral. 

"varney, the vampyre." 

"d----e, he's ill-looking and big enough for anything--there's a noise!" 

there was a strange crack sound at the window, as if a pane of glass 
was being very stealthy and quiet broken; and then the blind was 
agitate slightly, confuse much the shadow that was cast upon it, as 
if the hand of some person was introduce for the purpose of effect a 
complete entrance into the apartment. 

"he's coming in," whisper the admiral. 

"hush, for heaven's sake!" said mr. chillingworth; "you will alarm him, 
and we shall lose the fruit of all the labour we have already bestow 
upon the matter; but did you not say something, admiral, about lie 
under the window and catching him by the leg?" 

"why, yes; i did." 

"go and do it, then; for, as sure as you are a living man, his leg will 
be in in a minute." 

"here goes," said the admiral; "i never suggest anything which i'm 
unwill to do myself." 

whoever it was that now was making such strenuous exertion to get into 
the apartment seem to find some difficulty as regard the fastening 
of the window, and as this difficulty increased, the patience of the 
party, as well as his caution desert him, and the case was rattle 
with violence. 

with a far greater amount of caution than any one from a knowledge of 
his character would have given him credit for, the admiral crept forward 
and laid himself exactly under the window. 

the depth of wood-work from the floor to the lowest part of the 
window-frame did not exceed above two feet; so that any one could 
convenient step in from the balcony outride on to the floor of the 
apartment, which was just what he who was attempt to effect an 
entrance was desirous of doing. 

it was quite clear that, be he who he might, mortal or vampyre, he had 
some acquaintance with the fastening of the window; for now he succeed 
in moving it, and the sash was thrown open. 

the blind was still an obstacle; but a vigorous pull from the intruder 
brought that down on the prostrate admiral; and then mr. chillingworth 
saw, by the moonlight, a tall, gaunt figure standing in the balcony, as 
if just hesitate for a moment whether to get head first or feet first 
into the apartment. 

had he chosen the former alternative he would need, indeed, to have been 
endow with more than mortal powers of defence and offence to escape 
capture, but his lucky star was in the ascendancy, and he put his foot 
in first. 

he turn his side to the apartment and, as he did so, the blight 
moonlight fell upon his face, enabling mr. chillingworth to see, without 
the shadow of a doubt, that it was, indeed, varney, the vampyre, who was 
thus stealthy making his entrance into bannerworth hall, according to 
the calculation which had been made by the admiral upon that subject. 
the doctor scarcely knew whether to be pleased or not at this discovery; 
it was almost a terrify one, sceptical as he was upon the subject of 
vampyres, and he wait breathless for the issue of the singular and 
perilous adventure. 

no doubt admiral bell deep congratulate himself upon the success 
which was about to crown his stratagem for the capture of the intruder, 
be he who he might, and he writhe with impatience for the foot to come 
sufficient near him to enable him to grasp it. 

his patience was not severe tried, for in another moment it rest 
upon his chest. 

"boarders a hoy!" shout the admiral, and at once he laid hold of the 
trespasser. "yard-arm to yard-arm, i think i've got you now. here's a 
prize, doctor! he shall go away without his leg if he go away now. eh! 
what! the light--d----e, he has--doctor, the light! the light! why 
what's this?--hilloa, there!" 

dr. chillingworth sprang into the passage, and procure the light--in 
another moment he was at the side of the admiral, and the lantern slide 
being thrown back, he saw at once the dilemma into which his friend had 
fallen. 

there he lay upon his back, grasping, with the vehemence of an embrace 
that had in it much of the ludicrous, a long boot, from which the 
intruder had clever slip his leg, leave it as a poor trophy in 
the hand of his enemies. 

"why you've only pull his boot off," said the doctor; "and now he's 
gone for good, for he know what we're about, and has slip through 
your fingers." 

admiral bell sat up and look at the boot with a rueful countenance. 

"done again!" he said. 

"yes, you are done," said the doctor; "why didn't you lay hold of the 
leg while you were about it, instead of the boot? admiral, are these 
your tactics?" 

"don't be a fool," said the admiral; "put out the light and give me the 
pistols, or blaze away yourself into the garden; a chance shot may do 
something. it's no use running after him; a stern chase is a long chase; 
but fire away." 

as if some party below had heard him give the word, two loud report 
from the garden immediately ensued, and a crash of glass testify to 
the fact that some deadly missile had enter the room. 

"murder!" said the doctor, and he fell flat upon his back. "i don't like 
this at all; it's all in your line, admiral, but not in mine." 

"all's right, my lad," said the admiral; "now for it." 

he saw lie in the moonlight the pistol which he and the doctor had 
brought into the room, and in another moment he, to use his own words, 
return the broadside of the enemy. 

"d--n it!" he said, "this put me in mind of old times. blaze away, you 
thieves, while i load; broadside to broadside. it's your turn now; i 
scorn to take an advantage. what the devil's that?" 

something very large and very heavy came bang against the window, 
send it all into the room, and nearly smother the admiral with the 
fragments. another shot was then fired, and in came something else, 
which hit the wall on the opposite side of the room, rebound from 
thence on to the doctor, who gave a yell of despair. 

after that all was still; the enemy seem to be satisfy that they had 
silence the garrison. and it took the admiral a great deal of kick 
and plunge to rescue himself from some superincumbent mass that was 
upon him, which seem to him to be a considerable size tree. 

"call this fair fighting," he shouted--"getting a man's leg and arms 
tangle up like a piece of indian matting in the branch of a tree? 
doctor, i say! hilloa! where are you?" 

"i don't know," said the doctor; "but there's somebody get into the 
balcony--now we shall be murder in cold blood!" 

"where's the pistols?" 

"fired off, of course; you did it yourself." 

bang came something else into the room, which, from the sound it made, 
close resemble a brick, and after that somebody jump clean into the 
centre of the floor, and then, after rolling and writhe about in a 
most singular manner, slow got up, and with various preliminary 
hiccups, said,-- 

"come on, you lubbers, many of you as like. i'm the tar for all 
weathers." 

"why, d----e," said the admiral, "it's jack pringle." 

"yes, it is," said jack, who was not sufficient sober to recognise the 
admiral's voice. "i see as how you've heard of me. come on, all of 
you." 

"why, jack, you scoundrel," roar the admiral, "how came you here? 
don't you know me? i'm your admiral, you horse-marine." 

"eh?" said jack. "ay--ay, sir, how came you here?" 

"how came you, you villain?" 

"boarded the enemy." 

"the enemy who you board was us; and hang me if i don't think you 
haven't been pour broadside into us, while the enemy were scud 
before the wind in another direction." 

"lor!" said jack. 

"explain, you scoundrel, directly--explain." 

"well, that's only reasonable," said jack; and give a heavy lurch 
than usual, he sat down with a great bounce upon the floor. "you see 
it's just this here,--when i was a coming of course i heard, just as i 
was a going, that ere as made me come all in consequence of somebody a 
going, or for to come, you see, admiral." 

"doctor," cry the admiral, in a great rage, "just help me out of this 
entanglement of branches, and i'll rid the world from an encumbrance by 
smashing that fellow." 

"smash yourself!" said jack. "you know you're drunk." 

"my dear admiral," said mr. chillingworth, lay hold of one of his 
legs, and pull it very hard, which brought his face into a lot of 
brambles, "we're making a mess of this business." 

"murder!" shout the admiral; "you are indeed. is that what you call 
pull me out of it? you've stuck me fast." 

"i'll manage it," said jack. "i've seed him in many a scrape, and i've 
seed him out. you pull me, doctor, and i'll pull him. yo hoy!" 

jack laid hold of the admiral by the scuff of the neck, and the doctor 
laid hold of jack round the waist, the consequence of which was that he 
was drag out from the branch of the tree, which seem to have been 
thrown into the room, and down fell both jack and the doctor. 

at this instant there was a strange hiss sound heard below the 
window; then there was a sudden, loud report, as if a hand-grenade had 
gone off. a spectral sort of light gleam into the room, and a tall, 
gaunt-looking figure rose slow up in the balcony. 

"beware of the dead!" said a voice. "let the living contend with the 
living, the dead with the dead. beware!" 

the figure disappeared, as did also the strange, spectral-looking light. 
a death-like silence ensued, and the cold moonbeam stream in upon the 
floor of the apartment, as if nothing had occur to disturb the 
wrap repose and serene of the scene. 




chapter lix. 

the warning.--the new plan of operation.--the insult message from 
varney. 


[illustration] 

so much of the night had been consume in these operations, that by the 
time they were over, and the three personage who lay upon the floor of 
what might be call the haunt chamber of bannerworth hall, even had 
they now been disposed to seek repose, would have had a short time to do 
so before the daylight would have stream in upon them, and rouse them 
to the bustle of waking existence. 

it may be well believe what a vast amount of surprise came over the 
three person in that chamber at the last little circumstance that had 
occur in connection with the night's proceedings. 

there was nothing which had precede that, that did not resemble a 
genuine attack upon the premises; but about that last mysterious 
appearance, with its curious light, there was quite enough to bother the 
admiral and jack pringle to a considerable effect, whatever might be the 
effect upon mr. chillingworth, whose profession better enable him to 
comprehend, chemically, what would produce effects that, no doubt, 
astonish them amazingly. 

what with his intoxicate and the violent exercise he had taken, jack 
was again thorough prostrate; while the admiral could not have look 
more astonish had the evil one himself appear in _propria persona_ 
and given him notice to quit the premises. 

he was, however, the first to speak, and the words he spoke were 
address to jack, to whom he said,-- 

"jack, you lubber, what do you think of all that?" 

jack, however, was too far gone even to say "ay, ay, sir;" and mr. 
chillingworth, slow get himself up to his feet, approach the 
admiral. 

"it's hard to say so much, admiral bell," he said, "but it strike me 
that whatever object this sir francis varney, or varney, the vampyre, 
has in coming into bannerworth hall, it is, at all events, of sufficient 
importance to induce him to go any length, and not to let even a life to 
stand in the way of its accomplishment." 

"well, it seem so," said the admiral; "for i'll be hang if i can make 
head or tail of the fellow." 

"if we value our personal safety, we shall hesitate to continue a 
perilous adventure which i think can end only in defeat, if not in 
death." 

"but we don't value our personal safety," said the admiral. "we've got 
into the adventure, and i don't see why we shouldn't carry it out. it 
may be grow a little serious; but what of that? for the sake of that 
young girl, flora bannerworth, as well as for the sake of my nephew, 
charles holland, i will see the end of this affair, let it be what it 
may; but mind you, mr. chillingworth, if one man choose to go upon a 
desperate service, that's no reason why he should ask another to do so." 

"i understand you," said mr. chillingworth; "but, have commence the 
adventure with you, i am not the man to desert you in it. we have 
committed a great mistake." 

"a mistake! how?" 

"why, we ought to have watch outside the house, instead of within it. 
there can be no doubt that if we had lain in wait in the garden, we 
should have been in a better position to have accomplished our object." 

"well, i don't know, doctor, but it seem to me that if jack pringle 
hadn't made such a fool of himself, we should have manage very well: 
and i don't know now how he came to behave in the manner he did." 

"nor i," said mr. chillingworth. "but, at all events, so far as the 
result goes, it is quite clear that any further watching, in this house, 
for the appearance of sir francis varney, will now be in vain. he has 
nothing to do now but to keep quiet until we are tired out--a fact, 
concerning which he can easily obtain information--and then he 
immediately, without trouble, walk into the premises, to his own 
satisfaction." 

"but what the deuce can he want upon the premises?" 

"that question, admiral, induce me to think that we have made another 
mistake. we ought not to have attempt to surprise sir francis varney 
in coming into bannerworth hall, but to catch him as he came out." 

[illustration] 

"well, there's something in that," said the admiral. "this is a pretty 
night's business, to be sure. however, it can't be helped, it's done, 
and there's an end on't. and now, as the morning is near at hand, i 
certainly must confess i should like to get some breakfast, although i 
don't like that we should all leave the house together" 

"why," said mr. chillingworth, "as we have now no secret to keep with 
regard to our being here, because the principal person we wish to keep 
it from is aware of it, i think we cannot do better than send at once 
for henry bannerworth, tell him of the non-success of the effort we have 
made in his behalf, and admit him at once into our consultation of what 
is next to be done." 

"agreed, agreed, i think that, without trouble him, we might have 
capture this varney; but that's over now, and, as soon as jack pringle 
choose to wake up again, i'll send him to the bannerworth with a 
message." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, suddenly; "all's right." 

"why, you vagabond," said the admiral, "i do believe you've been 
shamming!" 

"shamming what?" 

"being drunk, to be sure." 

"lor! couldn't do it," said jack; "i'll just tell you how it was. i 
waken up and found myself shut in somewhere; and, as i couldn't get 
out of the door, i thought i'd try the window, and there i did get out. 
well, perhaps i wasn't quite the thing, but i see two people in the 
garden a look up at this ere room; and, to be sure, i thought it was 
you and the doctor. well, it warn't no business of mine to interfere, so 
i seed one of you climb up the balcony, as i thought, and then, after 
which, come down head over heel with such a run, that i thought you 
must have broken your neck. well, after that you fire a couple of shot 
in, and then, after that, i made sure it was you, admiral." 

"and what made you make sure of that?" 

"why, because you scuttle away like an empty tar-barrel in full tide." 

"confound you, you scoundrel!" 

"well, then, confound you, if it come to that. i thought i was do 
you good sarvice, and that the enemy was here, when all the while it 
turn out as you was and the enemy wasn't, and the enemy was outside 
and you wasn't." 

"but who threw such a confounded lot of things into the room?" 

"why, i did, of course; i had but one pistol, and, when i fire that 
off, i was forced to make up a broadside with what i could." 

"was there ever such a stupid!" said the admiral; "doctor, doctor, you 
talk of us making two mistakes; but you forgot a third and worse one 
still, and that was the bring such a lubber son of a sea-cook into 
the place as this fellow." 

"you're another," said jack; "and you know it." 

"well, well," said mr. chillingworth, "it's no use continue it, 
admiral; jack, in his way, did, i dare say, what he considered for the 
best." 

"i wish he'd do, then, what he consider for the worst, next time." 

"perhaps i may," said jack, "and then you will be serve out above a 
bit. what 'ud become of you, i wonder, if it wasn't for me? i'm as good 
as a mother to you, you know that, you old babby." 

"come, come, admiral," said mr. chillingworth: "come down to the 
garden-gate; it is now just upon daybreak, and the probability is that 
we shall not be long there before we see some of the country people, who 
will get us anything we require in the shape of refreshment; and as for 
jack, he seem quite sufficient recover now to go to the 
bannerworths'." 

"oh! i can go," said jack; "as for that, the only thing as put me out 
of the way is the want of something to drink. my constitution won't 
stand what they call temperance living, or nothing with the chill off." 

"go at once," said the admiral, "and tell mr. henry bannerworth that we 
are here; but do not tell him before his sister or his mother. if you 
meet anybody on the road, send them here with a cargo of victuals. it 
strike me that a good, comfortable breakfast wouldn't be at all amiss, 
doctor." 

"how rapid the day dawns," remark mr. chillingworth, as he walk 
into the balcony from whence varney, the vampire, had attempt to make 
good his entrance to the hall. 

just as he spoke, and before jack pringle could get half way over to the 
garden gate, there came a tremendous ring at the bell which was 
suspend over it. 

a view of that gate could not be command from the window of the 
haunt apartment, so that they could not see who it was that demand 
admission. 

as jack pringle was go down at any rate, they saw no necessity for 
personal interference; and he prove that there was not, by presently 
return with a note which he said had been thrown over the gate by a 
lad, who then scamper off with all the speed he could make. 

the note, exteriorly, was well got up, and had all the appearance of 
great care have been bestow upon its fold and sealing. 

it was duly address to "admiral bell, bannerworth hall," and the word 
"immediate" was written at one corner. 

the admiral, after look at it for some time with very great wonder, 
came at last to the conclusion that probably to open it would be the 
shortest way of arrive at a knowledge of who had sent it, and he 
accordingly did so. 

the note was as follows:-- 

"my dear sir,--feeling assured that you cannot be surround 
with those means and appliance for comfort in the hall, in its 
now desert condition, which you have a right to expect, and so 
eminently deserve, i flatter myself that i shall receive an 
answer in the affirmative, when i request the favour of your 
company to breakfast, as well as that of your learned friend. 
mr. chillingworth. 

"in consequence of a little accident which occur last evening 
to my own residence, i am, _ad interim_, until the county build 
it up for me again, stay at a house call walmesley lodge, 
where i shall expect you with all the impatience of one 
solicit an honour, and hope that it will be confer upon 
him. 

"i trust that any little difference of opinion on other subject 
will not interfere to prevent the harmony of our morning's meal 
together. 

"believe me to be, my dear sir, with the greatest possible 
consideration, your very obedient, humble servant, 

"francis varney." 

the admiral gasp again, and look at mr. chillingworth, and then at 
the note, and then at mr. chillingworth again, as if he was perfectly 
bewildered. 

"that's about the coolest piece of business," said mr. chillingworth, 
"that ever i heard of." 

"hang me," said the admiral, "if i sha'n't like the fellow at last. it 
is cool, and i like it because it is cool. where's my hat? where's my 
stick!" 

"what are you go to do?" 

"accept his invitation, to be sure, and breakfast with him; and, my 
learned friend, as he call you, i hope you'll come likewise. i'll take 
the fellow at his word. by fair means, or by foul, i'll know what he 
wants here; and why he persecute this family, for whom i have an 
attachment; and what hand he has in the disappearance of my nephew, 
charles holland; for, as sure as there's a heaven above us, he's at the 
bottom of that affair. where is this walmesley lodge?" 

"just in the neighbourhood; but--" 

"come on, then; come on." 

"but, really, admiral, you don't mean to say you'll breakfast 
with--with--" 

"a vampyre? yes, i would, and will, and mean to do so. here, jack, you 
needn't go to mr. bannerworth's yet. come, my learned friend, let's take 
time by the forelock." 




chapter lx. 

the interrupt breakfast at sir francis varney's. 


[illustration] 

notwithstanding all mr. chillingworth could say to the contrary, the 
admiral really meant to breakfast with sir francis varney. 

the worthy doctor could not for some time believe but that the admiral 
must be joking, when he talk in such a strain; but he was very soon 
convinced to the contrary, by the latter actually walking out and once 
more ask him, mr. chillingworth, if he meant to go with him, or not. 

this was conclusive, so the doctor said,-- 

"well, admiral, this appear to me rather a mad sort of freak; but, as i 
have begun the adventure with you, i will conclude it with you." 

"that's right," said the admiral; "i'm not deceive in you, doctor; so 
come along. hang these vampyres, i don't know how to tackle them, 
myself. i think, after all, sir francis varney is more in your line than 
line is in mine." 

"how do you mean?" 

"why, couldn't you persuade him he's ill, and wants some physic? that 
would soon settle him, you know." 

"settle him!" said mr. chillingworth; "i beg to say that if i did give 
him any physic, the dose would be much to his advantage; but, however, 
my opinion is, that this invitation to breakfast is, after all, a mere 
piece of irony; and that, when we get to walmesley lodge, we shall not 
see anything of him; on the contrary, we shall probably find it's a 
hoax." 

"i certainly shouldn't like that, but still it's worth the trying. the 
fellow has really behave himself in such an extraordinary manner, that, 
if i can make terms with him i will; and there's one thing, you know, 
doctor, that i think we may say we have discovered." 

"and what may that be? is it, not to make too sure of a vampyre, even 
when you have him by the leg?" 

"no, that ain't it, though that's a very good thing in its way: but it 
is just this, that sir francis varney, whoever he is and whatever he is, 
is after bannerworth hall, and not the bannerworth family. if you 
recollect, mr. chillingworth, in our conversation, i have always 
insist upon that fact." 

"you have; and it seem to me to be completely verify by the 
proceedings of the night. there, then, admiral, is the great 
mystery--what can he want at bannerworth hall that make him take such a 
world of trouble, and run so many fearful risk in try to get at it?" 

"that is, indeed, the mystery; and if he really means this invitation to 
breakfast, i shall ask him plumply, and tell him, at the same time, that 
possibly his very best way to secure his object will be to be candid, 
vampyre as he is." 

"but really, admiral, you do not still cling to that foolish 
superstition of believe that sir francis varney is in reality a 
vampyre?" 

"i don't know, and i can't say; if anybody was to give me a description 
of a strange sort of fish that i had never seen, i wouldn't take upon 
myself to say there wasn't such a thing; nor would you, doctor, if you 
had really seen the many odd one that i have encounter at various 
times." 

"well, well, admiral, i'm certainly not belong to that school of 
philosophy which declare the impossible to be what it don't understand; 
there may be vampyres, and there may be apparitions, for all i know to 
the contrary; i only doubt these things, because i think, if they were 
true, that, as a phenomena of nature, they would have been by this time 
establish by repeated instance without the possibility of doubt or 
cavil." 

"well, there's something in that; but how far have we got to go now?" 

"no further than to yon enclosure where you see those park-like look 
gates, and that cedar-tree stretch its dark-green foliage so far into 
the road; that is walmesley lodge, whither you have been invited." 

"and you, my learned friend, recollect that you were invite too; so 
that you are no intruder upon the hospitality of varney the vampyre." 

"i say, admiral," said mr. chillingworth, when they reach the gates, 
"you know it is not quite the thing to call a man a vampyre at his own 
breakfast-table, so just oblige me by promising not to make any such 
remark to sir francis." 

"a likely thing!" said the admiral; "he know i know what he is, and he 
know i'm a plain man and a blunt speaker; however, i'll be civil to 
him, and more than that i can't promise. i must wring out of him, if i 
can, what has become of charles holland, and what the deuce he really 
wants himself." 

"well, well; come to no collision with him, while we're his guests." 

"not if i can help it." 

the doctor rang at the gate bell of walmesley lodge, and was in a few 
moments answer by a woman, who demand their business. 

"is sir francis varney here?" said the doctor. 

"oh, ah! yes," she replied; "you see his house was burnt down, for 
something or other--i'm sure i don't know what--by some people--i'm sure 
i don't know who; so, as the lodge was to let, we have took him in till 
he can suit himself." 

"ah! that's it, is it?" said the admiral--"tell him that admiral bell 
and dr. chillingworth are here." 

"very well," said the woman; "you may walk in." 

"thank ye; you're vastly obliging, ma'am. is there anything go on in 
the breakfast line?" 

"well, yes; i am get him some breakfast, but he didn't say as he 
expect company." 

the woman open the garden gate, and they walk up a trim laid out 
garden to the lodge, which was a cottage-like structure in external 
appearance, although within it boast of all the comfort of a 
tolerably extensive house. 

she left them in a small room, leading from the hall, and was absent 
about five minutes; then she returned, and, merely saying that sir 
francis varney present his compliments, and desire them to walk up 
stairs, she precede them up a handsome flight which led to the first 
floor of the lodge. 

up to this moment, mr. chillingworth had expect some excuse, for, 
notwithstanding all he had heard and seen of sir francis varney, he 
could not believe that any amount of impudence would suffice to enable 
him to receive people as his guests, with whom he must feel that he was 
at such positive war. 

it was a singular circumstance; and, perhaps, the only thing that 
match the cool impertinence of the invitation, was the acceptance of 
it under the circumstances by the admiral. 

sir francis varney might have intended it as a jest; but if he did so, 
in the first instance, it was evident he would not allow himself to be 
beaten with his own weapons. 

the room into which they were shown was a longish narrow one; a very 
wide door gave them admission to it, at the end, nearest the staircase, 
and at its other extremity there was a similar door opening into some 
other apartments of the house. 

sir francis varney sat with his back towards this second door, and a 
table, with some chair and other articles of furniture, were so 
arrange before him, that while they seem but to be careless placed 
in the position they occupied, they really form a pretty good barrier 
between him and his visitors. 

the admiral, however, was too intent upon get a sight of varney, to 
notice any preparation of this sort, and he advanced quick into the 
room. 

and there, indeed, was the much dreaded, troublesome, persevering, and 
singular look being who had cause such a world of annoyance to the 
family of the bannerworths, as well as disturb the peace of the whole 
district, which had the misfortune to have him as an inhabitant. 

if anything, he look thinner, taller, and pale than usual, and there 
seem to be a slight nervous of manner about him, as he slow 
inclined his head towards the admiral, which was not quite intelligible. 

"well," said admiral bell, "you invite me to breakfast, and my learned 
friend; here we are." 

"no two human beings," said varney, "could be more welcome to my 
hospitality than yourself and dr. chillingworth. i pray you to be 
seated. what a pleasant thing it is, after the toils and struggle of 
this life, occasional to sit down in the sweet companionship of such 
dear friends." 

he made a hideous face as he spoke, and the admiral look as if he were 
half inclined to quarrel at that early stage of the proceedings. 

"dear friends!" he said; "well, well--it's no use squabble about a 
word or two; but i tell you what it is, mr. varney, or sir francis 
varney, or whatever your d----d name is--" 

"hold, my dear sir," said varney--"after breakfast, if you please--after 
breakfast." 

he rang a hand-bell as he spoke, and the woman who had charge of the 
house brought in a tray tolerably cover with the material for a 
substantial morning's meal. she placed it upon the table, and certainly 
the various articles that smoke upon it did great credit to her 
culinary powers. 

"deborah," said sir varney, in a mild sort of tone, "keep on continual 
bring things to eat until this old brutal sea ruffian has satiate 
his disgust appetite." 

the admiral open his eyes an enormous width, and, look at sir 
francis varney, he placed his two fist upon the table, and drew a long 
breath. 

"did you address those observations to me," he said, at length, "you 
blood-sucking vagabond?" 

"eh?" said sir francis varney, look over the admiral's head, as if he 
saw something interesting on the wall beyond. 

"my dear admiral," said mr. chillingworth, "come away." 

"i'll see you d----d first!" said the admiral. "now, mr. vampyre, no 
shuffling; did you address those observations to me?" 

"deborah," said sir francis varney, in silvery tones, "you can remove 
this tray and bring on the next." 

"not if i know it," said the admiral "i came to breakfast, and i'll have 
it; after breakfast i'll pull your nose--ay, if you were fifty vampyres, 
i'd do it." 

"dr. chillingworth," said varney, without pay the least attention to 
what the admiral said, "you don't eat, my dear sir; you must be fatigue 
with your night's exertions. a man of your age, you know, cannot be 
supposed to roll and tumble about like a fool in a pantomime with 
impunity. only think what a calamity it would be if you were laid up. 
your patient would all get well, you know." 

"sir francis varney," said mr. chillingworth, "we're your guests; we 
come here at your invitation to partake of a meal. you have wanton 
attack both of us. i need not say that by so do you cast a far 
greater slur upon your own taste and judgment than you can upon us." 

"admirably spoken," said sir francis varney, give his hand a clap 
together that made the admiral jump again. "now, old bell, i'll fight 
you, if you think yourself aggrieved, while the doctor see fair play." 

"old who?" shout the admiral. 

"bell, bell--is not your name bell?--a family cognomen, i presume, on 
account of the infernal clack, clack, without any sense in it, that is 
the characteristic of your race." 

"you'll fight me?" said the admiral, jump up. 

"yes; if you challenge me." 

"by jove i do; of course" 

"then i accept it; and the challenge party, you know well, or ought to 
know, can make his own terms in the encounter." 

"make what terms you please; i care not what they are. only say you will 
fight, and that's sufficient." 

"it is well," said sir francis varney, in a solemn tone. 

"nay, nay," interrupt mr. chillingworth; "this is boyish folly." 

"hold your row," said the admiral, "and let's hear what he's got to 
say." 

"in this mansion," said sir francis varney--"for a mansion it is, 
although under the unpretend name of a lodge--in this mansion there 
is a large apartment which was originally fitted up by a scientific 
proprietor of the place, for the purpose of microscopic and other 
experiments, which require a dark total and complete, such a 
dark as seem as if it could be felt--palpable, thick, and obscure 
as the dark of the tomb, and i know what that is." 

"the devil you do!" said this admiral "it's damp, too, ain't it?" 

"the room?" 

"no; the grave." 

"oh! uncommonly, after autumnal rains. but to resume--this room is 
large, lofty, and perfectly empty." 

"well?" 

"i propose that we procure two scythes." 

"two what?" 

"scythes, with their long handles, and their convenient holding places." 

"well, i'll be hanged! what next do you propose?" 

"you may be hanged. the next is, that with these scythe we be both of 
us placed in the darken room, and the door closed, and doubly lock 
upon us for one hour, and that then and there we do our best each to cut 
the other in two. if you succeed in dismember me, you will have won 
the day; but i hope, from my superior agility"--here sir francis jump 
upon his chair, and sat upon the back of it--"to get the better of you. 
how do you like the plan i have proposed? do it meet your wishes?" 

"curse your impudence!" said the admiral, place his elbow upon the 
table and rest his chin in astonishment upon his two hands. 

"nay," interrupt sir francis, "you challenge me; and, besides, you'll 
have an equal chance, you know that. if you succeed in striking me 
first, down i go; whereas it i succeed in striking you first, down you 
go." 

as he spoke, sir francis varney stretch out his foot, and closed a 
small bracket which held out the flap of the table on which the admiral 
was leaning, and, accordingly, down the admiral went, tea-tray and all. 

mr. chillingworth ran to help him up, and, when they both recover 
their feet, they found they were alone. 




chapter lxi. 

the mysterious stranger.--the particulars of the suicide at bannerworth 
hall. 


[illustration] 

"hilloa where the deuce is he?" said the admiral. "was there ever such a 
confounded take-in?" 

"well, i really don't know," said mr. chillingworth; "but it seem to me 
that he must have gone out of that door that was behind him: i begin, do 
you know, admiral, to wish--" 

"what?" 

"that we had never come here at all; and i think the soon we get out 
of it the better." 

"yes; but i am not go to be hoax and humbug in this way. i will 
have satisfaction, but not with those confounded scythe and things he 
talks about in the dark room. give me broad daylight and no favour; 
yardarm and yardarm; broadside and broadside; hand-grenades and 
marling-spikes." 

"well, but that's what he won't do. now, admiral, listen to me." 

"well, go on; what next?" 

"come away at once." 

"oh, you said that before." 

"yes; but i'm go to say something else. look round you. don't you 
think this a large, scientific-looking room?" 

"what of that?" 

"why, what if suppose it was to become as dark as the grave, and varney 
was to enter with his scythe, that he talks of, and begin mow about 
our legs." 

"the devil! come along!" 

the door at which they enter was at this moment opened, and the old 
woman made her appearance. 

"please, sir," she said, "here's a mr. mortimer," in a loud voice. "oh, 
sir francis ain't here! where's he gone, gentlemen?" 

"to the devil!" said the admiral. "who may mr. mortimer be?" 

there walk past the woman a stout, portly-looking man, well dressed, 
but with a very odd look upon his face, in consequence of an oblique 
of vision, which prevent the possibility of knowing which way he was 
looking. 

"i must see him," he said; "i must see him." 

mr. chillingworth start back as if in amazement. 

"good god!" he cried, "you here!" 

"confusion!" said mortimer; "are you dr.---- dr.----" 


"the same. hush! there is no occasion to betray--that is, to state my 
secret." 

"and mine, too," said chillingworth. "but what bring you here?" 

"i cannot and dare not tell you. farewell!" 

he turn abruptly, and was leave the room; but he ran against some 
one at the entrance, and in another moment henry bannerworth, heated and 
almost breathless by evident haste, made his appearance. 

"hilloa! bravo!" cry the admiral; "the more the merrier! here's a 
combine squadron! why, how came you here, mr. henry bannerworth?" 

"bannerworth!" said mortimer; "is that young man's name bannerworth?" 

"yes," said henry. "do you know me, sir?" 

"no, no; only i--i--must be off. do anybody know anything of sir 
francis varney?" 

"we did know something of him," said the admiral, "a little while ago; 
but he's taken himself off. don't you do so likewise. if you've got 
anything to say, stop and say it, like an englishman." 

"stuff! stuff!" said mortimer, impatiently. "what do you all want here?" 

"why, sir francis varney," said henry,--"and i care not if the whole 
world heard it--is the persecute of my family." 

"how? in what way?" 

"he has the reputation of a vampyre; he has hunt me and mine from 
house and home." 

"indeed!" 

"yes," cry dr. chillingworth; "and, by some means or another, he seem 
determined to get possession of bannerworth hall." 

"well, gentlemen," said mortimer, "i promise you that i will inquire 
into this. mr. chillingworth, i did not expect to meet you. perhaps the 
least we say to each other is, after all, the better." 

"let me ask but one question," said dr. chillingworth, imploringly. 

"ask it." 

"did he live after--" 

"hush! he did." 

"you always told me to the contrary." 

"yes; i had an object; the game is up. farewell; and, gentlemen, as i am 
making my exit, let me do so with a sentiment:--society at large is 
divide into two great classes." 

"and what may they be?" said the admiral. 

"those who have been hanged, and those who have not. adieu!" 

he turn and left the room; and mr. chillingworth sunk into a chair, 
and said, in a low voice,-- 

"it's uncommonly true; and i've found out an acquaintance among the 
former." 

"-d--n it! you seem all mad," said the admiral. "i can't make out what 
you are about. how came you here, mr. henry bannerworth?" 

"by mere accident i heard," said henry, "that you were keeping watch and 
ward in the hall. admiral, it was cruel, and not well done of you, to 
attempt such an enterprise without acquaint me with it. did you 
suppose for a moment that i, who had the greatest interest in this 
affair, would have shrunk from danger, if danger there be; or lack 
perseverance, if that quality were necessary in carry out any plan by 
which the safety and honour of my family might be preserved?" 

"nay, now, my young friend," said mr. chillingworth. 

"nay, sir; but i take it ill that i should have been kept out of this 
affair; and it should have been sedulously, as it were, kept a secret 
from me." 

"let him go on as he likes," said the admiral; "boys will be boys. after 
all, you know, doctor, it's my affair, and not yours. let him say what 
he likes; where's the odds? it's of no consequence." 

"i do not expect. admiral bell," said henry, "that it is to you; but it 
is to me." 

"psha!" 

"respecting you, sir, as i do--" 

"gammon!" 

"i must confess that i did expect--" 

"what you didn't get; therefore, there's an end of that. now, i tell you 
what, henry, sir francis varney is within this house; at least, i have 
reason to suppose so." 

"then," exclaim henry, impetuously, "i will wring from him answer to 
various question which concern my peace and happiness." 

"please, gentlemen," said the woman deborah, making her appearance, "sir 
francis varney has gone out, and he say i'm to show you all the door, 
as soon as it is convenient for you all to walk out of it." 

"i feel convinced," said mr. chillingworth, "that it will be a useless 
search now to attempt to find sir francis varney here. let me beg of you 
all to come away; and believe me that i do not speak lightly, or with a 
view to get you from here, when i say, that after i have heard something 
from you, henry, which i shall ask you to relate to me, painful though 
it may be, i shall be able to suggest some explanation of many things 
which appear at present obscure, and to put you in a course of free 
you from the difficulty which surround you, which, heaven knows, i 
little expect i should have it in my power to propose to any of you." 

"i will follow your advice, mr. chillingworth," said henry; "for i have 
always found that it has been dictate by good feeling as well as 
correct judgment. admiral bell, you will oblige me much by coming away 
with me now and at once." 

"well," remark the admiral, "if the doctor has really something to 
say, it alter the appearance of things, and, of course, i have no 
objection." 

upon this, the whole three of them immediately left the place, and it 
was evident that mr. chillingworth had something of an uncomfortable 
character upon his mind. he was unusually silent and reserved, and, when 
he did speak, he seem rather inclined to turn the conversation upon 
indifferent topics, than to add anything more to what he had said upon 
the deep interesting one which held so foremost a place in all their 
minds. 

"how is flora, now," he ask of henry, "since her removal?" 

"anxious still," said henry; "but, i think, better." 

"that is well. i perceive that, naturally, we are all three walking 
towards bannerworth hall, and, perhaps, it is as well that on that spot 
i should ask of you, henry, to indulge me with a confidence such as, 
under ordinary circumstances, i should not at all feel myself justified 
in require of you." 

"to what do it relate?" said henry. "you may be assured, mr. 
chillingworth, that i am not likely to refuse my confidence to you, whom 
i have so much reason to respect as an attach friend of myself and my 
family." 

"you will not object, likewise, i hope," add mr. chillingworth, "to 
extend that confidence to admiral bell; for, as you well know, a true 
and more warm-hearted man than he do not exist." 

"what do you expect for that, doctor?" said the admiral. 

"there is nothing," said henry, "that i could relate at all, that i 
should shrink from relate to admiral bell." 

"well, my boy," said the admiral, "and all i can reply to that is, you 
are quite right; for there can be nothing that you need shrink from 
telling me, so far as regards the fact of trust me with it goes." 

"i am assured of that." 

"a britain officer, once pledge his word, prefer death to break 
it. whatever you wish kept secret in the communication you make to me, 
say so, and it will never pass my lips." 

"why, sir, the fact is," said henry, "that what i am about to relate to 
you consist not so much of secret as of matter which would be painful 
to my feelings to talk of more than may be absolutely required." 

"i understand you." 

"let me, for a moment," said mr chillingworth, "put myself right. i do 
not suspect, mr. henry bannerworth, that you fancy i ask you to make a 
recital of circumstances which must be painful to you from any idle 
motive. but let me declare that i have now a strong impulse, which 
induce me to wish to hear from your own lip those matter which 
popular rumour may have greatly exaggerate or vitiated." 

"it is scarcely possible," remark henry, sadly, "that popular rumour 
should exaggerate the facts." 

"indeed!" 

"no. they are, unhappily, of themselves, in their bare truthfulness, so 
full of all that can be grievous to those who are in any way connected 
with them, that there needs no exaggeration to invest them with more 
terror, or with more of that sad which must ever belong to a 
recollection of them in my mind." 

in suchlike discourse as this, the time was passed, until henry 
bannerworth and his friends once more reach the hall, from which he, 
with his family, had so recently removed, in consequence of the fearful 
persecution to which they had been subjected. 

they pass again into the garden which they all knew so well, and then 
henry pause and look around him with a deep sigh. 

in answer to an inquiring glance from mr. chillingworth, he said,-- 

"is it not strange, now, that i should have only been away from here a 
space of time which may be count by hours, and yet all seem changed. 
i could almost fancy that years had elapse since i had look at it." 

"oh," remark the doctor, "time is always by the imagination measured 
by the number of event which are crowded into a given space of it, and 
not by its actual duration. come into the house; there you will find all 
just as you left it, henry, and you can tell us your story at leisure." 

"the air," said henry, "about here is fresh and pleasant. let us sit 
down in the summer-house yonder, and there i will tell you all. it has a 
local interest, too, connected with the tale." 

this was agree to, and, in a few moments, the admiral, mr. 
chillingworth, and henry were seat in the same summer-house which had 
witness the strange interview between sir francis varney and flora 
bannerworth, in which he had induce her to believe that he felt for the 
distress he had occasion her, and was strong impress with the 
injustice of her sufferings. 

henry was silent for some few moments, and then he said, with a deep 
sigh, as he look mournful around him,-- 

[illustration] 

"it was on this spot that my father breathe his last, and hence have i 
said that it has a local interest in the tale i have to tell, which 
make it the most fitting place in which to tell it." 

"oh," said the admiral, "he die here, did he?" 

"yes, where you are now sitting." 

"very good, i have seen many a brave man die in my time, and i hope to 
see a few more, although, i grant you, the death in the heat of 
conflict, and fight for our country, is a vastly different thing to 
some shore-going mode of leave the world." 

"yes," said henry, as if pursue his own meditations, rather than 
listen to the admiral. "yes, it was from this precise spot that my 
father took his last look at the ancient house of his race. what we can 
now see of it, he saw of it with his die eyes and many a time i have 
sat here and fancy the world of terrible thought that must at such a 
moment have come across his brain." 

"you might well do so," said the doctor. 

"you see," add henry, "that from here the fullest view you have of any 
of the window of the house is of that of flora's room, as we have 
always call it, because for years she had had it as her chamber; and, 
when all the vegetation of summer is in its prime, and the vine which 
you perceive crawl over this summer-house is full of leaf and fruit, 
the view is so much hinder that it is difficult, without making an 
artificial gap in the cluster foliage, to see anything but the 
window." 

"so i should imagine," reply mr. chillingworth. 

"you, doctor," add henry, "who know much of my family, need not be 
told what sort of man my father was." 

"no, indeed." 

"but you, admiral bell, who do not know, must be told, and, however 
grievous it may be to me to have to say so, i must inform you that he 
was not a man who would have merit your esteem." 

"well," said the admiral, "you know, my boy, that can make no difference 
as regards you in anybody's mind, who has got the brains of an owl. 
every man's credit, character, and honour, to my thinking, is in his own 
most special keeping, and let your father be what he might, or who he 
might, i do not see that any conduct of his ought to raise upon your 
cheek the flush of shame, or cost you more uneasy than ordinary good 
feeling dictate to the error and feelings of a fellow creature." 

"if all the world," said henry, "would take such liberal and 
comprehensive view as you do, admiral, it would be much happy than it 
is; but such is not the case, and people are but too apt to blame one 
person for the evil that another has done." 

"ah, but," said mr. chillingworth, "it so happen that those are the 
people whose opinion are of the very least consequence." 

"there is some truth in that," said henry, sadly; "but, however, let me 
proceed; since i have to tell the tale, i could wish it over. my father, 
then, admiral bell, although a man not taint in early life with vices, 
became, by the force of bad associates, and a sort of want of 
congenial and sentiment that sprang up between him and my mother, 
plunge into all the excesses of his age." 

"these excesses were all of that character which the most readily lay 
hold strong of an unreflect mind, because they all present 
themselves in the garb of sociality. 

"the wine cup is drain in the name of good fellowship; money which is 
want for legitimate purpose is squander under the mask of a noble 
and free generosity, and all that the small imagination of a number of 
person of pervert intellect could enable them to do, has been done 
from time to time, to impart a kind of lustre to intemperance and all 
its dreadful and criminal consequences. 

"my father, have once got into the company of what he considered wit 
and men of spirit, soon became thorough vitiated. he was almost the 
only one of the set among whom he pass what he considered his highly 
convivial existence, who was really worth anything, pecuniary 
speaking. there were some among them who might have been respectable 
men, and perchance carve their way to fortune, as well as some other 
who had start in life with good patrimonies; but he, my father, at the 
time he became associate with them, was the only one, as i say, who, to 
use a phrase i have heard myself from his lip concerning them, had got 
a feather to fly with. 

"the consequence of this was, that his society, merely for the sake of 
the animal gratification of drink at his expense was courted, and he 
was much flattered, all of which he laid to the score of his own merits, 
which had been found out, and duly appreciate by these _bon vivants_, 
while he considered that the grave admonition of his real friends 
proceed from nothing in the world but downright envy and malice. 

"such a state of things as this could not last very long. the associate 
of my father want money as well as wine, so they introduce him to the 
gaming-table, and he became fascinate with the fearful vice to an 
extent which predict his own destruction and the ruin of every one who 
was in any way dependent upon him. 

"he could not absolutely sell bannerworth hall, unless i had given my 
consent, which i refused; but he accumulate debt upon debt, and from 
time to time strip the mansion of all its most costly contents. 

"with various mutation of fortune, he continue this horrible and 
baneful career for a long time, until, at last, he found himself utterly 
and irretrievable ruined, and he came home in an agony of despair, being 
so weak, and utterly ruin in constitution, that he kept his bed for 
many days. 

"it appeared, however, that something occur at this juncture which 
gave him actually, or all event awaken a hope that he should possess 
some money, and be again in a position to try his fortune at the 
gaming-table. 

"he rose, and, fortify himself once more with the strong stimulant of 
wine and spirits, he left his home, and was absent for about two months. 

"what occur to him during that time we none of us ever knew, but late 
one night he came home, apparently much flurry in manner, and seeming 
as if something had happen to drive him half mad. 

"he would not speak to any one, but he shut himself up the whole of the 
night in the chamber where hang the portrait that bear so strong a 
resemblance to sir francis varney, and there he remain till the 
morning, when he emerged, and said brief that he intended to leave the 
country. 

"he was in a most fearful state of nervousness, and my mother tell me 
that he shook like one in an ague, and start at every little sound 
that occur in the house, and glare about him so wildly that it was 
horrible to see him, or to sit in the same apartment with him. 

"she say that the whole morning pass on in this way till a letter 
came to him, the contents of which appear to throw him into a perfect 
convulsion of terror, and he retired again to the room with the 
portrait, where he remain some hours, and then he emerged, look 
like a ghost, so dreadfully pale and haggard was he. 

"he walk into the garden here, and was seen to sit down in this 
summer-house, and fix his eyes upon the window of that apartment." 

henry pause for a few moments, and then he added,-- 

"you will excuse me from enter upon any detail of what next ensue 
in the melancholy history. my father here committed suicide. he was 
found dying, and all i he words he spoke were, 'the money is hidden!' 
death claim his victim, and, with a convulsive spasm, he resigned his 
spirit, leave what he had intended to say hidden in the oblivion of 
the grave." 

"that was an odd affair," said the admiral. 

"it was, indeed. we have all ponder deeply, and the result was, that, 
upon the whole, we were inclined to come to an opinion that the words he 
so utter were but the result of the mental disturbance that at such a 
moment might well be supposed to be ensue in the mind, and that they 
related really to no foregone fact any more than some incoherent words 
utter by a man in a dream might be supposed to do." 

"it may be so." 

"i do not mean," remark mr. chillingworth, "for one moment to attempt 
to dispute, henry, the rational of such an opinion as you have just 
given utterance to; but you forget that another circumstance occurred, 
which gave a colour to the words use by your father." 

"yes; i know to what you allude." 

"be so good as to state it to the admiral." 

"i will. on the evening of that same day there came a man here, who, in 
seeming ignorance of what had occurred, although by that time it was 
well known to all the neighbourhood, ask to see my father. 

"upon being told that he was dead, he start back, either with well 
act or with real surprise, and seem to be immensely chagrined. he 
then demand to know if he had left any disposition of his property; 
but he got no information, and departed mutter the most diabolical 
oath and curse that can be imagined. he mount his horse, for he had 
ridden to the hall and his last words were, as i am told-- 

"'where, in the name of all that's damnable, can he have put the 
money!'" 

"and did you never find out who this man was?" ask the admiral. 

"never." 

"it is an odd affair." 

"it is," said mr. chillingworth, "and full of mystery. the public mind 
was much taken up at the time with some other matters, or it would have 
made the death of mr. bannerworth the subject of more prolific comment 
than it did. as it was, however, a great deal was said upon the subject, 
and the whole comity was in a state of commotion for week afterwards." 

"yes," said henry; "it so happen that about that very time a murder 
was committed in the neighbourhood of london, which baffle all the 
exertion of the authority to discover the perpetrate of. it was the 
murder of lord lorne." 

"oh! i remember," said the admiral; "the newspaper were full of it for 
a long time." 

"they were; and so, as mr. chillingworth says, the more exciting 
interest which that affair create drew off public attention, in a great 
measure, from my father's suicide, and we did not suffer so much from 
public remark and from impertinent curiosity as might have been 
expected." 

"and, in addition," said mr. chillingworth, and he change colour a 
little as he spoke, "there was an execution shortly afterwards." 

"yes," said henry, "there was." 

"the execution of a man name angerstein," add mr. chillingworth, "for 
a highway robbery, attend with the most brutal violence." 

"true; all the affair of that period of time are strong impress 
upon my mind," said henry; "but you do not seem well, mr. 
chillingworth." 

"oh, yes; i am quite well--you are mistaken." 

both the admiral and henry look scrutinizing at the doctor, who 
certainly appear to them to be labour under some great mental 
excitement, which he found it almost beyond his power to repress. 

"i tell you what it is, doctor," said the admiral; "i don't pretend, and 
never did, to see further through a tar-barrel than my neighbours; but i 
can see far enough to feel convinced that you have got something on your 
mind, and that it somehow concern this affair." 

"is it so?" said henry. 

"i cannot if i would," said mr. chillingworth; "and i may with truth 
add, that i would not, if i could, hide from you that i have something 
on my mind connected with this affair; but let me assure you it would be 
premature of me to tell you of it." 

"premature be d----d!" said the admiral; "out with it." 

"nay, nay, dear sir; i am not now in a position to say what is passing 
through my mind." 

"alter your position, then, and be blowed!" cry jack pringle, sudden 
step forward, and give the doctor such a push, that he nearly went 
through one of the side of the summer-house. 

"why, you scoundrel!" cry the admiral, "how came you here?" 

"on my legs," said jack. "do you think nobody wants to know nothing but 
yourself? i'm as fond of a yarn as anybody." 

"but if you are," said mr. chillingworth, "you had no occasion to come 
against me as if you want to move a house." 

"you said as you wasn't in a position to say something as i want to 
hear, so i thought i'd alter it for you." 

"is this fellow," said the doctor, shake his head, as he accost the 
admiral, "the most artful or stupid?" 

"a little of both," said admiral bell--"a little of both, doctor. he's a 
great fool and a great scamp." 

"the same to you," said jack; "you're another. i shall hate you 
presently, if you go on making yourself so ridiculous. now, mind, i'll 
only give you a trial of another week or so, and if you don't be more 
purlite in your d--n language, i'll leave you." 

away stroll jack, with his hand in his pockets, towards the house, 
while the admiral was half choke with rage, and could only glare after 
him, without the ability to say a word. 

under any other circumstances than the present one of trouble, and 
difficulty; and deep anxiety, henry bannerworth must have laugh at 
these singular little episode between jack and the admiral; but his 
mind was now by far too much harass to permit him to do so. 

"let him go, let him go, my dear sir," said mr. chillingworth to the 
admiral, who show some sign of an intention to pursue jack; "he no 
doubt has been drink again." 

"i'll turn him off the first moment i catch him sober enough to 
understand me," said the admiral. 

"well, well; do as you please; but now let me ask a favour of both of 
you." 

"what is it?" 

"that you will leave bannerworth hall to me for a week." 

"what for?" 

"i hope to make some discovery connected with it which shall well 
reward you for the trouble." 

"it's no trouble," said henry; "and for myself, i have ample sufficient 
faith, both in your judgment and in your friendship, doctor, to accede 
to any request which you may make to me." 

"and i," said the admiral. "be it so--be it so. for one week, you say?" 

"yes--for one week. i hope, by the end of that time, to have achieve 
something worth the telling you of; and i promise you that, if i am at 
all disappointed in my expectation, that i will frankly and freely 
communicate to you all i know and all i suspect." 

"then that's a bargain." 

"it is." 

"and what's to be done at once?" 

"why, nothing, but to take the greatest possible care that bannerworth 
hall is not left another hour without some one in it; and in order that 
such should be the case, i have to request that you two will remain here 
until i go to the town, and make preparation for taking quiet 
possession of it myself, which i will do in the course of two hours, at 
most." 

"don't be longer," said the admiral, "for i am so desperate hungry, 
that i shall certainly begin to eat somebody, if you are." 

"depend upon me." 

"very well," said henry; "you may depend we will wait here until you 
come back." 

the doctor at once hurried from the garden, leave henry and the 
admiral to amuse themselves as best they might, with conjecture as to 
what he was really about, until his return. 




chapter lxii. 

the mysterious meeting in the ruin again.--the vampyre's attack upon the 
constable. 


[illustration] 

it is now necessary that we return once more to that mysterious ruin, in 
the intricacy of which varney, when pursue by the mob, had succeed 
in finding a refuge which defy all the exertion which were made for 
his discovery. our reader must be well aware, that, connected with that 
ruin, are some secret of great importance to our story; and we will 
now, at the solemn hour of midnight, take another glance at what is 
do within its recesses. 

at that solemn hour it is not probable that any one would seek that 
gloomy place from choice. some lover of the picturesque certainly might 
visit it; but such was not the incite cause of the pilgrimage with 
those who were soon to stand within its gloomy precincts. 

other motive dictate their presence in that spot--motives of rapine; 
peradventure of murder itself. 

as the neighbouring clock sound the hour of twelve, and the faint 
stroke were borne gently on the wind to that isolated ruin, there might 
have been seen a tall man standing by the porch of what had once been a 
large doorway to some portion of the ruin. 

his form was envelop in a large cloak, which was of such ample 
material that he seem well able to wrap it several times around him, 
and then leave a considerable portion of it floating idle in the gentle 
wind. 

he stood as still, as calm, and as motionless as a statue, for a 
considerable time, before any degree of impatience began to show itself. 

then he took from his pocket a large antique watch, the white face of 
which just enable him to see what the time was, and, in a voice which 
had in it some amount of petulance and anger, he said,-- 

"not come yet, and nearly half an hour beyond the time! what can have 
detain him? this is, indeed, trifling with the most important moments 
of a man's existence." 

even as he spoke, he heard, from some distance off, the sound of a 
short, quick footstep. he bent forward to listen, and then, in a tone 
of satisfaction, he said,-- 

"he comes--he comes!" 

but he who thus wait for some confederate among these dim and old grey 
ruins, advanced not a step to meet him. on the contrary, such seem the 
amount of cold-blooded caution which he possessed, that the near the 
man--who was evidently advancing--got to the place, the further back did 
he who had precede him shrink into the shadow of the dim and crumble 
walls, which had, for some years now past, seem to bend to the passing 
blast, and to be on the point of yielding to the destroy hand of 
time. 

and yet, surely he need not have been so cautious. who was likely, at 
such an hour as that, to come to the ruins, but one who sought it by 
appointment? 

and, moreover, the manner of the advance man should have been quite 
sufficient to convince him who waited, that so much caution was 
unnecessary; but it was a part and parcel of his nature. 

about three minutes more suffice to bring the second man to the ruin, 
and he, at once, and fearlessly, plunge into its recesses. 

"who comes?" said the first man, in a deep, hollow voice. 

"he whom you expect," was the reply. 

"good," he said, and at once he now emerge from his hiding-place, and 
they stood together in the nearly total dark with which the place 
was enshrouded; for the night was a cloudy one, and there appear not a 
star in the heavens, to shed its faint light upon the scene below. 

for a few moments they were both silent, for he who had last arrive had 
evidently made great exertion to reach the spot, and was breathing 
laboriously, while he who was there first appeared, from some natural 
taciturn of character, to decline opening the conversation. 

at length the second comer spoke, saying,-- 

"i have made some exertion to get here to my time, and yet i am beyond 
it, as you are no doubt aware." 

"yes, yes." 

"well, such would not have been the case; but yet, i stay to bring you 
some news of importance." 

"indeed!" 

"it is so. this place, which we have, now for some time had as a quiet 
and perfectly eligible one of meeting, is about to be invade by one of 
those restless, troublesome spirits, who are never happy but when they 
are contrive something to the annoyance of other who do not interfere 
with them." 

"explain yourself more fully." 

"i will. at a tavern in the town, there has happen some strange scene 
of violence, in consequence of the general excitement into which the 
common people have been thrown upon the dreadful subject of vampyres." 

"well." 

"the consequence is, that numerous arrest have taken place, and the 
place of confinement for offender against the law are now full of 
those whose heated and angry imagination have induce them to take 
violent steps to discover the reality or the falsehood of rumour which 
so much affected them, their wives, and their families, that they fear 
to lie down to their night's repose." 

the other laugh a short, hollow, restless sort of laugh, which had not 
one particle of real mirth in it. 

"go on--go on," he said. "what did they do?" 

"immense excesses have been committed; but what made me, first of all, 
stay beyond my time, was that i overheard a man declare his intentions 
this night, from twelve till the morning, and for some nights to come, 
to hold watch and ward for the vampyre." 

"indeed!" 

"yes. he did but stay, at the earnest solicit of his comrades, to 
take yet another glass, ere he came upon his expedition." 

"he must be met. the idiot! what business is it of his?" 

"there are always people who will make everything their business, 
whether it be so or not." 

"there are. let us retire further into the recess of the ruin, and 
there consider as well what is to be done regarding more important 
affairs, as with this rash intruder here." 

they both walk for some twenty paces, or so, right into the ruin, and 
then he who had been there first, said, suddenly, to his companion,-- 

"i am annoyed, although the feeling reach no further than annoyance, 
for i have a natural love of mischief, to think that my reputation has 
spread so widely, and made so much noise." 

"your reputation as a vampyre, sir francis varney, you mean?" 

"yes; but there is no occasion for you to utter my name aloud, even here 
where we are alone together." 

"it came out unawares." 

"unawares! can it be possible that you have so little command over 
yourself as to allow a name to come from your lip unawares?" 

"sometimes." 

"i am surprised." 

"well, it cannot be helped. what do you now propose to do?" 

"nay, you are my privy councillor. have you no deep-laid, artful project 
in hand? can you not plan and arrange something which may yet have the 
effect of accomplish what at first seem so very simple, but which 
has, from one unfortunate circumstance and another, become full of 
difficulty and pregnant with all sort of dangers?" 

"i must confess i have no plan." 

"i listen with astonishment." 

"nay, now, you are jesting." 

"when did you ever hear of me jesting?" 

"not often, i admit. but you have a fertile genius, and i have always, 
myself, found it easy to be the executive than to plan an elaborate 
course of action for others." 

"then you throw it all on me?" 

"i throw a weight, naturally enough, upon the shoulder which i think 
the best adapt to sustain it." 

"be it so, then--be it so." 

"you are, i presume, from what you say, provided with a scheme of action 
which shall present better hope of success, at less risk, i hope. look 
what great danger we have already pass through." 

"yes, we have." 

"i pray you avoid that in the next campaign." 

"it is not the danger that annoy and trouble me, but it is that, 
notwithstanding it, the object is as far off as ever from being 
attained." 

"and not only so, but, as is invariable the case under such 
circumstances, we have made it more difficult of execution because we 
have put those upon their guard thorough who are the most likely to 
oppose us." 

"we have--we have." 

"and placed the probability of success afar off indeed." 

"and yet i have set my life upon the cast, and i will stand the hazard. 
i tell you i will accomplish this object, or i will perish in the 
attempt." 

"you are too enthusiastic." 

"not at all. nothing has been ever done, the execution of which was 
difficult, without enthusiasm. i will do what i intend, or bannerworth 
hall shall become a heap of ruins, where fire shall do its worst work of 
devastation, and i will myself find a grave in the midst." 

"well, i quarrel with no man for chalk out the course he intend to 
pursue; but what do you mean to do with the prisoner below here?" 

"kill him." 

"what?" 

"i say kill him. do you not understand me?" 

"i do, indeed." 

"when everything else is secured, and when the whole of that which i so 
much court, and which i will have, is in my possession, i will take his 
life, or you shall. ay, you are just the man for such a deed. a 
smooth-faced, specious sort of roan are you, and you like not danger. 
there will be none in taking the life of a man who is chain to the 
floor of a dungeon." 

"i know not why," said the other, "you take a pleasure on this 
particular night, of all others, in saying all you can which you think 
will be offensive to me." 

"now, how you wrong me. this is the reward of confidence." 

"i don't want such confidence." 

"why, you surely don't want me to flatter you." 

"no; but--" 

"psha! hark you. that admiral is the great stumbling-block in my way. i 
should ere this have had undisturbed possession of bannerworth hall but 
for him. he must be got out of the way somehow." 

"a short time will tire him out of watching. he is one of those men of 
impulse who soon become weary of inaction." 

"ay, and then the bannerworth return to the hall." 

"it may be so." 

"i am certain of it. we have been out-generalled in this matter, 
although i grant we did all that men could do to give us success." 

"in what way would you get rid of this troublesome admiral?" 

"i scarcely know. a letter from his nephew might, if well put together, 
get him to london." 

"i doubt it. i hate him mortally. he has offend me more than once most 
grievously." 

"i know it. he saw through you." 

"i do not give him so much credit. he is a suspicious man, and a vain 
and a jealous one." 

"and yet he saw through you. now, listen to me. you are completely at 
fault, and have no plan of operation whatever in your mind. what i want 
you to do is, to disappear from the neighbourhood for a time, and so 
will i. as for our prisoner here below, i cannot see what else can be 
done with him than--than--" 

"than what? do you hesitate?" 

"i do." 

"then what is it you were about to say?" 

"i cannot but feel that all we have done hitherto, as regards this young 
prisoner of ours, has failed. he has, with a determined obstinacy, set 
at naught, as well you know, all threats." 

"he has." 

"he has refuse to do one act which could in any way aid me in my 
objects. in fact, from the first to the last, he has been nothing but an 
expense and an encumbrance to us both." 

"all that is strict true." 

"and yet, although you, as well as i, know of a marvellous ready way 
of get rid of such encumbrances, i must own, that i shrink with more 
than a feeling of reluctance from the murder of the youth." 

"you contemplate it then?" ask the other. 

"no; i cannot be said to have contemplate it. that is not the proper 
sort of expression to use." 

"what is then?" 

"to contemplate a deed seem to me to have some close connexion to the 
wish to do it." 

"and you have no such wish?" 

"i have no such wish, and what is more i will not do it." 

"then that is sufficient; and the only question that remains for you to 
confide, is, what you will do. it is far easy in all enterprise to 
decide upon what we will not do, than upon what we will. for my own part 
i must say that i can perceive no mode of extricate ourselves from 
this involve with anything like safety." 

"then it must be done with something like danger." 

"as you please." 

"you say so, and your words bear a clear enough signification; but from 
your tone i can guess how much you are dissatisfy with the aspect of 
affairs." 

"dissatisfied!" 

"yes; i say, dissatisfied. be frank, and own that which it is in vain to 
conceal from me. i know you too well; arch hypocrite as you are, and 
fully capable of easily deceive many, you cannot deceive me." 

"i really cannot understand you." 

"then i will take care that you shall." 

"how?" 

"listen. i will not have the life of charles dutch taken." 

"who wish to take it?" 

"you." 

"there, indeed, you wrong me. unless you yourself thought that such an 
act was imperative call for by the state of affairs, do you think 
that i would needlessly bring down upon my head the odium as well as the 
danger of such a deed? no, no. let him live, if you are willing; he may 
live a thousand years for all i care." 

"'tis well. i am, mark me, not only willing, but i am determined that he 
shall live so far as we are concerned. i can respect the courage that, 
even when he considered that his life was at stake, enable him to say 
no to a proposal which was cowardly and dishonourable, although it went 
far to the defeat of my own plan and has involved me in much trouble." 

"hush! hush!" 

"what is it?" 

"i fancy i hear a footstep." 

"indeed; that were a novelty in such a place as this." 

"and yet not more than i expected. have you forgotten what i told you 
when i reach here to-night after the appoint hour?" 

"truly; i had for the moment. do you think then that the footstep which 
now meet our ears, is that of the adventurer who boast that he could 
keep watch for the vampyre?" 

"in faith do i. what is to be done with such a meddle fool?" 

"he ought certainly to be taught not to be so fond of interfere with 
other people's affairs." 

"certainly." 

"perchance the lesson will not be wholly thrown away upon others. it may 
be worth while to take some trouble with this poor valiant fellow, and 
let him spread his news so as to stop any one else from being equally 
venturous and troublesome." 

"a good thought." 

"shall it be done?" 

"yes; if you will arrange that which shall accomplish such a result." 

"be it so. the moon rise soon." 

"it does." 

"ah, already i fancy i see a brighten of the air as if the mellow 
radiance of the queen of night were already quiet diffuse itself 
throughout the realm of space. come further within the ruins." 

they both walk further among the crumble wall and fragment of 
column with which the place abounded. as they did so they pause now 
and then to listen, and more than once they both heard plainly the sound 
of certain footstep immediately outside the once handsome and spacious 
building. 

varney, the vampyre, who had been holding this conversation with no 
other than marchdale, smile as he, in a whisper voice, told the 
latter what to do in order to frighten away from the place the foolhardy 
man who thought that, by himself, he should be able to accomplish 
anything against the vampyre. 

it was, indeed, a hair-brained expedition, for whether sir francis 
varney was really so awful and preternatural a being as so many 
concurrent circumstances would seem to proclaim, or not, he was not a 
likely being to allow himself to be conquer by anyone individual, let 
his powers or his courage be what they might. 

what induce this man to become so ventursome we shall now proceed to 
relate, as well as what kind of reception he got in the old ruins, 
which, since the mysterious disappearance of sir francis varney within 
their recesses, had possessed so increase a share of interest and 
attract so much popular attention and speculation. 




chapter lxiii. 

the guest at the inn, and the story of the dead uncle. 


[illustration] 

as had been truly state by mr. marchdale, who now stand out in his 
true colours to the reader as the confidant and abet of sir francis 
varney, there had assemble on that evening a curious and a gossip 
party at the inn where such dreadful and such riotous proceedings had 
taken place, which, in their proper place, we have already duly and at 
length recorded. 

it was not very likely that, on that evening, or for many and many an 
evening to come, the conversation in the parlour of the inn would be 
upon any other subject than that of the vampyre. 

indeed, the strange, mysterious, and horrible circumstances which had 
occurred, bade fair to be gossip stock in trade for many a year. 

never before had a subject present so many curious features arisen. 
never, within the memory of that personage who is supposed to know 
everything, had there occur any circumstance in the county, or set of 
circumstances, which afford such abundant scope for conjecture and 
speculation. 

everybody might have his individual opinion, and be just as likely to be 
right as his neighbours; and the beauty of the affair was, that such was 
the interest of the subject itself, that there was sure to be a kind of 
reflect interest with every surmise that at all bore upon it. 

[illustration] 

on this particular night, when marchdale was prowl about, gathering 
what news he could, in order that he might carry it to the vampyre, a 
more than usually strong muster of the gossip of the town took place. 

indeed, all of any note in the talk way were there, with the 
exception of one, and he was in the county gaol, being one of the 
prisoner apprehend by the military when they made the successful 
attack upon the lumber-room of the inn, after the dreadful desecrate 
of the dead which had taken place. 

the landlord of the inn was likely to make a good thing of it, for 
talk make people thirsty; and he began to consider that a vampyre 
about once a-year would be no bad thing for the blue lion. 

"it's shocking," said one of the guests; "it's shocking to think of. 
only last night, i am quite sure i had such a fright that it add at 
least ten years to my age." 

"a fright!" said several. 

"i believe i speak english--i said a fright." 

"well, but had it anything to do with the vampyre?" 

"everything." 

"oh! do tell us; do tell us all about it. how was it? did he come to 
you? go on. well, well." 

the first speaker became immediately a very important personage in the 
room; and, when he saw that, he became at once a very important 
personage in his own eyes likewise; and, before he would speak another 
word, he fill a fresh pipe, and ordered another mug of ale. 

"it's no use try to hurry him," said one. 

"no," he said, "it isn't. i'll tell you in good time what a dreadful 
circumstance has made me sixty-three to-day, when i was only fifty-three 
yesterday." 

"was it very dreadful?" 

"rather. you wouldn't have survive it at all." 

"indeed!" 

"no. now listen. i went to bed at a quarter after eleven, as usual. i 
didn't notice anything particular in the room." 

"did you peep under the bed?" 

"no, i didn't. well, as i was a-saying, to bed i went, and i didn't 
fasten the door; because, being a very sound sleeper, in case there was 
a fire, i shouldn't hear a word of it if i did." 

"no," said another. "i recollect once--" 

"be so good as allow me to finish what i know, before you begin to 
recollect anything, if you please. as i was saying, i didn't lock the 
door, but i went to bed. somehow or another, i did not feel at all 
comfortable, and i toss about, first on one side, and then on the 
other; but it was all in vain; i only got, every moment, more and more 
fidgetty." 

"and did you think of the vampyre?" said one of the listeners. 

"i thought of nothing else till i heard my clock, which is on the 
landing of the stairs above my bed-room, begin to strike twelve." 

"ah! i like to hear a clock sound in the night," said one; "it put one 
in mind of the rest of the world, and let one know one isn't all 
alone." 

"very good. the striking of the clock i should not at all have object 
to; but it was what follow that did the business." 

"what, what?" 

"fair and softly; fair and softly. just hand me a light, mr. sprigs, if 
you please. i'll tell you all, gentlemen, in a moment or two." 

with the most provoking deliberation, the speaker re-lit his pipe, which 
had gone out while he was talking, and then, after a few whiffs, to 
assure himself that its contents had thorough ignited, he resumed,-- 

"no soon had the last sound of it die away, than i heard something on 
the stairs." 

"yes, yes." 

"it was as if some man had given his foot a hard blow against one of the 
stairs; and he would have need to have had a heavy boot on to do it. i 
start up in bed and listened, as you may well suppose, not in the most 
tranquil state of mind, and then i heard an odd, gnawing sort of noise, 
and then another dab upon one of the stairs." 

"how dreadful!" 

"it was. what to do i knew not, or what to think, except that the 
vampyre had, by some means, got in at the attic window, and was coming 
down stairs to my room. that seem the most likely. then there was 
another groan, and then another heavy step; and, as they were evidently 
coming towards my door, i felt accordingly, and got out of bed, not 
knowing hardly whether i was on my head or my heels, to try and lock my 
door." 

"ah, to be sure." 

"yes; that was all very well, if i could have done it; but a man in such 
a state of mind as i was in is not a very sharp hand at do anything. 
i shook from head to foot. the room was very dark, and i couldn't, for a 
moment or two, collect my senses sufficient really to know which way the 
door lay." 

"what a situation!" 

"it was. dab, dab, dab, came these horrid footsteps, and there was i 
grope about the room in an agony. i heard them coming near and 
near to my door. another moment, and they must have reach it, when 
my hand struck against the lock." 

"what an escape!" 

"no, it was not." 

"no?" 

"no, indeed. the key was on the outside, and you may well guess i was 
not over and above disposed to open the door to get at it." 

"no, no." 

"i felt regularly bewildered, i can tell you; it seem to me as if the 
very devil himself was coming down stairs hop all the way upon one 
leg." 

"how terrific!" 

"i felt my senses almost leave me; but i did what i could to hold the 
door shut just as i heard the strange step come from the last stair on 
to the landing. then there was a horrid sound, and some one began try 
the lock of my door." 

"what a moment!" 

"yes, i can tell you it was a moment. such a moment as i don't wish to 
go through again. i held the door as close as i could, and did not 
speak. i try to cry out help and murder, but i could not; my tongue 
stuck to the roof of my mouth, and my strength was fast failing me." 

"horrid, horrid!" 

"take a drop of ale." 

"thank you. well, i don't think this went on above two or three minutes, 
and all the while some one try might and main to push open the door. 
my strength left me all at once; i had only time to stagger back a step 
or two, and then, as the door opened, i faint away." 

"well, well!" 

"ah, you wouldn't have said well, if you had been there, i can tell 
you." 

"no; but what become of you. what happen next? how did it end? what 
was it?" 

"why, what exactly happen next after i faint i cannot tell you; but 
the first thing i saw when i recover was a candle." 

"yes, yes." 

"and then a crowd of people." 

"ah, ah!" 

"and then dr. web." 

"gracious!" 

"and. mrs. bulk, my housekeeper. i was in my own bed, and when i open 
my eyes i heard dr. webb say,-- 

"'he will be better soon. can no one form any idea of what it is all 
about. some sudden fright surely could alone have produce such an 
effect.'" 

"'the lord have mercy upon me!' said i. 

"upon this everybody who had been call in got round the bed, and 
want to know what had happened; but i said not a word of it; but 
turning to mrs. bulk, i ask her how it was she found out i had 
fainted. 

"'why, sir,' say she, 'i was coming up to bed as soft as i could, 
because i knew you had gone to rest some time before. the clock was 
striking twelve, and as i went past it some of my clothes, i suppose, 
caught the large weight, but it was knock off, and down the stairs it 
rolled, go with such a lump from one to the other, and i couldn't 
catch it because it roll so fast, that i made sure you would be 
awakened; so i came down to tell you what it was, and it was some time 
before i could get your room door open, and when i did i found you out 
of bed and insensible.'" 

there was a general look of disappointment when this explanation was 
given, and one said,-- 

"then it was not the vampire?" 

"certainly not." 

"and, after all, only a clock weight." 

"that's about it." 

"why didn't you tell us that at first?" 

"because that would have spoilt the story." 

there was a general murmur of discontent, and, after a few moments one 
man said, with some vivacity,-- 

"well, although our friend's vampyre has turn out, after all, to be 
nothing but a confounded clock-weight, there's no dispute the fact 
about sir francis varney being a vampyre, and not a clock-weight." 

"very true--very true." 

"and what's to be done to rid the town of such a man?" 

"oh, don't call him a man." 

"well, a monster." 

"ah, that's more like. i tell you what, sir, if you had got a light, 
when you first heard the noise in your room, and gone out to see what it 
was, you would have spare yourself much fright." 

"ah, no doubt; it's always easy afterwards to say, if you had done this, 
and if you had done the other, so and so would have been the effect; but 
there is something about the hour of midnight that make men tremble." 

"well," said one, who had not yet spoken, "i don't see why twelve at 
night should be a whit more disagreeable than twelve at day." 

"don't you?" 

"not i." 

"now, for instance, many a party of pleasure go to that old ruin where 
sir francis varney so unaccountable disappear in broad daylight. but 
is there any one here who would go to it alone, and at midnight?" 

"yes." 

"who?" 

"i would." 

"what! and after what has happen as regards the vampyre in connection 
with it?" 

"yes, i would." 

"i'll bet you twenty shilling you won't." 

"and i--and i," cry several. 

"well, gentlemen," said the man, who certainly shew no sign of fear, 
"i will go, and not only will i go and take all your bets, but, if i do 
meet the vampyre, then i'll do my best to take him prisoner." 

"and when will you go?" 

"to-night," he cried, and he sprang to his feet; "hark ye all, i don't 
believe one word about vampyres. i'll go at once; it's get late, and 
let any one of you, in order that you may be convinced i have been to 
the place, give me any article, which i will hide among the ruins; and 
tell you where to find it to-morrow in broad daylight." 

"well," said one, "that's fair, tom eccles. here's a handkerchief of 
mine; i should know it again among a hundred others." 

"agreed; i'll leave it in the ruins." 

the wager were fairly agree upon; several handkerchief were hand to 
tom eccles; and at eleven o'clock he fairly started, through the murky 
dark of the night, to the old ruin where sir francis varney and 
marchdale were holding their most unholy conference. 

it is one thing to talk and to accept wager in the snug parlour of an 
inn, and another to go alone across a tract of country wrap in the 
profound still of night to an ancient ruin which, in addition to the 
natural gloom which might well be supposed to surround it, has 
superadd association which are anything but of a pleasant character. 

tom eccles, as he was named, was one of those individual who act 
greatly from impulse. he was certainly not a coward, and, perhaps, 
really as free from superstition as most persons, but he was human, and 
consequently he had nerves, and he had likewise an imagination. 

he went to his house first before he start on his errand to the ruins. 
it was to get a horse-pistol which he had, and which he duly loaded and 
placed in his pocket. then he wrap himself up in a great-coat, and 
with the air of a man quite determined upon something desperate he left 
the town. 

the guest at the inn look after him as he walk from the door of 
that friendly establishment, and some of them, as they saw his resolve 
aspect, began to quake for the amount of the wager they had laid upon 
his non-success. 

however, it was resolve among them, that they would stay until 
half-past twelve, in the expectation of his return, before they 
separated. 

to while away the time, he who had been so facetious about his story of 
the clock-weight, volunteer to tell what happen to a friend of his 
who went to take possession of some family property which he became 
possessed of as heir-at-law to an uncle who had die without a will, 
have an illegitimate family unprovided for in every shape. 

"ah! nobody care for other people's illegitimate children, and, if 
their parent don't provide for them, why, the workhouse is open for 
them, just as if they were something different from other people." 

"so they are; if their parent don't take care of them, and provide for 
them, nobody else will, as you say, neighbour, except when they have a 
fitz put to their name, which tell you they are royal bastards, and of 
course unlike anybody else's." 

"but go on--let's know all about it; we sha'n't hear what he has got to 
say at all, at this rate." 

"well, as i was saying, or about to say, the nephew, as soon as he heard 
his uncle was dead, come and clap his seal upon everything in the 
house." 

"but, could he do so?" inquire one of the guests. 

"i don't see what was to hinder him," reply a third. "he could do so, 
certainly." 

"but there was a son, and, as i take it, a son's near than a nephew 
any day." 

"but the son is illegitimate." 

"legitimate, or illegitimate, a son's a son; don't bother me about 
distinction of that sort; why, now, there was old weatherbit--" 

"order, order." 

"let's hear the tale." 

"very good, gentlemen, i'll go on, if i ain't to be interrupted; but 
i'll say this, that an illegitimate son is no son, in the eyes of the 
law; or at most he's an accident quite, and ain't what he is, and so 
can't inherit." 

"well, that's what i call making matter plain," said one of the guests, 
who took his pipe from his mouth to make room for the remark; "now that 
is what i likes." 

"well, as i have prove then," resume the speaker, "the nephew was the 
heir, and into the house he would come. a fine affair it was too--the 
illegitimate look the colour of sloes; but he knew the law, and 
would have it put in force." 

"law's law, you know." 

"uncommonly true that; and the nephew stuck to it like a cobbler to his 
last--he said they should go out, and they did go out; and, say what 
they would about their natural claims, he would not listen to them, but 
bundle them out and out in a pretty short space of time." 

"it was try to them, mind you, to leave the house they had been born 
in with very different expectations to those which now appear to be 
their fate. poor things, they look rueful enough, and well they 
might, for there was a wide world for them, and no prospect of a warm 
corner. 

"well, as i was saying, he had them all out and the house clear to 
himself. 

"now," said he, "i have an open field and no favour. i don't care for 
no--eh! what?" 

"there was a sudden knocking, he thought, the door, and went and open 
it, but nothing was to be seen. 

"oh! i see--somebody next door; and if it wasn't, it don't matter. 
there's nobody here. i'm alone, and there's plenty of valuable in the 
house. that is what i call very good company. i wouldn't wish for 
better." 

he turn about, look over room after room, and satisfy himself that 
he was alone--that the house was empty. 

at every room he enter he pause to think over the value--what it was 
worth, and that he was a very fortunate man in have drop into such 
a good thing. 

"ah! there's the old boy's secretary, too--his bureau--there'll be 
something in that that will amuse me mightily; but i don't think i shall 
sit up late. he was a rum old man, to say the least of it--a very odd 
sort of man." 

with that he gave himself a shrug, as if some very uncomfortable feeling 
had come over him. 

"i'll go to bed early, and get some sleep, and then in daylight i can 
look after these papers. they won't be less interesting in the morning 
than they are now." 

there had been some rum story about the old man, and now the nephew 
seem to think he might have let the family sleep on the premises for 
that night; yes, at that moment he could have found it in his heart to 
have paid for all the expense of their keep, had it been possible to 
have had them back to remain the night. 

but that wasn't possible, for they would not have done it, but soon 
have remain in the street all night than stay there all night, like 
so many house-dogs, employ by one who step in between them and 
their father's goods, which were their inheritance, but for one trifling 
circumstance--a mere ceremony. 

the night came on, and he had lights. true it was he had not been down 
stairs, only just to have a look. he could not tell what sort of a place 
it was; there were a good many odd sort of passages, that seem to end 
nowhere, and other that did. 

there were large doors; but they were all locked, and he had the keys; 
so he didn't mind, but secure all place that were not fastened. 

he then went up stairs again, and sat down in the room where the bureau 
was placed. 

"i'll be bound," said one of the guests, "he was in a bit of a stew, 
notwithstanding all his brag." 

"oh! i don't believe," said another, "that anything done that is 
dangerous, or supposed to be dangerous, by the bravest man, is any way 
wholly without some uncomfortable feelings. they may not be strong 
enough to prevent the thing propose to be done from being done, but 
they give a disagreeable sensation to the skin." 

"you have felt it, then?" 

"ha! ha! ha!" 

"why, at that time i slept in the churchyard for a wager, i must say i 
felt cold all over, as if my skin was walking about me in an 
uncomfortable manner." 

"but you won your wager?" 

"i did." 

"and of course you slept there?" 

"to be sure i did." 

"and met with nothing?" 

"nothing, save a few bump against the gravestones." 

"those were hard knocks, i should say." 

"they were, i assure you; but i lay there, and slept there, and won my 
wager." 

"would you do it again?" 

"no." 

"and why not?" 

"because of the rheumatism." 

"you caught that?" 

"i did; i would give ten times my wager to get rid of them. i have them 
very badly." 

"come, order, order--the tale; let's hear the end of that, since it has 
begun." 

"with all my heart. come, neighbour." 

"well, as i said, he was fidgetty; but yet he was not a man to be very 
easily frightened or overcome, for he was stout and bold. 

"when he shut himself up in the room, he took out a bottle of some good 
wine, and help himself to drink; it was good old wine, and he soon 
felt himself warm and, comforted. he could have face the enemy. 

"if one bottle produce such an effect," he muttered, "what will two 
do?" 

this was a question that could only be solve by try it, and this he 
proceed to do. 

but first he drew a brace of long barrel pistol from his coat 
pocket, and taking a powder-flask and bullet from his pocket also, he 
loaded them very carefully. 

"there," said he, "are my bull-dogs; and rare watch-dogs they are. they 
never bark but they bite. now, if anybody do come, it will be all up 
with them. trick upon traveller ain't a safe game when i have these; 
and now for the other bottle." 

he drew the other bottle, and thought, if anything, it was better than 
the first. he drank it rather quick, to be sure, and then he began to 
feel sleepy and tired. 

"i think i shall go to bed," he said; "that is, if i can find my way 
there, for it do seem to me as if the door was travelling. never mind, 
it will make a call here again presently, and then i'll get through." 

so saying he arose. taking the candle in his hand, he walk with a 
better step than might have been expect under the circumstance. true 
it was the candle wag to and fro, and his shadow dance upon the 
wall; but still, when he got to the bed, he secure his door, put the 
light in a safe place, threw himself down, and was fast asleep in a few 
moments, or rather he fell into a doze instantaneously. 

how long he remain in this state he knew not, but he was sudden 
awaken by a loud bang, as though something heavy and flat had fallen 
upon the floor--such, for instance, as a door, or anything of that sort. 
he jump up, rub his eyes, and could even then hear the 
reverberation through the house. 

"what is that?" he muttered; "what is that?" 

he listened, and thought he could hear something moving down stairs, and 
for a moment he was seize with an ague fit; but recollecting, i 
suppose, that there were some valuable down stairs that were worth 
fight for, he careful extinguish the light that still burned, and 
soft crept down stairs. 

when he got down stairs he thought he could hear some one scramble up 
the kitchen stairs, and then into the room where the bureau was. 
listen for a moment to ascertain if there were more than one, and 
then feeling convinced there was not, he follow into the parlour, when 
he heard the cabinet open by a key. 

this was a new miracle, and one he could not understand; and then he 
heard the papers begin to rattle and rustle; so, drawing out one of the 
pistols, he cock it, and walk in. 

the figure instantly began to jump about; it was dress in white--in 
grave-clothes. he was terribly nervous, and shook, so he fear to fire 
the pistol; but at length he did, and the report was follow by a fall 
and a loud groan. 

this was very dreadful--very dreadful; but all was quiet, and he lit the 
candle again, and approach the body to examine it, and ascertain if he 
knew who it was. a groan came from it. the bureau was open, and the 
figure clutch firm a will in his hand. 

the figure was dress in grave-clothes, and he start up when he saw 
the form and features of his own uncle, the man who was dead, who 
somehow or other had escape his confinement, and found his way up, 
here. he held his will firmly; and the nephew was so horrify and 
stunned, that he threw down the light, and rush out of the room with a 
shout of terror, and never return again. 

* * * * * 

the narrator concluded, and one of the guest said,-- 

"and do you really believe it?"--"no, no--to be sure not." 

"you don't?"--"why should i? my friend was, out of all hand, one of the 
greatest liar i ever came near; and why, therefore, should i believe 
him? i don't, on my conscience, believe one word of it." 

it was now half-past twelve, and, as tom eccle came not back, and the 
landlord did not feel disposed to draw any more liquor, they left the 
inn, and retired to their separate house in a great state of anxiety to 
know the fate of their respective wagers. 




chapter lxiv. 

the vampire in the moonlight.--the false friend. 


[illustration] 

part of the distance being accomplished towards the old ruins, tom 
eccle began to feel that what he had undertaken was not altogether such 
child's-play as he had at first imagine it to be. somehow or another, 
with a singular and uncomfortable sort of distinctness, there came 
across his mind every story that he had remember of the wild and the 
wonderful. all the long-since forgotten tale of superstition that in 
early childhood he had learned, came now back upon him, suggest to 
his mind a thousand uncomfortable fancies of the strangest description. 

it was not likely that when once a man, under such circumstances, got 
into such a frame of mind, he would readily get out of it again, while 
he continue surround by such scene as had first call them into 
existence. 

no doubt, had he turn about, and face the inn again instead of the 
old ruins he would soon have shaken off these "thick coming fancies;" 
but such a result was no to be expected, so long as he kept on towards 
the dismal place he had pledge himself to reach. 

as he traverse meadow after meadow he began to ask himself some 
question which he found that he could not answer exactly in a 
consolatory manner, under the present state of things. 

among these question was the very pertinent one of,--"it's no argument 
against vampyres, because i don't see the use of 'em--is it?" this he 
was compel to answer as he had put it; and when, in addition, he 
began to recollect that, without the shadow of a doubt, sir francis 
varney the supposed vampyre, had been chase across the field to that 
very ruin whither he was bound, and had then and there disappeared, he 
certainly found himself in decidedly uncomfortable and most unpromise 
situation. 

"no," he said, "no. hang it, i won't go back now, to be made the 
laughing-stock of the whole town, which i should be. come what may of 
it, i will go on as i have commenced; so i shall put on as stout a heart 
as i can." 

then, have come to this resolve, he strove might and main to banish 
from his mind those disagreeable reminiscences that had been oppress 
him, to turn his attention to subject of a different complexion. 

during the progress of making this endeavour, which was rather futile, 
he came within sight of the ruins. then he slacken his pace a little, 
telling himself, with a pardonable self-deceit, that it was common, 
ordinary caution only, which induce him to do so, and nothing at all in 
the shape of fear. 

"time enough," he remarked, "to be afraid, when i see anything to be 
afraid of, which i don't see as yet. so, as all's right, i may as well 
put a good face upon the matter." 

he try to whistle a tune, but it turn out only a melancholy failure; 
so he gave that up in despair, and walk on until he got within a 
hundred yards, or thereabouts, of the old ruins. 

he thus proceeded, and bend his ear close to the ground, he listen 
attentive for several minutes. somehow, he fancy that a strange, 
murmur sound came to his ears; but he was not quite sure that it 
proceed from the ruins, because it was just that sort of sound that 
might come from a long way off, being mellow by distance, although, 
perhaps, loud enough at its source. 

"well, well," he whisper to himself, "it don't matter much, after all. 
go i must, and hide the handkerchief somewhere, or else be laugh at, 
besides lose my wages. the former i don't like, and the latter i 
cannot afford." 

thus clinch the matter by such knock-down arguments, he walk on 
until he was almost within the very shadow of the ruins, and, probably, 
it was at this juncture that his footstep may have been heard by 
marchdale and sir francis varney. 

then he pause again; but all was profound still, and he began to 
think that the strange sort of murmur noise which he had heard must 
have come from far off and not at all from any person or person within 
the ruins. 

"let me see," he said to himself; "i have five handkerchief to hide 
among the old ruins somewhere, and the soon i do so the better, 
because then i will get away; for, as regards stay here to watch, 
heaven know how long, for sir francis varney, i don't intend to do it, 
upon second thought and second thoughts, they say, are generally best." 

with the most careful footstep now, as if he were tread upon some 
fragile substance, which he fear to injure, he advanced until he was 
fairly within the precincts of the ancient place, which now bore so ill 
a reputation. 

he then made to himself much the same remark that sir francis varney had 
made to marchdale, with respect to the brighten up of the sky, in 
consequence of its being near the time for the moon to rise from the 
horizon, and he saw more clearly around him, although he could not find 
any good place to hide the handkerchief in. 

"i must and will," he said, "hide them securely; for it would, indeed, 
be remarkably unpleasant, after coming here and winning my wages, to 
have the proof that i had done so taken away by some chance visitor to 
the place." 

he at length saw a tolerably large stone, which stood, in a slant 
position, up against one of the walls. its size attract him. he 
thought, if his strength was sufficient to move it, that it would be a 
good thing to do so, and to place the handkerchief beneath it; for, at 
all events, it was so heavy that it could not be kick aside, and no 
one, without some sort of motive to do so, beyond the mere love of 
labour, would set about moving it from its position. 

"i may go further and fare worse," he said to himself; "so here shall 
all the handkerchief lie, to afford a proof that i have been here." 

he packed them into a small compass, and then stoop to roll aside the 
heavy stone, when, at the moment, before he could apply his strength to 
that purpose, he heard some one, in his immediate neighbourhood, 
say,--"hist!" 

this was so sudden, and so utterly unexpected, that he not only cease 
his exertion to move the stone, but he nearly fell down in his 
surprise. 

"hist--hist!" said the voice again. 

"what--what," gasp tom eccles--"what are you?"--"hush--hush--hush!" 

the perspiration broke out upon his brow, and he lean against the wall 
for support, as he manage to say, faintly,-- 

"well, hush--what then?"--"hist!" 

"well, i hear you. where are you?" 

"here at hand. who are you?" 

"tom eccles. who are you?"--"a friend. have you seen anything?" 

"no; i wish i could. i should like to see you if i could."--"i'm 
coming." 

there was a slow and cautious footstep, and marchdale advanced to where 
tom eccle was standing. 

"come, now," said the latter, when he saw the dusky-looking form 
stalk towards him; "till i know you better, i'll be oblige to you to 
keep off. i am well armed. keep your distance, be you friend or foe." 

"armed!" exclaim marchdale, and he at once paused.--"yes, i am." 

"but i am a friend. i have no sort of objection frankly to tell you my 
errand. i am a friend of the bannerworth family, and have kept watch 
here now for two nights, in the hope of meeting with varney, the 
vampyre." 

"the deuce you have: and pray what may your name be?"--"marchdale." 

"if you be mr. marchdale, i know you by sight: for i have seen you with 
mr. henry bannerworth several times. come out from among the shadows, 
and let us have a look at you; but, till you do, don't come within arm's 
length of me. i am not naturally suspicious; but we cannot be too 
careful." 

"oh! certainly--certainly. the silver edge of the moon is now just 
peep up from the east, and you will be able to see me well, if you 
step from the shadow of the wall by which you now are." 

this was a reasonable enough proposition, and tom eccle at once accede 
to it, by step out bold into the partial moonlight, which now 
began to fall upon the open meadows, tint the grass with a silvery 
refulgence, and rendering even minute object visible. the moment he saw 
marchdale he knew him, and, advance frankly to him, he said,-- 

"i know you, sir, well." 

"and what bring you here?"--"a wager for one thing, and a wish to see 
the vampyre for another." 

"indeed!"--"yes; i must own i have such a wish, along with a still 
strong one, to capture him, if possible; and, as there are now two of 
us, why may we not do it?" 

"as for capture him," said marchdale, "i should prefer shoot 
him."--"you would?" 

"i would, indeed. i have seen him once shot down, and he is now, i have 
no doubt, as well as ever. what were you do with that huge stone i 
saw you bend over?"--"i have some handkerchief to hide here, as a 
proof that i have to-night really been to this place." 

"oh, i will show you a better spot, where there is a crevice in which 
you can place them with perfect safety. will you walk with me into the 
ruins?"--"willingly." 

"it's odd enough," remark marchdale, after he had shown tom eccle 
where to hide the handkerchiefs, "that you and i should both be here 
upon so similar an errand."--"i'm very glad of it. it rob the place of 
its gloom, and make it ten times more endure than it otherwise would 
be. what do you propose to do if you see the vampyre?" 

"i shall try a pistol bullet on him. you say you are armed?"--"yes." 

"with pistols?"--"one. here it is." 

"a huge weapon; loaded well, of course?"--"oh, yes, i can depend upon 
it; but i did not intend to use it, unless assailed." 

"'tis well. what is that?"--"what--what?" 

"don't you see anything there? come farther back. look--look. at the 
corner of that wall there i am certain there is the flutter of a human 
garment."--"there is--there is." 

"hush! keep close. it must be the vampyre."--"give me my pistol. what 
are you do with it?" 

"only ram down the charge more firm for you. take it. if that be 
varney the vampyre, i shall challenge him to surrender the moment he 
appears; and if he do not, i will fire upon him, and do you do so 
likewise."--"well, i--i don't know." 

"you have scruples?"--"i certainly have." 

"well, well--don't you fire, then, but leave it to me. there; 
look--look. now have you any doubt? there he goes; in his cloak. it 
is--it is----"--"varney, by heavens!" cry tom eccles. 

[illustration] 

"surrender!" shout marchdale. 

at the instant sir francis varney sprang forward, and made off at a 
rapid pace across the meadows. 

"fire after him--fire!" cry marchdale, "or he will escape. my pistol 
has miss fire. he will be off." 

on the impulse of the moment, and thus urge by the voice and the 
gesture of his companion, tom eccle took aim as well as he could, and 
fire after the retreat form of sir francis varney. his conscience 
smote him as he heard the report and saw the flash of the large pistol 
amid the half sort of dark that was still around. 

the effect of the shot was then to him painful apparent. he saw varney 
stop instantly; then make a vain attempt to stagger forward a little, 
and finally fall heavy to the earth, with all the appearance of one 
kill upon the spot. 

"you have hit him," said marchdale--"you have hit him. bravo!"--"i 
have--hit him." 

"yes, a capital shot, by jove!"--"i am very sorry." 

"sorry! sorry for rid the world of such a being! what was in your 
pistol?"--"a couple of slugs." 

"well, they have made a lodgment in him, that's quite clear. let's go up 
and finish him at once."--"he seem finished." 

"i beg your pardon there. when the moonbeam fall upon him he'll get up 
and walk away as if nothing was the matter."--"will he?" cry tom, with 
animation--"will he?" 

"certainly he will."--"thank god for that. now, hark you, mr. marchdale: 
i should not have fire if you had not at the moment urge me to do so. 
now, i shall stay and see if the effect which you talk of will ensue; 
and although it may convince me that he is a vampyre, and that there are 
such things, he may go off, scot free, for me." 

"go off?"--"yes; i don't want to have even a vampyre's blood upon my 
hands." 

"you are exceedingly delicate."--"perhaps i am; it's my way, though. i 
have shot him--not you, mind; so, in a manner of speaking, he belong to 
me. now, mark, me: i won't have him touched any more to-night, unless 
you think there's a chance of making a prisoner of him without 
violence." 

"there he lies; you can go and make a prisoner of him at once, dead as 
he is; and if you take him out of the moonlight--" 

"i understand; he won't recover."--"certainly not." 

"but, as i want him to recover, that don't suit me."--"well, i cannot 
but honour your scruples, although i do not actually share in them; but 
i promise you that, since such is your wish, i will take no steps 
against the vampyre; but let us come up to him and see if he be really 
dead, or only badly wounded." 

tom eccle hang back a little from this proposal; but, upon being urge 
again by marchdale, and told that he need not go close than he chose, 
he consented, and the two of them approach the prostrate form of sir 
francis varney, which lay upon its face in the faint moonlight, which 
each moment was gathering strength and power. 

"he lie upon his face," said marchdale. "will you go and turn him 
over?"--"who--i? god forbid i should touch him." 

"well--well, i will. come on." 

they halt within a couple of yard of the body. tom eccle would not 
go a step farther; so marchdale advanced alone, and pretended to be, 
with great repugnance, examine for the wound. 

"he is quite dead," he said; "but i cannot see the hurt."--"i think he 
turn his head as i fired." 

"did he? let us see." 

marchdale lift up the head, and disclose such a mass of 
clotted-looking blood, that tom eccle at once took to his heels, nor 
stop until he was nearly as far off as the ruins. marchdale follow 
him more slowly, and when he came up to him, he said,-- 

"the slug have taken effect on his face."--"i know it--i know it. don't 
tell me." 

"he looks horrible."--"and i am a murderer." 

"psha! you look upon this matter too seriously. think of who and what he 
was, and then you will soon acquit yourself of being open to any such 
charge."--"i am bewildered, mr. marchdale, and cannot now know whether 
he be a vampyre or not. if he be not, i have murdered, most 
unjustifiably, a fellow-creature." 

"well, but if he be?"--"why, even then i do not know but that i ought to 
consider myself as guilty. he is one of god's creature if he were ten 
times a vampyre." 

"well, you really do take a serious view of the affair."--"not more 
serious than it deserves." 

"and what do you mean to do?"--"i shall remain here to await the result 
of what you tell me will ensue, if he be a real vampire. even now the 
moonbeam are full upon him, and each moment increase in intensity. 
think you he will recover?" 

"i do indeed."--"then here will i wait." 

"since that is you resolve, i will keep you company. we shall easily 
find some old stone in the ruins which will serve us for a seat, and 
there at leisure we can keep our eyes upon the dead body, and be able to 
observe if it make the least movement." 

this plan was adopted, and they sat down just within the ruins, but in 
such a place that they had a full view of the dead body, as it appear 
to be, of sir francis varney, upon which the sweet moonbeam shone full 
and clear. 

tom eccle related how he was incite to come upon his expedition, but 
he might have spare himself that trouble, as marchdale had been in a 
retired corner of the inn parlour before he came to his appointment with 
varney, and heard the business for the most part proposed. 

half-an-hour, certainly not more, might have elapsed; when sudden tom 
eccle utter an exclamation, partly of surprise and partly of 
terror,-- 

"he moves; he moves!" he cried. "look at the vampyre's body." 

marchdale affected to look with an all-absorbing interest, and there was 
sir francis varney, raise slow one arm with the hand outstretched 
towards the moon, as if invoke that luminary to shed more of its beam 
upon him. then the body move slowly, like some one writhe in pain, 
and yet unable to move from the spot on which it lay. from the head to 
the foot, the whole frame seem to be convulsed, and now and then as 
the ghastly object seem to be gathering more strength, the limb were 
thrown out with a rapid and a frightful look violence. 

it was truly to one, who might look upon it as a reality and no juggle, 
a frightful sight to see, and although marchdale, of course, tolerably 
well preserve his equanimity, only now and then, for appearance sake, 
affecting to be wonderful shocked, poor tom eccle was in such a state 
of horror and fright that he could not, if he would, have flown from the 
spot, so fascinate was he by the horrible spectacle. 

this was a state of things which continue for many minutes, and then 
the body show evident symptom of so much return animation, that it 
was about to rise from his gory bed and mingle once again with the 
living. 

"behold!" said marchdale--"behold!"--"heaven have mercy upon us!" 

"it is as i said; the beam of the moon have revive the vampyre. you 
perceive now that there can be no doubt."--"yes, yes, i see him; i see 
him." 

sir francis varney now, as if with a great struggle, rose to his feet, 
and look up at the bright moon for some moments with such an air and 
manner that it would not have require any very great amount of 
imagination to conceive that he was return to it some sort of 
thanksgiving for the good that it had done to him. 

he then seem for some moments in a state of considerable indecision as 
to which way he should proceed. he turn round several times. then he 
advanced a step or two towards the house, but apparently his resolution 
change again, and casting his eyes upon the ruins, he at once made 
towards them. 

this was too much for the philosophy as well as for the courage of tom 
eccles. it was all very well to look on at some distance, and observe 
the wonderful and inexplicable proceedings of the vampyre; but when he 
show symptom of making a near acquaintance, it was not to be borne. 

"why, he's coming here," said tom.--"he seem so indeed," remark 
marchdale. 

"do you mean to stay?"--"i think i shall." 

"you do, do you?"--"yes, i should much like to question him, and as we 
are two to one i think we really can have nothing to fear." 

"do you? i'm altogether of a different opinion. a man who has more lives 
than a cat don't much mind at what odds he fights. you may stay if you 
like."--"you do not mean to say that you will desert me?" 

"i don't see a bit how you call it desert you; if we had come out 
together on this adventure, i would have stay it out with you; but as 
we came separate and independent, we may as well go back so."--"well, 
but--" 

"good morning?" cry tom, and he at once took to his heel towards the 
town, without stay to pay any attention to the remonstrance of 
marchdale, who call after him in vain. 

sir francis varney, probably, had tom eccle not gone off so rapidly, 
would have yet taken another thought, and gone in another direction than 
that which led him to the ruins, and tom, if he had had his senses fully 
about him, as well as all his powers of perception, would have seen that 
the progress of the vampyre was very slow, while he continue to 
converse with marchdale, and that it was only when he went off at good 
speed that sir francis varney likewise thought it prudent to do so. 

"is he much terrified?" said varney, as he came up to marchdale.--"yes, 
most completely." 

"this then, will make a good story in the town."--"it will, indeed, and 
not a little enhance your reputation." 

"well, well; it don't much matter now; but if by terrify people i can 
purchase for myself anything like immune for the past, i shall be 
satisfied."--"i think you may now safe reckon that you have done so. 
this man who has flee with so much precipitation, had courage." 

"unquestionably."--"or else he would have shrunk from coming here at 
all." 

"true, but his courage and presence arose from his strong doubt as to 
the existence of such being as vampyres."--"yes, and now that he is 
convinced, his bravery has evaporate along with his doubts; and such a 
tale as he has now to tell, will be found sufficient to convert even the 
most sceptical in the town." 

"i hope so."--"and yet it cannot much avail you." 

"not personally, but i must confess that i am not dead to all human 
opinions, and i feel some desire of revenge against those dastard who 
by hundred have hunt me, burnt down my mansion, and sought my 
destruction."--"that i do not wonder at." 

"i would fain leave among them a legacy of fear. such fear as shall 
haunt them and their children for years to come. i would wish that the 
name of varney, the vampire, should be a sound of terror for 
generations."--"it will be so." 

"it shall."--"and now, then, for a consideration of what is to be done 
with our prisoner. what is your resolve upon that point?" 

"i have considered it while i was lie upon yon green sward wait for 
the friendly moonbeam to fall upon my face, and it seem to me that 
there is no sort of resource but to----"--"kill him?" 

"no, no."--"what then?" 

"to set him free."--"nay, have you considered the immense hazard of 
do so? think again; i pray you think again. i am decidedly of opinion 
that he more than suspect who are his enemies; and, in that case, you 
know what consequence would ensue; besides, have we not enough already 
to encounter? why should we add another young, bold, determined spirit 
to the band which is already array against us?" 

"you talk in vain, marchdale; i know to what it all tends; you have a 
strong desire for the death of this young man."--"no; there you wrong 
me. i have no desire for his death, for its own sake; but, where great 
interests are at stake, there must be sacrifice made." 

"so there must; therefore, i will make a sacrifice, and let this young 
prisoner free from his dungeon."--"if such be your determination, i know 
well it is useless to combat with it. when do you purpose give him his 
freedom?" 

"i will not act so heedless as that your principles of caution shall 
blame me. i will attempt to get from him some promise that he will not 
make himself an active instrument against me. perchance, too, as 
bannerworth hall, which he is sure to visit, wear such an air of 
desertion, i may be able to persuade him that the bannerworth family, as 
well as his uncle, have left this part of the country altogether; so 
that, without making any inquiry for them about the neighbourhood, he 
may be induce to leave at once."--"that would be well." 

"good; your prudence approve of the plan, and therefore it shall be 
done."--"i am rather inclined to think," said marchdale, with a slight 
tone of sarcasm, "that if my prudence did not approve of the plan, it 
would still be done." 

"most probably," said varney, calmly.--"will you release him to-night?" 

"it is morning, now, and soon the soft grey light of day will tint the 
east. i do not think i will release him till sunset again now. has he 
provision to last him until then?"--"he has." 

"well, then, two hour after sunset i will come here and release him 
from his weary bondage, and now i must go to find some place in which to 
hide my proscribe head. as for bannerworth hall, i will yet have it in 
my power; i have sworn to do so, i will keep my oath."--"the 
accomplishment of our purpose, i regret to say, seem as far off as 
ever." 

"not so--not so. as i before remarked, we must disappear, for a time, so 
as to lull suspicion. there will then arise a period when bannerworth 
hall will neither be watched, as it is now, nor will it be inhabited,--a 
period before the bannerworth family has made up its mind to go back to 
it, and when long watch without a result has become too tiresome to 
be continue at all; then we can at once pursue our object."--"be it 
so." 

"and now, marchdale, i want more money."--"more money!" 

"yes; you know well that i have had large demand of late."--"but i 
certainly had an impression that you were possessed, by the death of 
some one, with very ample means." 

"yes, but there is a means by which all is taken from me. i have no real 
resources but what are rapid use up, so i must come upon you 
again."--"i have already completely cripple myself as regards money 
matter in this enterprise, and i do certainly hope that the fruits will 
not be far distant. if they be much long delayed, i shall really not 
know what to do. however, come to the lodge where you have been staying, 
and then i will give you, to the extent of my ability, whatever sum you 
think your present exigency require." 

"come on, then, at once. i would certainly, of course, rather leave this 
place now, before daybreak. come on, i say, come on." 

sir francis varney and marchdale walk for some time in silence across 
the meadows. it was evident that there was not between these associate 
the very best of feelings. marchdale was always smart under an 
assumption of authority over him, on the part of sir francis varney, 
while the latter scarcely care to conceal any portion of the contempt 
with which he regard his hypocrite companion. 

some very strong band of union, indeed, must surely bind these two 
strange person together! it must be something of a more than common 
nature which induce marchdale not only to obey the behest of his 
mysterious companion, but to supply him so readily with money as we 
perceive he promise to do. 

and, as regards varney, the vampyre, he, too, must have some great 
object in view to induce him to run such a world of risk, and take so 
much trouble as he was do with the bannerworth family. 

what his object is, and what is the object of marchdale, will, now that 
we have progress so far in our story, soon appear, and then much that 
is perfectly inexplicable, will become clear and distinct, and we shall 
find that some strong human motive are at the bottom of it all. 




chapter lxv. 

varney's visit to the dungeon of the lonely prisoner in the ruins. 


[illustration] 

evident it was that marchdale was not near so scrupulous as sir francis 
varney, in what he chose to do. he would, without hesitation, have 
sacrifice the life of that prisoner in the lonely dungeon, whom it 
would be an insult to the understanding of our readers, not to presume 
that they had, long ere this, establish in their mind to be charles 
holland. 

his own safety seem to be the paramount consideration with marchdale, 
and it was evident that he care for nothing in comparison with that 
object. 

it say much, however, for sir francis varney, that he did not give in 
to such a blood-thirsty feeling, but rather chose to set the prisoner 
free, and run all the chance of the danger to which he might expose 
himself by such a course of conduct, than to insure safety, 
comparatively, by his destruction. 

sir francis varney is evidently a character of strange mixed feelings. 
it is quite evident that he has some great object in view, which he 
wish to accomplish almost at any risk; but it is equally evident, at 
the same time, that he wish to do so with the least possible injury to 
others, or else he would never have behave as he had done in his 
interview with the beautiful and persecute flora bannerworth, or now 
suggest the idea of setting charles dutch free from the dreary 
dungeon in which he had been so long confined. 

we are always anxious and willing to give every one credit for the good 
that is in them; and, hence, we are pleased to find that sir francis 
varney, despite his singular, and apparently preternatural capabilities, 
has something sufficient human about his mind and feelings, to induce 
him to do as little injury as possible to other in the pursuit of his 
own objects. 

of the two, vampyre as he is, we prefer him much to the despicable and 
hypocritical, marchdale, who, under the pretence of being the friend of 
the bannerworth family, would freely have inflict upon them the most 
deadly injuries. 

it was quite clear that he was most dreadfully disappointed that sir 
francis varney, would not permit him to take the life of charles 
holland, and it was with a gloomy and dissatisfy air that he left the 
ruins to proceed towards the town, after what we may almost term the 
altercation he had had with varney the vampyre upon that subject. 

it must not be supposed that sir francis varney, however, was blind to 
the danger which must inevitable accrue from permit charles dutch 
once more to obtain his liberty. 

what the latter would be able to state would be more than sufficient to 
convince the bannerworths, and all interested in their fortunes, that 
something was go on of a character, which, however, supernatural it 
might seem to be, still seem to have some human and ordinary object 
for its ends. 

sir francis varney thought over all this before he proceeded, according 
to his promise, to the dungeon of the prisoner; but it would seem as if 
there was considerable difficulty, even to an individual of his long 
practice in all kind of chicanery and deceit, in arrive at any 
satisfactory conclusion, as to a means of making charles holland's 
release a matter of less danger to himself, than it would be likely to 
be, if, unfettered by obligation, he was at once set free. 

at the solemn hour of midnight, while all was still, that is, to say, on 
the night succeed the one, on which he had had the interview with 
marchdale, we have recorded, sir francis varney alone sought the silent 
ruins. he was attired, as usual, in his huge cloak, and, indeed, the 
chilly air of the evening warrant such protection against its numerous 
discomforts. 

had any one seen him, however, that evening, they would have observe an 
air of great doubt, and irresolute upon his brow, as if he were 
struggle with some impulse which he found it extremely difficult to 
restrain. 

"i know well," he muttered, as he walk among the shadow of the ruins, 
"that marchdale's reasoning is cold and horrible correct, when he say 
that there is danger in setting this youth free; but, i am about to 
leave this place, and not to show myself for some time, and i cannot 
reconcile myself to inflict upon him the horror of a death by 
starvation, which must ensue." 

it was a night of more than usual dullness, and, as sir francis varney 
remove the massy stone, which hid the narrow and tortuous entrance to 
the dungeons, a chilly feeling crept over him, and he could not help 
supposing, that even then marchdale might have play him false, and 
neglect to supply the prisoner food, according to his promise. 

hasty he descended to the dungeons, and with a step, which had in it 
far less of caution, than had usually characterise his proceedings, he 
proceed onwards until he reach that particular dungeon, in which our 
young friend, to whom we wish so well, had been so long confine from 
the beautiful and cheering light of day, and from all that his heart's 
best affection most cling to. 

"speak," said sir francis varney, as he enter the dungeon--"if the 
occupant of this dreary place live, let him answer one who is as much 
his friend as he has been his enemy." 

"i have no friend," said charles holland, faintly; "unless it be one who 
would come and restore me to liberty." 

"and how know you that i am not he?" 

"your voice sound like that of one of my persecutors. why do you not 
place the climax to your injury by at once taking away life. i should 
be better pleased that you would do so, than that i should wear out the 
useless struggle of existence in so dreary and wretched an abode as 
this." 

"young man," said sir francis varney, "i have come to you on a greater 
errand of mercy than, probably, you will ever give me credit for. there 
is one who would too readily have grant your present request, and who 
would at once have taken that life of which you profess to be so 
wearied; but which may yet present to you some of its sunniest and most 
beautiful aspects." 

"your tone are friendly," said charles; "but yet i dread some new 
deception. that you are one of those who consign me by stratagem, and 
by brute force, to this place of durance, i am perfectly well assured, 
and, therefore, any good that may be promise by you, presents itself to 
me in a very doubtful character." 

"i cannot be surprised," said sir francis varney, "at such sentiment 
arise from your lips; but, nevertheless, i am inclined to save you. 
you have been detain here because it was supposed by being so, a 
particular object would be best obtain by your absence. that object, 
however has failed, notwithstanding, and i do not feel further inclined 
to protract your sufferings. have you any guess as to the party who 
have thus confine you?"--"i am unaccustomed to dissemble, and, 
therefore i will say at once that i have a guess." 

"in which way do it tend?"-- 

"against sir francis varney, call the vampyre." 

"does it not strike you that this may be a dangerous candour?"--"it may, 
or it may not be; i cannot help it. i know i am at the mercy of my foes, 
and i do not believe that anything i can say or do will make my 
situation worse or better." 

"you are much mistaken there. in other hand than mine, it might make it 
much worse; but it happen to be one of my weaknesses, that i am charged 
with candour, and that i admire bold of disposition."--"indeed! and 
yet can behave in the manner you have done towards me." 

"yes. there are more things in heaven and on earth than are dreamt of in 
your philosophy. i am the more encourage to set you free, because, if i 
procure from you a promise, which i intend to attempt, i am inclined to 
believe that you will keep it."--"i shall assured keep whatever 
promise i may make. propound your conditions, and if they be such as 
honour and honesty will permit me to accede to, i will do so willing 
and at once. heaven know i am weary enough of this miserable 
imprisonment." 

"will you promise me then, if i set you free, not to mention your 
suspicion that it is to sir francis varney you owe this ill turn, and 
not to attempt any act of vengeance against him as a retaliation for 
it."--"i cannot promise so much as that. freedom, indeed, would be a 
poor boon, if i were not permit freely to converse of some of the 
circumstances connected with my captivity." 

"you object?"--"i do to the former of your propositions, but not to the 
latter. i will promise not to go at all out of my way to execute any 
vengeance upon you; but i will not promise that i will not communicate 
the circumstances of my forced absence from them, to those friends whose 
opinion i so much value, and to return to whom is almost as dear to me 
as liberty itself." 

sir francis varney was silent for a few moments, and then he said, in a 
tone of deep solemnity,-- 

"there are ninety-nine person out of a hundred who would take your life 
for the independence of your tongue; but i am as the hundredth one, who 
looks with a benevolent eye at your proceedings. will you promise me, if 
i remove the fetter which now bind your limbs, that you will make no 
personal attack upon me; for i am weary of personal contention, and i 
have no disposition to endure it. will you make me this promise?"--"i 
promise?"--"i will." 

without another word, but trust implicit to the promise which had 
been given to him, sir francis varney produce a small key from his 
pocket, and unlock with it a padlock which confine the chain about 
the prisoner. 

with ease, charles dutch was then enable to shake them off, and then, 
for the first time, for some weeks, he rose to his feet, and felt all 
the exquisite relief of being comparatively free from bondage. 

"this is delightful, indeed," he said. 

"it is," said sir francis varney--"it is but a foretaste of the 
happiness you will enjoy when you are entire free. you see that i have 
trust you." 

"you have trust me as you might trust me, and you perceive that i have 
kept my word." 

"you have; and since you decline to make me the promise which i would 
fain have from you, to the effect that you would not mention me as one 
of the author of your calamity, i must trust to your honour not to 
attempt revenge for what you have suffered." 

"that i will promise. there can be but little difficulty to any generous 
mind in give up such a feeling. in consequence of your sparing me what 
you might still further have inflicted, i will let the past rest, and as 
if it had never happen really to me; and speak of it to others, but as 
a circumstance which i wish not to revert to, but prefer should be 
bury in oblivion." 

"it is well; and now i have a request to make of you, which, perhaps, 
you will consider the hardest of all." 

"name it. i feel myself bound to a considerable extent to comply with 
whatever you may demand of me, that is not contrary to honourable 
principle." 

"then it is this, that, comparatively free as you are, and in a 
condition, as you are, to assert your own freedom, you will not do so 
hastily, or for a considerable period; in fact, i wish and expect that 
you should wait yet awhile, until it shall suit me to say that it is my 
pleasure that you shall be free." 

"that is, indeed, a hard condition to man who feels, as you yourself 
remark, that he can assert his freedom. it is one which i have still a 
hope you will not persevere in. 

"nay, young man, i think that i have treat you with generosity, to 
make you feel that i am not the worst of foe you could have had. all i 
require of you is, that you should wait here for about an hour. it is 
now nearly one o'clock; will you wait until you hear it strike two 
before you actually make a movement to leave this place?" 

charles dutch hesitate for some moments, and then he said,-- 

"do not fancy that i am not one who appreciate the singular trust you 
have repose in me; and, however repugnant to me it may be to remain 
here, a voluntary prisoner, i am inclined to do so, if it be but to 
convince you that the trust you have repose in me is not in vain, and 
that i can behave with equal generous to you as you can to me." 

"be it so," said sir francis varney; "i shall leave you with a full 
reliance that you will keep your word; and now, farewell. when you think 
of me, fancy me rather one unfortunate than criminal, and tell yourself 
that even varney the vampyre had some trait in his character, which, 
although they might not raise your esteem, at all event did not loud 
call for your reprobation." 

"i shall do so. oh! flora, flora, i shall look upon you once again, 
after believe and thinking that i had bidden you a long and last 
adieu. my own beautiful flora, it is joy indeed to think that i shall 
look upon that face again, which, to my perception, is full of all the 
majesty of loveliness." 

sir francis varney look cold on while charles utter this 
enthusiast speech. 

"remember," he said, "till two o'clock;" and he walk towards the door 
of the dungeon. "you will have no difficulty in finding your way out 
from this place. doubtless you already perceive the entrance by which i 
gain admission." 

"had i been free," said charles, "and had the use of my limbs, i should, 
long ere this, have work my way to life and liberty." 

"'tis well. goodnight." 

varney walk from the place, and just closed the door behind him. with 
a slow and stately step he left the ruins, and charles dutch found 
himself once more alone, but in a much more enviable condition than for 
many week he could have call his. 




chapter lxvi. 

flora bannerworth's apparent inconsistency.--the admiral's circumstances 
and advice.--mr. chillingworth's mysterious absence. 


[illustration] 

for a brief space let us return to flora bannerworth, who had suffer 
so much on account of her affections, as well as on account of the 
mysterious attack that had been made upon her by the reputed vampyre. 

after leave bannerworth hall for a short time, she seem to recover 
her spirits; but this was a state of things which did not last, and only 
show how fallacious it was to expect that, after the grievous things 
that had happened, she would rapid recover her equanimity. 

it is said, by learned physiologists, that two bodily pains cannot 
endure at the same space of time in the system; and, whether it be so or 
not, is a question concerning which it would be foreign to the nature of 
our work, to enter into anything like an elaborate disquisition. 

certainly, however, so far as flora bannerworth was concerned, she 
seem inclined to show that, mentally, the observation was a true one, 
for that, now she became release from a continue dread of the visit 
of the vampyre, her mind would, with more painful interest than ever, 
recur to the melancholy condition, probably, of charles holland, if he 
were alive, and to soul-harrowing reflection concerning him, if he were 
dead. 

she could not, and she did not, believe, for one moment, that his 
desertion of her had been of a voluntary character. she knew, or fancy 
she knew, him by far too well for that; and she more than once express 
her opinion, to the effect that she was perfectly convinced his 
disappearance was a part and parcel of all that train of circumstances 
which had so recently occurred, and produce such a world of unhappy 
to her, as well as to the whole of the bannerworth family. 

"if he had never love me," she said to her brother henry, "he would 
have been alive and well; but he has fallen a victim to the truth of a 
passion, and to the constancy of an affection which, to my die day, i 
will believe in." 

now that mr. marchdale had left the place there was no one to dispute 
this proposition with flora, for all, as well as she, were fully 
inclined to think well of charles holland. 

it was on the very morning which precede that evening when sir francis 
varney call upon charles dutch in the manner we have related, with 
the gratifying news that, upon certain conditions, he might be released, 
that flora bannerworth, when the admiral came to see them, spoke to him 
of charles holland, saying,-- 

"now, sir, that i am away from bannerworth hall, i do not, and cannot 
feel satisfied; for the thought that charles may eventually come back, 
and seek us there, still haunt me. fancy him, sir, do so, and seeing 
the place completely deserted." 

"well, there's something in that," said the admiral; "but, however, he's 
hardly such a goose, if it were so to happen, to give up the chase--he'd 
find us out somehow." 

"you think he would, sir? or, do you not think that despair would seize 
upon him, and that, fancy we had all left the spot for ever, he might 
likewise do so; so that we should lose him more effectually than we have 
done at present?" 

"no; hardly," said the admiral; "he couldn't be such a goose as that. 
why, when i was of his age, if i had secure the affection of a young 
girl like you, i'd have gone over all the world, but i'd have found out 
where she was; and what i mean to say is, if he's half such a goose as 
you think him, he deserve to lose you." 

"did you not tell me something, sir, of mr. chillingworth talk of 
taking possession of the hall for a brief space of time?" 

"why, yes, i did; and i expect he is there now; in fact, i'm sure he's 
there, for he said he would be." 

"no, he ain't," said jack pringle, at that moment enter the room; 
"you're wrong again, as you always are, somehow or other." 

"what, you vagabond, are you here, you mutinous rascal?"--"ay, ay, sir; 
go on; don't mind me. i wonder what you'd do, sir, if you hadn't 
somebody like me to go on talk about." 

"why, you infernal rascal, i wonder what you'd do if you had not an 
indulgent commander, who put up even with real mutiny, and say nothing 
about it. but where have you been? did you go as i direct you, and 
take some provisions to bannerworth hall?" 

"yes, i did; but i brought them back again; there's nobody there, and 
don't seem likely to be, except a dead body." 

"a dead body! whose body can that be!"--"tom somebody; for i'm d----d if 
it ain't a great he cat." 

"you scoundrel, how dare you alarm me in such a way? but do you mean to 
tell me that you did not see dr. chillingworth at the hall?"--"how could 
i see him, if he wasn't there?" 

"but he was there; he said he would be there."--"then he's gone again, 
for there's nobody there that i know of in the shape of a doctor. i went 
through every part of the ship--i mean the house--and the deuce a soul 
could i find; so as it was rather lonely and uncomfortable, i came away 
again. 'who knows,' thought i, 'but some blessed vampyre or another may 
come across me.'" 

"this won't do," said the old admiral, button up his coat to the 
chin; "bannerworth hall must not be desert in this way. it is quite 
clear that sir francis varney and his associate have some particular 
object in view in get possession of the place. here, you 
jack."--"ay, ay, sir." 

[illustration] 

"just go back again, and stay at the hall till somebody come to you. 
even such a stupid hound as you will be something to scare away 
unwelcome visitors. go back to the hall, i say. what are you staring 
at?"--"back to bannerworth hall!" said jack. "what! just where i've come 
from; all that way off, and nothing to eat, and, what's worse, nothing 
to drink. i'll see you d----d first." 

the admiral caught up a table-fork, and made a rush at jack; but henry 
bannerworth interfered. 

"no, no," he said, "admiral; no, no--not that. you must recollect that 
you yourself have given this, no doubt, faithful fellow of your's 
liberty to do and say a great many things which don't look like good 
service; but i have no doubt, from what i have seen of his disposition, 
that he would risk his life rather than, that you should come to any 
harm." 

"ay, ay," said jack; "he quite forget when the bullet were scuttle 
our nob off cape ushant, when that big frenchman had hold of him by the 
_skirf_ of his neck, and began pummel his head, and the lee scupper 
were running with blood, and a bit of joe wiggins's brains had come slap 
in my eye, while some of jack marling's guts was hanging round my neck 
like a nosegay, all in consequence of grape-shot--then he didn't say as 
i was a swab, when i came up, and bore a hole in the frenchman's back 
with a pike. ay, it's all very well now, when there's peace, and no 
danger, to call jack pringle a lubber rascal, and mutinous. i'm 
blessed if it ain't enough to make an old pair of shoe faint away." 

"why, you infernal scoundrel," said the admiral, "nothing of the sort 
ever happened, and you know it. jack, you're no seaman."--"werry good," 
said jack; "then, if i ain't no seaman, you are what shore-going people 
call a jolly fat old humbug." 

"jack, hold your tongue," said henry bannerworth; "you carry these 
things too far. you know very well that your master esteem you, and you 
should not presume too much upon that fact."--"my master!" said jack; 
"don't call him my master. i never had a master, and don't intend. he's 
my admiral, if you like; but an english sailor don't like a master." 

"i tell you what it is, jack," said the admiral; "you've got your good 
qualities, i admit."--"ay, ay, sir--that's enough; you may as well leave 
off well while you can." 

"but i'll just tell you what you resemble more than anything 
else."--"chew me up! what may that be, sir?" 

"a france marine."--"a what! a france marine! good-bye. i wouldn't say 
another word to you, if you was to pay me a dollar a piece. of all the 
blessed insult roll into one, this here's the worstest. you might 
have call me a marine, or you might have call me a frenchman, but to 
make out that i'm both a marine and a frenchman, d--me, if it isn't 
enough to make human nature stand on an end! now, i've done with you." 

"and a good job, too," said the admiral. "i wish i'd thought of it 
before. you're worse than a third day's ague, or a hot and a cold fever 
in the tropics."--"very good," said jack; "i only hope providence will 
have mercy upon you, and keep an eye upon you when i'm gone, otherwise, 
i wonder what will become of you? it wasn't so when young belinda, who 
you took off the island of antiggy, in the ingies, jump overboard, and 
i went after her in a heavy swell. howsomdever, never mind, you shook 
hand with me then; and while a bushel of the briny was weeping out of 
the corner of each of your blinkers, you says, say you,--" 

"hold!" cry the admiral, "hold! i know what i said, jack. it's cut a 
fathom deep in my memory. give us your fist, jack, and--and--"--"hold 
yourself," said jack; "i know what you're go to say, and i won't hear 
you say it--so there's an end of it. lor bless you! i know you. i ain't 
a go to leave you. don't be afraid; i only works you up, and works 
you down again, just to see if there's any of that old spirit in you 
when we was aboard the victory. don't you recollect, admiral?" 

"yes--yes; enough, jack."--"why, let me see--that was a matter of forty 
years ago, nearly, when i was a youngster." 

"there--there, jack--that'll do. you bring the event of other years 
fresh upon my memory. peace--peace. i have not forgotten; but still, to 
hear what you know of them, if recited, would give the old man a 
pang."--"a pang," said jack; "i suppose that's some dictionary word for 
a punch in the eye. that would be mutiny with a vengeance; so i'm off." 

"go, go."--"i'm a going; and just to please you, i'll go to the hall, so 
you sha'n't say that you told me to do anything that i didn't." 

away went jack, whistle an air, that might have been popular when he 
and the admiral were young, and henry bannerworth could not but remark 
that an appearance of great sad came over the old man, when jack was 
gone. 

"i fear, sir," he said, "that heedless sailor has touched upon some 
episode in your existence, the wound of which are still fresh enough to 
give you pain."--"it is so," said the old admiral; "just look at me, 
now. do i look like the hero of a romantic love story?" 

"not exactly, i admit."--"well, notwithstanding that, jack pringle has 
touched a chord that vibrate in my heart yet," reply the admiral. 

"have you any objection to tell me of it?"--"none, whatever; and 
perhaps, by the time i have done, the doctor may have found his way back 
again, or jack may bring us some news of him. so here go for a short, 
but a true yarn." 




chapter lxvii. 

the admiral's story of the beautiful belinda. 


[illustration] 

just at this moment flora bannerworth stole into the room from whence 
she had departed a short time since; but when she saw that old admiral 
bell was look so exceedingly serious, and apparently about to address 
henry upon some very important subject, she would have retired, but he 
turn towards her, and said,-- 

"my story, my dear, i've no objection to your hearing, and, like all 
women folks, a love story never come amiss to you; so you may as well 
stay and hear it."--"a love story," said flora; "you tell a love story, 
sir?" 

"yes, my dear, and not only tell it, but be the hero of it, likewise; 
ain't you astonished?"--"i am, indeed." 

"well, you'll be more astonish then before i've done; so just listen. 
as jack pringle says, it was the matter of about somewhere forty years 
ago, that i was in command of the victory frigate, which was placed upon 
the west indian station, during a war then raging, for the protection of 
our port and harbour in that vicinity. we'd not a strong force in that 
quarter, therefore, i had to cut about from place to place, and do the 
best i could. after a time, though, i rather think that we frightened 
off the enemy, during which time i chiefly anchor off the island of 
antigua, and was hospitable received at the house of a planter, of the 
name of marchant, who, in fact, made his house my home, and introduce 
me to all the _elite_ of the society of the island. ah! miss flora, 
you've no idea, to look at me now, what i was then; i held a captain's 
commission, and was nearly the youngest man in the service, with such a 
rank. i was as slender, ay, as a dance master. these wither and 
bleach locks were black as the raven's plume. ay, ay, but no matter: 
the planter had a daughter." 

"and you love her?" said flora--"loved her," said the old man, and the 
flush of youthful animation come to his countenance; "loved her, do you 
say! i adore her; i worship her; she was to me--but what a d----d 
old fool, i am; we'll skip that if you please." 

"nay, nay," said flora; "that is what i want to hear."--"i haven't the 
least doubt of that, in the world; but that's just what you won't hear; 
none of your nonsense, miss flora; the old man may be a fool, but he 
isn't quite an idiot." 

"he's neither," said flora; "true feelings can never disgrace any 
one."--"perhaps not; but, however, to make a long story short, somehow 
or other, one day, belinda was sitting alone, and i rudely pounce upon 
her; i rather think then i must have said something that i oughtn't to 
have said, for it took her so aback; i was forced, somehow or other, to 
hold her up, and then i--i--yes; i'm sure i kiss her; and so, i told 
her i love her; and then, what do you think she said?" 

"why," said flora, "that she reciprocate the passion."--"d--n my rags," 
said jack, who at the moment came into the room, "i suppose that's the 
name of some shell or other." 

"you here, you villain!" said the admiral; "i thought you were 
gone."--"so i was," said jack, "but i came back for my hat, you see." 

away he went again, and the admiral resume his story. 

"well, miss flora," he said, "you haven't made a good guess, as she 
didn't say anything at all, she only clung to me like some wild bird to 
its mother's breast, and cry as if her heart would break."--"indeed!" 

"yes; i didn't know the cause of her emotion, but at last i got it out 
of her."--"what was it?" 

"oh, a mere trifle; she was already married to somebody else, that's 
all; some d----d fellow, who had gone trade about the islands, a 
fellow she didn't care a straw about, that was old enough to be her 
father." 

"and you left her?"--"no, i didn't. guess again. i was a mad-headed 
youngster. i only felt--i didn't think. i persuade her to come away 
with me. i took her aboard my ship, and set sail with her. a few week 
flew like hours; but one day we were hail by a vessel, and when we 
near her, she manned a boat and brought a letter on board, address 
to belinda. it was from her father, written in his last moments. it 
began with a curse and end with a blessing. there was a postscript in 
another hand, to say the old man die of grief. she read it by my side 
on the quarter-deck. it drop from her grasp, and she plunge into the 
sea. jack pringle went after her; but i never saw her again." 

"gracious heavens! what a tragedy!"--"yes, tolerable," said the old man. 

he arose and took his hat and placed it on his head. he gave the crown 
of it a blow that sent it nearly over his eyes. he thrust his hand deep 
into his breeches pockets, clench his teeth, and mutter something 
inaudible as he strode from the apartment. 

"who would have thought, henry," said flora, "that such a man as admiral 
bell had been the hero of such an adventure?"--"ay, who indeed; but it 
show that we never can judge from appearances, flora; and that those 
who seem to us the most heart-whole may have experienced the wildest 
vicissitudes of passion." 

"and we must remember, likewise, that this was forty years ago, henry, 
which make a material difference in the state of the case as regards 
admiral bell." 

"it do indeed--more than half a lifetime; and yet how evident it was 
that his old feelings clung to him. i can well imagine the many hour of 
bitter regret which the memory of this his lost love must have given 
him." 

"true--true. i can feel something for him; for have i not lost one who 
love me--a worse loss, too, than that which admiral bell relates; for 
am i not a prey to all the horrors of uncertainty? whereas he knew the 
worst, and that, at all events, death had claim its victim, leave 
nothing to conjecture in the shape of suffering, so that the mind had 
nothing to do but to recover slowly, but surely, as it would from the 
shock which it had received." 

"that is worse than you, flora; but rather would i have you cherish hope 
of soon behold charles holland, probably alive and well, than fancy 
any great disaster has come over him." 

"i will endeavour to do so," reply flora. 

"i long to hear what has become of dr. chillingworth. his disappearance 
is most singular; for i fully suspect that he had some particular 
object in view in get possession for a short time of bannerworth 
hall; but now, from jack pringle's account, he appear not to be in it, 
and, in fact, to have disappear completely from the sight of all who 
knew him." 

"yes," said flora; "but he may have done that, brother, still in 
furtherance of his object." 

"it may be so, and i will hope that it is so. keep yourself close, 
sister, and see no one, while i proceed to his house to inquire if they 
have heard anything of him. i will return soon, be assured; and, in the 
meantime, should you see my brother, tell him i shall be at home in an 
hour or so, and not to leave the cottage; for it is more than likely 
that the admiral has gone to bannerworth hall, so that you may not see 
anything of him for some time." 




chapter lxviii. 

marchdale's attempt villany, and the result. 


[illustration] 

varney the vampyre left the dungeon of charles dutch amid the grey 
ruins, with a perfect confidence the young man would keep his word, and 
not attempt to escape from that place until the time had elapse which 
he had dictate to him. 

and well might he have that confidence, for have once given his word 
that he would remain until he heard the clock strike two from a 
neighbouring church, charles dutch never dreamt for a moment of 
break it. 

to be sure it was a weary time to wait when liberty appear before him; 
but he was the soul of honour, and the least likely man in all the world 
to infringe in the slightest upon the condition which he had, of his own 
free will, accede to. 

sir francis varney walk rapid until he came nearly to the outskirts 
of the town, and then he slacken his pace, proceeding more cautiously, 
and look careful about him, as if he fear to meet any one who 
might recognise him. 

he had not proceed far in this manner, when he became conscious of the 
cautious figure of a man gliding along in the opposite direction to that 
which he was taking. 

a suspicion struck him, from the general appearance, that it was 
marchdale, and if so he wonder to see him abroad at such a time. still 
he would not be quite certain; but he hurried forward, so as to meet the 
advance figure, and then his suspicion were confirmed; and marchdale, 
with some confusion in his looks and manners, accost him. 

"ah, sir francis varney," he said, "you are out late."-- 

"why, you know i should be out late," said varney, "and you likewise 
know the errand upon which i was to be out." 

"oh, i recollect; you were to release your prisoner."-- 

"yes, i was." 

"and have you done so?"-- 

"oh, no." 

"oh, indeed. i--i am glad you have taken better thought of it. good 
night--good night; we shall meet to-morrow."-- 

"adieu," said sir francis varney; and he watch the retreat figure 
of marchdale, and then he added, in a low tone to himself,-- 

"i know his object well. his craven spirit shrink at the notion, a 
probable enough one, i will admit, that charles dutch has recognise 
him, and that, if once free, he would denounce him to the bannerworths, 
holding him up to scorn in his true colours, and bring down upon his 
head, perhaps, something more than detest and contempt. the 
villain! he is go now to take the life of the man whom he consider 
chain to the ground. well, well, they must fight it out together. 
charles dutch is sufficient free to take his own part, although 
marchdale little think that such is the case." 

marchdale walk on for some little distance, and then he turn and 
look after sir francis varney. 

"indeed!" he said; "so you have not release him to-night, but i know 
well will do so soon. i do not, for my part, admire this romantic 
generous which set a fox free at the moment that he's the most 
dangerous. it's all very well to be generous, but it is better to be 
just first, and that i consider means look after one's self first. i 
have a poniard here which will soon put an end to the trouble of the 
prisoner in his dungeon--its edge is keen and sharp, and will readily 
find a way to his heart." 

he walk on quite exulting and careless now, for he had got into 
the open country, and it was extremely unlikely that he would meet 
anybody on his road to the ruins. 

it did not take many minutes, sharp walking now to bring him close to 
the spot which he intended should become such a scene of treacherous 
slaughter, and just then he heard from afar off something like the 
mutter of thunder, as if heaven itself was proclaim its vengeance 
against the man who had come out to slay one of its best and noblest 
creatures. 

"what is that'" said marchdale, shrink back a moment; "what is 
that--an approach storm? it must be so, for, now i recollect me, the 
sun set behind a bank of cloud of a fiery redness, and as the evening 
drew in there was every appearance in the heaven of some ensue strife 
of the elements." 

he listen for a few moments, and fixed his eyes intent in the 
direction of the horizon from where the mutter sound had proceeded. 

he had not long to wait before he saw a bright flash of blue lightning, 
which for one instant illumine the sky; then by the time he could have 
count twelve there came the thunder which the flash preceded, and he 
felt terribly anxious to complete his enterprize, so that he might get 
back to the town and be safe house before the storm, which was 
evidently approaching, should burst upon him. 

"it is sweeping on apace," he said; "why did i not come earlier?" 

even as he spoke he plunge among the recess of the ruins, and 
searching about for the old stone which cover the entrance to the 
dungeon, he was surprise to find it roll from its place, and the 
aperture open. 

"what is the meaning of this?" he said; "how negligent of sir francis 
varney; or perhaps, after all, he was only jesting with me, and let the 
prisoner go. if that should be the case, i am foil indeed; but surely 
he could not be so full of indiscretion." 

again came a dazzle flash of lightning, which now, surround by the 
ruins as he was, made him shrink back and cover his eyes for a moment; 
and then follow a peal of thunder with not half the duration of time 
between it and the flash which had characterize the previous electric 
phenomenon. 

"the storm approach fast," said marchdale; "i must get my work done 
quickly, if indeed my victim be here, which i begin seriously to doubt." 

he descended the intricate winding passage to the vault below, which 
serve the purpose of a dungeon, and when he got very nearly into the 
depth of its recesses, he call aloud, saying,-- 

"ho! what ho! is there any one here?"--"yes," said charles holland, who 
fancy it might be his former visitor returned. "have you come to 
repent of your purpose?" 

"ah!" said marchdale to himself, "sir francis, after all, has told me 
the truth--the prisoner is still here." 

the light from without was not near sufficient to send the least ray 
into the depths of that dungeon; so that marchdale, when he enter the 
place, could see nothing but an absolute blackness. 

it was not so, however, with charles holland, whose eyes had been now so 
long accustomed to the place that he could see in it as if a dim 
twilight irradiate it, and he at once, in his visitor, saw his worst 
foe, and not the man who had comparatively set him free. 

he saw, too, that the hand of his visitor grasp a weapon, which 
marchdale thought that, favoured by the darkness, he might carry openly 
in perfect security. 

"where are you?" said marchdale; "i cannot see you."--"here!" said 
charles, "you may feel my grip;" and he sprung upon him in an instant. 

the attack was so sudden and so utterly unexpected, that marchdale was 
thrown backwards, and the dagger wrest from his grasp, during the 
first impulse which charles dutch had thrown into his attack. 

moreover, his head struck with such violence against the earthern floor, 
that it produce a temporary confusion of his faculties, so that, had 
charles dutch been so inclined, he might, with marchdale's own weapon, 
have easily taken his life. 

the young man did, on the impulse of the moment, raise it in his hand, 
but, on the impulse of another thought, he cast it from him, 
exclaiming-- 

"no, no! not that; i should be as bad as he, or nearly so. this villain 
has come to murder me, but yet i will not take his life for the deed. 
what shall i do with him? ha! a lucky thought--chains!" 

he drag marchdale to the identical spot of earth on which he had lain 
so long; and, as sir francis varney had left the key of the padlock 
which bound the chain together in it, he, in a few moments, had 
succeed in place the villain marchdale in the same durance from 
which he had himself shortly since escaped. 

"remain there," he said, "until some one come to rescue you. i will not 
let you starve to death, but i will give you a long fast; and, when i 
come again, it shall be along with some of the bannerworth family, to 
show them what a viper they have foster in their hearts." 

marchdale was just sufficient conscious now to feel all the reality 
of his situation. in vain he attempt to rise from his prostrate 
position. the chain did their duty, keeping down a villain with the 
same means that they had held in ignominious confinement a true man. 

he was in a perfect agony, inasmuch as he considered that he would be 
allow to remain there to starve to death, thus achieve for himself a 
more horrible death than any he had ever thought of inflicting. 

"villain!" exclaim charles holland, "you shall there remain; and, let 
you have what mental suffering you may, you richly deserve them." 

he heed not the cries of marchdale--he heed not his imprecation any 
more than he did his prayers; and the arch hypocrite use both in 
abundance. charles was but too happy once more to look upon the open 
sky, although it was then in darkness, to heed anything that marchdale, 
in the agony to which he was now reduced, might feel inclined to say; 
and, after glancing around him for some few moments, when he was free of 
the ruins, and inhale with exquisite delight the free air of the 
surrounding meadows, he saw, by the twinkling of the lights, in which 
direction the town lay, and knowing that by taking a line in that path, 
and then after a time diverge a little to the right, he should come to 
bannerworth hall, he walk on, never in his whole life probably feeling 
such an enjoyment of the mere fact of existence as at such a moment as 
that of exquisite liberty. 

our reader may with us imagine what it is to taste the free, fresh air 
of heaven, after being long pent up, as he, charles holland, had been, 
in a damp, noisome dungeon, teeming with unwholesome exhalations. they 
may well suppose with what an amount of rapture he now found himself 
unrestrained in his movements by those gall fetter which had hung 
for so long a period upon his youthful limbs, and which, not 
unfrequent in the despair of his heart, he had thought he should 
surely die in. 

and last, although not least in his dear esteem, did the rapturous 
thought of once more look in the sweet face of her he love come 
cross him with a gush of delight. 

"yes!" he exclaimed, as he quicken his pace; "yes! i shall be able to 
tell flora bannerworth how well and how truly i love her. i shall be 
able to tell her that, in my weary and hideous imprisonment, the thought 
alone of her has support me." 

as he near the hall, he quicken his pace to such an extent, that 
soon he was forced to pause altogether, as the exertion he had 
undertaken pretty plainly told him that the imprisonment, scanty diet, 
and want of exercise, which had been his portion for some time past, had 
most material decrease his strength. 

his limb trembled, and a profuse perspiration bedewed his brow, 
although the night was rather cold than otherwise. 

"i am very weak," he said; "and much i wonder now that i succeed in 
overcome that villain marchdale; who, if i had not done so, would most 
assured have murder me." 

and it was a wonder; for marchdale was not an old man, although he might 
be considered certainly as past the prime of life, and he was of a 
strong and athletic build. but it was the sudden of his attack upon 
him which had given charles dutch the great advantage, and had cause 
the defeat of the ruffian who came bent on one of the most cowardly and 
dastard murder that could be committed--namely, upon an unoffend 
man, whom he supposed to be loaded with chains, and incapable of making 
the least efficient resistance. 

charles soon again recover sufficient breath and strength to proceed 
towards the hall, and now warned, by the exhaustion which had come over 
him that he had not really anything like strength enough to allow him to 
proceed rapidly, he walk with slow and deliberate steps. 

this mode of proceeding was more favourable to reflection than the wild, 
rapid one which he had at first adopted, and in all the glowing colours 
of youthful and ingenious fancy did he depict to himself the surprise 
and the pleasure that would beam in the countenance of his beloved flora 
when she should find him once again by her side. 

of course, he, charles, could know nothing of the contrivance which had 
been resort to, and which the reader may lay wholly to the charge of 
marchdale, to blacken his character, and to make him appear faithless to 
the love he had professed. 

had he known this, it is probable that indignation would have add 
wings to his progress, and he would not have been able to proceed at the 
leisurely pace he felt that his state of physical weakness dictate to 
him. 

and now he saw the topmost portion at bannerworth hall push out from 
amongst the tree with which the ancient pile was so much surrounded, 
and the sight of the home of his beloved revive him, and quicken the 
circulation of the warm blood in his veins. 

"i shall behold her now," he said--"i shall behold her how! a few 
minutes more, and i shall hold her to my heart--that heart which has 
been ever hers, and which carry her image enshrine in its deepest 
recesses, even into the gloom of a dungeon!" 

but let us, while charles dutch is indulge in these delightful 
anticipations--anticipations which, we regret, in consequence of the 
departure of the bannerworth from the hall, will not be realize so 
soon as he supposes--look back upon the discomfit hypocrite and 
villain, marchdale, who occupy his place in the dungeon of the old 
ruins. 

until charles dutch actually had left the strange, horrible, and 
cell-like place, he could scarcely make up his mind that the young man 
entertain a serious intention of leave him there. 

perhaps he did not think any one could be so cruel and so wicked as he 
himself; for the reader will no doubt recollect that his, marchdale's, 
counsel to varney, was to leave charles dutch to his fate, chain 
down as he was in the dungeon, and that fate would have been the 
horrible one of being starve to death in the course of a few days. 

when now, however, he felt confident that he was deserted--when he heard 
the sound of charles holland's retreat footstep slow die away in 
the distance, until not the faintest echo of them reach his ears, he 
despair indeed; and the horror he experienced during the succeed 
ten minutes, might be considered an ample atone for some of his 
crimes. his brain was in a complete whirl; nothing of a tangible nature, 
but that he was there, chain down, and left to starve to death, came 
across his intellect. then a kind of madness, for a moment or two, took 
possession of him; he made a tremendous effort to burst asunder the 
band that held him. 

but it was in vain. the chains--which had been placed upon charles 
dutch during the first few days of his confinement, when he had a 
little recover from the effects of the violence which had been 
committed upon him at the time when he was captured--effectually 
resist marchdale. 

they even cut into his flesh, inflict upon him some grievous wounds; 
but that was all he achieve by his great effort to free himself, so 
that, after a few moments, bleeding and in great pain, he, with a deep 
groan, desist from the fruitless effort he had better not have 
commenced. 

then he remain silent for a time, but it was not the silence of 
reflection; it was that of exhaustion, and, as such, was not likely to 
last long; nor did it, for, in the course of another five minutes, he 
call out loudly. 

perhaps he thought there might be a remote chance that some one 
traverse the meadow would hear him; and yet, if he had duly 
considered the matter, which he was not in a fitting frame of mind to 
do, he would have recollect that, in choose a dungeon among the 
underground vault of these ruins, he had, by experiment, made certain 
that no cry, however loud, from where he lay, could reach the upper air. 
and thus had this villain, by the very precaution which he had himself 
taken to ensure the safe custody of another, been his own greatest 
enemy. 

"help! help! help!" he cry frantic "varney! charles holland! have 
mercy upon me, and do not leave me here to starve! help, oh, heaven! 
curse on all your heads--curses! oh, mercy--mercy--mercy!" 

in suchlike incoherent expression did he pass some hours, until, what 
with exhaustion and a rage thirst that came over him, he could not 
utter another word, but lay the very picture of despair and discomfit 
malice and wickedness. 




chapter lxix. 

flora bannerworth and her mother.--the episode of chivalry. 


[illustration] 

gladly we turn from such a man as marchdale to a consideration of the 
beautiful and accomplished flora bannerworth, to whom we may, without 
destroy in any way the interest of our plot, predict a much happy 
destiny than, probably, at that time, she consider as at all likely to 
be hers. 

she certainly enjoyed, upon her first removal from bannerworth hall, 
greater serene of mind than she had done there; but, as we have 
already remark of her, the more her mind was withdrawn, by change of 
scene, from the horrible consideration which the attack of the vampyre 
had forced upon her, the more she revert to the fate of charles 
holland, which was still shroud in so much gloom. 

she would sit and converse with her mother upon that subject until she 
work up her feelings to a most uncomfortable pitch of excitement, and 
then mrs. bannerworth would get her younger brother to join them, who 
would occasional read to her some composition of his own, or of some 
favourite writer whom he thought would amuse her. 

[illustration] 

it was on the very evening when sir francis varney had made up his mind 
to release charles holland, that young bannerworth read to his sister 
and his mother the following little chivalry incident, which he told 
them he had himself collate from authentic sources:-- 

"the knight with the green shield," exclaim one of a party of 
men-at-arms, who were drink together at an ancient hostel, not far 
from shrewsbury--"the knight with the green shield is as good a knight 
as ever buckle on a sword, or wore spurs."--"then how come it he is 
not one of the victor in the day's tournament?" exclaim another.--"by 
the bone of alfred!" said a third, "a man must be judge of by his 
deserts, and not by the partiality of his friends. that's my opinion, 
friends."--"and mine, too," said another. 

"that is all very true, and my opinion would go with yours, too; but not 
in this instance. though you may accuse me of partiality, yet i am not 
so; for i have seen some of the victor of to-day by no means forward in 
the press of battle-men who, i will not say fear danger, but who like 
it not so well but they avoid it as much as possible." 

"ay, marry, and so have i. the reason is, 'tis much easy to face a 
blunt lance, than one with a spear-head; and a man may practise the 
one and thrive in it, but not the other; for the best lance in the 
tournament is not always the best arm in the battle." 

"and that is the reason of my saying the knight with the green shield 
was a good knight. i have seen him in the midst of the melee, when men 
and horse have been hurl to the ground by the shock; there he has 
behave himself like a brave knight, and has more than once been notice 
for it." 

"but how canne he to be so easily overthrown to-day? that speak 
something."--"his horse is an old one." 

"so much the better," said another; "he's use to his work, and as 
cunning as an old man."--"but he has been wound more than once, and is 
weaken very much: besides, i saw him lose his footing, else he had 
overthrown his opponent. 

"he did not seem distress about his accident, at all events, but sat 
contented in the tent."--"he know well that those who know him will 
never attribute his misadventure either to want of courage or conduct; 
moreover, he seem to be one of those who care but little for the 
opinion of men who care nothing for him." 

"and he's right. well, dear comrades, the health of green knight, or the 
knight with a green shield, for that's his name, or the designation he 
choose to go by."--"a health to the knight with the green shield!" 
shout the men-at-arms, as they lift their cup on high. 

"who is he?" inquire one of the men-at-arms, of him who had spoken 
favourable of the stranger.--"i don't know." 

"and yet you spoke favourable of him a few seconds back, and said what a 
brave knight he was!"--"and so i uphold him to be; but, i tell you what, 
friend, i would do as much for the greatest stranger i ever met. i have 
seen him fight where men and horse have bit the dust in hundreds; and 
that, in my opinion, speak out for the man and warrior; he who cannot, 
then, fight like a soldier, had better tilt at home in the castle-yard, 
and there win ladies' smiles, but not the commendation of the leader of 
the battle." 

"that's true: i myself recollect very well sir hugh de colbert, a very 
accomplished knight in the castle-yard; but his men were as fine a set 
of fellow as ever cross a horse, to look at, but they prove 
deficient at the moment of trial; they were broken, and flee in a 
moment, and scarce one of them received a scratch." 

"then they hadn't stood the shock of the foeman?"--"no; that's certain." 

"but still i should like to know the knight,--to know his name very 
well."--"i know it not; he has some reason for keeping it secret, i 
suppose; but his deed will not shame it, be it what it may. i can bear 
witness to more than one foeman fall beneath his battle-axe." 

"indeed!"--"yes; and he took a banner from the enemy in the last battle 
that was fought." 

"ah, well! he deserve a better fortune to-morrow. who is to be the 
bridegroom of the beautiful bertha, daughter of lord de cauci?"--"that 
will have to be decided: but it is presume that sir guthrie de beaumont 
is the intended." 

"ah! but should he not prove the victor?"--"it's understood; because 
it's known he is intended by the parent of the lady, and none would be 
ungallant enough to prevail against him,--save on such conditions as 
would not endanger the fruits of victory." 

"no?"--"certainly not; they would lay the trophy at the foot of the 
beauty worship by the knight at the tournament." 

"so, triumphant or not, he's to be the bridegroom; bearing off the prize 
of valour whether or no,--in fact, deserve her or not,--that's the 
fact."--"so it is, so it is." 

"and a shame, too, friends; but so it is now; but yet, if the knight's 
horse recover from the strain, and is fit for work to-morrow, it 
strike me that the green shield will give some work to the holiday 
knight." 

* * * * * 

there had been a grand tournament held near shrewsbury castle, in honour 
of the intended nuptials of the beautiful lady bertha de cauci. she was 
the only daughter of the earl de cauci, a nobleman of some note; he was 
one of an ancient and unblemished name, and of great riches. 

the lady was beautiful, but, at the same time, she was an unwill 
bride,--every one could see that; but the bridegroom care not for that. 
there was a seal sorrow on her brow,--a sorrow that seem sincere and 
lasting; but she spoke not of it to any one,--her lip were seldom 
parted. she love another. yes; she love one who was far away, fight 
in the war of his country,--one who was not so rich in lands as her 
present bridegroom. 

when he left her, she remember his promise; it was, to fight on till 
he earn a fortune, or name that should give him some right to claim 
her hand, even from her imperious father. but alas! he came not; and 
what could she do against the command of one who would be obeyed? her 
mother, too, was a proud, haughty woman, one whose sole anxiety was to 
increase the grandeur and power of her house by such connections. 

thus it was pressed on by circumstances, she could no long hold out, 
more especially as she heard nothing of her knight. she knew not where 
he was, or indeed if he were living or dead. she knew not he was never 
named. this last circumstance, indeed, gave her pain; for it assured her 
that he whom she love had been unable to signalize himself from among 
other men. that, in fact, he was unknown in the annals of fame, as well 
as the probability that he had been slain in some of the early 
skirmish of the war. this, if it had happened, cause her some pain to 
think upon; not but such event were look upon with almost 
indifference by females, save in such case where their affection were 
engaged, as on this occasion. but the event was soften by the fact 
that men were continual fall by the hand of man in such encounters, 
but at the same time it was considered an honourable and praiseworthy 
death for a soldier. he was wounded, but not with the anguish we now 
hear of; for the friends were console by the reflection that the 
deceased warrior die cover with glory. 

bertha, however, was young, and as yet she knew not the cause of her 
absent knight's silence, or why he had not been heard of among the most 
forward in the battle. 

"heaven's will be done," she exclaimed; "what can i do? i must submit to 
my father's behests; but my future life will be one of misery and 
sorrow." 

she wept to think of the past, and to dream of the future; both alike 
were sorrowful to think upon--no comfort in the past and no joy in the 
future. 

thus she wept and sorrow on the night of the first tournament; there 
was to be a second, and that was to be the grand one, where her intended 
bridegroom was to show himself off in her eyes, and take his part in the 
sport. 

* * * * * 

bertha sat late--she sat sorrow by the light of the lamp and the 
flicker flame of the fire, as it rose and fell on the hearth and 
threw dance shadow on the walls. 

"oh, why, arthur home, should you thus be absent? absent, too, at such a 
time when you are more need than ever. alas, alas! you may no long 
be in the land of the living. your family is great and your name 
known--your own has been spoken with commendation from the lip of your 
friend; what more of fame do you need? but i am speak without 
purpose. heaven have mercy on me." 

as she spoke she look up and saw one of her women in wait standing 
by. 

"well, what would you?"--"my lady, there is one who would speak with 
you," said the hand-maiden. 

"with me?"--"yes, my lady; he name you the lady bertha de cauci." 

"who and what is he?" she inquired, with something like trepidation, of 
the maiden.--"i know not, my lady." 

"but gave he not some token by which i might know who i admit to my 
chamber?"--"none," reply the maiden. 

"and what do he bear by way of distinguish himself? what crest or 
device doth he bear?"--"merely a green shield." 

"the unsuccessful knight in the tournament to-day. heaven's! what can he 
desire with me; he is not--no, no, it cannot be--it cannot be."--"will 
you admit him, lady?" 

"indeed, i know not what to do; but yet he may have some intelligence to 
give me. yes, yes, admit him; but first throw some log on the fire." 

the attendant did as she was desired, and then quit the room for the 
purpose of admit the stranger knight with the green shield. in a few 
moments she could hear the stride of the knight as he enter the 
apartment, and she thought the step was familiar to her ear--she thought 
it was the step of sir arthur home, her lover. she wait anxious to 
see the door open, and then the stranger entered. his form and bearing 
was that of her lover, but his visor was down, and she was unable to 
distinguish the features of the stranger. 

his armour was such as had seen many a day's hard wear, and there were 
plenty of mark of the battle about him. his travel-worn accoutrements 
were altogether such as bespoke service in the field. 

"sir, you desire to see me; say wherefore you do so, and if it is news 
you bring." the knight answer not, but pointed to the female 
attendant, as if he desire she would withdraw. "you may retire," said 
bertha; "be within call, and let me know if i am threaten with 
interruption." 

the attendant retired, and then the knight and lady were left alone. the 
former seem at a loss how to break silence for some moments, and then 
he said,-- 

"lady ----" "oh, heavens! 'tis he!" exclaim bertha, as she sprang to 
her feet; "it is sir arthur home!" 

"it is," exclaim the knight, pull up his visor, and drop on one 
knee he encircle his arm round the waist of the lady, and at the same 
moment he pressed her lip to his own. 

the first emotion of joy and surprise over, bertha checked her 
transports, and chid the knight for his boldness. 

"nay, chide me not, dear bertha; i am what i was when i left you, and 
hope to find you the same." 

"am i not?" said bertha.--"truly i know not, for you seem more beautiful 
than you were then; i hope that is the only change." 

"if there be a change, it is only such as you see. sorrow and regret 
form the principal causes."--"i understand you." 

"my intended nuptials ----" "yes, i have heard all. i came here but 
late in the morning; and my horse was jaded and tired, and my impatience 
to attend the tournament cause me a disaster which it is well it came not 
on the second day." 

"it is, dear arthur. how is it i never heard your name mentioned, or 
that i received no news from any one about you during the war that have 
ended?"--"i had more than one personal enemy, bertha; men who would have 
been glad to see me fall, and who, in default of that, would not have 
minded bribe an assassin to secure my death for them at any risk 
whatever." 

"heavens! and how did you escape such a death from such people, 
arthur?"--"by adopt such a device as that i wear. the knight of the 
green shield i'm called." 

"i saw you to-day in the tournament."--"and there my tired and jaded 
horse gave way; but to-morrow i shall have, i hope, a different 
fortune." 

"i hope so too."--"i will try; my arm has been good in battle, and i 
see not why it should be deficient in peaceful jousts." 

"certainly not. what fortune have you met with since you left 
england?"--"i was of course known but to a few; among those few were the 
general under whom i serve and my more immediate officers, who i knew 
would not divulge my secret." 

"and they did not?"--"no; kept it nobly, and kept their eyes upon me in 
battle; and i have reap a rich harvest in force, honour, and riches, i 
assure you." 

"thank heaven!" said bertha.--"bertha, if i be conqueror, may i claim 
you in the court-yard before all the spectators?" 

"you may," said bertha, and she hung her head.--"moreover," said sir 
arthur, "you will not make a half promise, but when i demand you, you 
will at once come down to me and accept me as your husband; if i be the 
victor then he cannot object to the match." 

"but he will have many friends, and his intended bride will have many 
more, so that you may run some danger among so many enemies."--"never 
fear for me, bertha, because i shall have many friends of distinction 
there too--many old friends who are try men in battle, and whose deed 
are a glory and honour to them; besides, i shall have my commander and 
several gentlemen who would at once interfere in case any unfair 
advantage was attempt to be taken of my supposed weakness." 

"have you a fresh horse?" inquire bertha.--"i have, or shall have by 
the morning; but promise me you will do what i ask you, and then my arm 
will be nerve to its utmost, and i am sure to be victorious." 

"i do promise," said bertha; "i hope you may be as successful as you 
hope to be, arthur; but suppose fortune should declare against you; 
suppose an accident of any kind were to happen, what could be done 
then?"--"i must be content to hide myself for ever afterwards, as a 
defeat knight; how can i appear before your friends as the claimant of 
your hand?" 

"i will never have any other."--"but you will be forced to accept this 
guthrie de beaumont, your father's chosen son-in-law." 

"i will seek refuge in a cloister."--"will you fly with me, bertha, to 
some sequester spot, where we can live in each other society?" 

"yes," said bertha, "anything, save marriage with guthrie de 
beaumont."--"then await the tournament of to-morrow," said sir arthur, 
"and then this may be avoided; in the meantime, keep up a good heart and 
remember i am at hand." 

* * * * * 

these two lovers part for the present, after a protract interview, 
bertha to her chamber, and the knight of the green shield to his tent. 

the following morning was one of great preparation; the lists had been 
enlarged, and the seat made more commodious, for the influx of visitor 
appear to be much greater than had been anticipated. 

moreover, there were many old warrior of distinction to be present, 
which made the bridegroom look pale and feel uncomfortable as to the 
result of the tournament. the tilt was to begin at an early hour, 
and then the feast and revelry would begin early in the evening, 
after the tilt had all pass off. 

in that day's work there were many thrown from their saddles, and many 
broke their lances. the bridegroom tilt with several knights, and came 
off victorious, or without disadvantage to either. 

the green knight, on the contrary, tilt with but few, and always 
victorious, and such match were with men who had been men of some name 
in the wars, or at least in the tilt yard. 

the sports drew to a close, and when the bridegroom became the 
challenger, the knight of the green shield at once rode out quiet to 
meet him. the encounter could not well be avoided, and the bridegroom 
would willing have decline the joust with a knight who had disposed 
of his enemy so easily, and so unceremonious as he had. 

the first encounter was enough; the bridegroom was thrown to a great 
distance, and lay insensible on the ground, and was carry out of the 
field. there was an immediate sensation among the friends of the 
bridegroom, several of whom rode out to challenge the stranger knight 
for his presumption. 

in this, however, they had misreckone the chances, for the challenge 
accept their challenge with alacrity and disposed of them one by one 
with credit to himself until the day was concluded. the stranger was 
then ask to declare who he was, upon which he lift his visor, and 
said, 

"i am sir arthur home, and claim the lady bertha as my bride, by the 
law of arms, and by those of love." 

* * * * * 

again the tent was felled, and again the hostelry was tenant by the 
soldier, who declared for one side and then for the other, as the cup 
clang and jingle together. 

"said i not," exclaim one of the troopers, "that the knight with a 
green shield was a good knight?"--"you did," reply the other. 

"and you knew who he was?" said another of the troopers.--"not i, 
comrades; i had seen him fight in battle, and, therefore, partly guess 
how it would be if he had any chance with the bridegroom. i'm glad he 
has won the lady." 

it was true, the lady bertha was won, and sir arthur home claim his 
bride, and then they attempt to defeat his claim; yet bertha at once 
express herself in his favour, to strong that they were, however 
reluctantly compelled, to consent at last. 

at this moment, a loud shout as from a multitude of person came upon 
their ear and flora start from her seat in alarm. the cause of the 
alarm we shall proceed to detail. 




chapter lxx. 

the funeral of the stranger of the inn.--the popular commotion, and mrs. 
chillingworth's appeal to the mob.--the new riot.--the hall in danger. 


[illustration] 

as yet the town was quiet; and, though there was no appearance of riot 
or disturbance, yet the magistracy had taken every precaution they 
deem needful, or their position and necessity warranted, to secure 
the peace of the town from the like disturbance to that which had been, 
of late, a disgrace and terror of peaceably-disposed persons. 

the populace were well advertise of the fact, that the body of the 
stranger was to be bury that morning in their churchyard; and that, to 
protect the body, should there be any necessity for so doing, a large 
body of constable would be employed. 

there was no disposition to riot; at least, none was visible. it look 
as if there was some event about to take place that was highly 
interesting to all parties, who were peaceable assemble to witness the 
interment of nobody knew who. 

the early hour at which person were assembling, at different points, 
clearly indicate that there was a spirit of curiosity about the town, 
so uncommon that none would have notice it but for the fact of the 
crowd of people who hung about the streets, and there remained, listless 
and impatient. 

the inn, too, was crowded with visitors, and there were many who, not 
being blessed with the strength of purse that some were, were hanging 
about in the distance, wait and watch the motions of those who 
were better provided. 

"ah!" said one of the visitors, "this is a disagreeable job in your 
house, landlord."--"yes, sir; i'd soon it had happen elsewhere, i 
assure you. i know it has done me no good." 

"no; no man could expect any, and yet it is none the less unfortunate 
for that."--"i would soon anything else happen than that, whatever it 
might be. i think it must be something very bad, at all events; but i 
dare say i shall never see the like again." 

"so much the better for the town," said another; "for, what with 
vampyre and riots, there has been but little else stirring than 
mischief and disturbance of one kind and another." 

"yes; and, what between varney and bannerworths, we have had but little 
peace here." 

"precisely. do you know it's my opinion that the least thing would upset 
the whole town. any one unlucky word would do it, i am sure," said a 
tall thin man. 

"i have no doubt of it," said another; "but i hope the military would do 
their duty under such circumstances, for people's lives and property are 
not safe in such a state of things."--"oh, dear no." 

"i wonder what has become of varney, or where he can have gone 
to."--"some thought he must have been burn when they burn his 
house," reply the landlord. 

"but i believe it generally understood he's escaped, has he not? no 
trace of his body were found in the ruins."--"none. oh! he's escaped, 
there can be no doubt of that. i wish i had some fortune depend upon 
the fact; it would be mine, i am sure." 

"well, the lord keep us from vampyre and suchlike cattle," said an old 
woman. "i shall never sleep again in my bed with any safety. it 
frighten one out of one's life to think of it. what a shame the men 
didn't catch him and stake him!" 

the old woman left the inn as soon as she had spoke this christian 
speech. 

"humane!" said a gentleman, with a sporting coat on. "the old woman is 
no advocate for half measures!" 

"you are right, sir," said the landlord; "and a very good look-out she 
keeps upon the pot, to see it's full, and careful blow the froth 
off!"--"ah! i thought as much." 

"how soon will the funeral take place, landlord?" inquire a person, who 
had at that moment enter the inn.--"in about an hour's time, sir." 

"oh! the town seem pretty full, though it is very quiet. i suppose it 
is more as a matter of curiosity people congregate to see the funeral of 
this stranger?" 

"i hope so, sir." 

"the time is wearing on, and if they don't make a dust, why then the 
military will not be troubled." 

"i do not expect anything more, sir," said the landlord; "for you see 
they must have had their swing out, as the saying is, and be fully 
satisfied. they cannot have much more to do in the way of exhibit 
their anger or dislike to vampyres--they all have done enough." 

"so they have--so they have." 

"granted," said an old man with a troublesome cough; "but when did you 
ever know a mob to be satisfied? if they want the moon and got it, 
they'd find out it would be necessary to have the stars also." 

"that's uncommonly true," said the landlord. "i shouldn't be surprise 
if they didn't do something worse than ever."--"nothing more likely," 
said the little old man. "i can believe anything of a mob--anything--no 
matter what." 

the inn was crowded with visitors, and several extra hand were employ 
to wait upon the customers, and a scene of bustle and activity was 
display that was never before seen. it would glad the heart of a 
landlord, though he were made of stone, and landlord are usually of 
much more malleable material than that. 

however, the landlord had hardly time to congratulate himself, for the 
bearer were come now, and the undertaker and his troop of 
death-following officials. 

there was a stir among the people, who began now to awaken from the 
lethargy that seem to have come over them while they were wait for 
the moment when it should arrive, that was to place the body under the 
green sod, against which so much of their anger had been raised. there 
was a decent silence that pervade the mob of individual who had 
assembled. 

death, with all its ghastly insignia, had an effect even upon the 
unthinking multitude, who were ever ready to inflict death or any 
violent injury upon any object that came in their way--they never 
hesitated; but even these, now the object of their hatred was no more, 
felt appalled. 

'tis strange what a change come over masses of men as they gaze upon a 
dead body. it may be that they all know that to that complexion they 
must come at last. this may be the secret of the respect offer to the 
dead. 

the undertaker are men, however, who are use to the presence of 
death--it is their element; they gain a living by attend upon the 
last obsequies of the dead; they are use to dead bodies, and care not 
for them. some of them are humane men, that is, in their way; and even 
among them are men who wouldn't be deprived of the joke as they screw 
down the last screw. they could not forbear, even on this occasion, to 
hold their converse when left alone. 

"jacobs," said one who was turning a long screw, "jacobs, my boy, do you 
take the chair to-night?"--"yes," said jacob who was a long 
lugubrious-looking man, "i do take the chair, if i live over this 
blessed event." 

"you are not croaking, jacobs, are you? well, you are a lively customer, 
you are."--"lively--do you expect people to be lively when they are full 
dress for a funeral? you are a nice article for your profession. you 
don't feel like an undertaker, you don't." 

"don't, jacobs, my boy. as long as i look like one when occasion 
demands; when i have done my job i put my comfort in my pocket, and 
think how much more pleasant it is to be go to other people's 
funeral than to our own, and then only see the difference as regards 
the money." 

"true," said jacob with a groan; "but death's a melancholy article, at 
all events."--"so it is." 

"and then when you come to consider the number of people we have 
buried--how many have gone to their last homes--and how many more will 
go the same way."--"yes, yes; that's all very well, jacob. you are 
precious surly this morning. i'll come to-night. you're brew a 
sentimental tale as sure as egg is eggs." 

"well, that is pretty certain; but as i was saying how many more are 
there--" 

"ah, don't bother yourself with calculation that have neither beginning 
nor end, and which haven't one point to go. come, jacob, have you 
finished yet?"--"quite," said jacob. 

they now arrange the pall, and placed all in readiness, and return to 
a place down stairs where they could enjoy themselves for an odd half 
hour, and pass that time away until the moment should arrive when his 
reverence would be ready to bury the deceased, upon consideration of the 
fee to be paid upon the occasion. 

the tap-room was crowded, and there was no room for the men, and they 
were taken into the kitchen, where they were seated, and earnest at 
work, prepare for the ceremony that had so shortly to be performed. 

"any better, jacobs?"--"what do you mean?" inquire jacobs, with a 
groan. "it's news to me if i have been ill." 

"oh, yes, you were doleful up stairs, you know."--"i've a proper regard 
for my profession--that's the difference between you and i, you know." 

"i'll wager you what you like, now, that i'll handle a corpse and drive 
a screw in a coffin as well as you, now, although you are so solid and 
miserable."--"so you may--so you may." 

"then what do you mean by saying i haven't a proper regard for my 
profession?"--"i say you haven't, and there's the thing that shall prove 
it--you don't look it, and that's the truth." 

"i don't look like an undertaker! indeed i dare say i don't if i ain't 
dress like one."--"nor when you are," reiterate jacob. 

"why not, pray?"--"because you have always a grin on your face as broad 
as a gridiron--that's why." 

this end the dispute, for the employer of the men sudden put his 
head in, saying,-- 

"come, now, time's up; you are want up stairs, all of you. be quick; 
we shall have his reverence wait for us, and then we shall lose his 
recommendation." 

"ready sir," said the round man, taking up his pint and finish it off 
at a draught, at the same moment he thrust the remains of some bread and 
cheese into his pocket. 

jacob, too, took his pot, and, have finished it, with great gravity 
follow the example of his more jocose companion, and they all left the 
kitchen for the room above, where the corpse was lie ready for 
interment. 

there was an unusual bustle; everybody was on the tip-top of 
expectation, and await the result in a quiet hurry, and hope to have 
the first glimpse of the coffin, though why they should do so it was 
difficult to define. but in this fit of mysterious hope and expectation 
they certainly stood. 

"will they be long?" inquire a man at the door of one inside,--"will 
they be long before they come?"--"they are coming now," said the man. 
"do you all keep quiet; they are knock their head against the top of 
the landing. hark! there, i told you so." 

the man departed, hearing something, and being satisfy that he had got 
some information. 

"now, then," said the landlord, "move out of the way, and allow the 
corpse to pass out. let me have no indecent conduct; let everything be 
as it should be." 

the people soon remove from the passage and vicinity of the doorway, 
and then the mournful procession--as the newspaper have it--moved 
forward. they were heard coming down stairs, and thence along the 
passage, until they came to the street, and then the whole number of 
attendant was plainly discernible. 

how different was the funeral of one who had friends. he was alone; none 
followed, save the undertaker and his attendants, all of whom look 
solemn from habit and professional motives. even the jocose man was as 
supernatural solemn as could be well imagined; indeed, nobody knew he 
was the same man. 

"well," said the landlord, as he watch them down the street, as they 
slow pace their way with funereal, not sorrowful, solemnity--"well, i 
am very glad that it is all over." 

"it has been a sad plague to you," said one. 

"it has, indeed; it must be to any one who has had another such a job as 
this. i don't say it out of any disrespect to the poor man who is dead 
and gone--quite the reverse; but i would not have such another affair on 
my hand for pounds." 

"i can easily believe you, especially when we come to consider the 
disagreeable of a mob." 

"you may say that. there's no knowing what they will or won't do, 
confound them! if they'd act like men, and pay for what they have, why, 
then i shouldn't care much about them; but it don't do to have other 
people in the bar." 

"i should think not, indeed; that would alter the scale of your profits, 
i reckon." 

"it would make all the difference to me. business," add the landlord, 
"conducted on that scale, would become a loss; and a man might as well 
walk into a well at once." 

"so i should say. have many such occurrence as these been usual in this 
part of the country?" inquire the stranger. 

"not usual at all," said the landlord; "but the fact is, the whole 
neighbourhood has run distracted about some superhuman being they call a 
vampyre." 

"indeed!"--"yes; and they suspect the unfortunate man who has been 
lie up-stairs, a corpse, for some days." 

"oh, the man they have just taken in the coffin to bury?" said the 
stranger. 

"yes, sir, the same." 

"well, i thought perhaps somebody of great consequence had sudden 
become defunct."--"oh, dear no; it would not have cause half the 
sensation; people have been really mad." 

"it was a strange occurrence, altogether, i believe, was it?" inquire 
the stranger.--"indeed it was, sir. i hardly know the particulars, there 
have been so many tale afloat; though they all concur in one point, and 
that is, it has destroy the peace of one family." 

"who has done so?"--"the vampyre." 

"indeed! i never heard of such an animal, save as a fable, before; it 
seem to me extraordinary." 

"so it would do to any one, sir, as was not on the spot, to see it; i'm 
sure i wouldn't." 

* * * * * 

in the meantime, the procession, short as it was of itself, move along 
in slow time through a throng of people who ran out of their house on 
either side of the way, and line the whole length of the town. 

many of these closed in behind, and follow the mourner until they 
were near the church, and then they made a rush to get into the 
churchyard. 

as yet all had been conduct with tolerable propriety, the funeral met 
with no impediment. the presence of death among so many of them seem 
some check upon the licence of the mob, who bowed in silence to the 
majesty of death. 

who could bear ill-will against him who was now no more? man, while he 
is man, is always the subject of hatred, fear, or love. some one of 
these passions, in a modify state, exist in all men, and with such 
feelings they will regard each other; and it is barely possible that any 
one should not be the object of some of these, and hence the stranger's 
corpse was treat with respect. 

in silence the body proceed along the highway until it came to the 
churchyard, and follow by an immense multitude of people of all 
grades. 

the authority trembled; they knew not what all this portended. they 
thought it might pass off; but it might become a storm first; they hope 
and fear by turns, till some of them fell sick with apprehension. 

there was a deep silence observe by all those in the immediate vicinity 
of the coffin, but those farther in the rear found full expression for 
their feelings. 

"do you think," said an old man to another, "that he will come to life 
again, eh?"--"oh, yes, vampyre always do, and lay in the moonlight, and 
then they come to life again. moonlight recover a vampyre to life 
again." 

"and yet the moonlight is cold."--"ah, but who's to tell what may happen 
to a vampyre, or what's hot or what's cold?" 

"certainly not; oh, dear, no."--"and then they have permission to suck 
the blood of other people, to live themselves, and to make other people 
vampyres, too." 

"the lord have mercy upon us!"--"ay, but they have driven a stake 
through this one, and he can't get in moonlight or daylight; it's all 
over--he's certainly done for; we may congratulate ourselves on this 
point." 

"so we may--so we may." 

they now near the grave, the clergyman officiate as usual on such 
occasions. there was a large mob of person on all sides, with serious 
faces, watch the progress of the ceremony, and who listen in 
quietness. 

there was no sign of any disturbance amongst the people, and the 
authority were well pleased; they congratulate themselves upon the 
quiet and orderly of the assemblage. 

the service was end and the coffin lowered, and the earth was thrown 
on the coffin-lid with a hollow sound. nobody could hear that sound 
unmoved. but in a short while the sound cease as the grave became 
filled; it was then trodden careful down. 

there were no relative there to feel affected at the last scene of all. 
they were far away, and, according to popular belief upon the subject, 
they must have been dead some ages. 

* * * * * 

the mob watch the last shovel-full of earth thrown upon the coffin, 
and witness the ram down of the soil, and the heap of it over 
at top to make the usual monument; for all this was done speedy and 
carefully, lest there should be any tendency to exhume the body of the 
deceased. 

the people were now somewhat relieved, as to their state of solemnity 
and silence. they would all of them converse freely on the matter that 
had so long occupy their thoughts. 

they seem now let loose, and everybody found himself at liberty to say 
or do something, no matter if it were not very reasonable; that is not 
always require of human being who have souls, or, at least it is 
unexpected; and were it expected, the expectation would never be 
realized. 

the day was likely to wear away without a riot, nay, even without a 
fight; a most extraordinary occurrence for such a place under the 
existing circumstances; for of late the populace, or, perhaps, the 
townspeople, were extremely pugnacious, and many were the dispute that 
were settled by the very satisfactory application of the knuckle to the 
head of the party holding a contrary opinion. 

thus it was they were ready to take fire, and a hubbub would be the 
result of the slightest provocation. but, on the present occasion, there 
was a remarkable dearth of, all subject of the nature described. 

who was to lead israel out to battle? alas! no one on the present 
occasion. 

such a one, however, appeared, at least, one who furnish a ready 
excuse for a disturbance. 

suddenly, mrs chillingworth appear in the midst of a large concourse 
of people. she had just left her house, which was close at hand, her 
eyes red with weeping, and her children around her on this occasion. 

the crowd made way for her, and gather round her to see what was go 
to happen. 

"friends and neighbours," she said "can any of you relieve the tear of 
a distress wife and mother, have any of you seen anything of my 
husband, mr. chillingworth?" 

"what the doctor?" exclaim one.--"yes; mr. chillingworth, the surgeon. 
he has not been home two days and a night. i'm distracted!--what can 
have become of him i don't know, unless--" 

here mrs chillingworth paused, and some person said,-- 

"unless what, mrs chillingworth? there are none but friends here, who 
wish the doctor well, and would do anything to serve him--unless what? 
speak out." 

"unless he's been destroy by the vampyre. heaven know what we may all 
come to! here am i and my children deprived of our protector by some 
means which we cannot imagine. he never, in all his life, did the same 
before." 

"he must have been spirited away by some of the vampyres. i'll tell you 
what, friend," said one to another, "that something must be done; 
nobody's safe in their bed." 

"no; they are not, indeed. i think that all vampyre ought to be burn 
and a stake run through them, and then we should be safe." 

"ay; but you must destroy all those who are even suspect of being 
vampyres, or else one may do all the mischief."--"so he might." 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. "chillingworth for ever! we'll find the 
doctor somewhere, if we pull down the whole town." 

there was an immense commotion among the populace, who began to start 
throw stones, and do all sort of things without any particular 
object, and some, as they said, to find the doctor, or to show how 
willing they were to do so if they knew how. 

mrs. chillingworth, however, kept on talk to the mob, who continue 
shouting; and the authority anticipate an immediate outbreak of 
popular opinion, which is generally accompany by some forcible 
demonstration, and on this occasion some one suggest the propriety of 
burning down bannerworth hall; because they had burn down the 
vampyre's home, and they might as well burn down that of the injure 
party, which was carry by acclamation; and with loud shout they 
start on their errand. 

this was a mob's proceeding all over, and we regret very much to say, 
that it is very much the characteristic of english mobs. what an 
uncommonly strange thing it is that people in multitude seem completely 
to get rid of all reason--all honour--all common ordinary honesty; 
while, if you were to take the same people singly, you would find that 
they were reasonable enough, and would shrink with a feeling quite 
approach to horror from anything in the shape of very flagrant 
injustice. 

this can only be account for by a piece of cowardice in the human 
race, which induce them when alone, and acting with the full 
responsibility of their actions, to shrink from what it is quite evident 
they have a full inclination to do, and will do when, have partially 
lost their individuality in a crowd, they fancy, that to a certain 
extent they can do so with impunity. 

the burning of sir francis varney's house, although it was one of those 
proceedings which would not bear the test of patient examination, was 
yet, when we take all the circumstances into consideration, an act 
really justifiable and natural in comparison with the one which was now 
meditated. 

bannerworth hall had never been the residence even of anyone who had 
done the people any injury or given them any offence, so that to let it 
become a prey to the flame was but a gratuitous act of mischief. 

it was, however, or seem to be, doomed, for all who have had any 
experience in mobs, must know how extremely difficult it is to withdraw 
them from any impulse once given, especially when that impulse, as in 
the present instance, is of a violent character. 

"down with bannerworth hall!" was the cry. "burn it--burn it," and 
augment by fresh numbers each minute, the ignorant, and, in many 
respects, ruffianly assemblage, soon arrive within sight of what had 
been for so many years the bane of the bannerworths, and whatever may 
have been the fault of some of that race, those fault had been of a 
domestic character, and not at all such as would interfere with the 
public weal. 

the astonished, and almost worn-out authorities, hastily, now, after 
have disposed of their prisoners, collected together what troops they 
could, and by the time the misguided, or rather the not guide at all 
populace, had got halfway to bannerworth hall, they were being 
outflank by some of the dragoons, who, by taking a more direct route, 
hope to reach bannerworth hall first, and so perhaps, by letting the 
mob see that it was defended, induce them to give up the idea of its 
destruction on account of the danger attendant upon the proceeding by 
far exceed any of the anticipate delight of the disturbance. 

[illustration] 




chapter lxxi. 

the strange meeting at the hall between mr. chillingworth and the 
mysterious friend of varney. 


[illustration] 

when we praise our friend mr. chillingworth for not telling his wife 
where he was going, in pursuance of a caution and a discrimination so 
highly creditable to him, we are quite certain that he has no such 
excuse as regards the reader. therefore we say at once that he had his 
own reason now for taking up his abode at bannerworth hall for a time. 
these reason seem to be all dependant upon the fact of have met the 
mysterious man at sir francis varney's; and although we perhaps would 
have hope that the doctor might have communicate to henry bannerworth 
all that he knew and all that he surmised, yet have we no doubt that 
what he keeps to himself he has good reason for so keeping, and that 
his action as regards it are found upon some very just conclusions. 

he has then made a determination to take possession of, and remain in, 
bannerworth hall according to the full and free leave which the admiral 
had given him so to do. what result he anticipate from so lonely and 
so secret a watch we cannot say, but probably they will soon exhibit 
themselves. it need no sort of extraordinary discrimination for any 
one to feel it once that not the least good, in the way of an ambuscade, 
was likely to be effect by such person as admiral bell or jack 
pringle. they were all very well when fight should actually ensue, 
but they both were certainly remarkably and completely deficient in 
diplomatic skill, or in that sort of patience which should enable them 
at all to compete with the cunning, the skill, and the nice 
discrimination of such a man as sir francis varney. 

if anything were to be done in that way it was unquestionable to be done 
by some one alone, who, like the doctor, would, and could, remain 
profound quiet and await the issue of events, be they what they might, 
and probably remain a spy and attempt no overt act which should be of a 
hostile character. this unquestionable was the mode, and perhaps we 
should not be go too far when we say it was the only mode which could 
be with anything like safety rely upon as one likely to lead really to 
a discovery of sir francis varney's motive in making such determined 
exertion to get possession of bannerworth hall. 

that night was doom to be a very eventful one, indeed; for on it had 
charles dutch been, by a sort of wild impulsive generous of sir 
francis varney, rescue from the miserable dungeon in which he had been 
confined, and on that night, too, he, whom we cannot otherwise describe 
than as the villain marchdale, had been, in consequence of the evil that 
he himself meditated, and the crime with which he was quite willing to 
stain his soul, been condemn to occupy charles's position. 

on that night, too, had the infuriate mob determined upon the 
destruction of bannerworth hall, and on that night was mr. chillingworth 
wait with what patience he could exert, at the hall, for whatever in 
the chapter of accident might turn up of an advantageous character to 
that family in whose welfare and fortune he felt so friendly and so 
deep an interest. 

let us look, then, at the worthy doctor as he keeps his solitary watch. 

he did not, as had been the case when the admiral share the place with 
him in the hope of catching varney on that memorable occasion when he 
caught only his boot, sit in a room with a light and the means and 
appliance for making the night pass pleasant away; but, on the 
contrary, he abandoned the house altogether, and took up a station in 
that summer-house which has been before mention as the scene of a 
remarkable interview between flora bannerworth and varney the vampyre. 

alone and in the dark, so that he could not be probably seen, he watch 
that one window of the chamber where the first appearance of the hideous 
vampyre had taken place, and which seem ever since to be the special 
object of his attack. 

by remain from twilight, and get accustomed to the gradual 
increase dark of the place, no doubt the doctor was able to see 
well enough without the aid of any artificial light whether any one was 
in the place besides himself. 

"night after night," he said, "will i watch here until i have succeed 
in unravel this mystery; for that there is some fearful and undreamt 
of mystery at the bottom of all these proceedings i am well convinced." 

when he made such a determination as this, dr. chillingworth was not at 
all a likely man to break it, so there, look like a modern statue in 
the arbour, he sat with his eyes fixed upon the balcony and the window 
of what use to be call flora's room for some hours. 

the doctor was a contemplative man, and therefore he did not so acute 
feel the lonely of his position as many person would have done; 
moreover, he was decidedly not of a superstitious turn of mind, although 
certainly we cannot deny an imagination to him. however, if he really 
had harbour some strange fear and terror they would have been 
excusable, when we consider how many circumstances had combine to make 
it almost a matter of demonstration that sir francis varney was 
something more than mortal. 

what quantity of subject the doctor thought over during his vigil in 
that garden it is hard to say, but never in his whole life, probably, 
had he such a glorious opportunity for the most undisturbed 
contemplation of subject require deep thought to analyze, than as he 
had then. at least he felt that since his marriage he had never been so 
thorough quiet, and left so completely to himself. 

it is to be hope that he succeed in settle any medical points of a 
knotty character that might be hover in his brain, and certain it is 
that he had become quite absorb in an abstruse matter connected with 
physiology, when his ear were startled, and he was at once arouse to a 
full consciousness of where he was, and why he had come there, by the 
distant sound of a man's footstep. 

it was a footstep which seem to be that of a person who scarcely 
thought it at all necessary to use any caution, and the doctor's heart 
leap within him as in the lowest possible whisper he said to 
himself,-- 

"i am successful--i am successful. it is believe now that the hall is 
deserted, and no doubt that is sir francis varney come with confidence, 
to carry out his object in so sedulous attack it, be that object 
what it may." 

elated with this idea, the doctor listen intent to the advance 
footstep, which each moment sound more clearly upon his ears. 

it was evidently approach from the garden entrance towards the house, 
and he thought, by the occasional deaden sound of the person's feet, 
be he whom he might, that he could not see his way very well, and, 
consequently, frequent stray from the path, on to some of the 
numerous flower-beds which were in the way. 

"yes," said the doctor, exultingly, "it must be varney; and now i have 
but to watch him, and not to resist him; for what good on earth is it to 
stop him in what he wish to do, and, by such means, never wrest his 
secret from him. the only way is to let him go on, and that will i do, 
most certainly." 

now he heard the indistinct mutter of the voice of some one, so low 
that he could not catch what words were uttered; but he fancy that, in 
the deep tones, he recognised, without any doubt, the voice of sir 
francis varney. 

"it must be he," he said, "it surely must be he. who else would come 
here to disturb the solitude of an empty house? he comes! he comes!" 

now the doctor could see a figure emerge from behind some thick beeches, 
which had before obstruct his vision, and he look scrutinising 
about, while some doubt stole slow over his mind now as to whether it 
was the vampyre or not. the height was in favour of the supposition that 
it was none other than varney; but the figure look so much stouter, 
that mr. chillingworth felt a little stagger upon the subject, and 
unable wholly to make up his mind upon it. 

the pause of this visitor, too, opposite that window where sir francis 
varney had made his attempts, was another strong reason why the doctor 
was inclined to believe it must be him, and yet he could not quite make 
up his mind upon the subject, so as to speak with certainty. 

a very short time, however, indeed, must have suffice to set such a 
question as that at rest; and patience seem the only quality of mind 
necessary under those circumstances for mr. chillingworth to exert. 

the visitor continue gaze either at that window, or at the whole 
front of the house, for several minutes, and then he turn away from a 
contemplation of it, and walk slow along, parallel with the window 
of that dining-room, one of which had been broken so completely on the 
occasion of the admiral's attempt to take the vampyre prisoner. 

the moment the stranger alter his position, from look at the 
window, and commence walking away from it, mr. chillingworth's mind was 
made up. it was not varney--of that he felt now most positively assured, 
and could have no doubt whatever upon the subject. 

the gait, the general air, the walk, all were different; and then arose 
the anxious question of who could it be that had intrude upon that 
lonely place, and what could be the object of any one else but varney 
the vampyre to do so. 

the stranger look a powerful man, and walk with a firm tread, and, 
altogether he was an opponent that, had the doctor been ever so 
belligerent inclined, it would have been the height of indiscretion 
for him to attempt to cope with. 

it was a very vexatious thing, too, for any one to come there at such a 
juncture, perhaps only from motive of curiosity, or possibly just to 
endeavour to commit some petty depredation upon the desert building, 
if possible; and most heartily did the doctor wish that, in some way, he 
could scare away the intruder. 

the man walk along very slowly, indeed, and seem to be quite taking 
his time in making his observations of the building; and this was the 
more provoking, as it was get late, and if have project a visit 
at all, it would surely soon be made, and then, when he found any one 
there, of course, he would go. 

amaze beyond expression, the doctor felt about on the ground at his 
feet, until he found a tolerably large stone, which he threw at the 
stranger with so good an aim, that it hit him a smart blow on the back, 
which must have been anything but a pleasant surprise. 

that it was a surprise, and that, too, a most complete one, was evident 
from the start which the man gave, and then he utter a furious oath, 
and rub his back, as he glance about him to endeavour to ascertain 
from whence the missile had come. 

"i'll try him again with that," thought the doctor; "it may succeed in 
scare him away;" and he stoop to watch for another stone. 

it was well that he did so at that precise moment; for, before he rose 
again, he heard the sharp report of a pistol, and a crashing sound among 
some of the old wood work of which the summer-house was composed, told 
him that a shot had there taken effect. affair were now get much 
too serious; and, accordingly, dr. chillingworth thought that, rather 
than stay there to be made a target of, he would face the intruder. 

"hold--hold!" he cried. "who are you, and what do you mean by 
that?"--"oh! somebody is there," cry the man, as he advanced. "my 
friend, whoever you are, you were very foolish to throw a stone at me." 

"and, my friend, whoever you are," respond the doctor, "you were very 
spiteful to fire a pistol bullet at me in consequence."-- 

"not at all." 

"but i say yes; for, probably, i can prove a right to be here, which you 
cannot."--"ah!" said the stranger, "that voice--why--you are dr. 
chillingworth?" 

"i am; but i don't know you," said the doctor, as he emerge now from 
the summer-house, and confront the stranger who was within a few pace 
of the entrance to it. then he started, as he added,-- 

"yes, i do know you, though. how, in the name of heaven, came you here, 
and what purpose have you in so coming?" 

"what purpose have you? since we met at varney's, i have been making 
some inquiry about this neighbourhood, and learn strange 
things."--"that you may very easily do here; and, what is more 
extraordinary, the strange things are, for the most part, i can assure 
you, quite true." 

the reader will, from what has been said, now readily recognise this man 
as sir francis varney's mysterious visitor, to whom he gave, from some 
hidden cause or another, so large a sum of money, and between whom and 
dr. chillingworth a mutual recognition had taken place, on the occasion 
when sir francis varney had, with such cool assurance, invite the 
admiral to breakfast with him at his new abode. 

"you, however," said the man, "i have no doubt, are fully qualified to 
tell me of more than i have been able to learn from other people; and, 
first of all, let me ask you why you are here?"--"before i answer you 
that question, or any other," said the doctor, "let me beg of you to 
tell me truly, is sir francis varney--" 

the doctor whisper in the ear of the stranger some name, as if he 
feared, even there, in the silence of that garden, where everything 
conspire to convince him that he could not be overheard, to pronounce 
it in an audible tone. 

"he is," said the other.--"you have no manner of doubt of it?" 

"doubt?--certainly not. what doubt can i have? i know it for a positive 
certainty, and he knows, of course, that i do know it, and has purchase 
my silence pretty handsomely, although i must confess that nothing but 
my positive necessity would have induce me to make the large demand 
upon him that i have, and i hope soon to be able to release him 
altogether from them." 

the doctor shook his head repeatedly, as he said,-- 

"i suspect it; i suspect it, do you know, from the first moment that 
i saw you there in his house. his face haunt me ever since--awfully 
haunt me; and yet, although i felt certain that i had once seen it 
under strange circumstances, i could not identify it with--but no 
matter, no matter. i am wait here for him." 

"indeed!"--"ay, that i am; and i flung a stone at you, not knowing you, 
with hope that you would be, by such means, perhaps, scared away, and so 
leave the coast clear for him." 

"then you have an appointment with him?"--"by no means; but he has made 
such repeated and determined attack upon this house that the family who 
inhabit it were compel to leave it, and i am here to watch him, and 
ascertain what can possibly be his object." 

"it is as i suspected, then," mutter this man. "confound him! now can 
i read, as if in a book, most clearly, the game that he is playing!" 

"can you?" cry the doctor, energetically--"can you? what is it? tell 
me, for that is the very thing i want to discover."--"you don't say so?" 

"it is, indeed; and i assure you that it concern the peace of a whole 
family to know it. you say you have made inquiry about this 
neighbourhood, and, if you have done so, you have discover how the 
family of the bannerworth have been persecute by varney, and how, in 
particular, flora bannerworth, a beautiful and intelligent girl, has 
been most cruel made to suffer." 

"i have heard all that, and i dare say with many exaggerations."--"it 
would be difficult for any one really to exaggerate the horrors that 
have taken place in this house, so that any information which you can 
give respecting the motive of varney will tend, probably, to restore 
peace to those who have been so cruel persecuted, and be an act of 
kindness which i think not altogether inconsistent with your nature." 

"you think so, and yet know who i am."--"i do, indeed." 

"and what i am. why, if i were to go into the market-place of yon town, 
and proclaim myself, would not all shun me--ay, even the very lowest and 
vilest; and yet you talk of an act of kindness not being altogether 
inconsistent with my nature!"--"i do, because i know something more of 
you than many." 

there was a silence of some moments' duration, and then the stranger 
spoke in a tone of voice which look as if he were struggle with some 
emotion. 

"sir, you do know more of me than many. you know what i have been, and 
you know how i left an occupation which would have made me loathed. but 
you--even you--do not know what made me take to so terrible a 
trade."--"i do not." 

"would it suit you for me now to tell you?"--"will you first promise me 
that you will do all you can for this persecute family of the 
bannerworths, in whom i take so strange an interest?" 

"i will. i promise you that freely. of my own knowledge, of course, i 
can say but little concerning them, but, upon that warranting, i well 
believe they deserve abundant sympathy, and from me they shall have it." 

"a thousand thanks! with your assistance, i have little doubt of being 
able to extricate them from the tangle web of dreadful incident which 
has turn them from their home; and now, whatever you may choose to 
tell me of the cause which drove you to be what you became, i shall 
listen to with abundant interest. only let me beseech you to come into 
this summer-house, and to talk low." 

"i will, and you can pursue your watch at the same time, while i beguile 
its weariness."--"be it so." 

"you knew me years ago, when i had all the chance in the world of 
becoming respectable and respected. i did, indeed; and you may, 
therefore, judge of my surprise when, some years since, being in the 
metropolis, i met you, and you shun my company."--"yes; but, at last, 
you found out why it was that i shun your company." 

"i did. you yourself told me once that i met you, and would not leave 
you, but insist upon your dine with me. then you told me, when you 
found that i would take no other course whatever, that you were no other 
than the--the----"-- 

"out with it! i can bear to hear it now better than i could then! i told 
you that i was the common hangman of london!" 

"you did, i must confess, to my most intense surprise." 

"yes, and yet you kept to me; and, but that i respect you too much to 
allow you to do so, you would, from old associations, have countenance 
me; but i could not, and i would not, let you do so. i told you then 
that, although i held the terrible office, that i had not been yet 
call upon to perform its loathsome functions. soon--soon--come the 
first effort--it was the last!" 

"indeed! you left the dreadful trade?" 

"i did--i did. but what i want to tell you, for i could not then, was 
why i went ever to it. the wound my heart had received were then too 
fresh to allow me to speak of them, but i will tell you now. the story 
is a brief one, mr. chillingworth. i pray you be seated." 




chapter lxxii. 

the strange story.--the arrival of the mob at the hall, and their 
dispersion. 


[illustration] 

"you will find that the time which elapse since i last saw you in 
london, to have been spent in an eventful, varied manner."--"you were in 
good circumstances then," said mr. chillingworth.--"i was, but many 
event happen after that which alter the prospect; made it even more 
gloomy than you can well imagine: but i will tell you all candidly, and 
you can keep watch upon bannerworth hall at the same time. you are well 
aware that i was well to do, and had ample funds, and inclination to 
spend them."--"i recollect: but you were married then, surely?"--"i 
was," said the stranger, sadly, "i was married then."--"and now?"--"i am 
a widower." the stranger seem much moved, but, after a moment or so, 
he resumed--"i am a widower now; but how that event came about is partly 
my purpose to tell you. i had not married long--that is very long--for i 
have but one child, and she is not old, or of an age to know much more 
than what she may be taught; she is still in the course of education. i 
was early addict to gamble; the dice had its charms, as all those who 
have ever engaged in play but too well know; it is perfectly 
fascinating."--"so i have heard," said mr. chillingworth; "though, for 
myself, i found a wife and professional pursuit quite incompatible with 
any pleasure that took either time or resources."-- 

"it is so. i would i had never enter one of those house where men are 
deprived of their money and their own free will, for at the 
gambling-table you have no liberty, save that in gliding down the stream 
in company with others. how few have ever escape destruction--none, i 
believe--men are perfectly fascinated; it is ruin alone that enable a 
man to see how he has been hurried onwards without thought or 
reflection; and how fallacious were all the hope he ever entertained! 
yes, ruin, and ruin alone, can do this; but, alas! 'tis then too 
late--the evil is done. soon after my marriage i fell in with a 
chevalier st. john. he was a man of the world in every sense of the 
word, and one that was well versed in all the ways of society. i never 
met with any man who was so perfectly master of himself, and of perfect 
ease and self-confidence as he was. he was never at a loss, and, come 
what would, never betray surprise or vexation--two qualities, he 
thought, never ought to be shown by any man who move in society."-- 

"indeed!"--"he was a strange man--a very strange man."-- 

"did he gamble?"-- 

"it is difficult to give you a correct and direct answer. i should say 
he did, and yet he never lost or won much; but i have often thought he 
was more connected with those who did than was believed."-- 

"was that a fact?" inquire mr. chillingworth.-- 

"you shall see as we go on, and be able to judge for yourself. i have 
thought he was. well, he first took me to a handsome saloon, where 
gamble was carry on. we had been to the opera. as we came out, he 
recommend that we should sup at a house where he was well known, and 
where he was in the habit of spend his evenings after the opera, and 
before he retired. i agree to this. i saw no reason why i should not. 
we went there, and bitter have i repent of so do for years since, 
and do to this day."-- 

"your repentance has been sincere and lasting," said mr. chillingworth; 
"the one prove the other."--"it does; but i thought not so then. the 
place was glittering, and the wine good. it was a kind of earthly 
paradise; and when we had taken some wine, the chevalier said to me,-- 

"'i am desirous of seeing a friend backwards; he is at the hazard-table. 
will you go with me?'--i hesitated. i fear to see the place where a 
vice was carry on. i knew myself inclined to prudential motives. i 
said to him,--'no, st. john, i'll wait here for you; it may be as 
well--the wine is good, and it will content me?' 

"'do so,' he said, smiling; 'but remember i seldom or never play myself, 
nor is there any reason why you should.'--'i'll go, but i will not 
play.'--'certainly not; you are free alike to look on, play, or quit the 
place at any moment you please, and not be noticed, probably, by a 
single soul.' 

"i arose, and we walk backwards, have call one of the men who were 
wait about, but who were watch and door-keepers of the 'hell.' we 
were led along the passage, and pass through the pair of doors, which 
were well secure and render the possibility of a surprise almost 
impossible. after these dark places, we were sudden let into a place 
where we were dazzle by the light and brilliancy of the saloon. it was 
not so large as the one we left, but it was superior to it in all its 
appointments. 

"at first i could not well see who was, or who was not, in the room 
where we were. as soon, however, as i found the use of my eyes, i 
notice many well-dressed men, who were busy engaged in play, and who 
took no notice of any one who entered. we walk about for some minutes 
without speak to any one, but merely look on. i saw men engaged in 
play; some with earnestness, other again with great nonchalance, and 
money change hand without the least remark. there were but few who 
spoke, and only those in play. there was a hum of conversation; but you 
could not distinguish what was said, unless you paid some attention to, 
and was in close vicinity with, the individual who spoke. 

"'well,' said st. john, 'what do you think of this place?'--'why,' i 
replied, 'i had no notion of seeing a place fitted up as this is.' 

"'no; isn't it superb?'--'it is beautiful done. they have many 
visitors,' said i, 'many more than i could have believed.' 

"'yes, they are all _bona fide_ players; men of stamp and rank--none of 
your seedy leg who have only what they can cheat you out 
of.'--'ah!'--'and besides,' he added, 'you may often form friendship 
here that lead to fortune hereafter. i do not mean in play, because 
there is no necessity for your do so, or, if you do so, in go 
above a stake which you know won't hurt you.'--'exactly.' 

"'many men can never approach a table like this, and sit down to an 
hour's play, but, if they do, they must stake not only more than they 
can afford, but all their property, leave themselves beggars.' 'they 
do?" said i. 

"'but men who know themselves, their resources, and choose to indulge 
for a time, may often come and lay the foundation to a very pretty 
fortune.' 

"'do you see your friend?' i inquired.--'no, i do not; but i will 
inquire if he has been here--if not, we will go.' 

"he left me for a moment or two to make some inquiry, and i stood 
look at the table, where there were four players, and who seem to 
be engaged at a friendly game; and when one party won they look grave, 
and when the other party lost they smile and look happy. i walk 
away, as the chevalier did not return immediately to me; and then i saw 
a gentleman rise up from a table. he had evidently lost. i was standing 
by the seat, unconscious holding the back in my hand. i sat down 
without thinking or without speaking, and found myself at the hazard 
table. 

"'do you play, sir?'--'yes,' i said. i had hardly utter the words when 
i was sorry for them; but i could not recall them. i sat down, and play 
at once commenced. 

"in about ten or fifteen minutes, often lose and then winning, i found 
myself about a hundred and twenty pound in pocket, clear gain by the 
play. 

"'ah!' said the chevalier, who came up at that moment, 'i thought you 
wouldn't play.'--'i really don't know how it happened,' said i, 'but i 
sudden found myself here without any previous intention.' 

"'you are not a loser, i hope?'--'indeed i am not,' i replied; 'but not 
much a gainer.' 

"'nor need you desire to be. do you desire to give your adversary his 
revenge now, or take another opportunity.'--'at another time,' i 
replied. 

"'you will find me here the day after to-morrow, when i shall be at your 
service;' then bowing, he turn away. 

"'he is a very rich man whom you have been play with,' said the 
chevalier.--" 

"indeed!" 

"'yes, and i have known him to lose for three days together; but you may 
take his word for any amount; he is a perfect gentleman and man of 
honour.'--''tis well to play with such,' i replied; 'but i suppose you 
are about to leave.' 

"'yes, it grow late, and i have some business to transact to-morrow, so 
i must leave.'--'i will accompany you part of the way home,' said i, 
'and then i shall have finished the night.' 

"i did leave with him, and accompany him home, and then walk to my 
own home." 

* * * * * 

"this was my first visit, and i thought a propitious beginning, but it 
was the more dangerous. perhaps a loss might have effectually deter 
me, but it is doubtful to tell how certain event might have been 
altered. it is just possible that i might have been urge on by my 
desire to retrieve any loss i might have incurred, and so made myself at 
once the miserable being it took month to accomplish in bring me to. 

"i went the day but one after this, to meet the same individual at the 
gambling-table, and play some time with varied success, until i left 
off with a trifling loss upon the night's play, which was nothing of any 
consequence. 

[illustration] 

"thus matter went on; i sometimes won and sometimes lost, until i won a 
few hundreds, and this determined me to play for higher stakes than any 
i had yet play for. 

"it was no use go on in the peddle style i had been go on; i had 
won two hundred and fifty pound in three months, and had i been less 
fearful i might have had twenty-five thousand pounds. ah! i'll try my 
fortune at a higher game. 

"having once made this resolution, i was anxious to begin my new plan, 
which i hope would have the effect of place me far above my then 
present position in society, which was good, and with a little attention 
it would have made me an independent man; but then it require patience, 
and nothing more. however, the other method was so superior since it 
might all be done with good luck in a few months. ah! good luck; how 
uncertain is good luck; how changeful is fortune; how soon is the best 
prospect blight by the frost of adversity. in less than a month i had 
lost more than i could pay, and then i gamble on for a living. 

"my wife had but one child; her first and only one; an infant at her 
breast; but there was a change came over her; for one had come over 
me--a fearful one it was too--one not only in manner but in fortune too. 
she would beg me to come home early; to attend to other matters, and 
leave the dreadful life i was then leading. 

"'lizzy,' said i, 'we are ruined.'--'ruined!' she exclaimed, and 
stagger back, until she fell into a seat. 'ruined!' 

"'ay, ruined. it is a short word, but expressive.'--'no, no, we are not 
ruined. i know what you mean, you would say, we cannot live as we have 
lived; we must retrench, and so we will, right willingly.' 

"'you must retrench most wonderfully,' i said, with desperate calmness, 
'for the murder must out.'--'and so we will; but you will be with us; 
you will not go out night after night, ruin your health, our 
happiness, and destroy both peace and prospects.' 

"'no, no, lizzy, we have no chance of recover ourselves; house and 
home--all gone--all, all.'--'my god!' she exclaimed. 

"'ay, rail on,' said i; 'you have cause enough; but, no matter--we have 
lost all.'--'how--how?' 

"'it is useless to ask how; i have done, and there is an end of the 
matter; you shall know more another day; we must leave this house for a 
lodging.'--'it matter little,' she said; 'all may be won again, if you 
will but say you will quit the society of those who have ruin you.' 

"'no one,' said i, 'has ruin me; i did it; it was no fault of any one 
else's; i have not that excuse.'--'i am sure you can recover.' 

"'i may; some day fortune will shower her favours upon me, and i live on 
in that expectation.'--'you cannot mean that you will chance the 
gaming-table? for i am sure you must have lost all there?' 

"'i have.'--'god help me,' she said; 'you have done your child a wrong, 
but you may repair it yet.' 

"'never!'--''tis a long day! let me implore you, on my knees, to leave 
this place, and adopt some other mode of life; we can be careful; a 
little will do, and we shall, in time, be equal to, and better than what 
we have been.' 

"'we never can, save by chance.'--'and by chance we never shall,' she 
replied; 'if you will exert yourself, we may yet retrieve ourselves.' 

"'and exert myself i will.'--'and quit the gaming-table?' 

"'ask me to make no promises,' said i; 'i may not be able to keep them; 
therefore, ask me to make none.'--'i do ask you, beg of, entreat of you 
to promise, and solemn promise me that you will leave that fearful 
place, where men not only lose all their goods, but the feelings of 
nature also.' 

"'say no more, lizzy; if i can get a living elsewhere i will, but if 
not, i must get it there.' 

"she seem to be cast down at this, and she shed tears. i left the 
room, and again went to the gambling-house, and there that night, i won 
a few pounds, which enable me to take my wife and child away from the 
house they had so long live in, and took them afterwards to a miserable 
place,--one room, where, indeed, there were a few articles of furniture 
that i had save from the general wreck of my own property. 

"she took things much less to heart than i could have anticipated; she 
seem cheerful and happy,--she endeavour to make my home as 
comfortable as she could. 

"her whole endeavour was to make me as much as possible, forget the 
past. she wanted, as much as possible, to wean me away from my gamble 
pursuits, but that was impossible. i had no hope, no other prospect. 

"thus she strove, but i could see each day she was get paler, and 
more pale; her figure, before round, was more thin, and betray sign 
of emaciation. this prey upon me; and, when fortune deny me the 
means of carry home that which she so much wanted, i could never 
return for two days at a time. then i would find her shed tears, and 
sighing; what could i say? if i had anything to take her, then i use to 
endeavour to make her forget that i had been away. 

"'ah!' she would exclaim, 'you will find me dead one of these days; what 
you do now for one or two days, you will do by-and-bye for many days, 
perhaps weeks.'--'do not anticipate evil.' 

"'i cannot do otherwise; were you in any other kind of employment but 
that of gambling,' she said, 'i should have some hope of you; but, as it 
is, there is none.'--'speak not of it; my chance may turn out 
favourable yet, and you may be again as you were.' 

"'never.'--'but fortune is inconstant, and may change in my favour as 
much as she has done in others.' 

"'fortune is indeed constant, but misfortune is as inconstant.'--'you 
are prophetic of evil." 

"'ah! i would to heaven i could predict good; but who ever yet heard of 
a ruin gamble being able to retrieve himself by the same means that 
he was ruined?' 

"thus we use to converse, but our conversation was usually of but 
little comfort to either of us, for we could give neither any comfort to 
the other; and as that was usually the case, our interview became less 
frequent, and of less duration. my answer was always the same. 

"'i have no other chance; my prospects are limited to that one place; 
deprive me of that, and i never more should be able to bring you a 
mouthful of bread.' 

"day after day,--day after day, the same result followed, and i was as 
far from success as ever i was, and ever should be; i was yet a beggar. 

"the time flew by; my little girl was nearly four years old, but she 
knew not the misery her father and mother had to endure. the poor little 
thing sometimes went without more than a meal a day; and while i was 
living thus upon the town, upon the chance of the gaming-table, many a 
pang did she cause me, and so did her mother. my constant consolation 
was this,-- 

"'it is bad luck now,' i would say; 'but will be better by-and-bye; 
things cannot always continue thus. it is all for them--all for them.' 

"i thought that by continue constant in one course, i must be at 
land at the ebb of the tide. 'it cannot always flow one way,' i thought. 
i had often heard people say that if you could but have the resolution 
to play on, you must in the end seize the turn of fortune. 

"'if i could but once do that, i would never enter a hell again as long 
as i drew breath.' 

"this was a resolve i could not only make but keep, because i had 
suffer so much that i would never run through the same misery again 
that i had already gone through. however, fortune never seem inclined 
to take the turn i had hope for; fortune was as far off as ever, and 
had in no case given me any opportunity of recover myself. 

"a few pound were the utmost i could at any time muster, and i had to 
keep up something of an appearance, and seem as if i had a thousand a 
year; when, god knows, i could not have muster a thousandth part of 
that sum, were all done and paid for. 

"day after day pass on, and yet no change. i had almost given myself 
up to despair, when one night when i went home i saw my wife was more 
than usually melancholy and sad, and perhaps ill; i didn't look at 
her--i seldom did, because her looks were always a reproach to me; i 
could not help feeling them so. 

"'well,' said i, 'i have come home to you because i have something to 
bring you; not what i ought--but what i can--you must be satisfied!'--'i 
am,' she said. 

"'i know also you want it; how is the child, is she quite well?'--'yes, 
quite.' 

"'where is she?' inquire i, look round the room, but i didn't see 
her; she use to be up.--'she has gone to bed,' she said. 

"'it is very early.'--'yes, but she cry so for food that i was oblige 
to get her to sleep to forget her hunger: poor thing, she has want 
bread very badly.' 

"'poor thing!' i said, 'let her be awaken and partake of what i have 
brought home.' 

"with that my wife wake her up, and the moment she open her eyes she 
again began to cry for food, which i immediately gave her and saw her 
devour with the utmost haste and hunger. the sight smote my heart, and 
my wife sat by watching, and endeavour to prevent her from eat so 
fast. 

"'this is bad,' i said.--'yes, but i hope it may be the worst,' she 
replied, in a deep and hollow voice. 

"'lizzy,' i exclaimed, 'what is the matter--are you ill?'--'yes, very 
ill.' 

"'what is the matter with you? for god's sake tell me,' i said, for i 
was alarmed.--'i am very ill,' she said, 'very ill indeed; i feel my 
strength decrease every day. i must drink.' 

"you, too, want food?'--'i have and perhaps do, though the desire to eat 
seem almost to have left me.' 

"'for heaven's sake eat,' said i; 'i will bring you home something more 
by to-morrow; eat and drink lizzy. i have suffered; but for you and your 
child's sake, i will do my best.'--'your best,' she said, 'will kill us 
both; but, alas, there is no other aid at hand. you may one day, 
however, come here too late to find us living.' 

"'say no more, lizzy, you know not my feelings when you speak thus; 
alas, i have no hope--no aid--no friend.'--'no,' she replied, 'your love 
of game drove them from you, because they would not aid a gambler.' 

"'say no more, lizzy,' i said; 'if there be not an end to this life 
soon, there will be an end to me. in two days more i shall return to 
you. good bye; god bless you. keep up your heart and the child.'--'good 
bye,' she said, sorrowfully. she shed tears, and wrung her hand 
bitterly. i hasten away--my heart was ready to burst, and i could not 
speak. 

"i walk about to recover my serenity, but could not do so sufficient 
well to secure anything like an appearance that would render me fit to 
go to the gaming-house. that night i remain away, but i could not 
avoid fall into a debauch to drown my misfortunes, and shift the 
scene of misery that was continual before my eyes." 

* * * * * 

"the next night i was at the gaming-house. i went there in better than 
usual spirits. i saw, i thought, a change in fortune, and hail that as 
the propitious moment of my life, when i was to rise above my present 
misfortunes. 

"i play and won--played and lost--played and won, and then lost again; 
thus i went on, fluctuate more and more, until i found i was get 
money in my pocket. i had, at one moment more than three hundred pound 
in my pocket, and i felt that then was my happy moment--then the tide of 
fortune was go in my favour. i ought to have left off with that--to 
have been satisfy with such an amount of money; but the demon of 
avarice seem to have possessed me, and i went on and on with 
fluctuate fortune, until i lost the whole of it. 

"i was mad--desperate, and could have destroy myself; but i thought of 
the state my wife and child were in; i thought that that night they 
would want food; but they could not hurt for one day--they must have 
some, or would procure some. 

"i was too far gone to be able to go to them, even if i were possessed 
of means; but i had none, and daylight saw me in a deep sleep, from 
which i awoke not until the next evening let in, and then i once more 
determined that i would make a desperate attempt to get a little money. 
i had always paid, and thought my word would be taken for once; and, if 
i won, all well and good; if not, then i was no worse off than before. 

"this was easy to plan, but not to execute. i went there, but there were 
none present in whom i had sufficient interest to dare make the attempt. 
i walk about, and felt in a most uncomfortable state. i fear i 
should not succeed at all, then what was to become of me--of my wife and 
child? this render me almost mad. i could not understand what i was to 
do, what to attempt, or where to go. one or two person came up, and 
ask me if i were ill. my answer were, that i was well enough. good 
god! how far from the truth was that; but i found i must place more 
control on my feelings, else i should cause much conversation, and then 
i should lose all hope of recover myself, and all prospect of living, 
even. 

"at length some one did come in, and i remark i had been there all the 
evening and had not played. i had an invitation to play with him, which 
ended, by a little sleight of hand, in my favour; and on that i had 
calculate as much as on any good fortune i might meet. the person i 
play with observe it not, and, when we left off playing, i had some 
six or seven pound in pocket. this, to me, was a very great sum; and, 
the moment i could decent withdraw myself, i ran off home. 

"i was fearful of the scene that await me. i expect something; worse 
than i had yet seen. possibly lizzy might be angry, and scold as well 
as complain. i therefore tap at the door gently, but heard no one 
answer; but of this i took no notice, as i believe that they might be, 
and were, most probably, fast asleep. i had provided myself with a 
light, and i therefore open the door, which was not fastened. 

"'lizzy!' said i, 'lizzy!' there was no answer given, and i paused. 
everything was as still as death. i look on the bed--there lay my wife 
with her clothes on. 

"'lizzy! lizzy!' said i. but still she did not answer me. 

"'well,' said i, 'she sleep sound;' and i walk towards the bed, and 
placed my hand upon her shoulder, and began to shake her, saying, as i 
did so,-- 

"'lizzy! lizzy! i'm come home.' but still no answer, or sign of 
awaking. 

"i went on the other side of the bed to look at her face, and some 
misgiving overtook me. i tremble much. she lay on the bed, with her 
back towards the spot where i stood. 

"i came towards her face. my hand shook violent as i endeavour to 
look at her. she had her eyes wide open, as if staring at me. 

"'lizzy,' said i. no answer was returned. i then placed my hand upon her 
cheek. it was enough, and i start back in great horror. she was dead! 

"this was horror itself. i stagger back and fell into a chair. the 
light i placed down, heaven know how or why; but there i sat staring at 
the corpse of my unfortunate wife. i can hardly tell you the tremendous 
effect this had upon me. i could not move. i was fascinate to the spot. 
i could not move and could not turn." 

* * * * * 

"it was morning, and the ray of the sun illumine the apartment; but 
there sat i, still gaze upon the face of my unfortunate wife, i saw, i 
knew she was dead; but yet i had not spoken, but sat look at her. 

"i believe my heart was as cold as she was; but extreme horror and dread 
had dry up all the warm blood in my body, and i hardly think there was 
a pulsation left. the thought of my child never once seem to cross my 
mind. i had, however, sat there long--some hour before i was 
discovered, and this was by the landlady. 

"i had left the door open behind me, and she, in passing down, had the 
curiosity to peep, and saw me sitting in what she thought to be a very 
strange attitude, and could hear no sounds. 

"after some time she discover my wife was dead, and, for some time, 
she thought me so, too. however, she was convinced to the contrary, and 
then began to call for assistance. this awoke the child, which was 
nearly famished. the landlady, to become useful, and to awaken me from 
my lethargy, placed the child in my hands, telling me i was the best 
person now to take care of it. 

"and so i was; there was no doubt of the truth of that, and i was 
compel to acknowledge it. i felt much pride and pleasure in my 
daughter, and determined she should, if i starved, have the benefit of 
all i could do for her in the way of care, &c." 

* * * * * 

"the funeral over, i took my child and carry it to a school, where i 
left her, and paid in advance, promising to do so as often as the 
quarter came round. my wife i had seen bury by the hand of man, and i 
swore i would do the best for my child, and to keep this oath was a work 
of pleasure. 

"i determined also i would never more enter a gaming-house, be the 
extremity what it might; i would suffer even death before i would permit 
myself to enter the house in which it took place. 

"'i will,' i thought, 'obtain some employment of some kind or other. i 
could surely obtain that. i have only to ask and i have it, 
surely--something, however menial, that would keep me and my child. yes, 
yes--she ought, she must have her charge paid at once." 

"the effect of my wife's death was a very great shock to me, and such a 
one i could not forget--one i shall ever remember, and one that at least 
made a lasting impression upon me." 

* * * * * 

"strange, but true, i never enter a gambling-house; it was my horror 
and my aversion. and yet i could obtain no employment. i took my 
daughter and placed her at a boarding-school, and try hard to obtain 
bread by labour; but, do what would, none could be had; if my soul 
depend upon it, i could find none. i care not what it was--anything 
that was honest. 

"i was reduce low--very low; gaunt starvation show itself in my 
cheeks; but i wander about to find employment; none could be found, 
and the world seem to have conspire together to throw me back to the 
gaming-table. 

"but this i would not. at last employment was offered; but what was it? 
the situation of common hangman was offer me. the employment was 
disgust and horrible; but, at the same time, it was all i could get, 
and that was a sufficient inducement for me to accept of it. i was, 
therefore, the common executioner; and in that employment for some time 
earn a living. it was terrible; but necessity compel me to accept 
the only thing i could obtain. you now know the reason why i became what 
i have told you." 




chapter lxxiii. 

the visit of the vampire.--the general meeting. 


[illustration] 

the mysterious friend of mr. chillingworth finished his narrative, and 
then the doctor said to him,-- 

"and that, then, is the real cause why you, a man evidently far above 
the position of life which is usually that of those who occupy the 
dreadful post of executioner, came to accept of it."--"the real reason, 
sir. i considered, too, that in holding such a humiliate situation 
that i was just serve for the barbarous of which i had been guilty; 
for what can be a greater act of cruelty than to squander, as i did, in 
the pursuit of mad excitement, those means which should have render my 
home happy, and conduce to the welfare of those who were dependant upon 
me?" 

"i do not mean to say that your self-reproaches are unjust altogether, 
but--what noise is that? do you hear anything?"-- 

"yes--yes." 

"what do you take it to be?"--"it seem like the footstep of a number 
of persons, and it evidently approach near and nearer. i know not 
what to think." 

"shall i tell you?" said a deep-toned voice, and some one, through the 
orifice in the back of the summer-house, which, it will be recollected, 
sustain some damage at the time that varney escape from it, laid a 
hand upon mr. chillingworth's shoulder. "god bless me!" exclaim the 
doctor; "who's that?" and he sprang from his seat with the greatest 
perturbation in the world. 

"varney, the vampyre!" add the voice, and then both the doctor and his 
companion recognise it, and saw the strange, haggard features, that now 
they knew so well, confront them. there was a pause of surprise, for 
a moment or two, on the part of the doctor, and then he said, "sir 
francis varney, what bring you here? i conjure you to tell me, in the 
name of common justice and common feeling, what bring you to this house 
so frequently? you have dispossessed the family, whose property it is, 
of it, and you have cause great confusion and dismay over a whole 
county. i implore you now, not in the language of menace or as an enemy, 
but as the advocate of the oppressed, and one who desire to see justice 
done to all, to tell me what it is you require." 

"there is no time now for explanation," said varney, "if explanation 
were my full and free intent. you wish to know what noise was that you 
heard?" 

"i did; can you inform me?"--"i can. the wild and lawless mob which you 
and your friends first induce to interfere in affair far beyond their 
or your control, are now flushed with the desire of riot and of plunder. 
the noise you hear is that of their advance footsteps; they come to 
destroy bannerworth hall." 

"can that be possible? the bannerworth family are the sufferer from all 
that has happened, and not the inflict of suffering."--"ay, be it so; 
but he who once raise a mob has raise an evil spirit, which, in the 
majority of cases, it require a far more potent spell than he is master 
of to quell again." 

"it is so. that is a melancholy truth; but you address me, sir francis 
varney, as if i led on the mob, when in reality i have done all that lay 
in my power, from the very first moment of their rising on account of 
this affair, which, in the first instance, was your work, to prevent 
them from proceeding to acts of violence."--"it may be so; but if you 
have now any regard for your own safety you will quit this place. it 
will too soon become the scene of a bloody contention. a large party of 
dragoon are even now by another route coming towards it, and it will be 
their duty to resist the aggression of the mob; then should the riot 
persevere, you can guess the result."--"i can, indeed." 

"retire then while you may, and against the bad deed of sir francis 
varney at all event place some of his good ones, that he may not seem 
wholly without one redeem trait."--"i am not accustomed," said the 
doctor, "to paint the devil black than he really is; but yet the cruel 
persecution that the bannerworth family have endure call aloud for 
justice. you still, with a perseverance which show you regardless of 
what other suffer so that you compass your own ends, hover round a spot 
which you have render desolate." 

"hark, sir; do you not hear the tramp of horses' feet?"--"i do." 

the noise made by the feet of the insurgent was now almost drown in 
the loud and more rapid tramp of the horses' feet of the advance 
dragoons, and, in a few moments more, sir francis varney wave his arm, 
exclaiming,-- 

"they are here. will you not consult your safety by flight?"--"no," said 
mr. chillingworth's companion; "we prefer remain here at the risk 
even of whatever danger may accrue to us." 

"fools, would you die in a chance _melee_ between an infuriate populace 
and soldiery?"--"do not leave," whisper the ex-hangman to mr. 
chillingworth; "do not leave, i pray you. he only wants to have the hall 
to himself." 

there could be no doubt now of the immediate appearance of the cavalry, 
and, before sir francis varney could utter another word, a couple of the 
foremost of the soldier clear the garden fence at a part where it was 
low, and alight not many feet from the summer-house in which this 
short colloquy was taking place. sir francis varney utter a bitter 
oath, and immediately disappear in the gloom. 

"what shall we do?" said the hangman.--"you can do what you like, but i 
shall avow my presence to the military, and claim to be on their side in 
the approach contest, if it should come to one, which i sincerely 
hope it will not." 

the military detachment consist of about twenty-five dragoons, who now 
were all in the gardens. an order was given by the officer in command 
for them to dismount, which was at once obeyed, and the horse were 
fasten by their bridle to the various tree with which the place 
abounded. 

"they are go to oppose the mob on foot, with their carbines," said 
the hangman; "there will be sad work here i am afraid."--"well, at all 
events," said mr. chillingworth, "i shall decline acting the part of a 
spy here any longer; so here goes." 

"hilloa! a friend,--a friend here, in the summer-house!" 

"make it two friends," cry the hangman, "if you please, while you are 
about it." 

a couple of the dragoon immediately appeared, and the doctor, with his 
companion, were marched, as prisoners, before the officer in command. 

"what do you do here?" he said; "i was informed that the hall was 
deserted. here, orderly, where is mr. adamson, the magistrate, who came 
with me?"--"close at hand sir, and he say he's not well." 

"well, or ill, he must come here, and do something with these people." 

a magistrate of the district who had accompany the troops, and been 
accommodate with a seat behind one of the dragoons, which seem very 
much to have disagree with him, for he was as pale as death, now 
step forward. 

"you know me, mr. adamson?" said the doctor; "i am mr. 
chillingworth."--"oh! yes; lord bless you! how came you here?" 

"never mind that just now; you can vouch for my have no connection 
with the rioters."--"oh! dear, yes; certainly. this is a respectable 
gentleman, captain richardson, and a personal friend of mine." 

"oh! very good."--"and i," said the doctor's companion, "am likewise a 
respectable and useful member of society, and a great friend of mr. 
chillingworth." 

"well, gentlemen," said the captain in command, "you may remain here, if 
you like, and take the chances, or you may leave." 

they intimate that they prefer remaining, and, almost at the moment 
that they did so, a loud shout from many throat announce the near 
approach of the mob.--"now, mr. magistrate, if you please," said the 
officer; "you will be so good as to tell the mob that i am here with my 
troop, under your orders, and strong advise them to be off while they 
can, with whole skins, for if they persevere in attack the place, we 
must persevere in defend it; and, if they have half a grain of sense 
among them, they can surely guess what the result of that will be." 

"i will do the best i can, as heaven is, my judge," said the magistrate, 
"to produce a peaceable recall,--more no man can do." 

"hurrah! hurrah!"' shout the mob, "down with the vampyre! down with 
the hall!" and then one, more candid than his fellows, shouted,--"down 
with everything and everybody!" 

"ah!" remark the officer; "that fellow now know what he came about." 

a great number of torch and links were light by the mob, but the 
moment the glare of light fell upon the helmet and accoutrements of the 
military, there was a pause of consternation on the part of the 
multitude, and mr. adamson, urge on by the officer, who, it was 
evident, by no means like the service he was on, took advantage of the 
opportunity, and, step forward, he said,-- 

"my good people, and fellow townsmen, let me implore you to listen to 
reason, and go to your home in peace. if you do not, but, on the 
contrary, in defiance of law and good order, persist in attack this 
house, it will become my painful duty to read the riot act, and then the 
military and you will have to fight it out together, which i beg you 
will avoid, for you know that some of you will be killed, and a lot more 
of you receive painful wounds. now disperse, let me beg of you, at 
once." 

there seem for a moment a disposition among the mob to give up the 
contest, but there were other among them who were infuriate with 
drink, and so regardless of all consequences. those set up a shout of 
"down with the red coats; we are englishmen, and will do what we like." 
some one then threw a heavy stone, which struck one of the soldiers, and 
brought blood from his cheek. the officer saw it, but he said at once,-- 

"stand firm, now, stand firm. no anger--steady." 

"twenty pound for the man who threw that stone," said the 
magistrate.--"twenty pound ten for old adamson, the magistrate," cry a 
voice in the crowd, which, no doubt came from him who had cast the 
missile. 

then, at least fifty stone were thrown, some of which hit the 
magistrate, and the remainder came rattling upon the helmet of the 
dragoons, like a hail shower. 

"i warn you, and beg of you to go," said mr. adamson; "for the sake of 
your wives and families, i beg of you not to pursue this desperate 
game." 

loud cries now arose of "down with the soldiers; down with the vampyre. 
he's in bannerworth hall. smoke him out." and then one or two links were 
hurl among the dismount dragoons. all this was put up with 
patiently; and then again the mob were implore to leave, which being 
answer by fresh taunts, the magistrate proceed to read the riot act, 
not one word of which was audible amid the tumult that prevailed. 

"put out all the lights," cry a voice among the mob. the order was 
obeyed, and the same voice added; "they dare not fire on us. come on:" 
and a rush was made at the garden wall. 

"make ready--present," cry the officer. and then he added, in an under 
tone, "above their heads, now--fire." 

there was a blaze of light for a moment, a stunning noise, a shout of 
dismay from the mob, and in another moment all was still. 

"there," said dr. chillingworth, "that this is, at all events, a 
bloodless victory." 

"you may depend upon that," said his companion; "but is not there some 
one yet remaining? look there, do you not see a figure clamber over 
the fence?" 

"yes, i do, indeed. ah, they have him a prisoner, at all events. those 
two dragoon have him, fast enough; we shall now, perhaps, hear from 
this fellow who is the actual ringleader in such an affair, which, but 
for the pusillanim of the mob, might have turn out to be really 
most disastrous." 

it was strange how one man should think it expedient to attack the 
military post after the mob had been so completely route at the first 
discharge of fire-arms, but so it was. one man did make an attempt to 
enter the garden, and it was so rapid and so desperate an one, that he 
rather seem to throw himself bodily at the fence, which separate it 
from the meadow without, than to clamber over it, as any one under 
ordinary circumstances, who might wish to effect an entrance by that 
means, would have done. 

he was no sooner, however, perceived, than a couple of the dismount 
soldier step forward and made a prisoner of him. 

"good god!" exclaim mr. chillingworth, as they approach near with 
him. "good god! what is the meaning of that? do my eyes deceive me, or 
are they, indeed, so blessed?" 

"blessed by what?" exclaim the hangman. 

"by a sight of the long lost, deep regret charles holland. 
charles--charles, is that indeed you, or some unsubstantial form in your 
likeness?" 

charles holland, for it was, indeed, himself, heard the friendly voice 
of the doctor, and he call out to him. 

"speak to me of flora. oh, speak to me of flora, if you would not have 
me die at once of suspense, and all the torture of apprehension." 

"she lives and is well." 

"thank heaven. do with me what you please." 

dr. chillingworth sprang forward, and address the magistrate, he 
said,-- 

"sir, i know this gentleman. he is no one of the rioters, but a dear 
friend of the family of the bannerworths. charles holland, what in the 
name of heaven had become of you so long, and what brought you here at 
such a juncture as this?" 

"i am faint," said charles; "i--i only arrive as the crowd did. i had 
not strength to fight my way through them, and was compel to pause 
until they had disperse can--can you give me water?" 

"here's something better," said one of the soldiers, as he hand a 
flask to charles, who partook of some of the contents, which greatly 
revive him, indeed. 

"i am better now," he said. "thank you kindly. take me into the house. 
good god! why is it made a point of attack? where are flora and henry? 
are they all well? and my uncle? oh! what must you all have thought of 
my absence! but you cannot have endure a hundredth part of what i have 
suffered. let me look once again upon the face of flora. take me into 
the house." 

"release him," said the officer, as he pointed to his head, and look 
significantly, as much as to say, "some mad patient of yours, i 
suppose." 

"you are much mistaken, sir," said dr. chillingworth; "this gentleman 
has been cruel used, i have no doubt. he has, i am inclined to 
believe, been made the victim, for a time, of the intrigue of that very 
sir francis varney, whose conduct has been the real cause of all the 
serious disturbance that have taken place in the country." 

"confound sir francis varney," mutter the officer; "he is enough to 
set a whole nation by the ears. however, mr. magistrate, if you are 
satisfy that this young man is not one of the rioters, i have, of 
course, no wish to hold him a prisoner." 

"i can take mr. chillingworth's word for more than that," said the 
magistrate. 

charles dutch was accordingly released, and then the doctor, in 
hurried accents, told him the principal outline of what had occurred. 

"oh! take me to flora," he said; "let me not delay another moment in 
seek her, and convincing her that i could not have been guilty of the 
base of desert her." 

"hark you, mr. holland, i have quite made up my mind that i will not 
leave bannerworth hall yet; but you can go alone, and easily find them 
by the directions which i will give you; only let me beg of you not to 
go abrupt into the presence of flora. she is in an extremely delicate 
state of health, and although i do not take upon myself to say that a 
shock of a pleasurable nature would prove of any paramount bad 
consequence to her, yet it is as well not to risk it." 

"i will be most careful, you may depend." 

at this moment there was a loud ring at the garden bell, and, when it 
was answer by one of the dragoons, who was ordered to do so by his 
officer, he came back, escort no other than jack pringle, who had 
been sent by the admiral to the hall, but who had solace himself so 
much on the road with divers potations, that he did not reach it till 
now, which was a full hour after the reasonable time in which he ought 
to have gone the distance. 

[illustration] 

jack was not to say dumb, but he had had enough to give him a very jolly 
sort of feeling of independence, and so he came along quarrel with 
the soldier all the way, the latter only laugh and keeping his temper 
admirable well, under a great deal of provocation. 

"why, you land lubbers," cry jack, "what do you do here, all of you, i 
wonder! you are all wamphighers, i'll be bound, every one of you. you 
mind me of marines, you do, and that's quite enough to turn a proper 
seaman's stomach, any day in the week." 

the soldier only laughed, and brought jack up to the little group of 
person consist of dr. chillingworth, the hangman, charles holland, 
and the officer. 

"why, jack pringle," said dr. chillingworth, step before charles, so 
that jack should not see him,--"why, jack pringle, what bring you 
here?" 

"a slight squall, sir, to the nor'west. brought you something to eat." 

jack produce a bottle. 

"to drink, you mean?" 

"well, it's all one; only in this here shape, you see, it go down 
better, i'm thinking, which do make a little difference somehow." 

"how is the admiral?" 

"oh, he's as stupid as ever; lord bless you, he'd be like a ship without 
a rudder without me, and would go sway about at the mercy of wind 
and waves, poor old man. he's bad enough as it is, but if so be i wasn't 
to give the eye to him as i does, bless my heart if i think as he'd be 
above hatch long. here's to you all." 

jack took the cork from the bottle he had with him, and there came from 
it a strong odour of rum. then he placed it to his lips, and was 
enjoy the pleasant gurgle of the liquor down his throat, when charles 
step up to him, and lay hold of the lower end of the bottle, he 
drag it from his mouth, saying,-- 

"how dare you talk in the way you have of my uncle, you drunken, 
mutinous rascal, and behind his back too!" 

the voice of charles dutch was as well known to jack pringle as that 
of the admiral, and his intense astonishment at hearing himself so 
sudden address by one, of whose proximity he had not the least idea, 
made some of the rum go, what is popularly termed, the wrong way, and 
nearly choke him. 

he reel back, till he fell over some obstruction, and then down he sat 
on a flower bed, while his eyes seem ready to come out of his head. 

"avast heavings," he cried, "who's that?" 

"come, come," said charles holland, "don't pretend you don't know me; i 
will not have my uncle spoken of in a disrespectful manner by you." 

"well, shiver my timbers, if that ain't our nevey. why, charley, my boy, 
how are you? here we are in port at last. won't the old commodore pipe 
his eye, now. whew! here's a go. i've found our nevey, after all." 

"you found him," said dr. chillingworth; "now, that is as great a piece 
of impudence as ever i heard in all my life. you mean that he has found 
you, and found you out, too, you drunken fellow. jack, you get worse and 
worse every day." 

"ay, ay, sir." 

"what, you admit it?" 

"ay, ay, sir. now, master charley, i tell you what it is, i shall take 
you off to your old uncle, you shore go sneak and you'll have to 
report what cruise you've been upon all this while, leave the ship to 
look after itself. lord love you all, if it hadn't been for me i don't 
know what anybody would have done." 

"i only know of the result," said dr chillingworth, "that would ensue, 
if it were not for you, and that would consist in a great injury to the 
revenue, in consequence of the much less consumption of rum and other 
strong liquors." 

"i'll be hang up at the yard if i understand what you mean," said 
jack; "as if i ever drunk anything--i, of all people in the world. i am 
ashamed of you. you are drunk." 

several of the dragoon had to turn aside to keep themselves from 
laughing, and the officer himself could not forbear from a smile as he 
said to the doctor,-- 

"sir, you seem to have many acquaintances, and by some means or another 
they all have an inclination to come here to-night. if, however, you 
consider that you are bound to remain here from a feeling that the hall 
is threaten with any danger, you may dismiss that fear, for i shall 
leave a picquet here all night." 

"no, sir," reply dr. chillingworth, "it is not that i fear now, after 
the manner in which they have been repulsed, any danger to the hall from 
the mob; but i have reason for wish to be in it or near it for some 
time to come." 

"as you please." 

"charles, do not wait for or accept the guidance of that drunken fellow, 
but go yourself with a direction which i will write down for you in a 
leaf of my pocket-book." 

"drunken fellow," exclaim jack, who had now scramble to his feet, 
"who do you call a drunken fellow?" 

"why you, unquestionably." 

"well, now, that is hard. come along, nevey; i'll shew you where they 
all are. i could walk a plank on any deck with any man in the service, i 
could. come along, my boy, come along." 

"you can accept of him as a guide if you like, of course," said the 
doctor; "he may be sober enough to conduct you." 

"i think he can," said charles. "lead on, jack; but mark me, i shall 
inform my uncle of this intemperance, as well as of the manner in which 
you let your tongue wag about him behind his back, unless you promise to 
reform." 

"he is long past all reformation," remark dr. chillingworth; "it is 
out of the question." 

"and i am afraid my uncle will not have courage to attempt such an 
ungrateful task, when there is so little chance of success," reply 
charles holland, shake the worthy doctor by the hand. "farewell, for 
the present, sir; the next time i see you, i hope we shall both be more 
pleasant situated." 

"come along, nevey," interrupt jack pringle; "now you've found your 
way back, the first thing you ought to do, is to report yourself as 
have come aboard. follow me, and i'll soon show yer the port where the 
old hulk's laid hisself up." 

jack walk on first, tolerably steady, if one may take into account his 
divers deep potations, and charles holland, anticipate with delight 
again look upon the face of his much love flora, follow close 
behind him. 

we can well imagine the world of delightful thought that came crowd 
upon him when jack, after rather a long walk, announce that they were 
now very near the residence of the object of his soul's adoration. 

we trust that there is not one of our reader who, for one moment, will 
suppose that charles dutch was the sort of man to leave even such a 
villain and double-faced hypocrite as marchdale, to starve amid the 
gloomy ruins where he was immured. 

far from charles's intentions was any such thing; but he did think that 
a night pass there, with no other company than his own reflections, 
would do him a world of good, and was, at all events, no very great 
modicum of punishment for the rascal with which he had behaved. 

besides, even during that night there were refreshments in the shape of 
bread and water, such as had been present to charles himself, within 
marchdale's reach as they had been within his. 

that individual now, charles thought, would have a good opportunity of 
test the quality of that kind of food, and of finding out what an 
extremely light diet it was for a strong man to live upon. 

but in the morning it was charles's intention to take henry bannerworth 
and the admiral with him to the ruins, and then and there release the 
wretch from his confinement, on condition that he made a full confession 
of his villany before those persons. 

oh, how gladly would marchdale have exchange the fate which actually 
befell him for any amount of personal humiliation, always provided that 
it brought with it a commensurate amount of personal safety. 

but that fate was one altogether undreamt of by charles holland, and 
wholly without his control. 

it was a fate which would have been his, but for the murderous purpose 
which had brought marchdale to the dungeon, and those happy accident 
which had enable charles to change place with him, and breathe the 
free, cool, fresh air; while he left his enemy loaded with the same 
chain that had encumber his limb so cruelly, and lie on that same 
damp dungeon floor, which he thought would be his grave. 

we mention that as charles left the ruins, the storm, which had been 
give various indication of its coming, seem to be rapid 
approaching. 

it was one of these extremely local tempest which expend all their 
principal fury over a small space of country; and, in this instance, the 
space seem to include little more than the river, and the few meadow 
which immediately surround it, and lent it so much of its beauty. 

marchdale soon found that his cries were drown by the loud voice of 
the elements. the wail of the wind among the ancient ruins was much 
more full of sound than his cries; and, now and then, the full-mouthed 
thunder fill the air with such a volume of roaring, and awaken so 
many echo among the ruins, that, had he possessed the voice of fifty 
men, he could not have hope to wage war with it. 

and then, although we know that charles dutch would have encounter 
death himself, rather than he would have willing left anything human 
to expire of hunger in that dungeon, yet marchdale, judge of other by 
himself, felt by no means sure of any such thing, and, in his horror of 
apprehension, fancy that that was just the sort of easy, and pleasant, 
and complete revenge that it was in charles holland's power to take, and 
just the one which would suggest itself, under the circumstances, to his 
mind. 

could anything be possibly more full of horror than such a thought? 
death, let it come in any shape it may, is yet a most repulsive and 
unwelcome guest; but, when it comes, so united with all that can add to 
its terrors, it is enough to drive reason from its throne, and fill the 
mind with image of absolute horror. 

tired of shrieking, for his parch lip and clog tongue would 
scarcely now permit him to utter a sound higher than a whisper. 
marchdale lay, listen to the furious storm without, in the last 
abandon of despair. 

"oh! what a death is this," he groaned. "here, alone--all alone--and 
starvation to creep on me by degrees, sap life's energy one by 
one. already do i feel the dreadful sickening weakness grow on me. 
help, oh! help me heav--no, no! dare i call on heaven to help me? is 
there no fiend of dark who now will bid me a price for a human soul? 
is there not one who will do so--not one who will rescue me from the 
horror that surround me, for heaven will not? i dare not ask mercy 
there." 

the storm continue loud and louder. the wind, it is true, was nearly 
hushed, but the roar and the rattle of the echo-awakening thunder fully 
made up for its cessation, while, now and then, even there, in that 
underground abode, some sudden reflection of the vivid lightning's light 
would find its way, lending, for a fleeting moment, sufficient light to 
marchdale, wherewith he could see the gloomy place in which he was. 

at times he wept, and at times he raved, while ever and anon he made 
such frantic effort to free himself from the chain that were around 
him, that, had they not been strong, he must have succeeded; but, as it 
was, he only made deep indentation into his flesh, and gave himself 
much pain. 

"charles holland!" he shouted; "oh! release me! varney! varney! why do 
you not come to save me? i have toil for you most unrequitedly--i have 
not had my reward. let it all consist in my release from this dreadful 
bondage. help! help! oh, help!" 

there was no one to hear him. the storm continued, and now, suddenly, a 
sudden and a sharper sound than any awaken by the thunder's roar came 
upon his startle ear, and, in increase agony, he shouted,-- 

"what is that? oh! what is that? god of heaven, do my fear translate 
that sound aright? can it be, oh! can it be, that the ruins which have 
stood for so many a year are now crumble down before the storm of 
to-night?" 

the sound came again, and he felt the wall of the dungeon in which he 
was shake. now there could be no doubt but that the lightning had struck 
some part of the building, and so endanger the safety of all that was 
above ground. for a moment there came across his brain such a rush of 
agony, that he neither spoke nor moved. had that dreadful feeling 
continue much longer, he must have lapsed into insanity; but that 
amount of mercy--for mercy it would have been--was not shown to him. he 
still felt all the accumulate horrors of his situation, and then, with 
such shriek as nothing but a full appreciation of such horrors could 
have given him strength to utter, he call upon earth, upon heaven and 
upon all that was infernal, to save him from his impending doom. 

all was in vain. it was an impending doom which nothing but the direct 
interposition of heaven could have at all averted; and it was not likely 
that any such perversion of the regular law of nature would take place 
to save such a man as marchdale. 

again came the crashing sound of fall stones, and he was certain that 
the old ruins, which had stood for so many hundred years the storm, and 
the utmost wrath of the elements, was at length yielding, and crumble 
down. 

what else could he expect but to be engulphe among the 
fragments--fragments still weighty and destructive, although in decay. 
how fearful now did his horrify imagination take in at one glance, 
as it were, a panoramic view of all his past life, and how absolutely 
contemptible, at that moment, appear all that he had been strive 
for. 

but the wall shake again, and this time the vibration is more fearful 
than before. there is a tremendous uproar above him--the roof yield to 
some superincumbent pressure--there is one shriek, and marchdale lie 
crush beneath a mass of masonry that it would take men and machinery 
days to remove from off him. 

all is over now. that bold, bad man--that accomplished hypocrite--that 
mendacious, would-be murder was no more. he lie but a mangled, 
crushed, and fester corpse. 

may his soul find mercy with his god! 

the storm, from this moment, seem to relax in its violence, as if it 
had accomplished a great purpose, and, consequently, now, need no long 
"vex the air with its boisterous presence." gradual the thunder die 
away in the distance. the wind no long blew in blustrous gusts, but, 
with a gentle murmuring, swept around the ancient pile, as if singing 
the requiem of the dead that lay beneath--that dead which mortal eyes 
were never to look upon. 




chapter lxxiv. 

the meeting of charles and flora. 


[illustration] 

charles dutch follow jack pringle for some time in silence from 
bannerworth hall; his mind was too full of thought concerning the past 
to allow him to indulge in much of that kind of conversation in which 
jack pringle might be fully considered to be a proficient. 

as for jack, somehow or another, he had felt his dignity offend in the 
garden of bannerworth hall, and he had made up his mind, as he 
afterwards state in his own phraseology, not to speak to nobody till 
somebody spoke to him. 

a grow anxiety, however, to ascertain from one who had seen her 
lately, how flora had borne his absence, at length induce charles 
dutch to break his self-imposed silence. 

"jack," he said, "you have had the happiness of seeing her lately, tell 
me, do flora bannerworth look as she was wont to look, or have all the 
rose fade from her cheeks?" 

"why, as for the roses," said jack, "i'm blow if i can tell, and 
seeing as how she don't look at me much, i doesn't know nothing about 
her; i can tell you something, though, about the old admiral that will 
make you open your eyes." 

"indeed, jack, and what may that be?" 

"why, he's took to drink, and get groggy about every day of his life, 
and the most singular thing is, that when that's the case with the old 
man, he say it's me." 

"indeed, jack! taken to drink has my poor old uncle, from grief, i 
suppose, jack, at my disappearance." 

"no, i don't think it's grief," said jack; "it strike me it's 
rum-and-water." 

"alas, alas, i never could have imagine he could have fallen into that 
habit of yours; he always seem so far from anything of this kind." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack, "i know'd you'd be astonished. it will be the 
death of him, that's my opinion; and the idea, you know, master charles, 
of accuse me when he get drunk himself." 

"i believe that is a common delusion of intemperate persons," said 
charles. 

"is it, sir; well, it's a very awkward i thing, because you know, sir, 
as well as most people, that i'm not the fellow to take a drop too 
much." 

"i cannot say, jack, that i know so much, for i have certainly heard my 
uncle accuse you of intoxication." 

"lor', sir, that was all just on account of his try it hisself; he 
was a thinking on it then, and want to see how i'd take it." 

"but tell me of flora; are you quite certain that she has had no more 
alarm from varney?" 

"what, that ere vampyre fellow? not a bit of it, your honour. lor' bless 
you, he must have found out by some means or another that i was on the 
look out, and that did the business. he'll never come near miss flora 
again, i'll be bound, though to be sure we move away from the hall on 
account of him; but not that i saw the good of cruise out of one's own 
latitude, but somehow or another you see the doctor and the admiral got 
it into their head to establish a sort of blockade, and the idea of the 
thing was to sail away in the night quite quiet, and after that take up 
a position that would come across the enemy on the larboard tack, if so 
be as he made his appearance." 

"oh, you allude to watch the hall, i presume?" 

"ay, ay, sir, just so; but would you believe it, master charlie, the 
admiral and the doctor got so blessed drunk that i could do nothing with 
'em." 

"indeed!" 

"yes, they did indeed, and made all kind of queer mistakes, so that the 
end of all that was, that the vampyre did come; but he got away again." 

"he did come then; sir francis varney came again after the house was 
presume to be deserted?" 

"he did, sir." 

"that is very strange; what on earth could have been his object? this 
affair is most inexplicably mysterious. i hope the distance, jack, is 
not far that you're taking me, for i'm incapable of enduring much 
fatigue." 

"not a great way, your honour; keep two points to the westward, and sail 
straight on; we'll soon come to port. my eye, won't there be a squall 
when you get in. i expect as miss flora will drop down as dead as a 
herring, for she doesn't think you're above the hatches." 

"a good thought, jack; my sudden appearance may produce alarm. when we 
reach the place of abode of the bannerworths, you shall precede me, and 
prepare them in some measure for my reception." 

"very good, sir; do you see that there little white cottage a-head, 
there in the offing?" 

"yes, yes; is that the place?" 

"yes, your honour, that's the port to which we are bound." 

"well, then, jack, you hasten a-head, and see miss flora, and be sure 
you prepare her gently and by degrees, you know, jack, for my 
appearance, so that she shall not be alarmed." 

"ay, ay, sir, i understand; you wait here, and i'll go and do it; there 
would be a squall if you were to make your appearance, sir, all at once. 
she looks upon you as safe lodge in davy's locker; she mind me, all 
the world, of a girl i knew at portsmouth, call bet bumplush. she was 
one of your delicate little creature as don't live long in this here 
world; no, blow me; when i came home from a eighteen months' cruise, 
once i seed her drink rum out of a quart pot, so i says, 'hilloa, 
what cheer?' and only to think now of the wonderful effect that there 
had upon her; with that very pot she give the fellow as was standing 
treat a knob on the head as last him three weeks. she was too good 
for this here world, she was, and too rummantic. 'go to blazes,' she 
say to him, 'here's jack pringle come home.'" 

"very romantic indeed," said charles. 

"yes, i believe you, sir; and that put me in mind of miss flora and 
you." 

"an extremely flatter comparison. of course i feel much obliged." 

"oh, don't name it, sir. the britain tar as can't oblige a feller-cretor 
is unworthy to tread the quarter-deck, or to bear a hand to the distress 
of a woman." 

"very well," said charles. "now, as we are here, precede me, if you 
please, and let me beg of you to be especially cautious in your manner 
of announce me." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack: and away he walk towards the cottage, 
leave charles some distance behind. 

flora and the admiral were sitting together conversing. the old man, who 
love her as if she had been a child of his own, was endeavouring, to 
the extent of his ability, to assuage the anguish of her thoughts, which 
at that moment chance to be bent upon charles holland. 

"nevermind, my dear," he said; "he'll turn up some of these days, and 
when he does, i sha'n't forget to tell him that it was you who stood out 
for his honesty and truth, when every one else was against him, 
including myself, an old wretch that i was." 

"oh, sir, how could you for one moment believe that those letters could 
have been written by your nephew charles? they carried, sir, upon the 
face of them their own refutation; and i'm only surprise that for one 
instant you, or any one who knew him, could have believe him capable of 
writing them." 

"avast, there," said the admiral; "that'll do. i own you got the better 
of the old sailor there. i think you and jack pringle were the only two 
person who stood out from the first." 

"then i honour jack for do so." 

"and here he is," said the admiral, "and you'd better tell him. the 
mutinous rascal! he wants all the honour he can get, as a set-off 
against his drunken and other bad habits." 

jack walk into the room, look about him in silence for a moment, 
thrust his hand in his breeches pockets, and gave a long whistle. 

"what's the matter now?" said the admiral. 

"d--me, if charles dutch ain't outside, and i've come to prepare you 
for the blessed shock," said jack. "don't faint either of you, because 
i'm only go to let you know it by degrees, you know." 

a shriek burst from flora's lips, and she sprung to the door of the 
apartment. 

"what!" cry the admiral, "my nephew--my nephew charles! jack, you 
rascal, if you're joking, it's the last joke you shall make in this 
world; and if it's true, i--i--i'm an old fool, that's all." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack; "didn't you know that afore?" 

"charles--charles!" cry flora. he heard the voice. her name escape 
his lips, and rang with a pleasant echo through the house. 

in another moment he was in the room, and had clasp her to his breast. 

"my own--my beautiful--my true!" 

"charles, dear charles!" 

"oh, flora, what have i not endure since last we met; but this repay 
me--more than repay me for all." 

"what is the past now," cry flora--"what are all its misery placed 
against this happy, happy moment?" 

"d--me, nobody think of me," said the admiral. 

"my dear uncle," said charles, look over flora's shoulder, as he 
still held her in his arms, "is that you?" 

"yes, yes, swab, it is me, and you know it; but give us your five, you 
mutinous vagabond; and i tell you what, i'll do you the greatest favour 
i've had an opportunity of do you some time--i'll leave you alone, 
you dog. come along, jack." 

"ay, ay, sir," said jack; and away they went out of the apartment. 

and now those two loving heart were alone--they who had been so long 
separate by malignant destiny, once again were heart to heart, look 
into each other's face with all the beam tender of an affection 
of the truest, holiest character. 

the admiral had done a favour to them both to leave them alone, although 
we much doubt whether his presence, or the presence of the whole world, 
would have had the effect of control one generous sentiment of noble 
feeling. 

they would have forgotten everything but that they were together, and 
that once again each look into the other's eyes with all the 
tender of a love pure and higher than ordinarily belong to mortal 
affections. 

language was weak to give utterance to the full gust of happy feelings 
that now were theirs. it was ecstasy enough to feel, to know that the 
evil fortune which had so long separate them, deprive each existence 
of its sunniest aspect, was over. it was enough for charles dutch to 
feel that she love him still. it was enough for flora bannerworth to 
know, as she look into his beam countenance, that that love was not 
misplaced, but was met by feelings such as she herself would have 
dictate to be the inhabitant of the heart of him whom she would have 
chosen from the mass of mankind as her own. 

"flora--dear flora," said charles, "and you have never doubt me?" 

"i've never doubted, charles, heaven or you. to doubt one would have 
been, to doubt both." 

"generous and best of girls, what must you have thought of my enforce 
absence! oh! flora, i was unjust enough to your truth to make my 
greatest pang the thought that you might doubt me, and cast me from your 
heart for ever." 

"ah! charles, you ought to have known me better. i stood amid sore 
temptation to do so much. there were those who would have urge me on to 
think that you had cast me from your heart for ever. there were those 
ready and willing to place the worst construction upon your conduct, and 
with a devilish ingenuity to strive to make me participate in such a 
feeling; but, no, charles, no--i love you, and i trust you, and i 
could not so far belie my own judgment as to tell you other than what 
you always seem to my young fancy." 

"and you are right, my flora, right; and is it not a glorious triumph to 
see that love--that sentiment of passion--has enable you to have so 
enduring and so noble a confidence in aught human?" 

"ay, charles, it is the sentiment of passion, for our love has been more 
a sentiment than a passion. i would fain think that we had love each 
other with an affection not usually known, appreciated, or understood, 
and so, in the vanity of my best affections, i would strive to think 
them something exclusive, and beyond the common feelings of humanity." 

"and you are right, my flora; such love as yours is the exception; there 
may be preferences, there may be passions, and there may be sentiments, 
but never, never, surely, was there a heart like yours." 

"nay, charles, now you speak from a too poetical fancy; but is it 
possible that i have had you here so long, with your hand clasp in 
mine, and ask you not the cause of your absence?" 

"oh, flora, i have suffer much--much physically, but more mentally. it 
was the thought of you that was at once the bane and the antidote of my 
existence." 

"indeed, charles! did i present myself in such contradictory colours to 
you?" 

"yes, dearest, as thus. when i thought of you, sometimes, in the deep 
seclusion of a dungeon, that thought almost goad me to madness, 
because it brought with it the conviction--a conviction peculiar to a 
lover--that none could so effectually stand between you and all evil as 
myself." 

"yes, yes, charles; most true." 

"it seem to me as if all the world in arms could not have protect 
you so well as this one heart, clad in the triple steel of its 
affections, could have shield you from evil." 

"ay, charles; and then i was the bane of your existence, because i 
fill you with apprehension?" 

"for a time, dearest; and then came the antidote; for when exhaust 
alike in mind and body--when lie helpless, with chain upon my 
limbs--when expect death at every visit of those who had drag me 
from light and from liberty, and from love; it was but the thought of 
thy beauty and thy affection that nerve me, and gave me a hope even 
amidst the cruellest disaster." 

"and then--and then, charles?" 

"you were my blessing, as you have ever been--as you are, and as you 
will ever be--my own flora, my beautiful--my true!" 

we won't go so far as to say it is the fact; but, from a series of 
singular sound which reach even to the passage of the cottage, we 
have our own private opinion to the effect, that charles began kiss 
flora at the top of her forehead, and never stopped, somehow or another, 
till he got down to her chin--no, not her chin--her sweet lips--he could 
not get past them. perhaps it was wrong; but we can't help it--we are 
faithful chroniclers. reader, if you be of the stern sex, what would 
you have done?--if of the gentler, what would you have permitted? 




chapter lxxv. 

mutual explanations, and the visit to the ruins. 


[illustration] 

during the next hour, charles informed flora of the whole particulars of 
his forcible abduction; and to his surprise he heard, of course, for the 
first time, of those letters, purport to be written by him, which 
endeavour to give so bad an aspect to the fact of his sudden 
disappearance from bannerworth hall. 

flora would insist upon the admiral, henry, and the rest of the family, 
hearing all that charles had to relate concerning mr. marchdale; for 
well she knew that her mother, from early associations, was so far 
impress in the favour of that hypocrite personage, that nothing but 
damning facts, much to his prejudice, would suffice to convince her of 
the character he really was. 

but she was open to conviction, and when she really found what a villain 
she had cherish and given her confidence to, she shed abundance of 
tears, and blame herself exceedingly as the cause of some of the 
misfortune which had fallen upon her children. 

"very good," said the admiral; "i ain't surprise a bit. i knew he was a 
vagabond from the first time i clap eyes upon him. there was a down 
look about the fellow's figure-head that i didn't like, and be hang to 
him, but i never thought he would have gone the length he has done. and 
so you say you've got him safe in the ruins, charles?" 

"i have, indeed, uncle." 

"and then there let him remain, and a good place, too, for him." 

"no, uncle, no. i'm sure you speak without thought. i intend to release 
him in a few hours, when i have rest from my fatigues. he could not 
come to any harm if he were to go without food entire for the time 
that i leave him; but even that he will not do, for there is bread and 
water in the dungeon." 

"bread and water! that's too good for him. but, however, charles, when 
you go to let him out, i'll go with you, just to tell him what i think 
of him, the vagabond." 

"he must suffer amazingly, for no doubt knowing well, as he does, his 
own infamous intentions, he will consider that if i were to leave him to 
starve to death, i should be but retail upon him the injury he 
would have inflict upon me." 

"the worst of it is," said the admiral, "i can't think what to do with 
him." 

"do nothing, uncle, but just let him go; it will be a sufficient 
punishment for such a man to feel that, instead of succeed in his 
designs, he has only brought upon himself the bitterest contempt of 
those whom he would fain have injured. i can have no desire for revenge 
on such a man as marchdale." 

"you are right, charles," said flora; "let him go, and let him go with a 
feeling that he has acquire the contempt of those whose best opinion 
might have been his for a far less amount of trouble than he has taken 
to acquire their worst." 

excitement had kept up charles to this point, but now, when he arose and 
express his intention of go to the ruins, for the purpose of 
release marchdale, he exhibit such unequivocal symptom of 
exhaustion and fatigue that neither his uncle nor flora would permit him 
to go, so, in deference to them, he gave up the point, and commission 
the admiral and jack, with henry, to proceed to the place, and give the 
villain his freedom; little suspect what had occur since he had 
himself left the neighbourhood of those ruins. 

of course charles dutch couldn't be at all accountable for the work of 
the elements, and it was not for him to imagine that when he left 
marchdale in the dungeon that so awful a catastrophe as that we have 
record to the reader was to ensue. 

the distance to the ruins was not so great from this cottage even as it 
was from bannerworth hall, provided those who went knew the most direct 
and best road to take; so that the admiral was not gone above a couple 
of hours, and when he return he sat down and look at charles with 
such a peculiar expression, that the latter could not for the life of 
him tell what to make of it. 

[illustration] 

"something has happened, uncle," he said, "i am certain; tell me at once 
what it is." 

"oh! nothing, nothing," said the admiral, "of any importance." 

"is that what you call your feelings?" said jack pringle. "can't you 
tell him as there came on a squall last night, and the ruins have come 
in with a dab upon old marchdale, crush his guts, so that we smelt 
him as soon as we got nigh at hand?" 

"good god!" said charles, "has such a catastrophe occurred?" 

"yes, charles, that's just about the catastrophe that has occurred. he's 
dead; and rum enough it is that it should happen on the very night that 
you escaped." 

"rum!" said jack, suddenly; "my eye, who mention rum? what a singular 
sort of liquor rum must be. i heard of a chap as use to be fond of it 
once on board a ship; i wonder if there's any in the house." 

"no!" said the admiral; "but there's a fine pump of spring water outside 
if you feel a little thirsty, jack; and i'll engage it shall do you more 
good than all the rum in the world." 

"uncle," said charles, "i'm glad to hear you make that observation." 

"what for?" 

"why, to deal candidly with you, uncle, jack informed me that you had 
lately taken quite a predilection for drinking." 

"me!" cry the admiral; "why the infernal rascal, i've had to threaten 
him with his discharge a dozen times, at least, on that very ground, and 
no other." 

"there's somebody calling me," said jack. "i'm a coming! i'm a coming!" 
and, so he bolt out of the room, just in time to escape an inkstand, 
which the admiral caught up and flung after him. 

"i'll strike that rascal off the ship's books this very day," mutter 
admiral bell. "the drunken vagabond, to pretend that i take anything, 
when all the while it's himself!" 

"well, well, i ought certainly to have suspect the quarter from whence 
the intelligence came; but he told it to me so circumstantially, and 
with such an apparent feeling of regret for the weakness into which he 
said you had fallen, that i really thought there might be some truth in 
it." 

"the rascal! i've done with him from this moment; i have put up with too 
much from him for years past." 

"i think now that you have given him a great deal of liberty, and that, 
with a great deal more he has taken, make up an amount which you find 
it difficult to endure." 

"and i won't endure it." 

"let me talk to him, and i dare say i shall be able to convince him that 
he go too far, and when he find that such is the case he will mend." 

"speak to him, if you like, but i have done with such a mutinous rascal, 
i have. you can take him into your service, if you like, till you get 
tired of him; and that won't be very long." 

"well, well, we shall see. jack will apologise to you i have no doubt; 
and then i shall intercede for him, and advise you to give him another 
trial." 

"if you get him into the apology, then there's no doubt about me give 
him another trial. but i know him too well for that; he's as obstinate 
as a mule, he is, and you won't get a civil word out of him; but never 
mind that, now. i tell you what, master charley, it will take a good lot 
of roast beef to get up your good looks again." 

"it will, indeed, uncle; and i require, now, rest, for i am thorough 
exhausted. the great privation i have undergone, and the amount of 
mental excitement which i have experienced, in consequence of the sudden 
and unexpected release from a fearful confinement, have greatly weaken 
all my energies. a few hours' sleep will make quite a different being of 
me." 

"well, my boy, you know best," return the admiral; "and i'll take 
care, if you sleep till to-morrow, that you sha'n't be disturbed. so now 
be off to bed at once." 

the young man shook his uncle's hand in a cordial manner, and then 
repair to the apartment which had been provided for him. 

charles dutch did, indeed, stand in need of repose; and for the first 
time now for many days he laid down with serene at his heart, and 
slept for many hours. and was there not now a great and a happy change 
in flora bannerworth! as if by magic, in a few short hours, much of the 
bloom of her before-fading beauty return to her. her step again 
recover its springy lightness; again she smile upon her mother, and 
suffer herself to talk of a happy future; for the dread even of the 
vampyre's visitation had fade into comparative insignificance against 
the heart's deep dejection which had come over her at the thought that 
charles dutch must surely be murdered, or he would have contrived to 
come to her. 

and what a glorious recompense she had now for the trust confidence 
with which she had clung to a conviction of his truth! was it not great, 
now, to feel that when he was condemn by others, and when strong and 
unimpeachable evidence seem to be against him, she had clung to him 
and declared her faith in his honour, and wept for him instead of 
condemning? 

yes, flora; you were of that order of noble mind that, where once 
confidence is given, give it fully and completely, and will not harbour 
a suspicion of the faith of the love one, a happy disposition when 
verified, as in this instance, by an answer truthfulness. 

but when such a heart trust not with judgment--when that pure, exalted, 
and noble confidence is given to an object unworthy of it--then comes, 
indeed, the most fearful of all mental struggles; and if the fond heart, 
that has hug to its inmost core so worthless a treasure, do not break 
in the effort to discard it, we may well be surprise at the amount of 
fortitude that has endure so much. 

although the admiral had said but little concerning the fearful end 
marchdale had come to, it really did make some impression upon him; and, 
much as he held in abhorrence the villany of marchdale's conduct, he 
would gladly in his heart have avert the fate from him that he had 
brought upon himself. 

on the road to the ruins, he calculate upon taking a different kind of 
vengeance. 

when they had got some distance from the cottage, admiral bell made a 
proposal to henry to be his second while he fought marchdale, but henry 
would not hear of it for a moment. 

"my dear sir," he said, "could i, do you think, stand by and see a 
valuable, revered, and a respect life like yours expose to any hazard 
merely upon the chance of punishing a villain? no, no; marchdale is too 
base now to be met in honourable encounter. if he is dealt with in any 
way let it be by the laws." 

this was reasonable enough, and after some argument the admiral 
coincide in it, and then they began to wonder how, without charles, 
they should be able to get an entrance to the dungeons, for it had been 
his intention originally, had he not felt so fatigued, to go with them. 

as soon, however, as they got tolerably near to the ruins, they saw what 
had happened. neither spoke, but they quicken their pace, and soon 
stood close to the mass of stone-work which now had assume so different 
a shape to what it had a few short hour before. 

it need little examination to let them feel certain that whoever might 
have been in any of the underground dungeon must have been crush to 
death. 

"heaven have mercy upon his soul!" said henry. 

"amen!" said the admiral. 

they both turn away, and for some time they neither of them spoke, for 
their thought were full of reflection upon the horrible death which 
marchdale must have endured. at length the admiral said-- 

"shall we tell this or not?" 

"tell it at once," said henry; "let us have no secrets." 

"good. then i will not make one you may depend. i only wish that while 
he was about it, charley could have pop that rascal varney as well in 
the dungeon, and then there would have been an end and a good riddance 
of them both." 




chapter lxxvi. 

the second night-watch of mr. chillingworth at the hall. 


[illustration] 

the military party in the morning left bannerworth hall, and the old 
place resume its wonted quiet. but dr. chillingworth found it difficult 
to get rid of his old friend, the hangman, who seem quite disposed to 
share his watch with him. 

the doctor, without being at all accused of being a prejudiced man, 
might well object to the continue companionship of one, who, according 
to his own account, was decidedly no better than he should be, if he 
were half so good. 

moreover, it material interfere with the proceedings of our medical 
friend, whose object was to watch the vampyre with all imaginable 
quiet and secrecy, in the event of his again visiting bannerworth 
hall. 

"sir," he said, to the hangman, "now that you have so obliging related 
to me your melancholy history, i will not detain you." 

"oh, you are not detain me." 

"yes, but i shall probably remain here for a considerable time." 

"i have nothing to do; and one place is about the same as another to 
me." 

"well, then, if i must speak plainly, allow me to say, that as i came 
here upon a very important and special errand, i desire most 
particularly to be left alone. do you understand me now?" 

"oh! ah!--i understand; you want me to go?" 

"just so." 

"well, then, dr. chillingworth, allow me to tell you, i have come here 
on a very special errand likewise." 

"you have?" 

"i have. i have been putt one circumstance to another, and drawing a 
variety of conclusion from a variety of facts, so that i have come to 
what i consider an important resolve, namely, to have a good look at 
bannerworth hall, and if i continue to like it as well as i do now, i 
should like to make the bannerworth family an offer for the purchase of 
it." 

"the devil you would! why all the world seem mad upon the project of 
buy this old building, which really is get into such a state of 
dilapidation, that it cannot last many years longer." 

"it is my fancy." 

"no, no; there is something more in this than meet the eye. the same 
reason, be it what may, that has induce varney the vampyre to become so 
desirous of possess the hall, actuate you." 

"possibly." 

"and what is that reason? you may as well be candid with me." 

"yes, i will, and am. i like the picturesque aspect of the place." 

"no, you know that that is a disingenuous answer, that you know well. it 
is not the aspect of the old hall that has charm for you. but i feel, 
only from your conduct, more than ever convinced, that some plot is 
go on, have the accomplishment of some great object as its climax, 
a something of which you have guessed." 

"how much you are mistaken!" 

"no, i am certain i am right; and i shall immediately advise the 
bannerworth family to return, and to take up their abode again here, in 
order to put an end to the hope which you, or varney, or any one else 
may have, of get possession of the place." 

"if you were a man," said the hangman, "who care a little more for 
yourself, and a little less for others, i would make a confidant of 
you." 

"what do you mean?" 

"why, i mean, candidly, that you are not selfish enough to be entitle 
to my confidence." 

"that is a strange reason for withhold confidence from any man." 

"it is a strange reason; but, in this case, a most abundant true one. 
i cannot tell you what i would tell you, because i cannot make the 
agreement with you that i would fain make." 

"you talk in riddles." 

"to explain which, then, would be to tell my secret." 

dr. chillingworth was, evidently, much annoyed, and yet he was in an 
extremely helpless condition; for as to force the hangman to leave the 
hall, if he did not feel disposed to do so, that was completely out of 
the question, and could not be done. in the first place, he was a much 
more powerful man than the doctor, and in the second, it was quite 
contrary to all mr. chillingworth's habits, to engage in anything like 
personal warfare. 

he could only, therefore, look his vexation, and say,-- 

"if you are determined upon remaining, i cannot help it; but, when some 
one, as there assured will, come from the bannerworths, here, to me, 
or i shall be under the necessity of state candidly that you are 
intruding." 

"very good. as the morning air is keen, and as we now are not likely to 
be as good company to each other as we were, i shall go inside the 
house." 

this was a proposition which the doctor did not like, but he was 
compel to submit to it; and he saw, with feelings of uneasiness, the 
hangman make his way into the hall by one of the windows. 

then dr. chillingworth sat down to think. much he wonder what could be 
the secret of the great desire which varney, marchdale, and even this 
man had, all of them to be possessor of the old hall. 

that there was some powerful incentive he felt convinced, and he long 
for some conversation with the bannerworths, or with admiral bell, in 
order that he might state what had now taken place. that some one would 
soon come to him, in order to bring fresh provisions for the day, he was 
certain, and all he could do, in the interim, was, to listen to what the 
hangman was about in the hall. 

not a sound, for a considerable time, disturbed the intense still of 
the place; but, now, suddenly, mr. chillingworth thought he heard a 
hammering, as if some one was at work in one of the rooms of the hall. 

"what can be the meaning of that?" he said, and he was about to proceed 
at once to the interior of the building, through the same window which 
had enable the hangman to gain admittance, when he heard his own name 
pronounced by some one at the back of the garden fence, and upon casting 
his eyes in that direction, he, to his great relief, saw the admiral and 
henry bannerworth. 

"come round to the gate," said the doctor. "i am more glad to see you 
than i can tell you just now. do not make more noise than you can help; 
but, come round to the gate at once." 

they obey the injunction with alacrity, and when the doctor had 
admitted them, the admiral said, eagerly,-- 

"you don't mean to tell us that he is here?" 

"no, no, not varney; but he is not the only one who has taken a great 
affection for bannerworth hall; you may have another tenant for it, and 
i believe at any price you like to name." 

"indeed!" 

"hush! creep along close to the house, and then you will not be seen. 
there! do you hear that noise in the hall?" 

"why it sounds," said the admiral, "like the ship's carpenter at work." 

"it does, indeed, sound like a carpenter; it's only the new tenant 
making, i dare say, some repairs." 

"d--n his impudence!" 

"why, it certainly do look like a very cool proceeding, i must admit." 

"who, and what is he?" 

"who he is now, i cannot tell you, but he was once the hangman of 
london, at a time when i was practise in the metropolis, and so i 
became acquaint with him. he know sir francis varney, and, if i 
mistake not, has found out the cause of that mysterious personage's 
great attachment to bannerworth hall, and has found the reason so 
cogent, that he has got up an affection for it himself." 

"to me," said henry, "all this is as incomprehensible as anything can 
possibly be. what on earth do it all mean?" 

"my dear henry," said the doctor, "will you be rule by me?" 

"i will be rule by any one whom i know i can trust; for i am like a man 
grope his way in the dark." 

"then allow this gentleman who is carpenter away so pleasant within 
the house, to do so to his heart's content, but don't let him leave it. 
show yourself now in the garden, he has sufficient prudence to know 
that three constitute rather fearful odds against one, and so he will be 
careful, and remain where he is. if he should come out, we need not let 
him go until we thorough ascertain what he has been about." 

"you shall command the squadron, doctor," said the admiral, "and have it 
all your own way, you know, so here goes! come along, henry, and let's 
show ourselves; we are both armed too!" 

they walk out into the centre of the garden, and they were soon 
convinced that the hangman saw them, for a face appear at the window, 
and was as quick withdrawn again. 

"there," said the doctor, "now he know he is a prisoner, and we may as 
well place ourselves in some position which command a good view of the 
house, as well as of the garden gate, and so see if we cannot starve him 
out, though we may be starve out ourselves." 

"not at all!" said admiral bell, produce from his ample pocket 
various parcels,--"we came to bring you ample supplies." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; we have been as far as the ruins." 

"oh, to release marchdale. charles told me how the villain had fallen 
into the trap he had laid for him." 

"he has, indeed, fallen into the trap, and it's one he won't easily get 
out of again. he's dead." 

"dead!--dead!" 

"yes; in the storm of last night the ruins have fallen, and he is by 
this time as flat as a pancake." 

"good god! and yet it is but a just retribution upon him. he would have 
assassinate poor charles dutch in the cruelest and most cold-blooded 
manner, and, however we may shudder at the manner of his death, we 
cannot regret it." 

"except that he has escape your friend the hangman," said the admiral. 

"don't call him my friend, if you please," said dr. chillingworth, "but, 
hark how he is working away, as if he really intended to carry the house 
away piece by piece, as opportunity may serve, if you will not let it to 
him altogether, just as it stands." 

"confound him! he is evidently working on his own account," said the 
admiral, "or he would not be half so industrious." 

there was, indeed, a tremendous amount of hammer and noise, of one 
sort and another, from the house, and it was quite clear that the 
hangman was too heart and soul in his work, whatever may have been the 
object of it, to care who was listen to him, or to what conjecture he 
gave rise. 

he thought probably that he could but he stop in what he was about, 
and, until he was so, that he might as well go on. 

and on he went, with a vengeance, vex the admiral terribly, who 
propose so repeatedly to go into the house and insist upon knowing what 
he was about, that his, wish were upon the point of being concede to 
by henry, although they were combat by the doctor, when, from the 
window at which he had entered, out step the hangman. 

"good morning, gentlemen! good morning," he said, and he move towards 
the garden gate. "i will not trouble you any longer. good morning!" 

"not so fast," said the admiral, "or we may bring you up with a round 
turn, and i never miss my mark when i can see it, and i shall not let it 
get out of sight, you may depend." 

he drew a pistol from his pocket, as he spoke, and pointed it at the 
hangman, who, thereupon pause and said:-- 

"what! am i not to be permit to go in peace? why it was but a short 
time since the doctor was quarrel with me because i did not go, and 
now it seem that i am to be shot if i do." 

"yes," said the admiral, "that's it." 

"well! but,--" 

"you dare," said he, "stir another inch towards the gate, and you are a 
dead man!" 

the hangman hesitate a moment, and look at admiral bell; apparently 
the result of the scrutiny was, that he would keep his word, for he 
sudden turn and dive in at the window again without saying another 
word. 

"well; you have certainly stop him from leaving," said henry; "but 
what's to be done now?" 

"let him be, let him be," said the doctor; "he must come out again, for 
there are no provisions in the place, and he will be starve out." 

"hush! what is that?" said henry. 

there was a very gentle ring at the bell which hung over the garden 
gate. 

"that's an experiment, now, i'll be bound," said the doctor, "to 
ascertain if any one is here; let us hide ourselves, and take no 
notice." 

the ring in a few moments was repeated, and the three confederate hid 
themselves effectually behind some thick laurel bush and await with 
expectation what might next ensue. 

not long had they occupy their place of concealment, before they heard 
a heavy fall upon the gravel pathway, immediately within the gate, as 
if some one had clamber to the top from the outside, and then jump 
down. 

that this was the case the sound of footstep soon convinced them, and 
to their surprise as well as satisfaction, they saw through the 
interstice of the laurel bush behind which they were concealed, no less 
a personage that sir francis varney himself. 

"it is varney," said henry. 

"yes, yes," whisper the doctor. "let him be, do not move for any 
consideration, for the first time let him do just what he likes." 

"d--n the fellow!" said the admiral; "there are some points about him 
that like, after all, and he's quite an angel compare to that rascal 
marchdale." 

"he is,--he save charles." 

"he did, and not if i know it shall any harm come to him, unless he were 
terribly to provoke it by becoming himself the assailant." 

"how sad he looks!" 

"hush! he come nearer; it is not safe to talk. look at him." 




chapter lxxvii. 

varney in the garden.--the communication of dr. chillingworth to the 
admiral and henry. 


[illustration] 

kind reader, it was indeed varney who had clamber over the garden 
wall, and thus made his way into the garden of bannerworth hall; and 
what fill those who look at him with the most surprise was, that he 
did not seem in any particular way to make a secret of his presence, but 
walk on with an air of bold which either arose from a feeling of 
absolute impunity, from his thinking there was no one there, or from an 
audacity which none but he could have compassed. 

as for the little party that was there assembled, and who look upon 
him, they seem thunderstricken by his presence; and henry, probably, 
as well as the admiral, would have burst out into some sudden 
exclamation, had they not been restrained by dr. chillingworth, who, 
suspect that they might in some way give an alarm, hasten to speak 
first, saying in a whisper,-- 

"for heaven's sake, be still, fortune, you see, favours us most 
strangely. leave varney alone. you have no other mode whatever of 
discover what he really wants at bannerworth hall." 

"i am glad you have spoken," said henry, as he drew a long breath. "if 
you had not, i feel convinced that in another moment i should have 
rush forward and confront this man who has been the very bane of my 
life." 

"and so should i," said the admiral; "although i protest against any 
harm being done to him, on account of some sort of good feeling that he 
has displayed, after all, in release charles from that dungeon in 
which marchdale has perished." 

"at the moment," said henry, "i had forgotten that; but i will own that 
his conduct has been tincture by a strange and wild kind of generous 
at times, which would seem to bespeak, at the bottom of his heart, some 
good feelings, the impulse of which were only quench by 
circumstances." 

"that is my firm impression of him, i can assure you," said dr. 
chillingworth. 

they watch varney now from the leafy covert in which they were 
situated, and, indeed, had they been less effectually concealed, it did 
not seem likely that the much dread vampyre would have perceive them; 
for not only did he make no effort at concealment himself, but he took 
no pains to see if any one was watch him in his progress to the 
house. 

his footstep were more rapid than they usually were, and there was 
altogether an air and manner about him, as if he were move to some 
purpose which of itself was sufficient important to submerge in its 
consequence all ordinary risk and all ordinary cautions. 

he try several window of the house along that terrace of which we 
have more than once had occasion to speak, before he found one that 
opened; but at length he did succeed, and step at once into the hall, 
leave those, who now for some moments in silence had regard his 
movements, to lose themselves in a fearful sea of conjecture as to what 
could possibly be his object. 

"at all events," said the admiral, "i'm glad we are here. if the vampyre 
should have a fight with that other fellow, that we heard do such a 
lot of carpenter work in the house, we ought, i think, to see fair 
play." 

"i, for one," said the doctor, "would not like to stand by and see the 
vampyre murdered; but i am inclined to think he is a good match for any 
mortal opponent." 

"you may depend he is," said henry. 

"but how long, doctor, do you purpose that we should wait here in such a 
state of suspense as to what is go on within the house?" 

"i hope not long; but that something will occur to make us have food for 
action. hark! what is that?" 

there was a loud crash within the building, as of broken glass. it 
sound as if some window had been completely dashed in; but although 
they look careful over the front of the building, they could see no 
evidence of such a thing have happened, and were compelled, 
consequently, to come to the opinion that varney and the other man must 
have met in one of the back rooms, and that the crash of glass had 
arisen from some personal conflict in which they had engaged. 

"i cannot stand this," said henry. 

"nay, nay," said the doctor; "be still, and i will tell you something, 
than which there can be no more fitting time than this to reveal it." 

"refers it to the vampyre?" 

"it does--it does." 

"be brief, then; i am in an agony of impatience." 

"it is a circumstance concerning which i can be brief; for, horrible as 
it is, i have no wish to dress it in any adventitious colours. sir 
francis varney, although under another name, is an old acquaintance of 
mine." 

"acquaintance!" said henry. 

"why, you don't mean to say you are a vampyre?" said the admiral; "or 
that he has ever visit you?" 

"no; but i knew him. from the first moment that i look upon him in 
this neighbourhood, i thought i knew him; but the circumstance which 
induce me to think so was of so terrific a character, that i made some 
effort to chase it from my mind. it has, however, grown upon me day by 
day, and, lately, i have had proof sufficient to convince me of his 
identity with one whom i first saw under most singular circumstances of 
romance." 

"say on,--you are agitated." 

"i am, indeed. this revelation has several times, within the last few 
days, tremble on my lips, but now you shall have it; because you ought 
to know all that it is possible for me to tell you of him who has cause 
you so serious an amount of disturbance." 

"you awaken, doctor," said henry, "all my interest." 

"and mine, too," remark the admiral. "what can it be all about? and 
where, doctor, did you first see this varney the vampyre?" 

"in his coffin." 

both the admiral and henry gave start of surprise as, with one accord, 
they exclaimed,-- 

"did you say coffin?" 

"yes: i tell you, on my word of honour, that the first time in my life i 
saw ever sir francis varney, was in his coffin." 

"then he is a vampyre, and there can be no mistake," said the admiral. 

"go on, i pray you, doctor, go on," said henry, anxiously. 

"i will. the reason why he became the inhabitant of a coffin was simply 
this:--he had been hanged,--executed at the old bailey, in london, 
before ever i set eyes upon that strange countenance of his. you know 
that i was practise surgery at the london school some years ago, and 
that, consequently, as i commence the profession rather late in life, i 
was extremely anxious to do the most i could in a very short space of 
time." 

"yes--yes." 

"arrived, then, with plenty of resources, which i did not, as the young 
men who affected to be study in the same class as myself, spend in 
the pursuit of what they considered life in london, i was 
indefatigable in my professional labours, and there was nothing 
connected with them which i did not try to accomplish. 

"at that period, the difficulty of get a subject for anatomize 
was very great, and all sort of scheme had to be put into requisition 
to accomplish so desirable, and, indeed, absolutely necessary a purpose. 

"i became acquaint with the man who, i have told you, is in the hall, 
at present, and who then fill the unenviable post of public 
executioner. it so happened, too, that i had read a learned treatise, by 
a frenchman, who had made a vast number of experiment with galvanic and 
other apparatus, upon person who had come to death in different ways, 
and, in one case, he assert that he had actually recover a man who 
had been hanged, and he had live five week afterwards. 

"young as i then was, in comparison to what i am now, in my profession, 
this inflamed my imagination, and nothing seem to me so desirable as 
get hold of some one who had only recently been put to death, for 
the purpose of try what i could do in the way of attempt a 
resuscitate of the subject. it was precisely for this reason that i 
sought out the public executioner, and made his acquaintance, whom every 
one else shunned, because i thought he might assist me by hand over 
to me the body of some condemn and execute man, upon whom i could try 
my skill. 

"i broach the subject to him, and found him not averse. he said, that 
if i would come forward and claim, as next of kin and allow the body to 
be remove to his house, the body of the criminal who was to be execute 
the first time, from that period, that he could give me a hint that i 
should have no real next of kin opponents, he would throw every facility 
in my way. 

"this was just what i wanted; and, i believe, i wait with impatience 
for some poor wretch to be hurried to his last account by the hand of 
my friend, the public executioner. 

"at length a circumstance occur which favoured my designs most 
effectually,--a man was apprehend for a highway robbery of a most 
aggravate character. he was tried, and the evidence against him was so 
conclusive, that the defence which was attempt by his counsel, became 
a mere matter of form. 

"he was convicted, and sentenced. the judge told him not to flatter 
himself with the least notion that mercy would be extend to him. the 
crime of which he had been found guilty was on the increase it was 
highly necessary to make some great public example, to show evil doer 
that they could not, with impunity, thus trample upon the liberty of the 
subject, and had suddenly, just as it were, in the very nick of time, 
committed the very crime, attend with all the aggravate circumstances 
which made it easy and desirable to hang him out of hand. 

"he heard his sentence, they tell me unmoved. i did not see him, but he 
was represent to me as a man of a strong, and well-knit frame, with 
rather a strange, but what some would have considered a handsome 
expression of countenance, inasmuch as that there was an expression of 
much haughty resolution depict on it. 

"i flew to my friend the executioner. 

"'can you,' i said, 'get me that man's body, who is to be hang for the 
highway robbery, on monday?' 

"'yes,' he said; 'i see nothing to prevent it. not one soul has offer 
to claim even common companionship with him,--far less kindred. i think 
if you put in your claim as a cousin, who will bear the expense of his 
decent burial, you will have every chance of get possession of the 
body.' 

"i did not hesitate, but, on the morning before the execution, i call 
upon one of the sheriffs. 

"i told him that the condemn man, i regret to say, was related to 
me; but as i knew nothing could be done to save him on the trial, i had 
abstain from coming forward; but that as i did not like the idea of 
his being rudely inter by the authorities, i had come forward to ask 
for the body, after the execution should have taken place, in order that 
i might, at all events, bestow upon it, in some sequester spot, a 
decent burial, with all the rite of the church. 

"the sheriff was a man not overburthene with penetration. he applaud 
my pious feelings, and actually gave me, without any inquiry, a written 
order to receive the body from the hand of the hangman, after it had 
hung the hour prescribed by the law. 

"i did not, as you may well suppose, wish to appear more in the business 
than was absolutely necessary; but i gave the executioner the sheriff's 
order for the body, and he promise that he would get a shell ready to 
place it in, and four stout men to carry it at once to his house, when 
he should cut it down. 

"'good!' i said; 'and now as i am not a little anxious for the success 
of my experiment, do you not think that you can manage so that the fall 
of the criminal shall not be so sudden as to break his neck?' 

"'i have thought of that,' he said, 'and i believe that i can manage to 
let him down gently, so that he shall die of suffocation, instead of 
have his neck put out of joint. i will do my best." 

"'if you can but succeed in that,' said i, for i was quite in a state of 
mania upon the subject, 'i shall be much indebted to you, and will 
double the amount of money which i have already promised.' 

"this was, as i believe it would be, a powerful stimulus to him to do 
all in his power to meet my wishes, and he took, no doubt, active 
measure to accomplish all that i desired. 

"you can imagine with what intense impatience i wait the result. he 
reside in an old ruinous look house, a short distance on the surrey 
side of the river, and there i had arrange all my apparatus for making 
experiment upon the dead man, in an apartment the window of which 
command a view of the entrance." 

[illustration] 

"i was completely ready by half-past eight, although a moment's 
consideration of course told me that at least another hour must elapse 
before there could be the least chance of my seeing him arrive, for whom 
i so anxious longed. 

"i can safe say so infatuated was i upon the subject, that no fond 
lover ever look with more nervous anxiety for the arrival of the 
chosen object of his heart, than i did for that dead body, upon which i 
propose to exert all the influence of professional skill, to recall 
back the soul to its earthly dwelling-place. 

"at length i heard the sound of wheels. i found that my friend the 
hangman had procure a cart, in which he brought the coffin, that being 
a much quick mode of conveyance than by bearer so that about a 
quarter past nine o'clock the vehicle, with its ghastly content, stop 
at the door of his house. 

"in my impatience i ran down stairs to meet that which ninety-nine men 
out of a hundred would have gone some distance to avoid the sight of, 
namely, a corpse, livid and fresh from the gallows. i, however, herald 
it as a great gift, and already, in imagination i saw myself imitate 
the learned frenchman, who had publish such an elaborate treatise on 
the mode of restore life under all sort of circumstances, to those 
who were already pronounced by unscientific person to be dead. 

"to be sure, a sort of feeling had come over me at times, knowing as i 
did that the france are a nation that do not scruple at all to sacrifice 
truth on the altar of vanity, that it might be after all a mere 
rhodomontade; but, however, i could only ascertain so much by actually 
trying, so the suspicion that such might, by a possibility, be the end 
of the adventure, did not deter me. 

"i officious assist in have the coffin brought into the room where 
i had prepared everything that was necessary in the conduction of my 
grand experiment; and then, when no one was there with me but my friend 
the executioner, i, with his help, the one of us taking the head and the 
other the feet, took the body from the coffin and laid it upon a table. 

"hastily i placed my hand upon the region of the heart, and to my great 
delight i found it still warm. i drew off the cap that cover the face, 
and then, for the first time, my eyes rest upon the countenance of him 
who now call himself--heaven only know why--sir francis varney." 

"good god!" said henry, "are you certain?" 

"quite." 

"it may have been some other rascal like him," said the admiral. 

"no, i am quite sure now; i have, as i have before mention to you, 
try to get out of my own conviction upon the subject, but i have been 
actually assured that he is the man by the very hangman himself." 

"go on, go on! your tale certainly is a strange one, and i do not say it 
either to compliment you or to cast a doubt upon you, but, except from 
the lip of an old, and value friend, such as you yourself are, i 
should not believe it.' 

"i am not surprise to hear you say that," reply the doctor; "nor 
should i be offend even now if you were to entertain a belief that i 
might, after all, be mistaken." 

"no, no; you would not be so positive upon the subject, i well know, if 
there was the slightest possibility of an error." 

"indeed i should not." 

"let us have the sequel, then." 

"it is this. i was most anxious to effect an immediate resuscitation, if 
it were possible, of the hang man. a little manipulation soon 
convinced me that the neck was not broken, which left me at once every 
thing to hope for. the hangman was more prudent than i was, and before i 
commence my experiments, he said,-- 

"'doctor, have you duly considered what you mean to do with this fellow, 
in case you should be successful in restore him to life?' 

"'not i,' said i. 

"'well,' he said, 'you can do as you like; but i consider that it is 
really worth thinking of.' 

"i was headstrong on the matter, and could think of nothing but the 
success or the non-success, in a physiology point of view, of my plan 
for restore the dead to life; so i set about my experiment without 
any delay, and with a complete and a vigour that promise the most 
completely successful results, if success could at all be an ingredient 
in what sober judgment would doubtless have denominate a mad-headed and 
wild scheme. 

"for more than half an hour i try in vain, by the assistance of the 
hangman, who act under my directions. not the least symptom of 
vitality present itself; and he had a smile upon his countenance, as 
he said in a banter tone,-- 

"'i am afraid, sir, it is much easy to kill than to restore their 
patient with doctors.' 

"before i could make him any reply, for i felt that his observation had 
a good amount of truth in it, join to its sarcasm the hang man 
utter a loud scream, and open his eyes. 

"i must own i was myself rather startled; but i for some moments long 
continue the same means which had produce such an effect, when 
sudden he sprang up and laid hold of me, at the same time 
exclaiming,-- 

"'death, death, where is the treasure?' 

"i had fully succeeded--too fully; and while the executioner look on 
with horror depict in his countenance, i flee from the room and the 
house, taking my way home as fast as i possibly could. 

"a dread came over me, that the restore man would follow me if he 
should find out, to whom it was he was indebted for the rather 
questionable boon of a new life. i packed up what articles i set the 
greatest store by, bade adieu to london, and never have i since set foot 
within that city." 

"and you never met the man you had so resuscitated?" 

"not till i saw varney, the vampyre; and, as i tell you, i am now 
certain that he is the man." 

"that is the strangest yarn that ever i heard," said the admiral. 

"a most singular circumstance," said henry. 

"you may have notice about his countenance," said dr. chillingworth, "a 
strange distort look?" 

"yes, yes." 

"well, that has arisen from a spasmodic contraction of the muscles, in 
consequence of his have been hanged. he will never lose it, and it has 
not a little contribute to give him the horrible look he has, and to 
invest him with some of the seeming outward attribute of the vampyre." 

"and that man who is now in the hall with him, doctor," said henry, "is 
the very hangman who execute him?" 

"the same. he tell me that after i left, he paid attention to the 
restore man, and complete what i had nearly done. he kept him in his 
house for a time, and then made a bargain with him, for a large sum of 
money per annum, all of which he has regularly been paid, although he 
tell me he has no more idea where varney get it, than the man in the 
moon." 

"it is very strange; but, hark! do you not hear the sound of voice in 
angry altercation?" 

"yes, yes, they have met. let us approach the window now. we may chance 
to hear something of what they say to each other." 




chapter lxxviii. 

the altercation between varney and the executioner in the hall.--the 
mutual agreement. 


[illustration] 

there was certainly a loud wrangle in the hall, just as the doctor 
finished his most remarkable revelation concerning sir francis varney, a 
revelation which by no means attack the fact of his being a vampyre or 
not; but rather on the contrary, had a tendency to confirm any opinion 
that might arise from the circumstance of his being restore to life 
after his execution, favourable to that belief. 

they all three now careful approach the window of the hall, to 
listen to what was go on, and after a few moments they distinct 
heard the voice of the hangman, saying in loud and rather angry 
accents,-- 

"i do not deny but that you have kept your word with me--our bargain has 
been, as you say, a profitable one: but, still i cannot see why that 
circumstance should give you any sort of control over my actions." 

"but what do you here?" said varney, impatiently. 

"what do you?" cry the other. 

"nay, to ask another question, is not to answer mine. i tell you that i 
have special and most important business in this house; you can have no 
motive but curiosity." 

"can i not, indeed? what, too, if i have serious and important business 
here?" 

"impossible." 

"well, i may as easily use such a term as regards what you call 
important business, but here i shall remain." 

"here you shall not remain." 

"and will you make the somewhat hazardous attempt to force me to leave?" 

"yes, much as i dislike lift my hand against you, i must do so; i 
tell you that i must be alone in this house. i have most special 
reasons--reasons which concern my continue existence. 

"your continue existence you talk of.--tell me, now, how is it that you 
have acquire so frightful a reputation in this neighbourhood? go where 
i will, the theme of conversation is varney, the vampyre! and it is 
implicit believe that you are one of those dreadful character that 
feed upon the life-blood of others, only now and then revisite the 
tomb to which you ought long since to have gone in peace." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; what, in the name of all that's inexplicable, has induce you to 
enact such a character?" 

"enact it! you say. can you, then, from all you have heard of me, and 
from all you know of me, not conceive it possible that i am not enact 
any such character? why may it not be real? look at me. do i look like 
one of the inhabitant of the earth?" 

"in sooth, you do not." 

"and yet i am, as you see, upon it. do not, with an affected philosophy, 
doubt all that may happen to be in any degree repugnant to your usual 
experiences." 

"i am not one disposed to do so; nor am i prepared to deny that such 
dreadful being may exist as vampyres. however, whether or not you 
belong to so frightful a class of creatures, i do not intend to leave 
here; but, i will make an agreement with you." 

varney was silent; and after a few moments' pause, the other 
exclaimed,-- 

"there are people, even now, watch the place, and no doubt you have 
been seen coming into it." 

"no, no, i was satisfy no one was here but you." 

"then you are wrong. a doctor chillingworth, of whom you know something, 
is here; and him, you have said, you would do no harm to, even to save 
your life." 

"i do know him. you told me that it was to him that i was mainly 
indebted for my mere existence; and although i do not consider human 
life to be a great boon, i cannot bring myself to raise my hand against 
the man who, whatever might have been the motive for the deed, at all 
events, did snatch me from the grave." 

"upon my word," whisper the admiral, "there is something about that 
fellow that i like, after all." 

"hush!" said henry, "listen to them. this would all have been 
unintelligible to us, if you had not related to us what you have." 

"i have just told you in time," said chillingworth, "it seems." 

"will you, then," said the hangman, "listen to proposals?" 

"yes," said varney. 

"come along, then, and i will show you what i have been about; and i 
rather think you have already a shrewd guess as to my motive. this 
way--this way." 

they move off to some other part of the mansion, and the sound of their 
voice gradual die away, so that after all, the friends had not got 
the least idea of what that motive was, which still induce the vampyre 
and the hangman, rather than leave the other on the premises, to make an 
agreement to stay with each other. 

"what's to be done now?" said henry. 

"wait," said dr. chillingworth, "wait, and watch still. i see nothing 
else that can be done with any degree of safety." 

"but what are we to wait for?" said the admiral. 

"by waiting, we shall, perhaps, find out," was the doctor's reply; "but 
you may depend that we never shall by interfering." 

"well, well, be it so. it seem that we have no other resource. and when 
either or both of those fellow make their appearance, and seem about to 
leave, what is to be done with them?" 

"they must be seize then, and in order that that may be done without 
any bloodshed, we ought to have plenty of force here. henry, could you 
get your brother, and charles, if he be sufficient recovered, to 
come?" 

"certainly, and jack pringle." 

"no," said the admiral, "no jack pringle for me; i have done with him 
completely, and i have made up my mind to strike him off the ship's 
books, and have nothing more to do with him." 

"well, well," add the doctor, "we will not have him, then; and it is 
just as well, for, in all likelihood, he would come drunk, and we shall 
be--let me see--five strong without him, which ought to be enough to 
take prisoner two men." 

"yes," said henry, "although one of them may be a vampyre." 

"that make no difference," said the admiral. "i'd as soon take a ship 
manned with vampyre as with frenchmen." 

henry start off upon his errand, certainly leave the admiral and the 
doctor in rather a critical situation while he was gone; for had varney 
the vampyre and the hangman chosen, they could certainly easily have 
overcome so inefficient a force. 

the admiral would, of course, have fought, and so might the doctor, as 
far as his hand would permit him; but if the other had really been 
intent upon mischief, they could, from their downright superior physical 
power, have taken the lives of the two that were oppose to them. 

but somehow the doctor appear to have a great confidence in the 
affair. whether that confidence arose from what the vampyre had said 
with regard to him, or from any hidden conviction of his own that they 
would not yet emerge from the hall, we cannot say; but certain it is, he 
wait the course of event with great coolness. 

no noise for some time came from the house; but then the sounds, as if 
workmen were busy within it, were sudden resumed, and with more vigour 
than before. 

it was nearly two hour before henry made the private signal which had 
been agree upon as that which should proclaim his return; and then he 
and his brother, with charles, who, when he heard of the matter, would, 
notwithstanding the persuasion of flora to the contrary, come, got 
quiet over the fence at a part of the garden which was quite hidden 
from the house by abundant vegetation, and the whole three of them took 
up a position that tolerably well command a view of the house, while 
they were themselves extremely well hidden behind a dense mass of 
evergreens. 

"did you see that rascal, jack pringle?" said the admiral. 

"yes," said henry; "he is drunk." 

"ah, to be sure." 

"and we had no little difficulty in shake him off. he suspect where 
we were going; but i think, by being peremptory, we got fairly rid of 
him." 

"the vagabond! if he come here, i'll brain him, i will, the swab. why, 
lately he's done nothing but drink. that's the way with him. he'll go on 
sometimes for a year and more, and not take more than enough to do him 
good, and then all at once, for about six or eight weeks, he do 
nothing but drink." 

"well, well, we can do without him," said henry. 

"without him! i should think so. do you hear those fellow in the hall 
at work? d--n me, if i haven't all of a sudden thought what the reason 
of it all is." 

"what--what?" said the doctor, anxiously. 

"why, that rascal varney, you know, had his house burnt down." 

"yes; well?" 

"yes, well. i dare say he didn't think it well. but, however, he no 
doubt wants another; so, you see, my idea is, that he's steal the 
material from bannerworth hall." 

"oh, is that your notion?" 

"yes, and a very natural one, i think, too, master doctor, whatever you 
may think of it. come, now, have you a better?" 

"oh, dear, no, certainly not; but i have a notion that something to eat 
would comfort the inward man much." 

"and so would something to drink, blow me if it wouldn't," said jack 
pringle, sudden making his appearance. 

the admiral made a rush upon him; but he was restrained by the others, 
and jack, with a look of triumph, said,-- 

"why, what's amiss with you now? i ain't drunk now. come, come, you have 
something dangerous in the wind, i know, so i've made up my mind to be 
in it, so don't put yourself out of the way. if you think i don't know 
all about it, you are mistaken, for i do. the vampyre is in the house 
yonder, and i'm the fellow to tackle him, i believe you, my boys." 

"good god!" said the doctor, "what shall we do?" 

"nothing," said jack, as he took a bottle from his pocket and applied 
the neck of it to his lips--"nothing--nothing at all." 

"there's something to begin with," said the admiral, as with his stick 
he gave the bottle a sudden blow that broke it and spilt all its 
contents, leave jack petrified, with the bit of the neck of it still 
in his mouth. 

"my eye, admiral," he said, "was that done like a britain seaman? my 
eye--was that the trick of a lubber, or of a thorough-going first-rater? 
first-rater? my eye--" 

"hold your noise, will you; you are not drunk yet, and i was determined 
that you should not get so, which you soon would with that rum-bottle, 
if i had not come with a broadside across it. now you may stay; but, 
mark me, you are on active service now, and must do nothing without 
orders." 

"ay, ay, your honour," said jack, as he drop the neck of the bottle, 
and look rueful upon the ground, from whence arose the aroma of 
rum--"ay, ay; but it's a hard case, take it how you will, to have your 
grog stopped; but, d--n it, i never had it stop yet when it was in my 
mouth." 

henry and charles could not forbear a smile at jack's discomfiture, 
which, however, they were very glad of, for they knew full well his 
failing, and that in the course of another half hour he would have been 
drunk, and incapable of being controlled, except, as on some former 
occasions, by the exercise of brute force. 

but jack was evidently displeased, and considered himself to be 
grievous insulted, which, after all, was the better, inasmuch as, 
while he was brood over his wrongs, he was quiet; when, otherwise, it 
might have been a very difficult matter to make him so. 

they partook of some refreshments, and, as the day advanced, the 
brother bannerworth, as well as charles holland, began to get very 
anxious upon the subject of the proceedings of sir francis varney in the 
hall. 

they converse in low tones, exhaust every, as they considered, 
possible conjecture to endeavour to account for his mysterious 
predilection for that abode, but nothing occur to them of a 
sufficient probable motive to induce them to adopt it as a conclusion. 

they more than suspect dr. chillingworth, because he was so silent, 
and hazard no conjecture at all of knowing something, or of have 
form to himself some highly probable hypothesis upon the subject; but 
they could not get him to agree that such was the case. 

when they challenge him upon the subject, all he would say was,-- 

"my good friends, you perceive that, there is a great mystery somewhere, 
and i do hope that to-night it will be clear up satisfactorily." 

with this they were compel to be satisfied; and now the soft and 
sombre shades of evening began to creep over the scene, envelop all 
object in the dim and repose of early night. 

the noise from the house had ceased, and all was profound still. but 
more than once henry fancy he heard footstep outside the garden. 

he mention his suspicion to charles holland, who immediately said,-- 

"the same thing has come to my ears." 

"indeed! then it must be so; we cannot both of us have merely imagine 
such a thing. you may depend that this place is beleaguer in some way, 
and that to-night will be productive of event which will throw a great 
light upon the affair connected with this vampyre that have hitherto 
baffle conjecture." 

"hush!" said charles; "there, again; i am quite confident i heard a 
sound as of a broken twig outside the garden-wall. the doctor and the 
admiral are in deep discussion about something,--shall we tell them?" 

"no; let us listen, as yet." 

they bent all their attention to listening, incline their ear towards 
the ground, and, after a few moments, they felt confident that more than 
one footstep was creep along, as cautious as possible, under the 
garden wall. after a few moments' consultation, henry made up his 
mind--he being the best acquaint with the locality of the place--to 
go and reconnoitre, so he, without saying anything to the doctor or the 
admiral, glide from where he was, in the direction of a part of the 
fence which he knew he could easily scale. 




chapter lxxix. 

the vampyre's danger.--the last refuge.--the ruse of henry bannerworth. 


[illustration] 

yet knowing to what deed of violence the passion of a lawless mob will 
sometimes lead them, and have the experience of what had been 
attempt by the alarm and infuriate populace on a former occasion, 
against the hall, henry bannerworth was, reasonably enough, not without 
his fear that something might occur of a nature yet highly dangerous to 
the stability of his ancient house. 

he did not actually surmount the fence, but he crept so close to it, 
that he could get over in a moment, if he wished; and, if any one should 
move or speak on the other side, he should be quite certain to hear 
them. 

for a few moments all was still, and then sudden he heard some one 
say, in a low voice, 

"hist! hist! did you hear nothing?" 

"i thought i did," said another; "but i now am doubtful." 

"listen again." 

"what," thought henry, "can be the motive of these men lie secrete 
here? it is most extraordinary what they can possibly want, unless they 
are brew danger for the hall." 

most cautious now he raise himself, so that his eyes could just look 
over the fence, and then, indeed, he was astonished. 

he had expect to see two or three persons, at the utmost; what was his 
surprise! to find a compact mass of men crouch down under the garden 
wall, as far as his eye could reach. 

for a few moments, he was so surprised, that he continue to gaze on, 
heedless of the danger there might be from a discovery that he was 
play the part of a spy upon them. 

when, however, his first sensation of surprise were over, he cautious 
remove to his former position, and, just as he did, so, he heard those 
who had before spoken, again, in low tones, break the still of 
the night. 

"i am resolve upon it," said one; "i am quite determined. i will, 
please god, rid the country of that dreadful man." 

"don't call him a man," said the oilier. 

"well, well; it is a wrong name to apply to a vampyre." 

"it is varney, after all, then," said henry. bannerworth, to 
himself;--"it is his life that they seek. what can be done to save 
him?--for save he shall be if i can compass such an object. i feel that 
there is yet a something in his character which is entitle to 
consideration, and he shall not be savage murder while i have an arm 
to raise in his defence. but if anything is now to be done, it must be 
done by stratagem, for the enemy are, by far, in too great force to be 
personally combat with." 

henry resolve to take the advice of his friends, and with that view he 
went silent and quiet back to where they were, and communicate to 
them the news that he had so unexpected discovered. 

they were all much surprised, and then the doctor said, 

"you may depend, that since the disappointment of the mob in the 
destruction of this place, they have had their eye upon varney. he has 
been dogged here by some one, and then by degree that assemblage has 
sought the spot." 

"he's a doom man, then," remark the admiral; "for what can save him 
from a determined number of persons, who, by main force, will overcome 
us, let us make what stand we may in his defence." 

"is there no hiding-place in the house," said charles, "where you might, 
after warning him of his danger, conceal him?" 

"there are plenty, but of what avail would that be, if they burn down 
the hall, which in all probability they will!" 

"none, certainly." 

"there is but one chance," said henry, "and that is to throw them off 
the scent, and induce them to think that he whom they seek is not here; 
i think that may possibly be done by boldness." 

"but how!" 

"i will go among them and make the effort." 

he at once left the friends, for he felt that there might be no time to 
lose, and hasten to the same part of the wall, over which he had 
look so short a time before, he clamber over it, and cried, in a 
loud voice, 

"stop the vampyre! stop the vampyre!" 

"where, where?" shout a number of person at once, turning their eyes 
eager towards the spot where henry stood. 

"there, across the fields," cry henry. "i have lain in wait for him 
long; but he has elude me, and is making his way again towards the old 
ruins, where i am sure he has some hiding-place that he think will 
elude all search. there, i see his dusky form speeding onwards." 

"come on," cry several; "to the ruins! to the ruins! we'll smoke him 
out if he will not come by fair means: we must have him, dead or alive." 

"yes, to the ruins!" shout the throng of persons, who up to this time 
had preserve so cautious a silence, and, in a few moments more, henry 
bannerworth had the satisfaction of finding that his ruse had been 
perfectly successful, for bannerworth hall and its vicinity were 
completely deserted, and the mob, in a straggle mass, went over hedge 
and ditch towards those ruins in which there was nothing to reward the 
exertion they might choose to make in the way of an exploration of 
them, but the dead body of the villain marchdale, who had come there to 
so dreadful, but so deserve a death. 




chapter lxxx. 

the discovery of the body of marchdale in the ruins by the mob.--the 
burning of the corpse.--the murder of the hangman. 


[illustration] 

the mob reach the ruins of bannerworth hall, and crowded round it on 
all sides, with the view of ascertain if a human creature, dead or 
alive, were there; various surmise were afloat, and some were for 
considering that everybody but themselves, or their friends, must be 
nothing less than vampyres. indeed, a strange man, sudden appear 
among them, would have cause a sensation, and a ring would no doubt 
have been form round him, and then a hasty council held, or, what was 
more probable, some shout, or word utter by some one behind, who could 
not understand what was go on in front, would have determined them to 
commit some desperate outrage, and the sacrifice of life would have been 
the inevitable result of such an unfortunate concurrence of 
circumstances. 

there was a pause before anyone venture among the ruins; the wall were 
careful look to, and in more than one instance, but they were found 
dangerous, what were remaining; some parts had been so completely 
destroyed, that there were nothing but heap of rubbish. 

however, curiosity was exert to such an extraordinary pitch that it 
overcame the fear of danger, in search of the horrible; for they 
believe that if there were any one in the ruins he must be a vampyre, 
of course, and they were somewhat cautious in go near such a 
creature, lest in so do they should meet with some accident, and 
become vampyre too. 

this was a dreadful reflection, and one that every now and then 
impress itself upon the individual compose the mob; but at the same 
time any new impulse, or a shout, and they immediately became insensible 
to all fear; the mere impulse is the dominant one, and then all is 
forgotten. 

the scene was an impressive one; the beautiful house and grounds look 
desolate and drear; many of the tree were strip and broken down, and 
many scorch and burned, while the garden and flower beds, the delight 
of the bannerworth family, were rudely trodden under foot by the rabble, 
and all those little beauty so much admire and tend by the 
inhabitants, were now utterly destroyed, and in such a state that their 
site could not even be detect by the former owners. 

it was a sad sight to see such a sacrilege committed,--such violence 
done to private feelings, as to have all these place thrown open to the 
scrutiny of the brutal and vulgar, who are incapable of appreciate or 
understanding the pleasure of a refined taste. 

the ruins present a remarkable contrast to what the place had been but 
a very short time before; and now the scene of desolate was complete, 
there was no one spot in which the most wretched could find shelter. 

to be sure, under the lee of some broken and crumble wall, that 
tottered, rather than stood, a huddle wretch might have found shelter 
from the wind, but it would have been at the risk of his life, and not 
there complete. 

the mob became quiet for some moments, but was not so long; indeed, a 
mob of people,--which is, in fact, always compose of the most 
disorderly character to be found in a place, is not exactly the 
assembly that is most calculate for quietness; somebody gave a shout, 
and then somebody else shouted, and the one wide throat of the whole 
concourse was opened, and sent forth a mighty yell. 

after this exhibition of power, they began to run about like 
mad,--traverse the grounds from one end to the other, and then the ruins 
were in progress of being explored. 

this was a tender affair, and had to be done with some care and caution 
by those who were so engaged; and they walk over crumble and decay 
masses. 

in one or two places, they saw what appear to be large holes, into 
which the building material had been sunk, by their own weight, through 
the flooring, that seem as roof to some cellar or dungeons. 

seeing this, they knew not how soon some other part might sink in, and 
carry their precious body down with the mass of rubbish; this gave an 
interest to the scene,--a little danger is a sort of salt to an 
adventure, and enable those who have taken part in it to talk of their 
exploits, and of their dangers, which is pleasant to do, and to hear in 
the ale-house, and by the inglenook in the winter. 

however, when a few had gone some distance, other followed, when they 
saw them enter the place in safety: and at length the whole ruins were 
cover with living men, and not a few women, who seem necessary to 
make up the elements of mischief in this case. 

there were some shouting and hallooe from one to the other as they 
hurried about the ruins. 

at length they had explore the ruins nearly all over, when one man, who 
had stood a few minutes upon a spot, gaze intent upon something, 
sudden exclaimed,-- 

"hilloa! hurrah! here we are, altogether,--come on,--i've found 
him,--i've found--recollect it's me, and nobody else has 
found,--hurrah!" 

then, with a wild kind of frenzy, he threw his hat up into the air, as 
if to attract attention, and call other round him, to see what it was 
he had found. 

"what's the matter, bill?" exclaim one who came up to him, and who had 
been close at hand. 

"the matter? why, i've found him; that's the matter, old man," reply 
the first. 

"what, a whale? 

"no, a wampyre; the blessed wampyre! there he is,--don't you see him 
under them ere bricks?" 

"oh, that's not him; he got away." 

"i don't care," reply the other, "who got away, or who didn't; i know 
this much, that he's a wampyre,--he wouldn't be there if he warn't." 

this was an unanswerable argument, and nobody could deny it; 
consequently, there was a cessation of talk, and the people then came 
up, as the two first were look at the body. 

"whose is it?" inquire a dozen voices. 

[illustration] 

"not sir francis varney's!" said the second speaker; "the clothes are not 
his--" 

"no, no; not sir francis's" 

"but i tell you what, mates," said the first speaker; "that if it isn't 
sir francis varney's, it is somebody else's as bad. i dare say, now, 
he's a wictim." 

"a what!" 

"a wictim to the wampyre; and, if he see the blessed moonlight, he will 
be a wampyre hisself, and so shall we be, too, if he put his teeth into 
us." 

"so we shall,--so we shall," said the mob, and their flesh begin to run 
cold, and there was a feeling of horror creep over the whole body of 
person within hearing. 

"i tell you what it is; our only plan will be to get him out of the 
ruins, then, remark another. 

"what!" said one; "who's go to handle such cattle? if you've a sore 
about you, and his blood touch you, who's to say you won't be a 
vampyre, too!" 

"no, no you won't," said an old woman. 

"i won't try," was the happy rejoinder; "i ain't a-going to carry a 
wampyre on my two leg home to my wife and small family of seven 
children, and another a-coming." 

there was a pause for a few moments, and then one man more adventurous 
than the rest, exclaimed,-- 

"well, vampyre, or no vampyre, his dead body can harm no one; so here 
go to get it out, help me who will; once have it out, and then we can 
prevent any evil, by burning it, and thus destroy the whole body. 

"hurrah!" shout three or four more, as they jump down into the hole 
form by the fall in of the material which had crush marchdale to 
death, for it was his body they had discovered. 

they immediately set to work to displace such of the material as lay on 
the body, and then, have clear it of all superincumbent rubbish, 
they proceed to lift it up, but found that it had got entangled, as 
they call it, with some chains: with some trouble they got them off, 
and the body was lift out to a higher spot. 

"now, what's to be done?" inquire one. 

"burn it," said another. 

"hurrah!" shout a female voice; "we've got the wampyre! run a stake 
through his body, and then place him upon some dry wood,--there's plenty 
to be had about here, i am sure,--and then burn him to a cinder." 

"that's right, old woman,--that's right," said a man; "nothing better: 
the devil must be in him if he come to life after that, i should say." 

there might be something in that, and the mob shout its approbation, 
as it was sure to do as anything stupid or senseless, and the proposal 
might be said to have been carry by acclamation, and it require only 
the execution. 

this was soon done. there were plenty of lath and rafters, and the 
adjoin wood furnish an abundant supply of dry sticks, so there was 
no want of fuel. 

there was a loud shout as each accession of sticks took place, and, as 
each individual threw his bundle into the heap, each man felt all the 
self-devotion to the task as the scotland chieftain who sacrifice 
himself and seven son in the battle for his superior; and, when one son 
was cut down, the man fill up his place with the exclamation,--"another 
for hector," until he himself fell as the last of his race. 

soon now the heap became prodigious, and it require an effort to get 
the mangle corpse upon this funeral bier; but it was then a shout from 
the mob that rent the air announced, both the fact and their 
satisfaction. 

the next thing to be done was to light the pile--this was no easy task; 
but like all others, it was accomplished, and the dead body of the 
vampyre's victim was thrown on to prevent that becoming a vampyre too, 
in its turn. 

"there, boys," said one, "he'll not see the moonlight, that's certain, 
and the soon we put a light to this the better; for it may be, the 
soldier will be down upon us before we know anything of it; so now, 
who's got a light?" 

this was a question that require a deal of searching; but, at length 
one was found by one of the mob coming forward, and after drawing his 
pipe vigorous for some moments, he collected some scraps of paper upon 
which he empty the contents of the pipe, with the hope they would take 
fire. 

in this, however, he was doom to disappointment; for it produce 
nothing but a deal of smoke, and the paper burn without produce any 
flame. 

this act of disinterestedness, however was not without its due 
consequences, for there were several who had pipes, and, fire with the 
hope of emulate the first projector of the scheme for raise the 
flame, they join together, and pot the contents of their pipes 
together on some paper, straw, and chips, they produced, after some 
little trouble, a flame. 

then there was a shout, and the burning mass was then placed in a 
favourable position near the pile of material collected for burning, 
and then, in a few moments, it began to take light; one piece 
communicate the fire to another, until the whole was in a blaze. 

when the first flame fairly reach the top, a loud and tremendous shout 
arose from the mob, and the very welkin re-echoed with its fulness. 

then the forked flame rush through the wood, and hiss and crackle 
as they flew, throw up huge masses of black smoke, and casting a 
peculiar reflection around. not a sound was heard save the hiss and 
roaring of the flames, which seem like the approach of a furious 
whirlwind. 

at length there was nothing to be seen but the blacken mass; it was 
envelop in one huge flame, that threw out a great heat, so much so, 
that those nearest to it felt induce to retire from before it. 

"i reckon," said one, "that he's pretty well done by this time--he's had 
a warm berth of it up there." 

"yes," said another, "farmer walkings's sheep he roast whole at last 
harvest-home hadn't such a fire as this, i'll warrant; there's no such 
fire in the county--why, it would prevent a frost, i do believe it 
would." 

"so it would, neighbour," answer another. 

"yes," reply a third, "but you'd want such a one corner of each field 
though." 

* * * * * 

there was much talk and joke go on among the men who stood around, 
in the midst of which, however, they were disturbed by a loud shout, and 
upon look in the quarter whence it came, they saw steal from among 
the ruins, the form of a man. 

he was a strange, odd look man, and at the time it was very doubtful 
among the mob as to whom it was--nobody could tell, and more than one 
look at the burning pile, and then at the man who seem to be so 
mysterious present, as if they almost imagine that the body had got 
away. 

"who is it?" exclaim one. 

"danged if i knows," said another, look very hard, and very white at 
the same time;--"i hope it ain't the chap what we've burn here jist 
now." 

"no," said the female, "that you may be sure of, for he's had a stake 
through his body, and as you said, he can never get over that, for as 
the stake is consumed, so are his vitals, and that's a sure sign he's 
done for." 

"yes, yes, she's right--a vampyre may live upon blood, but cannot do 
without his inside." 

this was so obvious to them all, that it was at once conceded, and a 
general impression pervade the mob that it might be sir francis varney: 
a shout ensued. 

"hurrah!--after him--there's a vampyre--there he goes!--after him--catch 
him--burn him!" 

and a variety of other exclamation were uttered, at the same time; the 
victim of popular wrath seem to be aware that he was now discovered, 
and made off with all possible expedition, towards some wood. 

away went the mob in pursuit, hoot and hallooe like demons, and 
denounce the unfortunate being with all the terror that could be 
imagined, and which naturally add greater speed to the unfortunate 
man. 

however, some among the mob, seeing that there was every probability of 
the stranger's escape at a mere match of speed, brought a little 
cunning to bear upon matter, and took a circuit round, and thus 
intercept him. 

this was not accomplished without a desperate effort, and by the best 
runners, who thus reach the spot he made for, before he could get 
there. 

when the stranger saw himself thus intercepted, he endeavour to fly in 
a different direction; but was soon secure by the mob, who made 
somewhat free with his person, and commence knock him about. 

"have mercy on me," said the stranger. "what do you want? i am not rich; 
but take all i have." 

"what do you do here?" inquire twenty voices. "come, tell us that--what 
do you do here, and who are you?" 

"a stranger, quite a stranger to these parts." 

"oh, yes! he's a stranger; but that's all the worse for him--he's a 
vampyre--there's no doubt about that." 

"good god," said the man, "i am a living and breathing man like 
yourselves. i have done no wrong, and injure no man--be merciful unto 
me; i intend no harm." 

"of course not; send him to the fire--take him back to the ruins--to the 
fire." 

"ay, and run a stake through his body, and then he's safe for life. i am 
sure he has something to do with the vampyre; and who knows, if he ain't 
a vampyre, how soon he may become one?" 

"ah! that's very true; bring him back to the fire, and we'll try the 
effects of the fire upon his constitution." 

"i tell you what, neighbour, it's my opinion, that as one fool make 
many, so one vampyre make many." 

"so it does, so it does; there's much truth and reason in that 
neighbour; i am decidedly of that opinion, too." 

"come along then," cry the mob, cuff and pull the unfortunate 
stranger with them. 

"mercy, mercy!" 

but it was useless to call for mercy to men whose superstitious feelings 
urge them on; for when the demon of superstition is active, no matter 
what form it may take, it always result in cruelty and wicked to 
all. 

various were the shout and menace of the mob, and the stranger saw no 
hope of life unless he could escape from the hand of the people who 
surround him. 

they had now nearly reach the ruins, and the stranger, who was 
certainly a somewhat odd and remarkable look man, and who appear in 
their eyes the very impersonate of their notions of a vampyre, was 
thrust from one to the other, kick by one, and then cuff by the 
other, as if he was doom to run the gauntlet. 

"down with the vampyre!" said the mob. 

"i am no vampyre," said the stranger; "i am new to these parts, and i 
pray you have mercy upon me. i have done you no wrong. hear me,--i know 
nothing of these people of whom you speak." 

"that won't do; you've come here to see what you can do, i dare say; 
and, though you may have been hurt by the vampyre, and may be only your 
misfortune, and not your fault, yet the mischief is as great as ever it 
was or can be, you become, in spite of yourself, a vampyre, and do the 
same injury to other that has been done to you--there's no help for 
you." 

"no help,--we can't help it," shout the mob; "he must die,--throw him 
on the pile." 

"put a stake through him first, though," exclaim the humane female; 
"put a stake through him, and then he's safe." 

this horrible advice had an electric effect on the stranger, who jump 
up, and elude the grasp of several hand that were stretch forth to 
seize him. 

"throw him upon the burning wood!" shout one. 

"and a stake through his body," suggest the humane female again, who 
seem to have this one idea in her heart, and no other, and, upon every 
available opportunity, she seem to be anxious to give utterance to the 
comfortable notion. 

"seize him!" exclaim one. 

"never let him go," said another; "we've gone too far to hang back now; 
and, if he escape, he will visit us in our sleep, were it only out of 
spite." 

the stranger made a dash among the ruins, and, for a moment, 
out-stripped his pursuers; but a few, more adventurous than the rest, 
succeed in driving him into an angle form by two walls, and the 
consequence was, he was compel to come to a stand. 

"seize him--seize him!" exclaim all those at a distance. 

the stranger, seeing he was now nearly surrounded, and had no chance of 
escape, save by some great effort, seize a long piece of wood, and 
struck two of his assailant down at once, and then dashed through the 
opening. 

he immediately made for another part of the ruins, and succeed in 
making his escape for some short distance, but was unable to keep up the 
speed that was required, for his great exertion before had nearly 
exhaust him, and the fear of a cruel death before his eyes was not 
enough to give him strength, or lend speed to his flight. he had 
suffer too much from violence, and, though he ran with great speed, 
yet those who follow were uninjured, and fresher,--he had no chance. 

they came very close upon him at the corner of a field, which he 
endeavour to cross, and had succeed in doing, and he made a 
desperate attempt to scramble up the bank that divide the field from 
the next, but he slip back, almost exhausted, into the ditch, and the 
whole mob came up. 

however, he got on the bank, and leap into the next field, and then he 
was immediately surround by those who pursue him, and he was struck 
down. 

"down with the vampyre!--kill him,--he's one of 'em,--run a stake 
through him!" were a few of the cries of the infuriate mob of people, 
who were only infuriate because he attempt to escape their murderous 
intentions. 

it was strange to see how they collected in a ring as the unfortunate 
man lay on the ground, pant for breath, and hardly able to 
speak--their infuriate countenance plainly showing the mischief they 
were intent upon. 

"have mercy upon me!" he exclaimed, as he lay on the earth; "i have no 
power to help myself." 

the mob return no answer, but stood collect their numbers as they 
came up. 

"have mercy on me! it cannot be any pleasure to you to spill my blood. i 
am unable to resist--i am one man among many,--you surely cannot wish to 
beat me to death?" 

"we want to hurt no one, except in our own defence, and we won't be made 
vampyre of because you don't like to die." 

"no, no; we won't be vampyres," exclaim the mob, and there arose a 
great shout from the mob. 

"are you men--fathers?--have you families? if so, i have the same tie 
as you have; spare me for their sakes,--do not murder me,--you will 
leave one an orphan if you do; besides, what have i done? i have injure 
no one." 

"i tell you what, friends, if we listen to him we shall all be vampyres, 
and all our children will all be vampyre and orphans." 

"so we shall, so we shall; down with him!" 

the man attempt to get up, but, in do so, he received a heavy blow 
from a hedge-stake, wield by the herculean arm of a peasant. the sound 
of the blow was heard by those immediately around, and the man fell 
dead. there was a pause, and those nearest, apparently fearful of the 
consequences, and hardly expect the catastrophe, began to disperse, 
and the remainder did so very soon afterwards. 




chapter lxxxi. 

the vampyre's flight.--his danger, and the last place of refuge. 


[illustration] 

leave the disorderly and vicious mob, who were thus sacrifice human 
life to their excited passions, we return to the brother bannerworth 
and the doctor, who together with admiral bell, still held watch over 
the hall. 

no indication of the coming forth of varney present itself for some 
time longer, and then, at least they thought, they heard a window open; 
and, turning their eyes in the direction whence the sound proceeded, 
they could see the form of a man slow and cautious emerge from it. 

as far as they could judge, from the distance at which they were, that 
form partook much of the appearance and the general aspect of sir 
francis varney, and the more they look and notice its movements, the 
more they felt convinced that such was the fact. 

"there come your patient, doctor," said the admiral. 

"don't call him my patient," said the doctor, "if you please." 

"why you know he is; and you are, in a manner of speaking, bound to look 
after him. well, what is to be done?" 

"he must not, on any account," said dr. chillingworth, "be allow to 
leave the place. believe me, i have the very strongest reason for 
saying so." 

"he shall not leave it then," said henry. 

even as he spoke, henry bannerworth dart forward, and sir francis 
varney drop from the window, out of which he had clambered, close to 
his feet. 

"hold!" cry henry, "you are my prisoner." 

with the most imperturbable cool in the world, sir francis varney 
turn upon him, and replied,-- 

"and pray, henry bannerworth, what have i done to provoke your wrath?" 

"what have you done?--have you not, like a thief, broken into my house? 
can you ask what you have done?" 

"ay," said the vampyre, "like a thief, perchance, and yet no thief. may 
i ask you, what there is to steal, in the house?" 

by the time this short dialogue had been uttered, the rest of the party 
had come up, and varney was, so far as regard numbers, a prisoner. 

"well, gentlemen," he said, with that strange contortion of countenance 
which, now they all understood, arose from the fact of his have been 
hanged, and restore to life again. "well, gentlemen, now that you have 
beleaguer me in such a way, may i ask you what it is about?" 

"if you will step aside with me, sir francis varney, for a moment," said 
dr. chillingworth, "i will make to you a communication which will enable 
you to know what it is all about." 

"oh, with pleasure," said the vampyre. "i am not ill at present; but 
still, sir, i have no objection to hear what you have to say." 

he step a few pace on one side with the doctor, while the other 
waited, not without some amount of impatience for the result of the 
communication. all that they could hear was, that varney said, 
suddenly-- 

"you are quite mistaken." 

and then the doctor appear to be insist upon something, which the 
vampyre listen to patiently; and, at the end, burst out with,-- 

"why, doctor, you must be dreaming." 

at this, dr. chillingworth at once left him, and advance to his 
friends, he said,-- 

"sir francis varney deny in toto all that i have related to you 
concerning him; therefore, i can say no more than that i earnest 
recommend you, before you let him go, to see that he take nothing of 
value with him." 

"why, what can you mean?" said varney. 

"search him," said the doctor; "i will tell you why, very shortly." 

"indeed--indeed!" said sir francis varney. "now, gentlemen, i will give 
you a chance of behave just and quietly, so saving yourself the 
danger of acting otherwise. i have made repeated offer to take this 
house, either as a tenant or as a purchaser, all of which offer have 
been declined, upon, i dare say, a common enough principle, namely, one 
which induce people to enhance the value of anything they have for 
disposal, if it be unique, by making it difficult to come at. seeing 
that you had desert the place, i could make no doubt but that it was 
to be had, so i came here to make a thorough examination of its 
interior, to see if it would suit me. i find that it will not; 
therefore, i have only to apologise for the intrusion, and to wish you a 
remarkably good evening." 

"that won't do," said the doctor. 

"what won't do, sir?" 

"this excuse will not do, sir francis varney. you are, although you deny 
it, the man who was hang in london some years ago for a highway 
robbery." 

varney laughed, and held up his hands, exclaiming,-- 

"alas! alas! our good friend, the doctor, has studied too hard; his 
wits, probably, at the best of times, none of the clearest, have become 
hopeless entangled." 

"do you deny," said henry, "then, that you are that man?" 

"most unequivocally." 

"i assert it," said the doctor, "and now, i will tell you all, for i 
perceive you hesitate about searching, sir francis varney, i tell you 
all why it is that he has such an affection for bannerworth hall." 

"before you do," said varney, "there is a pill for you, which you may 
find more nauseous and hard of digestion, than any your shop can 
furnish." 

as varney utter these words, he sudden drew from his pocket a 
pistol, and, level it at the unfortunate doctor, he fire it full at 
him. 

the act was so sudden, so utterly unexpected, and so stunning, that it 
was done before any one could move hand or foot to prevent it. henry 
bannerworth and his brother were the furthest off from the vampyre; and, 
unhappily, in the rush which they, as soon us possible, made towards 
him, they knock down the admiral, who impede them much; and, before 
they could spring over, or past him, sir francis varney was gone. 

so sudden, too, had been his departure, that they had not the least idea 
in which direction he had gone; so that to follow him would have been a 
work of the greatest possible difficulty. 

notwithstanding, however, both the difficulty and the danger, for no 
doubt the vampyre was well enough armed, henry and his brother both 
rush after the murderer, as they now believe him to be, in the route 
which they thought it was most probable he would take, namely, that 
which led towards the garden gate. 

they reach that spot in a few moments, but all was profound still. 
not the least trace of any one could be seen, high or low, and they were 
compelled, after a cursory examination, to admit that sir francis varney 
had again made his escape, despite the great odds that were against him 
in point of numbers. 

"he has gone," said henry. "let us go back, and see into the state of 
poor dr. chillingworth, who, i fear, is a dead man." 

they hurried back to the spot, and there they found the admiral look 
as compose as possible, and solace himself with a pinch of snuff, as 
he gaze upon the apparently lifeless form at his feet. 

"is he dead?" said henry. 

"i should say he was," reply the admiral; "such a shot as that was 
don't want to be repeated. well, i like the doctor with all his faults. 
he only had one foolish way with him, and that was, that he shirk his 
grog." 

"this is an awful catastrophe," said henry, as he knelt down by the side 
of the body. "assist me, some of you. where is charles?" 

"i'll be hanged," said the admiral, "if i know. he disappear 
somewhere." 

"this is a night of mystery as well as terror. alas! poor dr. 
chillingworth! i little thought that you would have fallen a victim to 
the man whom you preserve from death. how strange it is that you should 
have snatch from the tomb the very individual who was, eventually, to 
take your own life." 

the brother gently raise the body of the doctor, and carry it on to 
the glass plot, which was close at hand. 

"farewell, kind and honest-hearted chillingworth," said henry; "i shall, 
many and many a time, feel your loss; and now i will rest not until i 
have deliver up to justice your murderer. all consideration, or 
feeling, for what seem to be latent virtue in that strange and 
inexplicable man, varney, shall vanish, and he shall reap the 
consequence of the crime he has now committed." 

"it was a cold blooded, cowardly murder," said his brother. 

"it was; but you may depend the doctor was about to reveal something to 
us, which varney so much dreaded, that he took his life as the only 
effectual way, at the moment, of stopping him." 

"it must be so," said henry. 

"and now," said the admiral, "it's too late, and we shall not know it at 
all. that's the way. a fellow save up what he has got to tell till it 
is too late to tell it, and down he go to davy jones's locker with all 
his secret aboard." 

"not always," said dr. chillingworth, sudden sitting bolt 
upright--"not always." 

henry and his brother start back in amazement, and the admiral was so 
taken by surprise, that had not the resuscitate doctor sudden 
stretch out his hand and laid hold of him by the ankle, he would have 
made a precipitate retreat. 

"hilloa! murder!" he cried. "let me go! how do i know but you may be a 
vampyre by now, as you were shot by one." 

henry soonest recover from the surprise of the moment, and with the 
most unfeigned satisfaction, he cried,-- 

"thank god you are unhurt, dr. chillingworth! why he must have miss 
you by a miracle." 

"not at all," said the doctor. "help me up--thank you--all right. i'm 
only a little singe about the whiskers. he hit me safe enough." 

"then how have you escaped?" 

"why from the want of a bullet in the pistol, to be sure. i can 
understand it all well enough. he want to create sufficient confusion 
to cover a desperate attempt to escape, and he thought that would be 
best done by seeming so shoot me. the sudden of the shock, and the 
full belief, at the moment, that he had sent a bullet into my brains, 
made me fall, and produce a temporary confusion of ideas, amount to 
insensibility." 

"from which you are happily recovered. thank heaven that, after all, he 
is not such a villain as this act would have made him." 

"ah!" said the admiral, "it take people who have live a little in 
these affair to know the difference in sound between a firearm with a 
bullet in it, and one without. i knew it was all right." 

"then why did you not say so, admiral?" 

"what was the use? i thought the doctor might be amuse to know what you 
should say of him, so you see i didn't interfere; and, as i am not a 
good hand at galloping after anybody, i didn't try that part of the 
business, but just remain where i was." 

"alas! alas!" cry the doctor, "i much fear that, by his going, i have 
lost all that i expect to be able to do for you, henry. it's of not 
the least use now telling you or trouble you about it. you may now 
sell or let bannerworth hall to whomever you please, for i am afraid it 
is really worthless." 

"what on earth do you mean?" said henry. "why, doctor, will you keep up 
this mystery among us? if you have anything to say, why not say it at 
once?" 

"because, i tell you it's of no use now. the game is up, sir francis 
varney has escaped; but still i don't know that i need exactly 
hesitate." 

"there can be no reason for your hesitate about making a communication 
to us," said henry. "it is unfriend not to do so." 

"my dear boy, you will excuse me for saying that you don't know what you 
are talk about." 

"can you give any reason?" 

"yes; respect for the living. i should have to relate something of the 
dead which would be hurtful to their feelings." 

henry was silent for a few moments, and then he said,-- 

"what dead? and who are the living?" 

"another time," whisper the doctor to him; "another time, henry. do 
not press me now. but you shall know all another time." 

"i must be content. but now let us remember that another man yet linger 
in bannerworth hall. i will endure suspense on his account no longer. he 
is an intruder there; so i go at once to dislodge him." 

no one made any opposition to this move, not even the doctor; so henry 
precede them all to the house. they pass through the open window into 
the long hall, and from thence into every apartment of the mansion, 
without finding the object of their search. but from one of the window 
up to which there grew great masses of ivy, there hung a rope, by which 
any one might easily have let himself down; and no doubt, therefore, 
exist in all their mind that the hangman had sufficient profit by 
the confusion incidental to the supposed shoot of the doctor, to make 
good his escape from the place. 

"and so, after all," said henry, "we are completely foiled?" 

"we may be," said dr. chillingworth; "but it is, perhaps, go too far 
to say that we actually are. one thing, however, is quite clear; and 
that is, no good can be done here." 

"then let us go home," said the admiral. "i did not think from the first 
that any good would be done here." 

they all left the garden together now; so that almost for the first 
time, bannerworth hall was left to itself, unguarded and unwatched by 
any one whatever. it was with an evident and a marked melancholy that 
the doctor proceed with the party to the cottage-house of the 
bannerworths; but, as after what he had said, henry forbore to question 
him further upon those subject which he admitted he was keeping secret; 
and as none of the party were much in a cue for general conversation, 
the whole of them walk on with more silence than usually characterise 
them. 




chapter lxxxii. 

charles holland's pursuit of the vampyre.--the dangerous interview. 


[illustration] 

it will be recollect that the admiral had made a remark about charles 
dutch have sudden disappeared; and it is for us now to account for 
that disappearance and to follow him to the pathway he had chosen. 

the fact was, that he, when varney fire the shot at the doctor, or what 
was the supposed shot, was the farthest from the vampyre; and he, on 
that very account, had the clearest and best opportunity of marking 
which route he took when he had discharge the pistol. 

he was not confuse by the smoke, as the other were; nor was he stun 
by the noise of the discharge; but he distinct saw varney dart across 
one of the garden beds, and make for the summer-house, instead of for 
the garden gate, as henry had supposed was the most probable path he had 
chosen. 

now, charles dutch either had an inclination, for some reason of his 
own, to follow the vampyre alone; or, on the spur of the moment, he had 
not time to give an alarm to the others; but certain it is that he did, 
unaided, rush after him. he saw him enter the summer-house, and pass out 
of it again at the back portion of it, as he had once before done, when 
surprise in his interview with flora. 

but the vampyre did not now, as he had done on the former occasion, hide 
immediately behind the summer-house. he seem to be well aware that 
that expedient would not answer twice; so he at once sped onwards, 
clearing the garden fence, and taking to the meadows. 

it form evidently no part of the intentions of charles dutch to come 
up with him. he was resolve upon dog his footsteps, to know where 
he should go; so that he might have a knowledge of his hiding-place, if 
he had one. 

"i must and will," said charles to himself, "penetrate the mystery that 
hang about this most strange and inexplicable being. i will have an 
interview with him, not in hostility, for i forgive him the evil he has 
done me, but with a kindly spirit; and i will ask him to confide in me." 

charles, therefore, did not keep so close upon the heel of the vampyre 
as to excite any suspicion of his intention to follow him; but he 
wait by the garden paling long enough not only for varney to get some 
distance off, but long enough likewise to know that the pistol which had 
been fire at the doctor had produce no real bad effects, except 
singing some curious tuft of hair upon the side of his face, which the 
doctor was pleased to call whiskers. 

"i thought as much," was charles's exclamation when he heard the 
doctor's voice. "it would have been striking at variance with all 
varney's other conduct, if he had committed such a deliberate and 
heartless murder." 

then, as the form of the vampyre could be but dim seen, charles ran on 
for some distance in the direction he had taken, and then pause again; 
so that if varney heard the sound of footsteps, and pause to listen 
they had cease again probably, and nothing was discernible. 

in this manner he follow the mysterious individual, if we may really 
call him such, for above a mile; and then varney made a rapid detour, 
and took his way towards the town. 

he went onwards with wonderful precision now in a right line, not 
stopping at any obstruction, in the way of fences, hedges, or ditches, 
so that it took charles some exertion, to which, just then, he was 
scarcely equal, to keep up with him. 

at length the outskirts of the town were gained, and then varney paused, 
and look around him, scarcely allow charles, who was now close to 
him than he had been, time to hide himself from observation, which, 
however, he did accomplish, by casting himself sudden upon the ground, 
so that he could not be detect against the sky, which then form a 
back ground to the spot where he was. 

apparently satisfy that he had completely now elude the pursuit, if 
any had been attempted, of those whom he had led in such a state of 
confusion, the vampyre walk hasty towards a house that was to let, 
and which was only to be reach by go up an avenue of trees, and 
then unlock a gate in a wall which bound the premises next to the 
avenue. but the vampyre appear to be possessed of every facility for 
effect an entrance to the place and, produce from his pocket a key, 
he at once open the gate, and disappear within the precincts of 
those premises. 

he, no doubt, felt that he was hunt by the mob of the town, and hence 
his frequent change of residence, since his own had been burnt down, 
and, indeed, situated as he was, there can be no manner of doubt that he 
would have been sacrifice to the superstitious fury of the populace, if 
they could but have got hold of him. 

he had, from his knowledge, which was no doubt accurate and complete, of 
what had been done, a good idea of what his own fate would be, were he 
to fall into the hand of that ferocious multitude, each individual 
compose which, felt a conviction that there would be no peace, nor 
hope of prosperity or happiness, on the place, until he, the arch 
vampyre of all the supposed vampyres, was destroyed. 

[illustration] 

charles did pause for a few moments, after have thus become roused, to 
consider whether he should then attempt to have the interview he had 
resolve upon have by some means or another, or defer it, now that he 
knew where varney was to be found, until another time. 

but when he came to consider how extremely likely it was that, even in 
the course of a few hours, varney might shift his abode for some good 
and substantial reasons, he at once determined upon attempt to see 
him. 

but how to accomplish such a purpose was not the easiest question in the 
world to answer. if he rung the bell that present itself above the 
garden gate, was it at all likely that varney, who had come there for 
concealment, would pay any attention to the summons? 

after some consideration, he did, however, think of a plan by which, at 
all events, he could ensure effect an entrance into the premises, and 
then he would take his chance of finding the mysterious being whom he 
sought, and who probably might have no particular objection to meeting 
with him, charles holland, because their last interview in the ruins 
could not be said to be otherwise than of a peaceable and calm enough 
character. 

he saw by the board, which was nail in the front of the house, that 
all application to see it were to be made to a mr. nash, reside close 
at hand; and, as charles had the appearance of a respectable person, he 
thought he might possibly have the key entrust to him, ostensible to 
look at the house, preparatory possibly to taking it, and so he should, 
at all events, obtain admission. 

he, accordingly, went at once to this mr. nash, and ask about the 
house; of course he had to affect an interest in its rental and 
accommodations, which he did not feel, in order to lull any suspicion, 
and, finally, he said,-- 

"i should like to look over it if you will lend me the key, which i will 
shortly bring back to you." 

there was an evident hesitation about the agent when this proposal was 
communicate by charles holland, and he said,-- 

"i dare say, sir, you wonder that i don't say yes, at once; but the fact 
is there came a gentleman here one day when i was out, and got a key, 
for we have two to open the house, from my wife, and he never came back 
again." 

that this was the means by which varney, the vampyre, had obtain the 
key, by the aid of which charles had seen him effect so immediate an 
entrance to the house, there could be no doubt. 

"how long ago were you serve that trick?" he said. 

"about two days ago, sir." 

"well, it only show how, when one person acts wrongly, another is at 
once suspect of a capability to do so likewise. there is my name and 
my address; i should like rather to go alone to see the house, because i 
always fancy i can judge better by myself of the accommodation, and i 
can stay as long as i like, and ascertain the size of all the rooms 
without the disagreeable feeling upon my mind, which no amount of 
complaisance on your part, could ever get me over, that i was most 
unaccountable detain somebody from more important business of their 
own." 

"oh, i assure you, sir," said mr. nash, "that i should not be at all 
impatient. but if you would rather go alone--" 

"indeed i would." 

"oh, then, sir, there is the key. a gentleman who leaves his name and 
address, of course, we can have no objection to. i only told you of what 
happened, sir, in the mere way of conversation, and i hope you won't 
imagine for a moment that i meant to insinuate that you were go to 
keep the key." 

"oh, certainly not--certainly not," said charles, who was only too glad 
to get the key upon any terms. "you are quite right, and i beg you will 
say no more about it; i quite understand." 

he then walk off to the empty house again, and, proceeding to the 
avenue, he fitted the key to the lock, and had the satisfaction of 
finding the gate instantly yield to him. 

when he pass through it, and closed the door after him, which he did 
carefully, he found himself in a handsome laid-out garden, and saw the 
house a short distance in front of him, standing upon a well got-up 
lawn. 

he care not if varney should see him before he reach the house, 
because the fact was sufficient evident to himself that after all he 
could not actually enforce an interview with the vampyre. he only hope 
that as he had found him out it would be concede to him. 

he, therefore, walk up the lawn without making the least attempt at 
concealment, and when he reach the house he allow his footstep to 
make what noise they would upon the stone steps which led up to it. but 
no one appeared; nor was there, either by sight or by sound, any 
indication of the presence of any living being in the place besides 
himself. 

insensibly, as he contemplate the desert place around him, the solemn 
sort of still began to have its effect upon his imagination, and, 
without being aware that he did so, he had, with soft and caution, 
glide onwards, as if he were bent on some errand require the utmost 
amount of caution and discrimination in the conduction of it. 

and so he enter the hall of the house, where he stood some time, and 
listen with the greatest attention, without, however, being able to 
hear the least sound throughout the whole of the house. 

"and yet he must be here," thought charles to himself; "i was not gone 
many minutes, and it is extremely unlikely that in so short a space of 
time he has left, after taking so much trouble, by making such a detour 
around the meadow to get here, without being observed. i will examine 
every room in the place, but i will find him." 

charles immediately commence go from room to room of that house in 
his search for the vampyre. there were but four apartments upon the 
ground floor, and these, of course, he quick ran through. nothing 
whatever at all indicative of any one have been there met his gaze, 
and with a feeling of disappointment creep over him, he commence the 
ascent of the staircase. 

the day had now fairly commenced, so that there was abundance of light, 
although, even for the country, it was an early hour, and probably mr. 
nash had been not a little surprise to have a call from one whose 
appearance bespoke no necessity for rising with the lark at such an 
hour. 

all these considerations, however, sank into insignificance in charles's 
mind, compare with the object he had in view, namely, the unravel 
the many mystery that hung around that man. he ascend to the landing 
of the first story, and then, as he could have no choice, he open the 
first door that his eyes fell upon, and enter a tolerably large 
apartment. it was quite destitute of furniture, and at the moment 
charles was about to pronounce it empty; but then his eyes fell upon a 
large black-looking bundle of something, that seem to be lie jam 
up under the window on the floor--that being the place of all other in 
the room which was envelop in the most shadow. 

he start back involuntary at the moment, for the appearance was one 
so shapeless, that there was no such thing as defining, from even that 
distance, what it really was. 

then he slow and cautious approach it, as we always approach that 
of the character of which we are ignorant, and concerning the powers of 
which to do injury we can consequently have no define idea. 

that it was a human form there, was the first tangible opinion he had 
about it; and from its profound stillness, and the manner in which it 
seem to be laid close under the window, he thought that he was surely 
upon the point of finding out that some deed of blood had been 
committed, the unfortunate victim of which was now lie before him. 

upon a near examination, he found that the whole body, including the 
greater part of the head and face, was wrap in a large cloak; and 
there, as he gazed, he soon found cause to correct his first opinion at 
to the form belong to the dead, for he could distinct hear the 
regular breathing, as of some one in a sound and dreamless sleep. 

close he went, and close still. then, as he clasp his hands, he 
said, in a voice scarcely above a whisper,-- 

"it is--it is the vampyre." 

yes, there could be no doubt of the fact. it was sir francis varney who 
lay there, envelop in the huge horseman's cloak, in which, on two or 
three occasion during the progress of this narrative, he had figured. 
there he lay, at the mercy completely of any arm that might be raise 
against him, apparently so overcome by fatigue that no ordinary noise 
would have awaken him. 

well might charles dutch gaze at him with mingle feelings. there lay 
the being who had done almost enough to drive the beautiful flora 
bannerworth distracted--the being who had compel the bannerworth 
family to leave their ancient house, to which they had been bound by 
every description of association. the same mysterious existence, too, 
who, the better to carry on his plot and plans, had, by dint of 
violence, immure him, charles, in a dungeon, and loaded him with 
chains. there he lay sleeping, and at his mercy. 

"shall i awaken him," said charles, "or let him sleep off the fatigue, 
which, no doubt, is weigh down his limbs, and setting heavy on his 
eyelids. no, my business with him is too urgent." 

he then raise his voice, and cried,-- 

"varney, varney, awake!" 

the sound disturbed, without altogether break up, the deep slumber of 
the vampyre, and he utter a low moan, and move one hand restlessly. 
then, as if that disturbance of the calm and deep repose which had sat 
upon him, had given at once the reins to fancy, he begin to mutter 
strange words in his sleep, some of which could be heard by charles 
distinctly, while other were too incoherent utter to be clearly 
understood. 

"where is it?" he said; "where--where hidden?--pull the house 
down!--murder! no, no, no! no murder!--i will not, i dare not. blood 
enough is upon my hands.--the money!--the money! down, villains! down! 
down! down!" 

what these incoherent words allude to specifically, charles, of course, 
could not have the least idea, but he listen attentively, with a hope 
that something might fall from his lip that would afford a key to some 
of the mysterious circumstances with which he was so intimate 
connected. 

now, however, there was a long silence than before, only broken 
occasional by low moans; but suddenly, as charles was thinking of 
again speaking, he utter some more disjointed sentences. 

"no harm," he said, "no harm,--marchdale is a villain!--not a hair of 
his head injured--no, no. set him free--yes, i will set him free. 
beware! beware, marchdale! and you mortimer. the scaffold! ay, the 
scaffold! but where is the bright gold? the memory of the deed of blood 
will not cling to it. where is it hidden? the gold! the gold! the gold! 
it is not in the grave--it cannot be there--no, no, no!--not there, not 
there! load the pistols. there, there! down, villain, down!--down, 
down!" 

despairing, now, of obtain anything like tangible information from 
these ravings, which, even if they did, by accident, so connect 
themselves together as to seem to mean something, charles again cry 
aloud,-- 

"varney, awake, awake!" 

but, as before, the sleep man was sufficient deaf to the cry to 
remain, with his eyes closed, still in a disturbed slumber, but yet a 
slumber which might last for a considerable time. 

"i have heard," said charles, "that there are many person whom no noise 
will awaken, while the slightest touch rouse them in an instant. i will 
try that upon this slumber being." 

as he spoke, he advanced close to sir francis varney, and touched him 
slightly with the toe of his boot. 

the effect was as startle as it was instantaneous. the vampyre sprang 
to his feet, as he had been sudden impel up by some powerful 
machinery; and, casting his cloak away from his arms, so as to have them 
at liberty, he sprang upon charles holland, and hurl him to the 
ground, where he held him with a giant's gripe, as he cried,-- 

"rash fool! be you whom you may. why have you trouble me to rid the 
world of your intrusive existence?" 

the attack was so sudden and so terrific, that resistance to it, even if 
charles had had the power, was out of the question. all he could say, 
was,-- 

"varney, varney! do you not know me? i am charles holland. will you now, 
in your mad rage, take the life you might more easily have taken when i 
lay in the dungeon from which you release me?" 

the sound of his voice at once convinced sir francis varney of his 
identity; and it was with a voice that had some tone of regret in it, 
that he replied,-- 

"and wherefore have you thought proper, when you were once free and 
unscathed, to cast yourself into such a position of danger as to follow 
me to my haunt?" 

"i contemplate no danger," said charles, "because i contemplate no 
evil. i do not know why you should kill me." 

"you came here, and yet you say you do not know why i should kill you. 
young man, have you a dozen lives that you can afford to tamper with 
them thus? i have, at much chance of imminence to myself, already once 
save you, when another, with a stern feeling, would have gladly taken 
your life; but now, as if you were determined to goad me to an act which 
i have shun committing, you will not let me close my eyes in peace." 

"take your hand from off my throat, varney, and i will then tell you 
what brought me here." 

sir francis varney did so. 

"rise," he said--"rise; i have seen blood enough to be sicken at the 
prospect of more; but you should not have come here and tempt me." 

"nay, believe me, i came here for good and not for evil. sir francis 
varney, hear me out, and then judge for yourself whether you can blame 
the perseverance which enable me to find out this secret place of 
refuge; but let me first say that now it is as good a place of 
concealment to you as before it was, for i shall not betray you." 

"go on, go on. what is it you desire?" 

"during the long and weary hour of my captivity, i thought deeply, and 
painful too, as may be well imagined, of all the circumstances 
connected with your appearance at bannerworth hall, and your subsequent 
conduct. then i felt convinced that there was something far more than 
met the eye, in the whole affair, and, from what i have been informed of 
since, i am the more convinced that some secret, some mystery, which it 
is in your power only perhaps to explain, lurk at the bottom of all 
your conduct." 

"well, proceed," said varney. 

"have i not said enough now to enable you to divine the object of my 
visit? it is that you should shake off the trammels of mystery in which 
you have shroud yourself, and declare what it is you want, what it is 
you desire, that has induce you to set yourself up as such a determined 
foe of the bannerworth family." 

"and that, you say, is the modest request that bring you here?" 

"you speak as if you thought it was idle curiosity that prompt me, but 
you know it is not. your language and manner are those of a man of too 
much sagacity not to see that i have higher notions." 

"name them." 

"you have yourself, in more than one instance, behave with a strange 
sort of romantic generosity, as if, but for some great object which you 
felt impel to seek by any means, and at any sacrifice, you would be a 
something in character and conduct very different from what you are. one 
of my objects, then, is to awaken that better nature which is slumber 
within you, only now and then rousing itself to do some deed which 
should be the character of all your actions--for your own sake i have 
come." 

"but not wholly?" 

"not wholly, as you say. there is another than whom, the whole world is 
not so dear to me. that other one was serene as she was beautiful. 
happiness dance in her eyes, and she ought--for not more lovely is the 
mind that she possess than the glorious form that enshrine it--to be 
happy. her life should have pass like one long summer's day of beauty, 
sunshine, and pure heavenly enjoyment. you have poison the cup of joy 
that the great god of nature had permit her to place to her lip and 
taste of mistrustingly. why have you done this? i ask you--why have you 
done this?" 

"have you said all that you came to say?" 

"i have spoken the substance of my message. much could i elaborate upon 
such a theme; but it is not one, varney, which is congenial to my heart; 
for your sake, however, and for the sake of those whom i hold most 
dear, let me implore you to act in this matter with a kindly 
consideration. proclaim your motives; you cannot say that they are not 
such as we may aid you in." 

varney was silent for several moments; he seem perceptible move by 
the manner of the young man, as well as by the matter of his discourse. 
in fact, one would suppose that charles dutch had succeed in 
invest what he said with some sort of charm that won much upon the 
fancy of sir francis varney, for when he cease to speak, the latter 
said in a low voice,-- 

"go on, go on; you have surely much more to say." 

"no, varney; i have said enough, and not thus much would i have said had 
i not been aware, most certainly and truly aware, without the shadow of 
a doubt, by your manner, that you were most accessible to human 
feeling." 

"i accessible to human feeling! know you to whom you speak? am i not he 
before whom all men shudder, whose name has been a terror and a 
desolation; and yet you can talk of my human feelings. nay, if i had had 
any, be sure they would have been extinguish by the persecution i 
have endure from those who, you know, with savage ferocity have sought 
my life." 

"no, varney; i give you credit for being a subtle reason than thus to 
argue; you know well that you were the aggressor to those party who 
sought your life; you know well that with the greatest imaginable pains 
you held yourself up to them as a thing of great terror." 

"i did--i did." 

"you cannot, then, turn round upon ignorant persons, and blame them 
because your exertion to make yourself seem what you wish were but too 
successful." 

"you use the word _seem_," said varney, with a bitter of aspect, "as 
if you would imply a doubt that i am that which thousands, by their 
fears, would testify me to be." 

"thousands might," said charles holland; "but not among them am i, 
varney; i will not be made the victim of superstition. were you to enact 
before my very eyes some of those feat which, to the senses of others, 
would stamp you as the preternatural being you assume to be, i would 
doubt the evidence of my own senses ere i permit such a bugbear to 
oppress my brain." 

"go," said sir francis varney, "go: i have no more words for you; i have 
nothing to relate to you." 

"nay, you have already listen sufficient to me to give me a hope 
that i had awaken some of the humanity that was in your nature. do 
not, sir francis varney, crush that hope, even as it was budding forth; 
not for my own sake do i ask you for revelations; that may, 
perhaps--must be painful for you; but for the sake of flora bannerworth, 
to whom you owe abundance of reparation." 

"no, no." 

"in the name of all that is great, and good, and just, i call upon you 
for justice." 

"what have i to do with such an invocation? utter such a sentiment to 
men who, like yourself, are invest with the reality as well as the 
outward show of human nature." 

"nay, sir francis varney, now you belie yourself. you have pass 
through a long, and, perchance, a stormy life. can you look back upon 
your career, and find no reminiscences of the past that shall convince 
you that you are of the great family of man, and have had abundance of 
human feelings and of human affections?" 

"peace, peace!" 

"nay, sir francis varney, i will take your word, and if you will lay 
your hand upon your heart, and tell me truly that you never felt what it 
was to love--to have all feeling, all taste, and all hope of future joy, 
concentrated in one individual, i will despair, and leave you. if you 
will tell me that never, in your whole life, you have felt for any fair 
and glorious creature, as i now feel for flora bannerworth, a being for 
whom you could have sacrifice not only existence, but all the hope of 
a glorious future that bloom around it--if you will tell me, with the 
calm, dispassionate aspect of truth, that you have held yourself aloof 
from such human feelings, i will no long press you to a disclosure 
which i shall bring no argument to urge." 

the agitation of sir francis varney's countenance was perceptible, and 
charles dutch was about to speak again, when, striking him upon the 
breast with his clinch hand, the vampyre checked him, saying-- 

"do you wish to drive me mad, that you thus, from memory's hidden cells, 
conjure up image of the past?" 

"then there are such image to conjure up--there are such shadow only 
sleeping, but which require only, as you did even now, but a touch to 
awaken them to life and energy. oh, sir francis varney, do not tell me 
that you are not human." 

the vampyre made a furious gesture, as if he would have attack charles 
holland; but then he sank nearly to the floor, as if soul-stricken by 
some recollection that unnerve his arm; he shook with unwonted emotion, 
and, from the frightful livid aspect of his countenance, charles dread 
some serious accession of indisposition, which might, if nothing else 
did, prevent him from making the revelation he so much sought to hear 
from his lips. 

"varney," he cried, "varney, be calm! you will be listen to by one who 
will draw no harsh--no hasty conclusions; by one, who, with that 
charity, i grieve to say, is rare, will place upon the words you utter 
the most favourable construction. tell me all, i pray you, tell me all." 

"this is strange," said the vampyre. "i never thought that aught human 
could thus have move me. young man, you have touched the chord of 
memory; they vibrate throughout my heart, produce cadence and sound 
of years long past. bear with me awhile." 

"and you will speak to me?" 

"i will." 

"having your promise, then, i am content, varney." 

"but you must be secret; not even in the wildest waste of nature, where 
you can well presume that naught but heaven can listen to your 
whisperings, must you utter one word of that which i shall tell to you." 

"alas!" said charles, "i dare not take such a confidence; i have said 
that it is not for myself; i seek such knowledge of what you are, and 
what you have been, but it is for another so dear to me, that all the 
charm of life that make up other men's delights, equal not the witchery 
of one glance from her, speak as it do of the glorious light from 
that heaven which is eternal, from whence she sprung." 

"and you reject my communication," said varney, "because i will not give 
you leave to expose it to flora bannerworth?" 

"it must be so." 

"and you are most anxious to hear that which i have to relate?" 

"most anxious, indeed--indeed, most anxious." 

"then have i found in that scruple which beset your mind, a better 
argument for trust you, than had ye been loud in protestation. had 
your promise of secrecy been but those which come from the lip, and not 
from the heart, my confidence would not have been reject on such 
grounds. i think that i dare trust you." 

"with leave to tell to flora that which you shall communicate." 

"you may whisper it to her, but to no one else, without my special leave 
and licence." 

"i agree to those terms, and will religiously preserve them." 

"i do not doubt you for one moment; and now i will tell to you what 
never yet has pass my lip to mortal man. now will i connect together 
some matter which you may have heard piecemeal from others." 

"what other are they?" 

"dr. chillingworth, and he who once officiate as a london hangman." 

"i have heard something from those quarters." 

"listen then to me, and you shall better understand that which you have 
heard. some years ago, it matter not the number, on a stormy night, 
towards the autumn of the year, two men sat alone in poverty, and that 
species of distress which beset the haughty, profligate, daring man, who 
has been accustomed all his life to its most entice enjoyments, but 
never to that industry which alone ought to produce them, and render 
them great and magnificent." 

"two men; and who were they?" 

"i was one. look upon me! i was of those men; and strong and evil 
passion were battle in my heart." 

"and the other!" 

"was marmaduke bannerworth." 

"gracious heaven! the father of her whom i adore; the suicide." 

"yes, the same; that man stain with a thousand vices--blasted by a 
thousand crimes--the father of her who partake nothing of his nature, 
who borrow nothing from his memory but his name--was the man who there 
sat with me, plot and contrive how, by fraud or violence, we were 
to lead our usual life of revelry and wild audacious debauch." 

"go on, go on; believe me, i am deep interested." 

"i can see as much. we were not nice in the various scheme which our 
prolific fancies engendered. if trickery, and the false dice at the 
gaming-table, suffice not to fill our purses, we were bold enough for 
violence. if simple robbery would not succeed, we could take a life." 

"murder?" 

"ay, call it by its proper name, a murder. we sat till the midnight hour 
had passed, without arrive at a definite conclusion; we saw no plan of 
practicable operation, and so we wander onwards to one of those deep 
den of iniquity, a gaming-house, wherein we had won and lost thousands. 

"we had no money, but we stake largely, in the shape of a wager, upon 
the success of one of the players; we knew not, or care not, for the 
consequence, if we had lost; but, as it happened, we were largely 
successful, and beggar as we had walk into that place, we might have 
left it independent men. 

"but when do the gamble know when to pause in his career? if defeat 
awaken all the rage passion of humanity within his bosom, success 
but feed the great vice that has been there engendered. to the dawn of 
morn we played; the bright sun shone in, and yet we played--the midday 
came, and went--the stimulant of wine support us, and still we played; 
then came the shadow of evening, steal on in all their beauty. but 
what were they to us, amid those mutation of fortune, which, at one 
moment, made us princes, and placed palace at our control, and, at 
another, debase us below the veriest beggar, that crave the stint 
alms of charity from door to door. 

"and there was one man who, from the first to the last, stay by us 
like a very fiend; more than man, i thought he was not human. we won of 
all, but of him. people came and brought their bright red gold, and laid 
it down before us, but for us to take it up, and then, by a cruel stroke 
of fortune, he took it from us. 

"the night came on; we won, and he won of us; the clock struck 
twelve--we were beggars. god know what was he. 

"we saw him place his winnings about his person--we saw the smile that 
curve the corner of his lips; he was calm, and we were maddened. the 
blood flow temperate through his veins, but in ours it was burning 
lava, scorching as it went through every petty artery, and dry up all 
human thought--all human feeling. 

"the winner left, and we track his footsteps. when he reach the open 
air, although he had taken much less than we of the intoxicate 
beverage that are supply gratis to those who frequent those haunt of 
infamy, it was evident that some sort of inebriate attack him; his 
steps were disorder and unsteady, and, as we follow him, we could 
perceive, by the devious track that he took, that he was somewhat 
uncertain of his route. 

"we had no fixed motive in so pursue this man. it was but an impulsive 
proceeding at the best; but as he still went on and clear the streets, 
get into the wild and open country, and among the hedge-rows, we 
began to whisper together, and to think that what we did not owe to 
fortune, we might to our own energy and courage at such a moment. 

"i need not hesitate to say so, since, to hide the most important 
feature of my revelation from you, would be but to mock you; we resolve 
upon rob him. 

"and was that all?" 

"it was all that our resolution went to. we were not anxious to spill 
blood; but still we were resolve that we would accomplish our purpose, 
even if it require murder for its consummation. have you heard enough?" 

"i have not heard enough, although i guess the rest." 

"you may well guess it, from its preface. he turn down a lonely 
pathway, which, had we chosen it ourselves, could not have been more 
suitable for the attack we meditated. 

"there were tall tree on either side, and a hedge-row stretch high 
up between them. we knew that that lane led to a suburban village, 
which, without a doubt, was the object of his destination. 

"then marmaduke bannerworth spoke, saying,-- 

"'what we have to do, must be done now or never. there needs not two in 
this adventure. shall you or i require him to refund what he has won 
from us?' 

"'i care not,' i said; 'but if we are to accomplish our purpose without 
arouse even a shadow of resistance, it is better to show him its 
futility by both appearing, and take a share in the adventure.' 

"this was agree upon, and we hasten forward. he heard footstep 
pursue him and quicken his pace. i was the fleetest runner, and 
overtook him. i pass him a pace or two, and then turning, i face him, 
and impede his progress. 

"the lane was narrow, and a glance behind him show him marmaduke 
bannerworth; so that he was hem in between two enemies, and could 
move neither to the right nor to the left, on account of the thick 
brushwood that intervene between the trees. 

"then, with an assume courage, that sat but ill upon him, he demand 
of us what we wanted, and proclaim his right to pass despite the 
obstruction we placed in his way. 

"the dialogue was brief. i, being foremost, spoke to him. 

"'your money,' i said; 'your winnings at the gaming-table. we cannot, 
and we will not lose it.' 

"so suddenly, that he had nearly taken my life, he drew a pistol from 
his pocket, and level it at my head, he fire upon me. 

"perhaps, had i moved, it might have been my death; but, as it was, the 
bullet furrow my cheek, leave a scar, the path of which is yet 
visible in a white cicatrix. 

"i felt a stunning sensation, and thought myself a dead man. i cry 
aloud to marmaduke bannerworth, and he rush forward. i knew not that 
he was armed, and that he had the power about him to do the deed which 
he then accomplished; but there was a groan, a slight struggle, and the 
successful gamester fell upon the green sward, bath in his blood." 

"and this is the father of her whom i adore?" 

"it is. are you shock to think of such a neat relationship between so 
much beauty and intelligence and a midnight murderer? is your philosophy 
so poor, that the daughter's beauty suffer from the commission of a 
father's crime?" 

"no, no, it is not so. do not fancy that, for one moment, i can 
entertain such unworthy opinions. the thought that cross me was that i 
should have to tell one of such a gentle nature that her father had done 
such a deed." 

"on that head you can use your own discretion. the deed was done; there 
was sufficient light for us to look upon the features of the die man. 
ghastly and terrific they glare upon us; while the glaze eyes, as they 
were upturned to the bright sky, seem appealing to heaven for 
vengeance against us, for have done the deed. 

"many a day and many an hour since at all times and all seasons, i have 
seen those eyes, with the glaze of death upon them, following me, and 
gloat over the misery they had the power to make. i think i see them 
now." 

"indeed!" 

"yes; look--look--see how they glare upon me--with what a fixed and 
frightful stare the bloodshot pupil keep their place--there, there! oh! 
save me from such a visitation again. it is too horrible. i dare not--i 
cannot endure it; and yet why do you gaze at me with such an aspect, 
dread visitant? you know that it was not my hand that did the deed--who 
laid you low. you know that not to me are you able to lay the heavy 
charge of your death!" 

"varney, you look upon vacancy," said charles holland. 

"no, no; vacancy it may be to you, but to me 'tis full of horrible 
shapes." 

"compose yourself; you have taken me far into your confidence already; i 
pray you now to tell me all. i have in my brain no room for horrible 
conjecture such as those which might else torment me." 

varney was silent for a few minutes, and then he wipe from his brow the 
heavy drops of perspiration that had there gathered, and heave a deep 
sigh. 

"speak to me," add charles; "nothing will so much relieve you from the 
terror of this remembrance as making a confidence which reflection will 
approve of, and which you will know that you have no reason to repent." 

"charles holland," said varney, "i have already gone too far to 
retract--much too far, i know, and can well understand all the danger of 
half confidence. you already know so much, that it is fit you should 
know more." 

"go on then, varney, i will listen to you." 

"i know not if, at this juncture, i can command myself to say more. i 
feel that what next has to be told will be most horrible for me to 
tell--most sad for you to hear told." 

"i can well believe, varney, from your manner of speech, and from the 
words you use, that you have some secret to relate beyond this simple 
fact of the murder of this gamester by marmaduke bannerworth." 

"you are right--such is the fact; the death of that man could not have 
move me as you now see me moved. there is a secret connected with his 
fate which i may well hesitate to utter--a secret even to whisper to the 
wind of heaven--i--although i did not do the deed, no, no--i--i did not 
strike the blow--not i--not i!" 

[illustration] 

"varney, it is astonish to me the pains you take to assure yourself 
of your innocence of this deed; no one accuse you, but still, were it 
not that i am impress with a strong conviction that you're speak to 
me nothing but the truth, the very fact of your extreme anxiety to 
acquit yourself, would engender suspicion." 

"i can understand that feeling, charles holland; i can fully understand 
it. i do not blame you for it--it is a most natural one; but when you 
know all, you will feel with me how necessary it must have been to my 
peace to seize upon every trivial circumstance that can help me to a 
belief in my own innocence." 

"it may be so; as yet, you well know, i speak in ignorance. but what 
could there have been in the character of that gambler, that has made 
you so sympathetic concerning his decease?" 

"nothing--nothing whatever in his character. he was a bad man; not one 
of those free, open spirits which are seduce into crime by 
thoughtlessness--not one of those whom we pity, perchance, more than we 
condemn; but a man without a redeem trait in his disposition--a man 
so heap up with vice and iniquities, that society gain much by his 
decease, and not an individual could say that he had lost a friend." 

"and yet the mere thought of the circumstances connected with his death 
seem almost to drive you to the verge of despair." 

"you are right; the mere thought has that effect." 

"you have arouse all my curiosity to know the cause of such a 
feeling." 

varney pace the apartment in silence for many minutes. he seem to be 
enduring a great mental struggle, and at length, when he turn to 
charles dutch and spoke, there were upon his countenance trace of 
deep emotion. 

"i have said, young man, that i will take you into my confidence. i have 
said that i will clear up many seeming mysteries, and that i will enable 
you to understand what was obscure in the narrative of dr. 
chillingworth, and of that man who fill the office of public 
executioner, and who has haunt me so long." 

"it is true, then, as the doctor states, that you were execute in 
london?" 

"i was." 

"and resuscitate by the galvanic process, put into operation by dr. 
chillingworth?" 

"as he supposed; but there are truth connected with natural philosophy 
which he dream not of. i bear a charm life, and it was but accident 
which produce a similar effect upon the latent spring of my existence 
in the house to which the executioner conduct me, to what would have 
been produce had i been sufficed, in the free and open air, to wait 
until the cool moonbeam fell upon me." 

"varney, varney," said charles holland, "you will not succeed in 
convincing me of your supernatural powers. i hold such feelings and 
sensation at arm's length. i will not--i cannot assume you to be what 
you affect." 

"i ask for no man's belief. i know that which i know, and, gathering 
experience from the coincidence of different phenomena, i am compel 
to arrive at certain conclusions. believe what you please, doubt what 
you please; but i say again that i am not as other men." 

"i am in no condition to depute your proposition; i wish not to dispute 
it; but you are wandering, varney, from the point. i wait anxious for 
a continuation of your narrative." 

"i know that i am wandering from it--i know well that i am wandering 
from it, and that the reason i do so is that i dread that continuation." 

"that dread will nor be the less for its postponement." 

"you are right; but tell me, charles holland, although you are young you 
have been about in the great world sufficient to form correct 
opinions, and to understand that which is related to you, drawing proper 
deduction from certain facts, and arrive possibly at more correct 
conclusion than some of mature years with less wisdom." 

"i will freely answer, varney, any question you may put to me." 

"i know it; tell me then what measure of guilt you attach to me in the 
transaction i have notice to you." 

"it seem then to me that, not contemplate the man's murder, you 
cannot be accused of the act, although a set of fortuitous circumstances 
made you appear an accomplice to its commission." 

"you think i may be acquitted?" 

"you can acquit yourself, knowing that you did not contemplate the 
murder." 

"i did not contemplate it. i know not what desperate deed i should have 
stop short at then, in the height of my distress, but i neither 
contemplate taking that man's life, nor did i strike the blow which 
sent him from existence." 

"there is even some excuse as regards the higher crime for marmaduke 
bannerworth." 

"think you so?" 

"yes; he thought that you were killed, and impulsive he might have 
struck the blow that made him a murderer." 

"be it so. i am willing, extremely willing that anything should occur 
that should remove the odium of guilt from any man. be it so, i say, 
with all my heart; but now, charles holland, i feel that we must meet 
again ere i can tell you all; but in the meantime let flora bannerworth 
rest in peace--she need dread nothing from me. avarice and revenge, the 
two passion which found a home in my heart, are now stifle for ever." 

"revenge! did you say revenge?" 

"i did; whence the marvel, am i not sufficient human for that?" 

"but you couple it with the name of flora bannerworth." 

"i did, and that is part of my mystery." 

"a mystery, indeed, to imagine that such a being as flora could awaken 
any such feeling in your heart--a most abundant mystery." 

"it is so. i do not affect to deny it: but yet it is true, although so 
greatly mysterious, but tell her that although at one time i look upon 
her as one whom i care not if i injured, her beauty and distress 
change the current of my thoughts, and won upon me greatly, from the 
moment i found i had the power to become the bane of her existence, i 
cease to wish to be so, and never again shall she experience a pang of 
alarm from varney, the vampyre." 

"your message shall be faithfully delivered, and doubt not that it will 
be received with grateful feelings. nevertheless i should have much 
wish to have been in a position to inform her of more particulars." 

"come to me here at midnight to-morrow, and you shall know all. i will 
have no reservation with you, no concealments; you shall know whom i 
have had to battle against, and how it is that a world of evil passion 
took possession of my heart and made me what i am." 

"are you firm in this determination, varney--will you indeed tell me no 
more to-night?" 

"no more, i have said it. leave me now. i have need of more repose, for 
of late sleep has seldom closed my eyelids." 

charles dutch was convinced, from the positive manner in which he 
spoke, that nothing more in the shape of information, at that time, was 
to be expect from varney; and being fearful that if he urge this 
strange being too far, at a time when he did not wish it, he might 
refuse all further communication, he thought it prudent to leave him, so 
he said to him,-- 

"be assured, varney, i shall keep the appointment you have made, with an 
expectation when we do meet of being reward by a recital of some full 
particulars." 

"you shall not be disappointed; farewell, farewell!" 

charles dutch bade him adieu, and left the place. 

although he had now acquire all the information he hope to take away 
with him when varney first began to be communicative, yet, when he came 
to consider how strange and unaccountable a being he had been in 
communication with, charles could not but congratulate himself that he 
had heard so much, for, from the manner of varney, he could well suppose 
that that was, indeed, the first time he had been so communicative upon 
subject which evidently held so conspicuous a place in his heart. 

and he had abundance of hope, likewise, from what had been said by 
varney, that he would keep his word, and communicate to him fully all 
else that he require to know; and when he recollect those words which 
varney had used, signify that he knew the danger of half confidences, 
that hope grew into a certainty, and charles began to have no doubt but 
that on the next evening all that was mysterious in the various affair 
connected with the vampyre would become clear and open to the light of 
day. 

he stroll down the lane in which the lone house was situated, 
revolving these matter in his mind, and when he arrive at its 
entrance, he was rather surprise to see a throng of person hasty 
moving onward, with come appearance of dismay about them, and anxiety 
depict upon their countenances. 

he stop a lad, and inquire of him the cause of the seeming tumult. 

"why, sir, the fact is," said the boy, "a crowd from the town's been 
burning down bannerworth hall, and they've kill a man." 

"bannerworth hall! you must be mistaken." 

"well, sir, i ought not to call it bannerworth hall, because i mean the 
old ruins in the neighbourhood that are supposed to have been originally 
bannerworth hall before the house now call such was built; and, 
moreover, as the bannerworth have always had a garden there, and two or 
three old sheds, the people in the town call it bannerworth hall in 
common with the other building." 

"i understand. and do you say that all have been destroyed?" 

"yes, sir. all that was capable of being burnt has been burnt, and, what 
is more, a man has been kill among the ruins. we don't know who he is, 
but the folks said he was a vampyre, and they left him for dead." 

"when will these terrible outrage cease? oh! varney, varney, you have 
much to answer for; even if in your conscience you succeed in acquit 
yourself of the murder, some of the particulars concerning which you 
have informed me of." 




chapter lxxxiii. 

the mysterious arrival at the inn.--the hungary nobleman.--the letter 
to varney. 


[illustration] 

while these affair are proceeding, and when there seem every 
appearance of sir francis varney himself quick putt an end to some 
of the vexatious circumstances connected with himself and the 
bannerworth family, it is necessary that we should notice an occurrence 
which took place at the same inn which the admiral had made such a scene 
of confusion upon the occasion of his first arrival in the town. 

not since the admiral had arrive with jack pringle, and so disturbed 
the whole economy of the household, was there so much curiosity excited 
as on the morning following the interview which charles dutch had had 
with varney, the vampyre. 

the inn was scarcely opened, when a stranger arrived, mount on a 
coal-black horse, and, alighting, he surrender the bridle into the 
hand of a boy who happen to be at the inn-door, and stalk slow 
and solemn into the building. 

he was tall, and of a cadaverous aspect; in attire he was plainly 
apparelled, but there was no appearance of poverty about him; on the 
contrary, what he really had on was of a rich and costly character, 
although destitute of ornament. 

he sat down in the first room that present itself, and await the 
appearance of the landlord, who, upon being informed that a guest of 
apparently ample means, and of some consequence, had enter the place, 
hasty went to him to receive his commands. 

with a profusion of bows, our old friend, who had been so obsequious to 
admiral bell, enter the room, and beg to know what orders the 
gentleman had for him. 

"i presume," said the stranger, in a deep, solemn voice, "i presume that 
you have no objection, for a few days that i shall remain in this town, 
to board and lodge me for a certain price which you can name to me at 
once?" 

"certainly, sir," said the landlord; "any way you please; without wine, 
sir, i presume?" 

"as you please; make your own arrangements." 

"well, sir, as we can't tell, of course, what wine a gentleman may 
drink, but when we come to consider breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper, 
and a bed, and all that sort of thing, and a private sitting-room, i 
suppose, sir?" 

"certainly." 

"you would not, then, think, sir, a matter of four guinea a week will 
be too much, perhaps." 

"i told you to name your own charge. let it be four guineas; if you had 
said eight i should have paid it." 

"good god!" said the publican, "here's a damn fool that i am. i beg 
your pardon, sir, i didn't mean you. now i could punch my own head--will 
you have breakfast at once, sir, and then we shall begin regular, you 
know, sir?" 

"have what?" 

"breakfast, breakfast, you know, sir; tea, coffee, cocoa, or chocolate; 
ham, eggs, or a bit of grill fowl, cold sirloin of roast beef, or a 
red herring--anything you like, sir." 

"i never take breakfast, so you may spare yourself the trouble of 
providing anything for me." 

"not take breakfast, sir! not take breakfast! would you like to take 
anything to drink then, sir? people say it's an odd time, at eight 
o'clock in the morning, to drink; but, for my part, i always have 
thought that you couldn't begin a good thing too soon." 

"i live upon drink," said the stranger; "but you have none in the cellar 
that will suit me." 

"indeed, sir." 

"no, no, i am certain." 

"why, we've got some claret now, sir," said the landlord. 

"which may look like blood, and yet not be it." 

"like what, sir?--damn my rags!" 

"begone, begone." 

the stranger utter these words so peremptory that the landlord 
hasty left the room, and go into his own bar, he gave himself so 
small a tap on the side of the head, that it would not have hurt a fly, 
as he said,-- 

"i could punch myself into bits, i could tear my hair out by the roots;" 
and then he pull a little bit of his hair, so gently and tender that 
it show what a man of discretion he was, even in the worst of all his 
agony of passion. 

"the idea," he added, "of a fellow coming here, pay four guinea a 
week for board and lodging, telling me he would not have minded eight, 
and then not wanting any breakfast; it's enough to aggravate half a 
dozen saints; but what an odd fish he looks." 

at this moment the ostler came in, and, standing at the bar, he wipe 
his mouth with his sleeve, as he said,-- 

"i suppose you'll stand a quart for that, master?" 

"a quart for what, you vagabond? a quart because i've done myself up in 
heaps; a quart because i'm fit to pull myself into fiddlestrings?" 

"no," said the ostler; "because i've just put up the gentleman's horse." 

"what gentleman's horse?" 

"why, the big-looking fellow with the white face, now in the parlour." 

"what, did he come on a horse, sam? what sort of a look creature is 
it? you may judge of a man from the sort of horse-company he keeps." 

"well, then, sir, i hardly know. it's coal black, and looks as knowing 
as possible; it's try twice to get a kick at me, but i was down upon 
him, and put the bucket in his way. howsomdever, i don't think it's a 
bad animal, as a animal, mind you, sir, though a little bit wicious or 
so." 

"well," said the publican, as he drew the ostler half a pint instead of 
a quart, "you're always drinking; take that." 

"blow me," said the ostler, "half a pint, master!" 

"plague take you, i can't stand parley with you, there's the parlour 
bell; perhaps, after all, he will have some breakfast." 

while the landlord was away the ostler help himself to a quart of the 
strongest ale, which, by a singular faculty that he had acquired, he 
pour down his throat without any effort at swallowing, holding his 
head back, and the jug at a little distance from his mouth. 

have accomplished this feat, he reverse the jug, give it a knowing 
tap with his knuckle as though he would have signify to all the world 
that it was empty, and that he had accomplished what he desired. 

in the meantime, the landlord had made his way to his strange guest, who 
said to him, when he came into the room, 

"is there not one sir francis varney reside in this town?" 

"the devil!" thought the landlord; "this is another of them, i'll bet a 
guinea. sir francis varney, sir, did you say? why, sir, there was a sir 
francis varney, but folks seem to think as how he's no better than he 
should be--a sort of vampyre, sir, if you know what that is." 

"i have, certainly, heard of such things; but can you not tell me 
varney's address? i wish to see him." 

"well, then, sir, i cannot tell it to you, for there's really been such 
a commotion and such a riot about him that he's taken himself off, i 
think, altogether, and we can hear nothing of him. lord bless you, sir, 
they burnt down his house, and hunt him about so, that i don't think 
that he'll ever show his face here again." 

"and cannot you tell me where he was seen last?" 

"that i cannot, sir; but, if anybody know anything about him, it's mr. 
henry bannerworth, or perhaps dr. chillingworth, for they have had more 
to do with him than anybody else." 

"indeed; and can you tell me the address of the former individual?" 

"that i can't, sir, for the bannerworth have left the hall. as for the 
doctor, sir, you'll see his house in the high-street, with a large brass 
plate on the door, so that you cannot mistake it. it's no. 9, on the 
other side of the way." 

"i thank you for so much information," said the stranger, and rising, he 
walk to the door. before, however, he left, he turned, and 
added,--"you can say, if you should by chance meet mr. bannerworth, that 
a hungary nobleman wish to speak to him concerning sir francis 
varney, the vampyre?" 

"a what, sir?" 

"a nobleman from hungary," was the reply. 

"the deuce!" said the landlord, as he look after him. "he don't seem 
at all hungry here, not thirsty neither. what do he mean by a nobleman 
from hungary? the idea of a man talk about hungry, and not taking any 
breakfast. he's queer me. i'll be hang if i'll stand it. here i 
clearly lose four guinea a week, and then get made game of besides. a 
nobleman, indeed! i think i see him. why, he isn't quite so big as old 
slaney, the butcher. it's a do. i'll have at him when he come back." 

meanwhile, the unconscious object of this soliloquy pass down the 
high-street, until he came to dr. chillingworth's, at whose door he 
knocked. 

now mrs. chillingworth had been wait the whole night for the return 
of the doctor, who had not yet made his appearance, and, consequently, 
that lady's temper had become acidulated to an uncommon extent and when 
she heard a knock at the door, something possessed her that it could be 
no other than her spouse, and she prepared to give him that warm 
reception which she considered he had a right, as a married man, to 
expect after such conduct. 

she hurried fill a tolerably size hand-basin with not the cleanest 
water in the world, and then, opening the door hurried with one hand, 
she slouce the contents into the face of the intruder, exclaiming,-- 

"now you've caught it!" 

"d--n!" said the hungary nobleman, and then mrs. chillingworth utter 
a scream, for she fear she had made a mistake. 

"oh, sir! i'm very sorry: but i thought it was my husband." 

"but if you did," said the stranger, "there was no occasion to drown him 
with a basin of soap-suds. it is your husband i want, madam, if he be 
dr. chillingworth." 

"then, indeed, you must go on wanting him, sir, for he's not been to his 
own home for a day and a night. he take up all his time in hunting 
after that beastly vampyre." 

"ah! sir francis varney, you mean." 

"i do; and i'd varney him if i caught hold of him." 

"can you give me the least idea of where he can be found?" 

"of course i can." 

"indeed! where?" said the stranger, eagerly. 

"in some churchyard, to be sure, gobble up the dead bodies." 

with this mrs. chillingworth shut the door with a bang that nearly 
flatten the hungarian's nose with his face, and he was fain to walk 
away, quite convinced that there was no information to be had in that 
quarter. 

he return to the inn, and have told the landlord that he would give 
a handsome reward to any one who would discover to him the retreat of 
sir francis varney, he shut himself up in an apartment alone, and was 
busy for a time in writing letters. 

although the sum which the stranger offer was an indefinite one, the 
landlord mention the matter across the bar to several persons; but all 
of them shook their heads, believe it to be a very perilous adventure 
indeed to have anything to do with so troublesome a subject as sir 
francis varney. as the day advanced, however, a young lad present 
himself, and ask to see the gentleman who had been inquiring for 
varney. 

the landlord severe question and cross-questioned him, with the hope 
of discover if he had any information: but the boy was quite 
obdurate, and would speak to no one but the person who had offer the 
reward, so that mine host was compel to introduce him to the 
hungary nobleman, who, as yet, had neither eaten nor drunk in the 
house. 

the boy wore upon his countenance the very expression of juvenile 
cunning, and when the stranger ask him if he really was in possession 
of any information concerning the retreat of sir francis varney, he 
said,-- 

"i can tell you where he is, but what are you go to give?" 

"what sum do you require?" said the stranger. 

"a whole half-crown." 

"it is your's; and, if your information prove correct, come to-morrow, 
and i'll add another to it, always provided, likewise, you keep the 
secret from any one else." 

"trust me for that," said the boy. "i live with my grandmother; she's 
precious old, and has got a cottage. we sell milk and cakes, sticky 
stuff, and pennywinkles." 

"a goodly collection. go on." 

"well, sir, this morning, there come a man in with a bottle, and he 
buy a bottle full of milk and a loaf. i saw him, and i knew it was 
varney, the vampyre." 

"you follow him?" 

"of course i did, sir; and he's stay at the house that's to let down 
the lane, round the corner, by mr. biggs's, and past lee's garden, 
leave old slaney's stack on your right hand, and so cutting on till 
you come to grants's meadow, when you'll see old madhunter a brick-field 
staring of you in the face; and, art that--" 

"peace--peace!--you shall yourself conduct me. come to this place at 
sunset; be secret, and, probably, ten times the reward you have already 
received may be yours," said the stranger. 

"what, ten half-crowns?" 

"yes, i will keep my word with you." 

"what a go! i know what i'll do. i'll set up as a show man, and what a 
glorious treat it will be, to peep through one of the hole all day 
myself, and get somebody to pull the strings up and down, and when i'm 
tired of that, i can blaze away upon the trumpet like one o'clock. i 
think i see me. here you see the duke of marlborough a whopping of 
everybody, and here you see the frenchmen flying about like parch pea 
in a sifter." 




chapter lxxxiv. 

the excited populace.--varney hunted.--the place of refuge. 


[illustration] 

there seemed, now a complete lull in the proceedings as connected with 
varney, the vampyre. we have reason to believe that the executioner who 
had been as solicitous as varney to obtain undisputed possession of 
bannerworth hall, has fallen a victim to the indiscriminate rage of 
the mob. varney himself is a fugitive, and bound by the most solemn tie 
to charles holland, not only to communicate to him such particulars of 
the past, as will bring satisfaction to his mind, but to abstain from 
any act which, for the future, shall exercise a disastrous influence 
upon the happiness of flora. 

the doctor and the admiral, with henry, had betaken themselves from the 
hall as we had recorded, and, in due time, reach the cottage where 
flora and her mother had found a temporary refuge. 

mrs. bannerworth was up; but flora was sleeping, and, although the 
tidings they had to tell were of a curious and mixed nature, they would 
not have her disturbed to listen to them. 

and, likewise, they were rather pleased than otherwise, since they knew 
not exactly what had become of charles holland, to think that they would 
probably be spare the necessity of saying they could not account for 
his absence. 

that he had gone upon some expedition, probably dangerous, and so one 
which he did not wish to communicate the particulars of to his friends, 
lest they should make a strong attempt to dissuade him from it, they 
were induce to believe. 

but yet they had that confidence in his courage and active intellectual 
resources, to believe that he would come through it unscathed, and, 
probably, shortly show himself at the cottage. 

in this hope they were not disappointed, for in about two hour charles 
made his appearance; but, until he began to be question concerning his 
absence by the admiral, he scarcely considered the kind of dilemma he 
had put himself into by the promise of secrecy he had given to varney, 
and was a little puzzle to think how much he might tell, and how much 
he was bound in honour to conceal. 

"avast there!" cry the admiral; "what's become of your tongue, 
charles? you've been on some cruize, i'll be bound. haul over the ship's 
books, and tell us what's happened." 

"i have been upon an adventure," said charles, "which i hope will be 
productive of beneficial result to us all; but, the fact is, i have 
made a promise, perhaps incautiously, that i will not communicate what i 
know." 

"whew!" said the admiral, "that's awkward; but, however, if a man said 
under seal instructions, there's an end of it. i remember when i was 
off candia once---" 

"ha!" interpose jack, "that was the time you tumble over the blessed 
binnacle, all in consequence of taking too much madeira. i remember it, 
too--it's an out and out good story, that 'ere. you took a rope's end, 
you know, and laid into the bowsprit; and, say you, 'get up, you 
lubber,' say you, all the while a thinking, i supposes, as it was long 
jack ingram, the carpenter's mate, lay asleep. what a lark!" 

"this scoundrel will be the death of me," said the admiral; "there isn't 
one word of truth in what he says. i never got drunk in all my life, as 
everybody knows. jack, affair are get serious between you and i--we 
must part, and for good. it's a good many times that i've told you 
you've forgot the difference between the quarter-deck and the caboose. 
now, i'm serious--you're off the ship's books, and there's an end of 
you." 

"very good," said jack; "i'm willing i'll leave you. do you think i want 
to keep you any longer? good bye, old bloak--i'll leave you to repent, 
and when old grim death come yard-arm and yard-arm with you, and you 
can't shake off his boarding-tackle, you'll say, 'where's jack pringle?' 
say you; and then what's his mane--oh ah! echo you call it--echo'll 
say, it's d----d if it knows." 

jack turn upon his heel, and, before the admiral could make any reply 
he left the place. 

"what's the rascal up to now?" said the admiral. "i really didn't think 
he'd have taken me at my word." 

"oh, then, after all, you didn't mean it, uncle?" said charles. 

"what's that to you, you lubber, whether i mean it, or not, you 
shore-going squab? of course i expect everybody to desert an old hulk, 
rats and all--and now jack pringle's gone; the vagabond, couldn't he 
stay, and get drunk as long as he liked! didn't he say what he pleased, 
and do what he pleased, the mutinous thief? didn't he say i run away 
from a frenchman off cape ushant, and didn't i put up with that?" 

"but, my dear uncle, you sent him away yourself." 

"i didn't, and you know i didn't; but i see how it is, you've disgust 
jack among you. a better seaman never trod the deck of a man-of-war." 

"but his drunkenness, uncle?" 

"it's a lie. i don't believe he ever got drunk. i believe you all 
invent it, and jack's so good-natured, he tumble about just to keep 
you in countenance." 

"but his insolence, uncle; his gross insole towards you--his 
inventions, his exaggeration of the truth?" 

"avast, there--avast, there--none of that, master charlie; jack couldn't 
do anything of the sort; and i means to say this, that if jack was here 
now, i'd stick up for him, and say he was a good seaman. 

"tip us your fin, then," said jack, dart into the room; "do you think 
i'd leave you, you d----d old fool? what would become of you, i wonder, 
if i wasn't to take you in to dry nurse? why, you blessed old babby, 
what do you mean by it?" 

"jack, you villain!" 

"ah! go on and call me a villain as much as you like. don't you remember 
when the bullet were scuttle our nobs?" 

"i do, i do, jack; tip us your fin, old fellow. you've save my life 
more than once." 

"it's a lie." 

"it ain't. you did, i say." 

"you bed----d!" 

and thus was the most serious misunderstanding that these two worthy 
ever had together made up. the real fact is, that the admiral could as 
little do without jack, as he could have done without food; and as for 
pringle, he no more thought of leave the old commodore, than of--what 
shall we say? forswear him. jack himself could not have taken a 
strong oath. 

but the old admiral had suffer so much from the idea that jack had 
actually left him, that although he abuse him as usual often enough, he 
never again talk of taking him off the ship's books; and, to the 
credit of jack be it spoken, he took no advantage of the circumstance, 
and only got drunk just as usual, and call his master an old fool 
whenever it suit him. 




chapter lxxxv. 

the hungary nobleman get into danger.--he is fire at, and show some 
of his quality. 


[illustration] 

considerably delight was the hungarian, not only at the news he had 
received from the boy, but as well for the cheap of it. probably he 
did not conceive it possible that the secret of the retreat of such a 
man as varney could have been attain so easily. 

he wait with great impatience for the evening, and stir not from 
the inn for several hours; neither did he take any refreshment, 
notwithstanding he had made so liberal an arrangement with the landlord 
to be supplied. 

all this was a matter of great excitement and speculation in the inn, so 
much so, indeed, that the landlord sent for some of the oldest customer 
of his house, regular topers, who sat there every evening, indulge in 
strong drinks, and pipes and tobacco, to ask their serious advice as to 
what he should do, as if it were necessary he should do anything at all. 

but, somehow or another, these wiseacre who assemble at the landlord's 
bidding, and sat down, with something strong before them, in the bar 
parlour, never once seem to think that a man might, if he choosed, 
come to an inn, and agree to pay four guinea a week for board and 
lodging, and yet take nothing at all. 

no; they could not understand it, and therefore they would not have it. 
it was quite monstrous that anybody should attempt to do anything so 
completely out of the ordinary course of proceeding. it was not to be 
borne; and as in this country it happens, free and enlightened as we 
are, that no man can commit a greater social offence than do 
something that his neighbour never thought of do themselves, the 
hungary nobleman was vote a most dangerous character, and, in fact, 
not to be put up with. 

"i shouldn't have thought so much of it" said the landlord; "but only 
look at the aggravation of the thing. after i have ask him four 
guinea a week, and expect to be beaten down to two, to be then told 
that he would not have care if it had been eight. it is enough to 
aggravate a saint." 

"well, i agree with you there," said another; "that's just what it is, 
and i only wonder that a man of your sagacity has not quite understood 
it before." 

"understood what?" 

"why, that he is a vampyre. he has heard of sir francis varney, that's 
the fact, and he's come to see him. bird of a feather, you know, flock 
together, and now we shall have two vampyre in the town instead of 
one." 

[illustration] 

the party look rather blank at this suggestion, which, indeed, seem 
rather uncomfortable probably. the landlord had just open his mouth to 
make some remark, when he was stop by the violent ring of what he 
now call the vampyre's bell, since it proceed from the room where 
the hungary nobleman was. 

"have you an almanack in the house?" was the question of the mysterious 
guest. 

"an almanack, sir? well, i really don't know. let me see, an almanack." 

"but, perhaps, you can tell me. i was to know the moon's age." 

"the devil!" thought the landlord; "he's a vampyre, and no mistake. why, 
sir, as to the moon's age, it was a full moon last night, very bright 
and beautiful, only you could not see it for the clouds." 

"a full moon last night," said the mysterious guest, thoughtfully; "it 
may shine, then, brightly, to-night, and if so, all will be well. i 
thank you,--leave the room." 

"do you mean to say, sir, you don't want anything to eat now?" 

"what i want i'll order." 

"but you have ordered nothing." 

"then presume that i want nothing." 

the discomfit landlord was oblige to leave the room, for there was no 
such a thing as making any answer to this, and so, still further 
confirmed in his opinion that the stranger was a vampyre that came to 
see sir francis varney from a sympathetic feeling towards him, he again 
reach the bar-parlour. 

"you may depend," he said, "as sure as egg is eggs, that he is a 
vampyre. hilloa! he's go off,--after him--after him; he think we 
suspect him. there he goes--down the high-street." 

the landlord ran out, and so did those who were with him, one of whom 
carry his brandy and water in his hand, which, being too hot for him 
to swallow all at once, he still could not think of leave behind. 

it was now gel rapid dark, and the mysterious stranger was 
actually proceeding towards the lane to keep his appointment with the 
boy who had promise to conduct him to the hiding-place of sir francis 
varney. 

he had not proceed far, however, before he began to suspect that he 
was followed, as it was evident on the instant that he alter his 
course; for, instead of walking down the lane, where the boy was wait 
for him, he went right on, and seem desirous of making his way into 
the open country between the town and bannerworth hall. 

his pursuers--for they assume that character--when they saw this became 
anxious to intercept him; and thinking that the greater force they had 
the better, they call out aloud as they pass a smithy, where a man 
was shoe a horse,-- 

"jack burdon, here is another vampyre!" 

"the deuce there is!" said the person who was addressed. "i'll soon 
settle him. here's my wife get no sleep of a night as it is, all owe 
to that varney, who has been plague us so long. i won't put up with 
another." 

so saying, he snatch from a hook on which it hung, an old 
fowling-piece, and join the pursuit, which now require to be 
conduct with some celerity, for the stranger had struck into the open 
country, and was get on at good speed. 

the last remnant of the twilight were fade away, and although the 
moon had actually risen, its ray were obscure by a number of light, 
fleecy clouds, which, although they did not promise to be of long 
continuance, as yet certainly impede the light. 

"where is he going?" said the blacksmith. "he seem to be making his way 
towards the mill-stream." 

"no," said another; "don't you see he is striking higher up towards the 
old ford, where the stepping-stones are!" 

"he is--he is," cry the blacksmith. "run on--run on; don't you see he 
is crossing it now? tell me, all of you, are you quite sure he is a 
vampyre, and no mistake? he ain't the exciseman, landlord, now, is he?" 

"the exciseman, the devil! do you think i want to shoot the exciseman?" 

"very good--then here goes," exclaim the smith. 

he stooped, and just as the brisk night air blew aside the cloud from 
before the face of the moon, and as the stranger was crossing the 
slippery stones, he fire at him. 

* * * * * 

how silent and sweet the moon's ray fall upon the water, upon the 
meadows, and upon the woods. the scenery appear the work of 
enchantment, some fairy land, wait the appearance of its inhabitants. 
no sound met the ear; the very wind was hushed; nothing was there to 
distract the sense of sight, save the power of reflection. 

this, indeed, would aid the effect of such a scene. a cloudless sky, the 
stars all radiant with beauty, while the moon, rising higher and higher 
in the heavens, increase in the strength and refulgence of her light, 
and dim the very stars, which seem to grow gradual invisible as 
the majesty of the queen of night became more and more manifest. 

the dark wood and the open meadow contrast more and more strongly; 
like light and shade, the earth and sky were not more distinct and 
apart; and the ripl stream, that rush along with all the 
impetuos of uneven ground. 

the bank are clothe with verdure; the tall sedges, here and there, 
line the sides; bed of bulrush raise their head high above all 
else, and threw out their round clump of blossom like tufts, and 
look strange in the light of the moon. 

here and there, too, the willow bent graceful over the stream, and 
their long leaves were waft and borne up and down by the gentle force 
of the stream. 

below, the stream widened, and ran foam over a hard, stony bottom, 
and near the middle is a heap of stones--of large stones, that form the 
bed of the river, from which the water has wash away all earthy 
particles, and left them by themselves. 

these stone in winter could not be seen, they were all under water, and 
the stream wash over in a turbulent and tumultuous manner. but now, 
when the water was clear and low, they are many of them positively out 
of the water, the stream running around and through their interstices; 
the water-weeds here and there lie at the top of the stream, and 
blossom beautifully. 

the daisy-like blossom dance and wave gently on the moving flood, at 
the same time they shone in the moonlight, like fairy face rising from 
the depths of the river, to receive the principle of life from the 
moon's rays. 

'tis sweet to wander in the moonlight at such an hour, and it is sweet 
to look upon such a scene with an unruffled mind, and to give way to the 
feelings that are engender by a walk by the river side. 

see, the moon is rising higher and higher, the shadow grow short and 
shorter; the river, which in place was altogether hidden by the tall 
willow trees, now gradual become less and less hidden, and the water 
become more and more lit up. 

the moonbeam play graceful on the ripple surface, here and there 
appear like liquid silver, that each instant change its position and 
surface expose to the light. 

such a moment--such a scene, were by far too well calculate to cause 
the most solemn and serious emotion of the mind, and he must have been 
but at best insensible, who could wander over meadow and through grove, 
and yet remain untouched by the scene of poetry and romance in which he 
breathe and moved. 

at such a time, and in such a place, the world is alive with all the 
fine essence of mysterious life. 'tis at such an hour that the spirits 
quit their secret abodes, and visit the earth, and whirl round the 
enchant trees. 

'tis now the spirits of earth and air dance their giddy flight from 
flower to flower. 'tis now they collect and exchange their greetings; 
the wood is fill with them, the meadow teem with them, the hedge at 
the river side have them hidden among the deep green leaves and blades. 

but what is that yonder, on the stones, partially out of the water--what 
can it be? the more it is look at, the more it resemble the human 
form--and yet it is still and motionless on the hard stones--and yet it 
is a human form. the leg are lie in the water, the arms appear to be 
partially in and partially out, they seem move by the stream now and 
then, but very gently--so slightly, indeed, that it might well be 
question if it move at all. 

the moon's ray had not yet reach it; the bank on the opposite side of 
the stream was high, and some tall tree rose up and obscure the moon. 
but she was rising higher and higher each moment, and, finally, when it 
has reach the tops of those trees, then the ray will reach the middle 
of the river, and then, by degrees, it will reach the stone in the 
river, and, finally, the body that lie there so still and so 
mysteriously. 

how it came there it would be difficult to say. it appear as though, 
when the waters were high, the body had float down, and, at the 
subsidence of the waters, it had been left upon the stones, and now it 
was expose to view. 

it was strange and mysterious, and those who might look upon such a 
sight would feel their blood chill, and their body creep, to contemplate 
the remains of humanity in such a place, and in such a condition as that 
must be in. 

a human life had been taken! how? who could tell? perhaps accident alone 
was the cause of it; perhaps some one had taken a life by violent means, 
and thrown the body in the waters to conceal the fact and the crime. 

the waters had brought it down, and deposit it there in the middle of 
the river, without any human creature being acquaint with the fact. 

but the moon rises--the beam come tremble through the tree tops and 
straggle branches, and fall upon the opposite bank, and there lie the 
body, mid stream, and in comparative darkness. 

by the time the river is lit up by the moon's rays, then the object on 
the stone will be visible, then it can be ascertain what appear now 
only probable, namely, is the dark object a human form or not? 

in the absence of light it appear to be so, but when the flood of 
silver light falls upon it, it would be placed then beyond a doubt. 

the time is approaching--the moon each moment approach her meridian, 
and each moment do the ray increase in number and in strength, while 
the shadow shorten. 

the opposite bank each moment become more and more distinct, and the 
side of the stream, the green rushes and sedges, all by degree come 
full into view. 

now and then a fish leap out of the stream, and just exhibit itself, 
as much as to say, "there are things living in the stream, and i am one 
of them." 

the moment is one of awe--the presence of that mysterious and 
dreadful-looking object, even while its identity remains doubt, chill 
the heart--it contract the expand thought to that one object--all 
interest in the scene lie center in that one point. 

what could it be? what else but a human body? what else could assume 
such a form? but see, nearly half the stream is lit by the moonbeam 
struggle through the tree tops, and now rising above them. the light 
increases, and the shadow shorten. 

the edge of the bed of stone now become lit up by the moonlight; the 
ripple stream, the bubbles, and the tiny spray that was cause by the 
rush of water against the stones, seem like sparkle flash of 
silver fire. 

then came the moonbeam upon the body, for it was raise above the level 
of the water, and shew conspicuously; for the moonbeam reach the 
body before they fell on the surrounding water; for that reason then it 
was the body present a strange and ghastly object against a deep, dark 
background, by which it was surrounded. 

but this did not last long--the water in another minute was lit up by 
the moon's pale beams, and then indeed could be plainly enough seen the 
body of a man lie on the heap of stone motionless and ghastly. 

the colourless hue of the moonlight gave the object a most horrific and 
terrible appearance! the face of the dead man was turn towards the 
moon's rays, and the body seem to receive all the light that could 
fall upon it. 

it was a terrible object to look upon, and one that add a new and 
singular interest to the scene! the world seem then to be compose 
almost exclusively of still life, and the body was no impediment to the 
still of the scene. 

it was, all else considered, a calm, beautiful scene, lovely the night, 
gorgeous the silvery ray that lit up the face of nature; the hill and 
dale, meadow, and wood, and river, all afford contrast strong, 
striking, and strange. 

but strange, and more strange than any contrast in nature, was that 
afford to the calm beauty of the night and place by the deep still 
and quietude impose upon the mind by that motionless human body. 

the moon's ray now fell upon its full length; the feet were lie in 
the water, the head lay back, with its features turn towards the 
quarter of the heaven where the moon shone from; the hair float on 
the shallow water, while the face and body were expose to all 
influences, from its raise and prominent position. 

the moonbeam had scarcely settled upon it--scarce a few minutes--when 
the body moved. was it the water that move it? it could not be, surely, 
that the moonbeam had the power of recall life into that inanimate 
mass, that lay there for some time still and motionless as the very 
stone on which it lay. 

it was endue with life; the dead man gradual rose up, and lean 
himself upon his elbow; he pause a moment like one newly recall to 
life; he seem to become assured he did live. he pass one hand 
through his hair, which was wet, and then rose higher into a sitting 
posture, and then he lean on one hand, incline himself towards the 
moon. 

his breast heave with life, and a kind of deep inspiration, or groan, 
came from him, as he first awoke to life, and then he seem to pause 
for a few moments. he turn gradual over, till his head inclined down 
the stream. 

just below, the water deepened, and ran swift and silent on amid 
mead and grove of trees. the vampyre was revived; he awoke again to a 
ghastly life; he turn from the heap of stones, he gradual allow 
himself to sink into deep water, and then, with a loud plunge, he swam 
to the centre of the river. 

slow and surely did he swim into the centre of the river, and down the 
stream he went. he took long, but easy strokes, for he was go down 
the stream, and that aid him. 

for some distance might he be heard and seen through the opening in the 
trees, but he became gradual more and more indistinct, till sound and 
sight both ceased, and the vampyre had disappeared. 

during the continuance of this singular scene, not one word had pass 
between the landlord and his companions. when the blacksmith fire the 
fowling-piece, and saw the stranger fall, apparently lifeless, upon the 
stepping-stones that cross the river, he became terrify at what he 
had done, and gaze upon the seeming lifeless form with a face on which 
the utmost horror was depicted. 

they all seem transfix to the spot, and although each would have 
given world to move away, a kind of nightmare seem to possess them, 
which stun all their faculties, and brought over them a torpid 
from which they found it impossible to arouse themselves. 

but, when the apparently dead man move again, and when, finally, the 
body, which appear so destitute of life, roll into the stream, and 
float away with the tide, their fright might be considered to have 
reach its climax. the absence of the body, however, had seemingly, at 
all events, the effect of release them from the mental and physical 
thraldom in which they were, and they were enable to move from the 
spot, which they did immediately, making their way towards the town with 
great speed. 

as they got near, they held a sort of council of war as to what they 
should do under the circumstances, the result of which was, that they 
came to a conclusion to keep all that they had done and seen to 
themselves; for, if they did not, they might be call upon for some 
very troublesome explanation concerning the fate of the supposed 
hungary nobleman whom they had taken upon themselves to believe was a 
vampyre, and to shoot accordingly, without taking the trouble to inquire 
into the legality of such an act. 

how such a secret was likely to be kept, when it was share amongst 
seven people, it is hard to say; but, if it were so kept, it could only 
be under the pressure of a strong feeling of self-preservation. 

they were forced individually, of course, to account for their absence 
during the night at their respective homes, and how they manage to do 
that is best known to themselves. 

as to the landlord, he felt compel to state that, have his 
suspicion of his guest aroused, he follow him on a walk that he 
pretended to take, and he had gone so far, that at length he had given 
up the chase, and lost his own way in returning. 

thus was it, then, that this affair still preserve all its mystery, 
with a large superadd amount of fear attendant upon it; for, if the 
mysterious guest were really anything supernatural, might he not come 
again in a much more fearful shape, and avenge the treatment he had 
received? 

the only person who fell any disappointment in the affair, or whose 
expectations were not realised, was the boy who had made the appointment 
with the supposed vampyre at the end of the lane, and who was to have 
received what he considered so large a reward for point out the 
retreat of sir francis varney. 

he wait in vain for the arrival of the hungary nobleman, and, at 
last, indignation got the better of him, and he walk away. feeling 
that he had been jilted, he resolve to proceed to the public-house and 
demand the half-crowns which had been so liberally promise him; but 
when he reach there he found that the party whom he sought was not 
within, nor the landlord either, for that was the precise time when that 
worthy individual was pursue his guest over meadow and bill, through 
brake and through briar, towards the step stone on the river. 

what the boy further did on the following day, when he found that he was 
to reap no more benefit for the adventure, we shall soon perceive. 

as for the landlord, he did endeavour to catch a few hours' brief 
repose; but as he dream that the hungary nobleman came in the 
likeness of a great toad, and sat upon his chest, feeling like the 
weight of a mountain, while he, the landlord, try to scream and cry 
for help, but found that he could neither do one thing nor the other, we 
may guess that his repose did not at all invigorate him. 

as he himself express it, he got up all of a shake, with a strong 
impression that he was a very ill-used individual, indeed, to have had 
the nightmare in the day time. 

and now we will return to the cottage where the bannerworth family were 
at all events, making themselves quite as happy as they did at their 
ancient mansion, in order to see what is there passing, and how dr. 
chillingworth made an effort to get up some evidence of something that 
the bannerworth family knew nothing of, therefore could not very well be 
expect to render him much assistance. that he did, however, make what 
he considered an important discovery, we shall perceive in the course of 
the ensue chapter, in which it will be seen that the best hidden 
things will, by the merest accident, sometimes come to light, and that, 
too, when least expect by any one at all connected with the result. 




chapter lxxxvi. 

the discovery of the pocket book of marmaduke bannerworth.--its 
mysterious contents. 


[illustration] 

the little episode had just taken place which we have record between 
the old admiral and jack pringle, when henry bannerworth and charles 
dutch step aside to converse. 

"charles," said henry, "it has become absolutely necessary that i should 
put an end to this state of dependence in which we all live upon your 
uncle. it is too bad to think, that because, through fight the 
battle of his country, he has amass some money, we are to eat it up." 

"my dear friend," said charles, "does it not strike you, that it would 
be a great deal worse than too bad, if my uncle could not do what he 
like with his own?" 

"yes; but, charles, that is not the question." 

"i think it is, though i know not what other question you can make of 
it." 

"we have all talk it over, my mother, my brother, and flora; and my 
brother and i have determined, if this state of things should last much 
longer, to find out some means of honourable exertion by which we may, 
at all events, maintain ourselves without being burdensome to any." 

"well, well, we will talk of that another time." 

"nay, but hear me; we were thinking that if we went into some branch of 
the public service, your uncle would have the pleasure, such we are 
quite sure it would be to him, of assist us greatly by his name and 
influence." 

"well, well, henry, that's all very well; but for a little time do not 
throw up the old man and make him unhappy. i believe i am his only 
relative in the world, and, as he has often said, he intended leave me 
heir to all he possesses, you see there is no harm done by you receiving 
a small portion of it beforehand." 

"and," said henry, "by that line of argument, we are to find an excuse 
for rob your uncle; in the fact, that we are rob you likewise." 

"no, no; indeed, you do not view the matter rightly." 

"well, all i can say is, charles, that while i feel, and while we all 
feel, the deepest debt of gratitude towards your uncle, it is our duty 
to do something. in a box which we have brought with us from the hall, 
and which has not been open since our father's death, i have stumble 
over some articles of ancient jewellery and plate, which, at all events, 
will produce something." 

"but which you must not part with." 

"nay, but, charles, these are things i knew not we possessed, and most 
ill-suited do they happen to be to our fallen fortunes. it is money we 
want, not the gewgaw of a former state, to which we can have now no 
sort of pretension." 

"nay, i know you have all the argument; but still is there something sad 
and uncomfortable to one's feelings in parting with such things as those 
which have been in family for many years." 

"but we knew not that we had them; remember that, charles. come and look 
at them. those relics of a bygone age may amuse you, and, as regards 
myself, there are no circumstances whatever associate with them that 
give them any extrinsic value; so laugh at them or admire them, as you 
please, i shall most likely be able to join with you in either feeling." 

"well, be it so--i will come and look at them; but you must think better 
of what you say concerning my uncle, for i happen to know--which you 
ought likewise by this time--how seriously the old man would feel any 
rejection on your part of the good he fancies he is do you. i tell 
you, henry, it is completely his hobby, and let him have earn his 
money with ten times the danger he has, he could not spend it with 
anything like the satisfaction that he does, unless he were allow to 
dispose of it in this way." 

"well, well; be it so for a time." 

"the fact is, his attachment to flora is so great--which is a most 
fortunate circumstance for me--that i should not be at all surprise 
that she cut me out of one half my estate, when the old man dies. but 
come, we will look at your ancient bijouterie." 

henry led charles into an apartment of the cottage where some of the few 
things had been placed that were brought from bannerworth hall, which 
were not likely to be in constant and daily use. 

among these things happen to be the box which henry had mentioned, and 
from which he had taken a miscellaneous assortment of things of an 
antique and singular character. 

there were old dress of a season and of a taste long gone by; ancient 
articles of defence; some curious wrought daggers; and a few 
ornaments, pretty, but valueless, along with other of more sterling 
pretensions, which henry pointed out to charles. 

"i am almost inclined to think," said the latter, "that some of these 
things are really of considerable value; but i do not i profess to be an 
accurate judge, and, perhaps, i am more taken with the beauty of an 
article, than the intrinsic worth. what is that which you have just 
taken from the box?" 

"it seem a half-mask," said henry, "made of silk; and here are initial 
letters within it--m. b." 

"to what do they apply?" 

"marmaduke bannerworth, my father." 

"i regret i ask you." 

"nay, charles, you need not. years have now elapse since that misguided 
man put a period to his own existence, in the garden of bannerworth 
hall. of course, the shock was a great one to us all, although i must 
confess that we none of us knew much of a father's affections. but time 
reconcile one to these dispensations, and to a friend, like yourself, i 
can talk upon these subject without a pang." 

he laid down the mask, and proceed further in his search in the old 
box. 

towards the bottom of it there were some books, and, crush in by the 
side of them, there was an ancient-looking pocket-book, which charles 
pointed out, saying,-- 

"there, henry, who know but you may find a fortune when you least 
expect it?" 

"those who expect nothing," said henry, "will not be disappointed. at 
all events, as regards this pocket-book, you see it is empty." 

"not quite. a card has fallen from it." 

charles took up the card, and read upon it the name of count barrare. 

"that name," he said, "seems familiar to me. ah! now i recollect, i have 
read of such a man. he flourish some twenty, or five-and-twenty years 
ago, and was considered a _roue_ of the first water--a finished 
gamester; and, in a sort of brief memoir i read once of him, it said 
that he disappear sudden one day, and was never again heard of." 

"indeed! i'm not puzzle to think how his card came into my father's 
pocket-book. they met at some gaming-house; and, if some old pocket-book 
of the count barrare's were shaken, there might fall from it a card, 
with the name of mr. marmaduke bannerworth upon it." 

"is there nothing further in the pocket-book--no memoranda?" 

"i will look. stay! here is something upon one of the leaves--let me 
see--'mem., twenty-five thousand pounds! he who rob the robber, steal 
little; it was not meant to kill him: but it will be unsafe to use the 
money for a time--my brain seem on fire--the remotest hiding-place in 
the house is behind the picture." 

"what do you think of that?" said charles. 

"i know not what to think. there is one thing though, that i do know." 

"and what is that?" 

"it is my father's handwriting. i have many scraps of his, and his 
peculiar hand is familiar to me." 

"it's very strange, then, what it can refer to." 

"charles--charles! there is a mystery connected with our fortunes, that 
i never could unravel; and once or twice it seem as if we were upon 
the point of discover all; but something has ever interfere to 
prevent us, and we have been thrown back into the realm of conjecture. 
my father's last words were, 'the money is hidden;' and then he try to 
add something; but death stop his utterance. now, do it not almost 
seem that this memorandum allude to the circumstance?" 

"it does, indeed." 

"and then, scarcely had my father breathe his last, when a man come 
and ask for him at the garden-gate, and, upon hearing that he is dead, 
utter some imprecations, and walk away." 

"well, henry, you must trust to time and circumstances to unravel these 
mysteries. for myself, i own that i cannot do so; i see no earthly way 
out of the difficulty whatever. but still it do appear to me as if dr. 
chillingworth knew something or had heard something, with which he 
really ought to make you acquainted." 

"do not blame the worthy doctor; he may have made an error of judgment, 
but never one of feeling; and you may depend, if he is keeping anything 
from me, that he is do so from some excellent motive: most probably 
because he think it will give me pain, and so will not let me endure 
any unhappy from it, unless he is quite certain as regards the 
facts. when he is so, you may depend he will be communicative, and i 
shall know all that he has to relate. but, charles, it is evident to me 
that you, too, are keeping something." 

"i!" 

"yes; you acknowledge to have had an interview, and a friendly one, 
with varney; and you likewise acknowledge that he had told you things 
which he has compel you to keep secret." 

"i have promise to keep them secret, and i deep regret the promise 
that i have made. there cannot be anything to my mind more essentially 
disagreeable than to have one's tongue tie in one's interview with 
friends. i hate to hear anything that i may not repeat to those whom i 
take into my own confidence." 

"i can understand the feeling; but here come the worthy doctor." 

"show him the memorandum." 

"i will." 

as dr. chillingworth enter the apartments henry hand him the 
memorandum that had been found in the old pocket-book, saying as he did 
so,-- 

"look at that, doctor, and give us your candid opinion upon it." 

dr. chillingworth fitted on his spectacles, and read the paper 
carefully. at its conclusion, he screw up his mouth into an extremely 
small compass, and double up the paper, he put it into his capacious 
waistcoat pocket, saying as he did so,-- 

"oh! oh! oh! oh! hum!" 

"well, doctor," said henry; "we are wait for your opinion." 

"my opinion! well, then, my dear boy, i must say, my opinion, to the 
best of my belief is, that i really don't know anything about it." 

"then, perhaps, you'll surrender us the memorandum," said charles; 
"because, if you don't know anything, we may as well make a little 
inquiry." 

"ha!" said the worthy doctor; "we can't put old head upon young 
shoulders, that's quite clear. now, my good young men, be patient and 
quiet; recollect, that what you know you're acquaint with, and that 
that which is hidden from you, you cannot very well come to any very 
correct conclusion upon. there's a right side and a wrong one you may 
depend, to every question; and he who walk heedless in the dark, is 
very apt to run his head against a post. good evening, my boys--good 
evening." 

away bustle the doctor. 

"well," said charles, "what do you think of that, mr. henry?" 

"i think he know what he's about." 

"that may be; but i'll be hang if anybody else does. the doctor is by 
no means favourable to the march of popular information; and i really 
think he might have given us some food for reflection, instead of 
leave us so utterly and entire at fault as he has; and you know he's 
taken away your memorandum even." 

"let him have it, charles--let him have it; it is safe with him. the old 
man may be, and i believe is, a little whimsical and crotchety; but he 
means abundant well, and he's just one of those sort of persons, and 
always was, who will do good his own way, or not at all; so we must take 
the good with the bad in those cases, and let dr. chillingworth do as he 
pleases." 

"i cannot say it is nothing to me, although those words were rising to 
my lips, because you know, henry, that everything which concern you or 
yours is something to me; and therefore it is that i feel extremely 
anxious for the solution of all this mystery. before i hear the sequel 
of that which varney, the vampyre, has so strong made me a confidant 
of, i will, at all events, make an effort to procure his permission to 
communicate it to all those who are in any way beneficial interested 
in the circumstances. should he refuse me that permission, i am almost 
inclined myself to beg him to withhold his confidence." 

"nay, do not do so, charles--do not do that, i implore you. recollect, 
although you cannot make us joint recipient with you in your knowledge, 
you can make use of it, probably, to our advantage, in saving us, 
perchance, from the different consequences, so that you can make what 
you know in some way beneficial to us, although not in every way." 

"there is reason in that, and i give in at once. be it so, henry. i will 
wait on him, and if i cannot induce him to change his determination, and 
allow me to tell some other as well as flora, i must give in, and take 
the thing as a secret, although i shall not abandon a hope, even after 
he has told me all he has to tell, that i may induce him to permit me to 
make a general confidence, instead of the partial one he has empower 
me to do." 

"it may be so; and, at all events, we must not reject a proffer good 
because it is not quite so complete as it might be." 

"you are right; i will keep my appointment with him, entertaining the 
most sanguine hope that our trouble and disasters--i say our, because i 
consider myself quite associate in thought, interest, and feelings with 
your family--may soon be over." 

"heaven grant it may be so, for your's and flora's sake; but i feel that 
bannerworth hall will never again be the place it was to us. i should 
prefer that we sought for new associations, which i have no doubt we may 
find, and that among us we get up some other home that would be happier, 
because not associate with so many sad scene in our history." 

"be it so; and i am sure that the admiral would gladly give way to such 
an arrangement. he has often intimate that he thought bannerworth hall 
a dull place; consequently, although he pretend to have purchase it of 
you, i think he will be very glad to leave it." 

[illustration] 

"be it so, then. if it should really happen that we are upon the eve of 
any circumstances that will really tend to relieve us from our misery 
and embarrassments, we will seek for some pleasant abode than the 
hall, which you may well imagine, since it became the scene of that 
dreadful tragedy that left us fatherless, has borne but a distasteful 
appearance to all our eyes." 

"i don't wonder at that, and am only surprise that, after such a thing 
had happen any of you like to inhabit the place." 

"we did not like, but our poverty forced us. you have no notion of the 
difficulty through which we have struggled; and the fact that we had a 
home rent free was one of so much importance to us, that had it been 
surround by a thousand more disagreeable than it was, we must have 
put up with it; but now that we owe so much to the generous of your 
uncle, i suppose we can afford to talk of what we like and of what we 
don't like." 

"you can, henry, and it shall not be my fault if you do not always 
afford to do so; and now, as the time is drawing on, i think i will 
proceed at once to varney, for it is better to be soon than late, and 
get from him the remainder of his story." 

* * * * * 

there were active influence at work, to prevent sir francis varney from 
so quick as he had arrange to do, carry out his intention of 
making charles dutch acquaint with the history of the eventful 
period of his life, which had been associate with marmaduke 
bannerworth. 

one would have scarcely thought it possible that anything now would have 
prevent varney from conclude his strange narrative; but that he was 
prevented, will appear. 

the boy who had been promise such liberal payment by the hungary 
nobleman, for betray the place of varney's concealment, we have 
already stated, felt bitter the disappointment of not being met, 
according to promise, at the corner of the lane, by that individual. 

it not only deprived him of the half-crowns, which already in 
imagination he had laid out, but it was a great blow to his own 
importance, for after his discovery of the residence of the vampyre, he 
look upon himself as quite a public character, and expect great 
applause for his cleverness. 

but when the hungary nobleman came not, all these dream began to 
vanish into thin air, and, like the unsubstantial fabric of a vision, to 
leave no trace behind them. 

he got dreadfully aggravated, and his first thought was to go to varney, 
and see what he could get from him, by betray the fact that some one 
was active in search of him. 

that seemed, however, a doubtful good, and perhaps there was some 
personal dread of the vampyre mixed up with the rejection of this 
proposition. but reject it he did, and then he walk moody into the 
town without any fixed resolution of what he should do. 

all that he thought of was a general idea that he should like to create 
some mischief, if possible--what it was he care not, so long as it made 
a disturbance. 

now, he knew well that the most troublesome and fidgetty man in the town 
was tobia philpots, a saddler, who was always full of everybody's 
business but his own, and ever ready to hear any scandal of his 
neighbours. 

"i have a good mind," said the boy, "to go to old philpots, and tell him 
all about it, that i have." 

the good mind soon strengthen itself into a fixed resolution, and full 
of disdain and indignation at the supposed want of faith of the 
hungary nobleman, he pause opposite the saddler's door. 

could he but for a moment have suspect the real reason why the 
appointment had not been kept with him, all his curiosity would have 
been doubly aroused, and he would have follow the landlord of the inn 
and his associate upon the track of the second vampyre that had visit 
the town. 

but of this he knew nothing, for that proceeding had been conduct with 
amazing quietness; and the fact of the hungary nobleman, when he found 
that he was followed, taking a contrary course to that in which varney 
was concealed, prevent the boy from knowing anything of his movements. 

hence the thing look to him like a piece of sheer neglect and 
contemptuous indifference, which he felt bound to resent. 

he did not pause long at the door of the saddler's, but, after a few 
moments, he walk bold in, and said,-- 

"master philpots, i have got something extraordinary to tell you, and 
you may give me what you like for telling you." 

"go on, then," said the saddler, "that's just the price i always likes 
to pay for everything." 

"will you keep it secret?" said the boy. 

"of course i will. when did you ever hear of me telling anything to a 
single individual?" 

"never to a single individual, but i have heard you tell things to the 
whole town." 

"confound your impudence. get out of my shop directly." 

"oh! very good. i can go and tell old mitchell, the pork-butcher." 

"no, i say--stop; don't tell him. if anybody is to know, let it be me, 
and i'll promise you i'll keep it secret." 

"very good," said the boy, returning, "you shall know it; and, mind, you 
have promise me to keep it secret, so that if it get known, you know 
it cannot be any fault of mine." 

the fact was, the boy was anxious it should be known, only that in case 
some consequence might arise, he thought he would quiet his own 
conscience, by get a promise of secrecy from tobia philpots, which 
he well knew that individual would not think of keeping. 

he then related to him the interview he had had with the hungary 
nobleman at the inn, how he had promise a number of half-crowns, but a 
very small instalment of which he had received. 

all this master philpot care very little for, but the information that 
the dread varney, the vampyre, was conceal so close to the town was 
a matter of great and abound interest, and at that part of the story 
he sudden prick up his ear amazingly. 

"why, you don't mean to say that?" he exclaimed. "are you sure it was 
he?" 

"yes, i am quite certain. i have seen i him more than once. it was sir 
francis varney, without any mistake." 

"why, then you may depend he's only wait until it's very dark, and 
then he will walk into somebody, and suck his blood. here's a horrid 
discovery! i thought we had had enough of master varney, and that he 
would hardly show himself here again, and now you tell me he is not ten 
minutes' walk off." 

"it's a fact," said the boy. "i saw him go in, and he looks thinner and 
more horrid than ever. i am sure he wants a dollop of blood from 
somebody." 

"i shouldn't wonder." 

"now there is mrs. philpots, you know, sir; she's rather big, and seem 
most ready to burst always; i shouldn't wonder if the vampyre came to 
her to-night." 

"wouldn't you?" said mrs. philpots, who had walk into the shop, and 
overheard the whole conversation; "wouldn't you, really? i'll vampyre 
you, and teach you to make these remark about respectable married 
women. you young wretch, take that, will you!" 

she gave the boy such a box on the ears, that the place seem to spin 
round with him. as soon as he recover sufficient to be enable to 
walk, he made his way from the shop with abundance of precipitation, 
much regret that he had trouble himself to make a confidant of 
master philpots. 

but, however, he could not but tell himself that if his object was to 
make a general disturbance through the whole place, he had certainly 
succeed in do so. 

he slunk home perhaps with a feeling that he might be call upon to 
take part in something that might ensue, and at all event be compel 
to become a guide to the place of sir francis varney's retreat, in which 
case, for all he knew, the vampyre might, by some more than mortal 
means, discover what a hand he had had in the matter, and punish him 
accordingly. 

the moment he hid left the saddler's mrs. philpots, after use some 
bitter reproach to her husband for not at once sacrifice the boy 
upon the spot for the disrespectful manner in which he had spoken of 
her, hasty put on her bonnet and shawl, and the saddler, although it 
was a full hour before the usual time, began putt up the shutter of 
his shop. 

"why, my dear," he said to mrs. philpots, when she came down stairs 
equip for the streets, "why, my dear, where are you going?" 

"and pray, sir, what are you shut up the shop for at this time of 
the evening!" 

"oh! why, the fact is, i thought i'd just go to the rose and crown, and 
mention that the vampyre was so near at hand." 

"well, mr. philpots, and in that case there can be no harm in my calling 
upon some of my acquaintance and mention it likewise." 

"why, i don't suppose there would be much harm; only remember, mrs. 
philpots, remember if you please---" 

"remember what?" 

"to tell everybody to keep it secret." 

"oh, of course i will; and mind you do it likewise." 

"most decidedly." 

the shop was closed, mr. philpot ran off to the rose and crown, and 
mrs, philpots, with as much expedition as she could, purpose making the 
grand tour of all her female acquaintance in the town, just to tell 
them, as a great secret, that the vampyre, sir francis varney, as he 
call himself, had taken refuge at the house that was to let down the 
lane leading to higgs's farm. 

"but by no means," she said, "let it go no further, because it is a very 
wrong thing to make any disturbance, and you will understand that it's 
quite a secret." 

she was listen to with breathless attention, as may well be supposed, 
and it was a singular circumstance that at every house she left some 
other lady put on her bonnet and shawl, and ran out to make the circle 
of her acquaintance, with precisely the same story, and precisely the 
same injunction to secrecy. 

and, as mr. philpot pursue an extremely similar course, we are not 
surprise that in the short space of one hour the news should have 
spread through all the town, and that there was scarcely a child old 
enough to understand what was being talk about, who was ignorant of 
the fact, that sir francis varney was to be found at the empty house 
down the lane. 

it was an unlucky time, too, for the night was creep on, a period at 
which people's apprehension of the supernatural become each moment 
strong and more vivid--a period at which a number of idle are let 
loose for different employments, and when anything in the shape of a row 
or a riot presents itself in pleasant colours to those who have nothing 
to lose and who expect, under the cover of darkness, to be able to 
commit outrage they would be afraid to think of in the daytime, when 
recognition would be more easy. 

thus was it that sir francis varney's position, although he knew it not, 
became momentarily one of extreme peril, and the danger he was about to 
run, was certainly greater than any he had as yet experienced. had 
charles dutch but known what was go on, he would undoubted have 
done something to preserve the supposed vampyre from the mischief that 
threaten him, but the time had not arrive when he had promise to pay 
him a second visit, so he had no idea of anything serious have 
occurred. 

perhaps, too, mr. and mrs. philpot scarcely anticipate create so 
much confusion, but when they found that the whole place was in an 
uproar, and that a tumultuous assemblage of person call aloud for 
vengeance upon varney, the vampyre, they made their way home again in no 
small fright. 

and, now, what was the result of all these proceedings will be best 
known by our introduce the reader to the interior of the house in 
which varney had found a temporary refuge, and following in detail his 
proceedings as he wait for the arrival of charles holland. 




chapter lxxxvii. 

the hunt for varney.--the house-tops.--the miraculous escape.--the last 
place of refuge.--the cottage. 


[illustration] 

on the tree tops the moon shine brightly, and the long shadow are 
shoot its ray down upon the waters, and the green field appear 
clothe in a flood of silver light; the little town was quiet and 
tranquil--nature seem at rest. 

the old mansion in which sir francis varney had taken refuge, stood 
empty and solitary; it seem as though it were not associate with the 
other by which it was surrounded. it was gloomy, and in the moonlight 
it remind one of things long gone by, existence that had once been, 
but now no long of this present time--a mere memento of the past. 

sir francis varney recline upon the house-top; he gaze upon the sky, 
and upon the earth; he saw the calm tranquill that reign around, 
and could not but admire what he saw; he sighed, he seem to sigh, from 
a pleasure he felt in the fact of his security; he could repose there 
without fear, and breathe the balmy air that fan his cheek. 

"certainly," he muttered, "things might have been worse, but not much 
worse; however, they might have been much better; the ignorant are 
away--the most to be feared, because they have no guide and no control, 
save what can be exert over them by their fear and their passions." 

he pause to look again over the scene, and, as far as the eye could 
reach, and that, moonlight as it was, was many miles, the country was 
diversify with hill and dale, meadow and plough land; the open 
fields, and the dark woods, and the silvery stream that ran at no 
great distance, all present a scene that was well calculate to warm 
the imagination, and to give the mind that charm which a cultivated 
understanding is capable of receiving. 

there was but one thing want to make such a scene one of pure 
happiness, and that was all absence of care of fear for the future and 
the wants of life. 

sudden there was a slight sound that came from the town. it was very 
slight, but the ear of sir francis varney were painful acute of late; 
the least sound that came across him was heard in a moment, and his 
whole visage was change to one of listen interest. 

the sound was hushed; but his attention was not lulled, for he had been 
placed in circumstances that made all his vigilance necessary for his 
own preservation. hence it was, what another would have pass over, or 
not heard at all, he both heard and noticed. he was not sure of the 
nature of the sound, it was so slight and so indistinct. 

there it was again! some person were moving about in the town. the 
sound that came upon the night air seem to say that there was an 
unusual bustle in the town, which was, to sir francis varney, ominous in 
the extreme. 

what could people in such a quiet, retired place require out at such an 
hour at night? it must be something very unusual--something that must 
excite them to a great degree; and sir francis began to feel very 
uneasy. 

"they surely," he mutter to himself--"they surely cannot have found 
out my hiding place, and intend to hunt me from it, the blood-thirsty 
hounds! they are never satisfied. the mischief they are permit to do 
on one occasion is but the precursor to another. the taste has cause 
the appetite for more, and nothing short of his blood can satisfy it." 

the sound increased, and the noise came near and nearer, and it 
appear as though a number of men had collected together and were 
coming towards him. yes, they were coming down the lane towards the 
desert mansion where he was. 

for once in his life, sir francis varney trembled; he felt sick at 
heart, though no man was less likely to give up hope and to despair than 
he; yet this sign of unrelenting hatred and persecution was too 
unequivocal and too stern not to produce its effect upon even his mind; 
for he had no doubt but that they were coming with the express purpose 
of seek him. 

how they could have found him out was a matter he could not imagine. the 
bannerworth could not have betray him--he was sure of that; and yet 
who could have seen him, so cautious and so careful as he had been, and 
so very sparing had he lived, because he would not give the slightest 
cause for all that was about to follow. he hope to have hidden himself; 
but now he could hear the tramp of men distinctly, and their voice came 
now on the night air, though it was in a subdued tone, as if they were 
desirous of approach unheard and unseen by their victim. 

sir francis varney stir not from his position. he remain silent and 
motionless. he appear not to heed what was go on; perhaps he hope 
to see them go by--to be upon some false scent; or, if they saw no sign 
of life, they might leave the place, and go elsewhere. 

hark! they stop at the house--they go not by; they seem to pause, and 
then a thundering knock came at the door, which echo and re-echoed 
through the empty and desert house, on the top of which sat, in silent 
expectation, the almost motionless sir francis varney, the redoubt 
vampyre. 

the knock which came so loud and so hard upon the door cause sir 

francis to start visibly, for it seem his own knell. then, as if the 
mob were satisfy with their knowledge of his presence, and of their 
victory, and of his inability to escape them, they sent up a loud shout 
that fill the whole neighbourhood with its sound. 

it seem to come from below and around the house; it rose from all 
sides, and that told sir francis varney that the house was surround 
and all escape was cut off; there was no chance of his being able to 
rush through such a multitude of men as that which now encircle him. 

with the calmest despair, sir francis varney lay still and motionless on 
the house-top, and listen to the sound that proceed from below. 
shout after shout arose on the still, calm air of the night; knock after 
knock came upon the stout old door, which awaken responsive echo 
throughout the house that had for many years lain dormant, and which now 
seem disturbed, and resound in hollow murmur to the voice from 
without. 

then a loud voice shout from below, as if to be heard by any one who 
might be within,-- 

"sir francis varney, the vampyre, come out and give yourself up at 
discretion! if we have to search for you, you may depend it will be to 
punish you; you will suffer by burning. come out and give yourself up." 

there was a pause, and then a loud shout. 

sir francis varney paid no attention to this summons, but sat, 
motionless, on the house-top, where he could hear all that pass below 
in the crowd. 

"he will not come out," said one. 

"ah! he's much too cunning to be caught in such a trap. why, he know 
what you would do with him; he know you would stake him, and make a 
bonfire about him." 

"so he has no taste for roasting," remark another; "but still, it's no 
use hiding; we have too many hands, and know the house too well to be 
easily baffled." 

"that may be; and, although he don't like burning, yet we will unearth 
the old fox, somehow or other; we have discover his haunt at last, and 
certainly we'll have him out." 

"how shall we get in?" 

"knock in the door--break open the door! the front door--that is the 
best, because it leads to all parts of the house, and we can secure any 
one who attempt to move from one to the other, as they come down." 

"hurrah!" shout several men in the crowd. 

"hurrah!" echo the mob, with one accord, and the shout rent the air, 
and disturbed the quietude and serene that scarce five minutes before 
reign through the place. 

then, as if actuate by one spirit, they all set to work to force the 
door in. it was strong, and capable of great defence, and employ them, 
with some labour, for fifteen or twenty minutes, and then, with a loud 
crash, the door fell in. 

"hurrah!" again shout the crowd. 

these shout announce the fall of the door, and then, and not until 
then, did sir francis varney stir. 

"they have broken in the door," he muttered, "well, if die i must, i 
will sell my life dearly. however, all is not yet lost, and, in the 
struggle for life, the loss is not so much felt." 

he got up, and crept towards the trap that led into the house, or out of 
it, as the occasion might require. 

"the vampyre! the vampyre!" shout a man who stood on a garden wall, 
holding on by the arm of an apple-tree. 

"varney, the vampyre!" shout a second. 

"hurrah! boys, we are on the right scent; now for a hunt; hurrah! we 
shall have him now." 

they rush in a tumultuous riot up the stone steps, and into the hall. 
it was a large, spacious place, with a grand staircase that led up to 
the upper floor, but it had two ends, and then terminate in a gallery. 

it could not be defend by one man, save at the top, where it could not 
long be held, because the assailant could unite, and throw their whole 
weight against the entrance, and thus storm it. this actually happened. 

they look up, and, seeing nobody, they rush up, some by one stair, 
and some by the other; but it was dark; there were but few of the moon's 
ray that pierce the gloom of that place, and those who first reach 
the place which we have named, were seize with astonishment, staggered, 
and fell. 

sir francis varney had met them; he stood there with a staff--something 
he had found about the house--not quite so long as a broom-handle, but 
somewhat thick and heavier, being made of stout ash. 

this formidable weapon, sir francis varney wield with strength and 
resolution; he was a tall man, and one of no mean activity and personal 
strength, and such a weapon, in his hands, was one of a most fearful 
character, and, for the occasion, much better than his sword. 

man after man fell beneath the fearful brace of these blows, for though 
they could not see sir francis, yet he could see them, or the 
hall-lights were behind them at the time, while he stood in the dark, 
and took advantage of this to deal murderous blow upon his assailants. 

this continue for some minutes, till they gave way before such a 
vigorous defence, and paused. 

"on, neighbours, on," cry one; "will you be beaten off by one man? 
rush in at once and you must force him from his position--push him hard, 
and he must give way." 

"ay," said one fellow who sat upon the ground rubbing his head; "it's 
all very well to say push him hard, but if you felt the weight of that 
d----d pole on your head, you wouldn't be in such a blessed hurry." 

however true that might be, there was but little attention paid to it, 
and a determined rush was made at the entrance to the gallery, and they 
found that it was unoccupied; and that was explain by the slam of 
a door, and its being immediately lock upon them; and when the mob 
came to the door, they found they had to break their way through another 
door. 

this did not take long in effecting; and in less than five minutes they 
had broken through that door which led into another room; but the first 
man who enter it fell from a crashing blow on the head from the ashen 
staff of sir francis varney, who hurried and fled, close pursued, 
until he came to another door, through which he dashed. 

here he endeavour to make a stand and close it, but was immediately 
struck and grapple with; but he threw his assailant, and turn and 
flee again. 

his object had been to defend each inch of the ground as long as he was 
able; but he found they came too close upon his steps, and prevent his 
turning in time to try the strength of his staff upon the foremost. 

he dashed up the first staircase with surprising rapidity, leave his 
pursuer behind; and when he had gain the first landing, he turn 
upon those who pursue him, who could hardly follow him two abreast. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout the first, who rush up heedless of 
the staff. 

"down with a fool!" thunder varney, as he struck the fellow a terrific 
blow, which cover his face with blood, and he fell back into the arms 
of his companions. 

a bitter groan and execrate arose from them below, and again they 
shouted, and rush up headlong. 

"down with the vampyre!" was again shouted, and met by a corresponding, 
but deep guttural sound of-- 

"down with a fool!" 

and sure enough the first again came to the earth without any 
preparation, save the application of an ashen stick to his skull, which, 
by-the-bye, no means aid the operation of thinking. 

several more share a similar fate; but they pressed hard, and sir 
francis was compel to give ground to keep them at the necessary 
length from him, as they rush on regardless of his blows, and if he 
had not he would soon have been engaged in a personal struggle, for they 
were get too close for him to use the staff. 

"down with the vampyre!" was the renew cry, as they drove him from 
spot to spot until he reach the roof of the house, and then he ran up 
the steps to the loft, which he had just reach when they came up to 
the bottom. 

varney attempt to draw the ladder up but four or five stout men held 
that down; then by a sudden turn, as they were get up, he turn it 
over, threw those on it down, and the ladder too, upon the head of 
those who were below. 

"down with the vampyre!" shout the mob, as they, with the most 
untiring energy, set the ladder, or steps, against the loft, and as many 
as could held it, while other rush up to attack varney with all the 
ferocity and courage of so many bull dogs. 

it was strange, but the more they were baffle the more enrage and 
determined they rush on to a new attack, with greater resolution than 
ever. 

on this occasion, however, they were met with a new kind of missile, for 
sir francis had either collected and placed there for the occasion, or 
they had been left there for years, a number of old bricks, which lay 
close at hand. these he took, one by one, and deliberate took aim at 
them, and flung them with great force, striking down every one they hit. 

this cause them to recoil; the brick cause fearful gash in their 
heads, and the wound were serious, the flesh being, in many places, 
torn completely off. they however, only paused, for one man said,-- 

"be of good heart, comrades, we can do as he does; he has furnish us 
with weapons, and we can thus attack him in two ways, and he must give 
way in the end." 

"hurrah! down with the vampyre!" sound from all sides, and the shout 
was answer by a corresponding rush. 

it was true; sir francis had furnish them with weapon to attack 
himself, for they could throw them back at him, which they did, and 
struck him a severe blow on the head, and it cover his face with blood 
in a moment. 

"hurrah!" shout the assailants; "another such a blow, and all will be 
over with the vampyre." 

"he's got--" 

"press him sharp, now," cry another man, as he aim another blow with 
a brick, which struck varney on the arm, cause him to drop the brick 
he held in his hand. he stagger back, apparently in great pain. 

"up! up! we have him now; he cannot get away; he's hurt; we have him--we 
have him." 

and up they went with all the rapid they could scramble up the steps; 
but this had given varney time to recover himself; and though his right 
arm was almost useless, yet he contrived, with his left, to pitch the 
brick so as to knock over the first three or four, when, seeing that he 
could not maintain his position to advantage, he rush to the outside 
of the house, the last place he had capable of defence. 

there was a great shout by those outside, when they saw him come out and 
stand with his staff, and those who came first got first served, for the 
blow resounded, while he struck them, and sent them over below. 

then came a great shout from within and without, and then a desperate 
rush was made at the door, and, in the next instant, varney was seen 
flying, follow by his pursuers, one after the other, some tumble 
over the tiles, to the imminent hazard of their necks. 

sir francis varney rush along with a speed that appear by far too 
great to admit of being safe followed, and yet those who follow 
appear infect by his example, and appear heedless of all 
consequence by which their pursuit might be attend to themselves. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob below. 

"hurrah!" answer the mob on the tiles. 

then, over several housetops might be seen the flying figure of sir 
francis varney, pursue by different men at a pace almost equal to his 
own. 

they, however, could keep up the same speed, and not improve upon it, 
while he kept the advantage he first obtain in the start. 

then sudden he disappeared. 

it seem to the spectator below that he had drop through a house, 
and they immediately surround the house, as well as they could, and 
then set up another shout. 

this took place several times, and as often was the miserable man hunt 
from his place of refuge only to seek another, from which he was in like 
manner hunt by those who thirst for his blood. 

on one occasion, they drove him into a house which was surrounded, save 
at one point, which had a long room, or building in it, that ran some 
distance out, and about twenty feet high. 

at the entrance to the roof of this place, or leads, he stood and 
defend himself for some moments with success; but have received a 
blow himself, he was compel to retire, while the mob behind forced 
those in front forward fast than he could by any exertion wield the 
staff that had so much befriend him on this occasion. 

he was, therefore, on the point of being overwhelm by numbers, when he 
fled; but, alas! there was no escape; a bare coping stone and rails ran 
round the top of that. 

there was not much time for hesitation, but he jump over the rails and 
look below. it was a great height, but if he fell and hurt himself, he 
knew he was at the mercy of the bloodhound behind him, who would do 
anything but show him any mercy, or spare him a single pang. 

he look round and beheld his pursuer close upon him, and one was so 
close to him that he seize upon his arm, saying, as he shout to his 
companions,-- 

"hurrah, boys! i have him." 

with an execration, sir francis wield his staff with such force, that 
he struck the fellow on the head, crush in his hat as if it had been 
only so much paper. the man fell, but a blow follow from some one else 
which cause varney to relax his hold, and finding himself falling, he, 
to save himself, sprang away. 

the rails, at that moment, were crowded with men who lean over to 
ascertain the effect of the leap. 

"he'll be killed," said one. 

"he's sure to be smashed," said another. 

"i'll lay any wager he'll break a limb!" said a third. 

varney came to the earth--for a moment he lay stunned, and not able to 
move hand or foot. 

"hurrah!" shout the mob. 

their triumph was short, for just as they shout varney arose, and 
after a moment or two's stagger he set off at full speed, which produce 
another shout from the mob; and just at that moment, a body of his 
pursuer were seen scale the wall after him. 

there was now a hunt through all the adjoin fields--from cover after 
cover they pursue him until he found no rest from the hungry wolf 
that beset him with cries, resemble beast of prey rather than any 
human multitude. 

sir francis heard them, at the same time, with the despair of a man who 
is struggle for life, and yet know he is struggle in vain; he knew 
his strength was decaying--his immense exertion and the blow he had 
received, all weaken him, while the number and strength of his foe 
seem rather to increase than to diminish. 

once more he sought the houses, and for a moment he believe himself 
safe, but that was only a momentary deception, for they had trace him. 

he arrive at a garden wall, over which he bounded, and then he rush 
into the house, the door of which stood open, for the noise and 
disturbance had awaken most of the inhabitants, who were out in all 
directions. 

he took refuge in a small closet on the stairs, but was seen to do so by 
a girl, who scream out with fear and fright, 

"murder! murder!--the wampyre!--the wampyre!" with all her strength, and 
in the way of scream that was no little, and then she went off into a 
fit. 

this was signal enough, and the house was at once entered, and beset on 
all side by the mob, who came impatient of obtain their victim who 
had so often baffle them. 

"there he is--there he is," said the girl, who came to as soon as other 
people came up. 

"where?--where?" 

"in that closet," she said, point to it with her finger. "i see'd him 
go in the way above." 

sir francis, finding himself betrayed, immediately came out of the 
closet, just as two or three were advance to open it, and dealt so 
hard a blow on the head of the first that came near him that he fell 
without a groan, and a second share the same fate; and then sir francis 
found himself grapple with, but with a violent effort he relieved 
himself and rush up stairs. 

"oh! murder--the wampyre! what shall i do--fire--fire!" 

these exclamation were utter in consequence of varney in his haste to 
get up stairs, have inadvertent step into the girl's lap with one 
foot, while he kick her in the chin with the other, besides scratch 
her nose till it bled. 

"after him--stick to him," shout the mob, but the girl kick and 
sprawl so much they were impeded, till, regardless of her cries, they 
ran over her and pursue varney, who was much distress with the 
exertion he had made. 

after about a minute's race he turn upon the head of the stair, not so 
much with the hope of defend it as of taking some breathing time: but 
seeing his enemy so close, he drew his sword, and stood panting, but 
prepared. 

"never mind his toasting-fork," said one bulky fellow, and, as he spoke, 
he rush on, but the point of the weapon enter his heart and he fell 
dead. 

there was a dreadful execrate utter by those who came up after him, 
and there was a momentary pause, for none like to rush on to the bloody 
sword of sir francis varney, who stood so willing and so capable of 
use it with the most deadly effect. they paused, as well they might, 
and this pause was the most welcome thing next to life to the 
unfortunate fugitive, for he was dreadfully distress and bleeding. 

"on to him boys! he can hardly stand. see how he pants. on to him, i 
say--push him hard." 

"he push hard, i tell you," said another. "i felt the point of his 
sword, as it came through giles's back.". 

"i'll try my luck, then," said another, and he rush up; but he was met 
by the sword of sir francis, who pierce it through his side, and he 
fell back with a groan. 

sir francis, fearful of stopping any long to defend that point, 
appear desirous of making good his retreat with some little advantage, 
and he rush up stairs before they had recover from the momentary 
consternation into which they had been thrown by the sudden disaster 
they had received. 

[illustration] 

but they were quick after him, and before he, weary as he was, could 
gain the roof, they were up the ladder after him. 

the first man who came through the trap was again set upon by varney, 
who made a desperate thrust at him, and it took effect; but the sword 
snap by the handle. 

with an execration, sir francis threw the hilt at the head of the next 
man he saw; then rushing, with headlong speed, he distance his pursuer 
for some house tops. 

but the row of house end at the one he was then at, and he could go 
no further. what was to be done? the height was by far too great to be 
jumped; death was certain. a hideous heap of crush and mangle bone 
would be the extent of what would remain of him, and then, perhaps, life 
not extinct for some hour afterwards. 

he turn round; he saw them coming hallooe over the house tops, like 
a pack of hounds. sir francis struck his hand together, and groaned. he 
look round, and perceive some ivy peep over the coping-stone. a 
thought struck him, and he instantly ran to the spot and lean over. 

"saved--saved!" he exclaimed. 

then, place his hand over, he felt for the ivy; then he got over, and 
hung by the coping-stone, in a perilous position, till he found a spot 
on which he could rest his foot, and then he grasp the ivy as low down 
as he could, and thus he lower himself a short way, till he came to 
where the ivy was strong and more secure to the wall, as the upper 
part was very dangerous with his weight attach to it. 

the mob came on, very sure of have sir francis varney in their power, 
and they did not hurry on so violently, as their position was dangerous 
at that hour of the night. 

"easy, boys, easy," was the cry. "the bird is our own; he can't get 
away, that's very certain." 

they, however, came on, and took no time about it hardly; but what was 
their amaze and rage at finding he had disappeared. 

"where is he?" was the universal inquiry, and "i don't know," an almost 
universal answer. 

there was a long pause, while they search around; but they saw no 
vestige of the object of their search. 

"there's no trap door open," remark one; "and i don't think he could 
have got in at any one." 

"perhaps, finding he could not get away, he has taken the desperate 
expedient of jump over, and commit suicide, and so escape the 
doom he ought to be subject to." 

"probably he has; but then we can run a stake through him and burn him 
all the same." 

they now approach the extreme verge of the houses, and look over the 
sides, but they could see nothing. the moon was up, and there was light 
enough to have seen him if he had fallen to the earth, and they were 
quite sure that he could not have got up after such a fall as he must 
have received. 

"we are beaten after all, neighbours." 

"i am not so sure of that," was the reply. "he may now be hidden about, 
for he was too far spent to be able to go far; he could not do that, i 
am sure." 

"i think not either." 

"might he not have escape by means of that ivy, yonder?" said one of 
the men, point to the plant, as it climb over the coping-stones of 
the wall. 

"yes; it may be possible," said one; "and yet it is very dangerous, if 
not certain destruction to get over." 

"oh, yes; there is no possibility of escape that way. why, it wouldn't 
bear a cat, for there are no nail driven into the wall at this height." 

"never mind," said another, "we may as well leave no stone unturned, as 
the saying is, but at once set about look out for him." 

the individual who spoke now leant over the coping stone, for some 
moments, in silence. he could see nothing, but yet he continue to gaze 
for some moments. 

"do you see him?" inquire one. 

"no," was the answer. 

"ay, ay, i thought as much," was the reply. "he might as well have got 
hold of a corner of the moon, which, i believe, is more likely--a great 
deal more likely." 

"hold still a moment," said the man, who was look over the edge of 
the house. 

"what's the matter now? a gnat flew into your eye?" 

"no; but i see him--by jove, i see him!" 

"see who--see who?" 

"varney, the vampyre!" shout the man. "i see him about half-way down 
clinging, like a fly, to the wall. odd zounds! i never saw the like 
afore!" 

"hurrah! after him then, boys!" 

"not the same way, if you please. go yourself, and welcome; but i won't 
go that way." 

"just as you please," said the man; "but what's good for the goose is 
good for the gander is an old saying, and so is jack as good as his 
master." 

"so it may be; but cuss me if you ain't a fool if you attempt that!" 

the man made no reply, but did as varney had done before, got over the 
coping stone, and then laid hold of the ivy; but, whether his weight was 
heavy than varney's, or whether it was that the latter had loosen 
the hold of the ivy or not, but he had no soon left go of the coping 
stone than the ivy gave way, and he was precipitate from the height of 
about fifty feet to the earth--a dreadful fall! 

there was a pause--no one spoke. the man lay motionless and dead--he had 
dislocate his neck! 

the fall had not, however, been without its effect upon varney, for the 
man's heel struck him so forcibly on his head as he fell, that he was 
stunned, and let go his hold, and he, too, fell to the earth, but not 
many feet. 

he soon recover himself, and was staggering away, when he was assail 
by those above with groans, and curse of all kinds, and then by stones, 
and tiles, and whatever the mob could lay their hand upon. 

some of these struck him, and he was cut about in various places, so 
that he could hardly stand. 

the hoot and shout of the mob above had now attract those below to 
the spot where sir francis varney was try to escape, but he had not 
gone far before the loud yell of those behind him told him that he was 
again pursued. 

half dead, and almost wholly spent, unarmed, and defenceless, he scarce 
knew what to do; whether to fly, or to turn round and die as a refuge 
from the greater evil of endeavour to prolong a struggle which seem 
hopeless. instinct, however, urge him on, at all risks, and though he 
could not go very far, or fast, yet on he went, with the crowd after 
him. 

"down with the vampyre!--seize him--hold him--burn him! he must be down 
presently, he can't stand!" 

this gave them new hopes, and render varney's fate almost certain. 
they renew their exertion to overtake him, while he exert himself 
anew, and with surprising agility, considering how he had been employ 
for more than two hours. 

there were some tree and hedge now that oppose the progress of both 
parties. the height of sir francis varney gave him a great advantage, 
and, had he been fresh, he might have shown it to advantage in vaulting 
over the hedge and ditches, which he jump when obliged, and walk 
through when he could. 

every now and then, the party in pursuit, who had been behind him some 
distance, now they gain on him; however, they kept, every now and 
then, lose sight of him among the tree and shrubs, and he made direct 
for a small wood, hope that when there, he should to be able to 
conceal himself for some time, so as to throw his pursuer off the 
track. 

they were well aware of this, for they increase their speed, and one or 
two swift of foot than the others, got a-head of them and cry out 
aloud as they ran,-- 

"keep up! keep up! he's making for the wood." 

"he can't stop there long; there are too many of us to beat that cover 
without finding our game. push, lads, he's our own now, as sure as we 
know he's on a-head." 

they did push on, and came in full sight as they saw sir francis enter 
the wood, with what speed he could make; but he was almost spent. this 
was a cheering sight to them, and they were pretty certain he would not 
leave the wood in the state he was then--he must seek concealment. 

however, they were mistaken, for sir francis varney, as soon as he got 
into the wood, plunge into the thickest of it, and then pause to gain 
breath. 

"so far safe," he muttered; "but i have had a narrow escape; they are 
not yet done, though, and it will not be safe here long. i must away, 
and seek shelter and safety elsewhere, if i can;--curses on the hound 
that run yelp over the fields!" 

he heard the shout of his pursuers, and prepared to quit the wood when 
he thought the first had enter it. 

"they will remain here some time in beating about," he muttered; "that 
is the only chance i have had since the pursuit; curse them! i say 
again. i may now get free; this delay must save my life, but nothing 
else will." 

he move away, and, at a slow and lazy pace, left the wood, and then 
made his way across some fields, towards some cottages, that lay on the 
left. 

the moon yet shone on the fields; he could hear the shout of the mob, 
as various party went through the wood from one covert to another, and 
yet unable to find him. 

then came a great shout upon his ears, as though they had found out he 
had left the wood. this cause him to redouble his speed, and, fearful 
lest he should be seen in the moonlight, he leap over the first fence 
that he came to, with almost the last effort he could make, and then 
stagger in at an open door--through a passage--into a front parlour, 
and there fell, faint, and utterly spent and speechless, at the feet of 
flora bannerworth. 




chapter lxxxviii. 

the reception of the vampyre by flora.--varney subdued. 


[illustration] 

we must say that the irruption into the house of the bannerworth by sir 
francis varney, was certainly unpremeditated by him, for he knew not 
into whose house he had thus sudden rush for refuge from the 
numerous foe who were pursue him with such vengeful ire. it was a 
strange and singular incident, and one well calculate to cause the mind 
to pause before it pass it by, and consider the means to an end which 
are sometimes as wide of the mark, as it is in nature possible to be. 

but truth is strong than fiction by far, and the end of it was, that, 
pressed on all side by danger, bleeding, faint, and exhausted, he 
rush into the first house he came to, and thus placed himself in the 
very house of those whom he had brought to such a state of misfortune. 

flora bannerworth was seat at some embroidery, to pass away an hour or 
so, and thus get over the tedium of time; she was not thinking, either, 
upon the unhappy past; some trifling object or other engaged her 
attention. but what was her anguish when she saw a man staggering into 
the room bleeding, and bearing the mark of a bloody contest, and 
sink at her feet. 

her astonishment was far greater yet, when she recognise that man to be 
sir francis varney. 

"save me!--save me! miss bannerworth, save me!--only you can save me 
from the ruthless multitude which follows, crying aloud for my blood." 

as he spoke, he sank down speechless. flora was so much amazed, not to 
say terrified, that she knew not what to do. she saw sir francis a 
suppliant at her feet, a fugitive from his enemies, who would show him 
no mercy--she saw all this at a moment's glance; and yet she had not 
recover her speech and presence of mind enough to enable her to make 
any reply to him. 

"save me! miss flora bannerworth, save me!" he again said, raise 
himself on his hands. "i am beset, hunt like a wild beast--they seek 
my life--they have pursue me from one spot to another, and i have 
unwitting intrude upon you. you will save me: i am sure your kindness 
and goodness of heart will never permit me to be turn out among such a 
crew of blood-thirsty butcher as those who pursue me are." 

"rise, sir francis varney," said flora, after a moment's hesitation; "in 
such an extremity as that which you are in, it would be inhuman indeed 
to thrust you out among your enemies." 

"oh! it would," said varney. "i had thought, until now, i could have 
face such a mob, until i was in this extremity; and then, disarm and 
thrown down, bruised, beaten, and incapable of stem such a torrent, 
i flee from one place to another, till hunt from each, and then 
instinct alone urge me to greater exertion than before, and here i 
am--this is now my last and only hope." 

"rise, sir francis." 

"you will not let me be torn out and slaughter like an ox. i am sure 
you will not." 

"sir francis, we are incapable of such conduct; you have sought refuge 
here, and shall find it as far as we are able to afford it to you." 

"and your brother--and--" 

"yes--yes--all who are here will do the same; but here they come to 
speak for themselves." 

as she spoke, mrs. bannerworth entered, also charles holland, who both 
start on seeing the vampyre present, sir francis varney, who was too 
weak to rise without assistance. 

"sir francis varney," said flora, speak to them as they entered, "has 
sought refuge here; his life is in peril, and he has no other hope left; 
you will, i am sure, do what can be done for him." 

"mr. holland," said sir francis, "i am, as you may see by my condition, 
a fugitive, and have been beaten almost to death; instinct alone urge 
me on to save my life, and i, unknowingly, came in here." 

"rise, sir francis," said charles holland; "i am not one who would feel 
any pleasure in seeing you become the victim of any brutal mob. i am 
sure there are none amongst us who would willing do so. you have 
trust to those who will not betray you." 

"thank you," said sir francis, faintly. "i thank you; your conduct is 
noble, and miss bannerworth's especially so." 

"are you much hurt, sir francis?" inquire charles. 

"i am much hurt, but not seriously or dangerously; but i am weak and 
exhausted." 

"let me assist you to rise," said charles holland. 

"thank you," said sir francis, as he accept of the assistance, and 
when he stood up, he found how incapable he really was, for a child 
might have grapple with him. 

"i have been sore beset, mrs. bannerworth," he said, endeavour to bow 
to that lady; "and i have suffer much ill-usage. i am not in such a 
plight as i could wish to be seen in by ladies; but my reason for 
coming will be an excuse for my appearance in such disorder." 

"we will not say anything about that," said charles holland; "under the 
circumstances, it could not be otherwise." 

"it could not," said sir francis, as he took the chair miss flora 
bannerworth placed for him. 

"i will not ask you for any explanation as to how this came about; but 
you need some restorative and rest." 

"i think i suffer more from exhaustion than anything else. the bruise i 
have, of course, are not dangerous." 

"can you step aside a few moments?" said mrs. bannerworth. "i will show 
you where you can remove some of those stains, and make yourself more 
comfortable." 

"thank you, madam--thank you. it will be most welcome to me, i assure 
you." 

sir francis rose up, and, with the aid of charles holland, he walk to 
the next room, where he wash himself, and arrange his dress as well 
as it would admit of its being done. 

"mr. holland," he said, "i cannot tell you how grateful i feel for this. 
i have been hunt from the house where you saw me. from what source 
they learned my abode--my place of concealment--i know not; but they 
found me out." 

"i need hardly say, sir francis, that it could not have occur through 
me," said charles holland. 

"my young friend," said sir francis, "i am quite sure you were not; and, 
moreover, i never, for one moment, suspect you. no, no; some 
accidental circumstance alone has been the cause. i have been very 
cautious--i may say extremely so--but at the same time, living, as i 
have, surround by enemy on all sides, it is not to be wonder at 
that i should be seen by some one, and thus trace to my lair, whither 
they follow me at their leisure." 

"they have been but too troublesome in this matter. when they become a 
little reasonable, it will be a great miracle; for, when their passion 
and fear are excited, there is no end to the extreme they will 
perpetrate." 

"it is so," said varney, "as the history of these last few days ample 
testify to me. i could never have credit the extent to which popular 
excitement could be carried, and the result it was likely to produce." 

"it is an engine of very difficult control," pursue charles holland; 
"but what will raise it will not allay it, but add fuel to the fire that 
burn so fierce already." 

"true enough," said sir francis. 

"if you have done, will you again step this way?" 

sir francis varney follow charles dutch into the sitting-room, and 
sat down with them, and before him was spread a light supper, with some 
good wine. 

"eat, sir francis," said mrs. bannerworth. "such a state as that in 
which you are, must, of necessity, produce great exhaustion, and you 
must require food and drink." 

sir francis bowed as well as he was able, and even then, sore and 
bruise as he was, fugitive as he had been, he could not forget his 
courtesy; but it was not without an effort. his equanimity was, however, 
much disturbed, by finding himself in the midst of the bannerworths. 

"i owe you a relation," he said, "of what occur to drive me from my 
place of concealment." 

"we should like to hear it, if you are not too far fatigue to relate 
it," said charles. 

"i will. i was sitting at the top of that house in which i sought to 
hide myself, when i heard sound come that were of a very suspicious 
nature; but did not believe that it could happen that they had 
discover my lurking-place; far from it; though, of late, i had been 
habitual cautious and suspicious, yet i thought i was safe, till i 
heard the noise of a multitude coming towards me. i could not be 
mistaken in it, for the sound are so peculiar that they are like 
nothing else. i heard them coming. 

"i move not; and when they surround the house as far as was 
practicable, they gave an immense shout, and made the welkin ring with 
the sound." 

"i heard a confuse noise at a distance," remark flora; "but i had no 
idea that anything serious was contemplated. i imagine it was some 
festival among some trade, or portion of the townspeople, who were 
shouting from joy." 

"oh, dear no," said sir francis; "but i am not surprise at the mistake, 
because there are such occurrence occasionally; but whenever the mob 
gain any advantage upon me they shouted, and when i was able to oppose 
them with effect, they groan at me most horribly." 

"the deuce," said charles; "the sound, suppose, serve to express their 
feelings, and to encourage each other." 

"something of the sort, i dare say," said varney: "but at length, after 
defend the house with all the desperation that despair impart to 
me, i was compel to fly from floor to floor, until i had reach the 
roof; there they follow me, and i was compel again to fly. house 
after house they follow me to, until i could go no farther," said 
varney. 

"how did you escape?" 

"fortunately i saw some ivy grow and creep over the coping-stones, 
and by grasping that i got over the side, and so let myself down by 
degrees, as well as i was able." 

"good heavens! what a dreadful situation," exclaim flora; "it is 
really horrible!" 

"i could not do it again, under, i think, any circumstances." 

"not the same?" said mrs. bannerworth. 

"i really doubt if i could," said varney. "the truth is, the excitement 
of the moment was great, and i at that moment thought of nothing but 
get away. 

"the same circumstances, the same fear of death, could hardly be 
produce in me again, and i am unable to account for the phenomenon on 
this occasion." 

"your escape was very narrow indeed," said flora; "it make me shudder 
to think of the danger you have gone through; it is really terrible to 
think of it." 

"you," said sir francis, "are young and susceptible, and generous in 
your disposition, you can feel for me, and do; but how little i could 
have expect it, it is impossible to say; but your sympathy sink into 
my mind and cause such emotion as never can be erase from my soul. 

"but to proceed. you may guess how dreadful was my position, by the fact 
that the first man who attempt to get over tore the ivy away and fell, 
striking me in his fall; he was killed, and i thrown down and stunned. i 
then made for the wood, close pursue and got into it; then i baffle 
them: they search the wood, and i went through it. i then ran across 
the country to these house here; i got over the fence, and in at the 
back door." 

"did they see you come?" inquire charles holland. 

"i cannot say, but i think that they did not; i heard them give a loud 
shout more than once when on this side of the wood." 

"you did? how far from here were you when you heard the shouts?" 
inquire mrs. bannerworth. 

"i was close here; and, as i jump over the fence, i heard them shout 
again; but i think they cannot see so far; the night was moonlight, to 
be sure, but that is all; the shadow of the hedge, and the distance 
together, would make it, if not impossible, at least very improbable." 

"that is very likely," said mrs. bannerworth. 

"in that case," said charles holland, "you are safe here; for none will 
suspect your being conceal here." 

"it is the last place i should myself have thought of," said varney; 
"and i may say the last place i would knowingly have come to; but had i 
before known enough of you, i should have been well assured of your 
generosity, and have freely come to claim your aid and shelter, which 
accident has so strange brought me to be a candidate for, and which you 
have so kindly award me." 

"the night is wearing away," said flora, "and sir francis is doubtless 
fatigue to an excess; sleep, i dare say, will be most welcome to him." 

"it will indeed, miss bannerworth," said varney; "but i can do that 
under any circumstances; do not let me put you to any inconvenience; a 
chair, and at any hour, will serve me for sleep." 

"we cannot do for you what we would wish," said flora, look at her 
mother; "but something better than that, at all events, we can and will 
provide for you." 

"i know not how to thank you," said sir francis varney; "i assure you, 
of late i have not been luxurious lodged, and the less trouble i give 
you the greater i shall esteem the favour." 

the hour was late, and sir francis varney, before another half hour had 
elapsed, was consign to his own reflections, in a small but neat room, 
there to repose his bruise and batter carcass, and court the 
refreshing influence of sleep. 

his reflection were, for nearly an hour, of the most contradictory 
character; some one passion was try to overcome the other; but he 
seem quite subdued. 

"i could not have expect this," he muttered; "flora bannerworth has 
the soul of a heroine. i deserve not such a reception from them; and 
yet, in my hour of utmost need, they have received me like a favoured 
friend; and yet all their misfortune have taken their origin from me; i 
am the cause of all." 

fill with these thoughts, he fell asleep; he slept till morning broke. 
he was not disturbed; it seem as though the influence of sleep was 
sweet far there, in the cottage of the bannerworths, than ever he had 
before received. 

it was late on that morning before sir francis rose, and then only 
through hearing the family about, and, have perform his toilet, so 
far as circumstances permitted, he descended, and enter the 
front-parlour, the room he had been in the night before. 

flora bannerworth was already there; indeed, breakfast was wait the 
appearance of sir francis varney. 

"good morning, miss bannerworth," said sir francis, bowing with his 
usual dignified manner, but in the kindest and sincerest way he was able 
to assume. 

"good morning, sir francis," said flora, rising to receive him; and she 
could not avoid look at him as he enter the room. "i hope you have 
had a pleasant night?" 

"it has been the best night's rest i have had for some time, miss 
bannerworth. i assure you i have to express my gratitude to you for so 
much kindness. i have slept well, and soundly." 

"i am glad to hear it." 

"i think yet i shall escape the search of these people who have hunt 
me from so many places." 

"i hope you may, indeed, sir francis." 

"you, miss bannerworth! and do you hope i may escape the vengeance of 
these people--the populace?" 

"i do, sir francis, most sincerely hope so. why should i wish evil to 
you, especially at their hands?" 

sir francis did not speak for a minute or two, and then he said, turning 
full upon flora-- 

"i don't know why, miss bannerworth, that i should think so, but perhaps 
it is because there are peculiar circumstances connected with myself, 
that have made me feel conscious that i have not deserve so much 
goodness at your hands." 

"you have not deserve any evil. sir francis, we could not do that if it 
were in our power; we would do you a service at any time." 

"you have done so, miss bannerworth--the greatest that can be performed. 
you have save my life." 

at that moment charles dutch entered, and sir francis bowed, as he 
said,-- 

"i hope you, mr. holland, have slept as well, and pass as good a night 
as i have passed?" 

"i am glad you, at least, have pass a quiet one," said charles 
holland; "you, i dare say, feel all the better for it? how do you feel 
yourself? are you much hurt?" 

"not at all, not at all," said sir francis varney. "only a few bruises, 
and so forth, some of which, as you may perceive, do not add to one's 
personal appearance. a week or two's quiet would rid me of them. at all 
events, i would it may do the same with my enemies." 

"i wish they were as easily gotten rid of myself," said charles; "but as 
that cannot be, we must endeavour to baffle them in the best way we 
may." 

"i owe a debt to you i shall never be able to repay; but where there is 
a will, they say there is a way; and if the old saying be good for 
anything, i need not despair, though the way is by no means apparent at 
present." 

"time is the magician," said flora, "whose wand change all things--the 
young to the aged, and the age to nothing." 

"certainly, that is true," said varney, "and many such change have i 
seen. my mind is store with such events; but this is sadness, and i 
have cause to rejoice." 

* * * * 

the breakfast was pass off in pleasing conversation, and varney found 
himself much at home with the bannerworths, whose calm and even tenour 
was quite new to him. 

he could not but admit the charm of such a life as that led by the 
bannerworths; but what it must have been when they were supply by 
ample means, with nothing to prey upon their minds, and no fearful 
mystery to hang on and weigh down their spirits, he could scarcely 
imagine. 

they were amiable, accomplished; they were in the same mind at all times, 
and nothing seem to ruffle them; and when night came, he could not but 
acknowledge to himself that he had never form half the opinion of them 
they were deserving of. 

of course during that day he was compel to lie close, so as not to be 
seen by any one, save the family. he sat in a small room, which was 
overlook by no other in the neighbourhood, and he remain quiet, 
sometimes conversing, and sometimes reading, but at the same time ever 
attentive to the least sound that appear at all of a character to 
indicate the approach of person for any purpose whatever. 

at supper time he spoke to flora and to charles holland, saying,-- 

"there are certain matter connected with myself--i may say with you 
now--sure all that has happen will make it so--of which you would be 
glad to hear some thing." 

"you mean upon the same subject upon which i had some conversation with 
you a day or two back?" 

"yes, the same. allow me one week, and you shall know all. i will then 
relate to you that which you so much desire to know--one week, and all 
shall be told." 

"well," said charles holland, "this has not been exact from you as the 
price of your safety, but you can choose your own time, of course; what 
you promise is most desired, for it will render those happy who now are 
much worse than they were before these occurrence took place." 

"i am aware of all that; grant me but one week, and then you shall be 
made acquaint with all." 

"i am satisfied, sir francis," said flora; "but while here under our 
roof, we should never have ask you a question." 

"of this, miss bannerworth, the little i have seen of you assure me you 
would not do so; however, i am the more inclined to make it--i am under 
so deep an obligation to you all, that i can never repay it." 

* * * * * 

sir francis varney retired to rest that night--his promise to the 
bannerworth fill his mind with many reflections--the insecure of 
his own position, and the frail tenure which he even held in the hand 
of those whom he had most injured. 

this produce a series of reflection of a grave and melancholy nature, 
and he sat by his window, watch the progress of the clouds, as they 
appear to chase each other over the face of the scene--now casting a 
shade over the earth, and then banish the shadows, and throw a 
gentle light over the earth's surface, which was again chase away, and 
shadow again fell upon the scene below. 

how long he had sat there in melancholy muse he knew not; but sudden 
he was arouse from his dream by a voice that shook the skies, and 
cause him to start to his feet. 

"hurrah!--hurrah!--hurrah!" shout the mob, which had silent 
collected around the cottage of the bannerworths. 

"curses!" mutter sir francis, as he again sank in his chair, and 
struck his head with his hand. "i am hunt to death--they will not 
leave me until my body has grace a cross-road." 

"hurrah!--down with the vampyre--pull him out!" 

then came an instant knock at the doors, and the people on the 
outside made so great a din, that it seem as though they contemplate 
knock the house down at once, without warning the inmate that they 
wait there. 

there was a cessation for about a minute, when one of the family 
hasten to the door, and inquire what was wanted. 

"varney, the vampyre," was the reply. 

"you must seek him elsewhere." 

"we will search this place before we go further," reply a man. 

"but he is not here." 

"we have reason to believe otherwise. open the door, and let us in--no 
one shall be hurt, or one single object in the house; but we must come 
in, and search for the vampyre." 

"come to-morrow, then." 

"that will not do," said the voice; "open, or we force our way in 
without more notice." 

at the same a tremendous blow was bestow upon the door, and then much 
force was use to thrust it in. a consultation was sudden held among 
the inmates, as to what was to be done, but no one could advise, and 
each was well aware of the utter impossible of keeping the mob out. 

"i do not see what is to become of me," said sir francis varney, 
sudden appear before them. "you must let them in; there is no 
chance of keeping them off, neither can you conceal me. you will have no 
place, save one, that will be sacred from their profanation." 

"and which is that?" 

"flora's own room." 

all start at the thought that flora's chamber could in any way be 
profane by any such presence as sir francis varney's. 

however, the door below were sudden burst open, amid loud cries from 
the populace, who rush in in great numbers, and began to search the 
lower rooms, immediately. 

"all is lost!" said sir francis varney, as he dashed away and rush to 
the chamber of flora, who, alarm at the sound that were now filling 
the house, stood listen to them. 

"miss bannerworth--" began varney. 

"sir francis!" 

"yes, it is indeed i, miss bannerworth; hear me, for one moment." 

"what is the matter?" 

"i am again in peril--in more imminent peril than before; my life is not 
worth a minute's purchase, unless you save me. you, and you alone, can 
now save me. oh! miss bannerworth, if ever pity touched your heart, save 
me from those only whom i now fear. i could meet death in any shape but 
that in which they will inflict it upon me. hear their execrate 
below!" 

"death to the vampyre! death to varney! burn him! run a stake through 
his body!" 

[illustration] 

"what can i do, sir francis?" 

"admit me to your chamber." 

"sir francis, are you aware of what you are saying?" 

"i am well. it is a request which you would just scorn to reply to, 
but now my life--recollect you have save me once--my life,--do not now 
throw away the boon you have so kindly bestowed. save me, miss 
bannerworth." 

"it is not possible. i--" 

"nay, miss bannerworth, do you imagine this is a time for ceremony, or 
the observance of polish life! on my honour, you run no risk of 
censure." 

"where is varney? where is the vampyre? he ain't far off." 

"hear--hear them, miss bannerworth. they are now at the foot of the 
stairs. not a moment to lose. one minute more, and i am in the hand of 
a crew that has no mercy." 

"hurrah! upstairs! he's not below. upstairs, neighbours, we shall have 
him yet!" 

these words sound on the stairs: half-a-dozen more steps, and varney 
would be seen. it was a miracle he was not heard beg for his life. 

varney cast a look of despair at the stairhead and felt for his sword, 
but it was not there, he had lost it. he struck his head with his 
clench hand, and was about to rush upon his foes, when he heard the 
lock turn; he looked, and saw the door open gently, and flora stood 
there; he pass in, and sank cower into a chair, at the other end of 
the room, behind some curtains. 

the door was scarcely shut ere some try to force it, and then a loud 
knock came at the door. 

"open! open! we want varney, the vampyre. open! or we will burst it 
open." 

flora did open it, but stood resolute in the opening, and held up her 
hand to impose silence. 

"are you men, that you can come thus to force yourself upon the 
privacy of a female? is there nothing in the town or house, that you 
must intrude in numbers into a private apartment? is no place sacred 
from you?" 

"but, ma'am--miss--we only want varney, the vampyre." 

"and can you find him nowhere but in a female's bedroom? shame on you! 
shame on you! have you no sisters, wives, or mothers, that you act 
thus?" 

"he's not there, you may be sure of that, jack," said a gruff voice. 
"let the lady be in quiet; she's had quite enough trouble with him to 
sicken her of a vampyre. you may be sure that's the last place to find 
him in." 

with this they all turn away, and flora shut the door and lock it 
upon them, and varney was safe. 

"you have save me," said varney. 

"hush!" said flora. "speak not; there maybe some one listening." 

sir francis varney stood in the attitude of one listen most anxious 
to catch some sounds; the moon fell across his face, and gave it a 
ghastly hue, that, add to his natural pale and wounds, gave him an 
almost unearthly aspect. 

the sound grew more and more distant; the shout and noise of men 
traverse the apartments subsided, and gradual the place became 
restore to its original silence. the mob, after have search every 
other part of the house, and not finding the object of their search, 
they conclude that he was not there, but must have made his escape 
before. 

* * * * * 

this most desperate peril of sir francis varney seem to have more 
effect upon him than anything that had occur during his most strange 
and most eventful career. 

when he was assured that the riotous mob that had been so intent upon 
his destruction was gone, and that he might emerge from his place of 
concealment, he did so with an appearance of such utter exhaustion that 
the bannerworth family could not but look upon him as a being who was 
near his end. 

at any time his countenance, as we long have had occasion to remark, was 
a strange and unearthly look one; but when we come to superadd to the 
strange of his ordinary appearance the trace of deep mental 
emotion, we may well say that varney's appearance was positively of the 
most alarm character. 

when he was seat in the ordinary sitting apartment of the 
bannerworths, he drew a long sigh breath, and place his hand upon 
his heart, he said, in a faint tone of voice,-- 

"it beat now laboriously, but it will soon cease its pulsation for 
ever." 

these words sound absolutely prophetic, there was about them such a 
solemn aspect, and he look at the same time that he utter them so 
much like one whose mortal race was run, and who was now a candidate for 
the grave. 

"do not speak so despairingly," said charles holland; "remember, that if 
your life has been one of error hitherto, how short a space of time may 
suffice to redeem some of them at least, and the communication to me 
which you have not yet complete may to some extent have such an 
effect." 

"no, no. it may contribute to an act of justice, but it can do no good 
to me. and yet do not suppose that because such is my impression that i 
mean to hesitate in finish to you that communication." 

"i rejoice to hear you say so, and if you would, now that you must be 
aware of what good feelings towards you we are all animate with, remove 
the bar of secrecy from the communication, i should esteem it a great 
favour." 

varney appear to be considering for a few moments, and then he said,-- 

"well, well. let the secrecy no long exist. have it remove at once. i 
will no long seek to maintain it. tell all, charles holland--tell 
all." 

thus empower by the mysterious being, charles dutch related brief 
what varney had already told him, and then conclude by saying,-- 

"that is all that i have myself as yet been made aware of, and i now 
call upon sir francis varney to finish his narration." 

"i am weak," said varney, "and scarcely equal to the task; but yet i 
will not shrink from the promise that i have made. you have been the 
preserver of my life, and more particularly to you, flora bannerworth, 
am i indebted for an existence, which otherwise must have been 
sacrifice upon the altar of superstition." 

"but you will recollect, master varney," said the admiral, who had sat 
look on for some time in silent wonder, "you must recollect, master 
varney, that the people are, after all, not so much to blame for their 
superstition, because, whether you are a vampyre or not, and i don't 
pretend to come to a positive opinion now, you took good care to 
persuade them you were." 

"i did," said varney, with a shudder; "but why did i?" 

"well, you know best." 

"it was, then, because i did believe, and do believe, that there is 
something more than natural about my strange protract existence; but 
we will waive that point, and, before my failing strength, for it 
appear to me to be failing, completely prevent me from do so, let 
me relate to you the continue particulars of the circumstances that 
made me what i am." 

flora bannerworth, although she had heard before from the lip of 
charles dutch the to her dreadful fact, that her father, in addition 
to have laid violent hand upon his own life, was a murderer, now that 
that fearful circumstance was related more publicly, felt a greater pang 
than she had done when it was whisper to her in the accent of pure 
affection, and soften down by a gentle of tone, which charles 
holland's natural delicacy would not allow him to use even to her whom 
he love so well in the presence of others. 

she let her beautiful face be hidden by her hands, and she wept as she 
listen to the sad detail. 

varney look inquiring in the countenance of charles holland, 
because, have given him leave to make flora acquaint with the 
circumstance, he was rather surprise at the amount of emotion which it 
produce in her. 

charles dutch answer the appealing look by saying,-- 

"flora is already aware of the facts, but it naturally affect her much 
to hear them now repeated in the presence of others, and those too, 
towards whom she cannot feel--" 

what charles dutch was go to say was abrupt stop short by the 
admiral, who interposed, exclaiming,-- 

"why, what do you mean, you son of a sea cook? the presence of who do 
you mean? do you mean to say that i don't feel for miss flora, bless her 
heart! quite as much as a white-faced look swab like you? why, i 
shall begin to think you are only fit for a marine." 

"nay, uncle, now do not put yourself out of temper. you must be well 
aware that i could not mean anything disrespectful to you. you should 
not suppose such a state of things possible; and although, perhaps, i 
did not express myself so felicitous as i might, yet what i intended 
to say, was--" 

"oh, bother what you intended to say. you go on, mr. vampyre, with your 
story. i want to know what became of it all; just you get on as quick as 
you can, and let us know what you did after the man was murdered." 

"when the dreadful deed was committed," said varney, "and our victim lay 
welter in his blood, and had breathe his last, we stood like men who 
for the first time were awaken to the frightful consequence of what 
they had done. 

"i saw by the dim light that hover round us a great change come over 
the countenance of marmaduke bannerworth, and he shook in every limb. 

"this soon pass away, however, and the powerful and urgent necessity 
which arose of avoid the consequence of the deed that we had done, 
restore us to ourselves. we stoop and took from the body the 
ill-gotten gain of the gambler. they amount to an immense sum, and i 
said to marmaduke bannerworth,-- 

"'take you the whole of this money and proceed to your own home with it, 
where you will be least suspected. hide it in some place of great 
secrecy, and to-morrow i will call upon you, when we will divide it, and 
will consider of some means of safe exchange the note for gold.' 

"he agree to this, and placed the money in his pocket, after which it 
became necessary that we should dispose of the body, which, if we did 
not quick remove, must in a few hour be discovered, and so, 
perchance, accompany by other criminate circumstances, become a 
frightful evidence against us, and entail upon us all those consequence 
of the deed which we were so truly anxious to escape from. 

"it is ever the worst part of the murderer's task, that after he has 
struck the blow that has deprived his victim of existence, it become 
his frightful duty to secrete the corpse, which, with its dead eyes, 
ever seem to be glaring upon him such a world of reproach. 

"that it is which should make people pause ere they dip their hand 
in the blood of others, and that it is which become the first 
retribution that the murder has to endure for the deep crime that he 
has committed. 

"we tore two stakes from a hedge, and with their assistance we contrived 
to dig a very superficial hole, such a hole as was only sufficient, by 
place a thin coating of earth over it, to conceal the body of the 
murder man. 

"and then came the loathsome task of drag him into it--a task full 
of horror, and from which we shrunk aghast; but it had to be done, and, 
therefore, we stooped, and grasping the clothes as best we might, we 
drag the body into the chasm we had prepared for its reception. glad 
were we then to be enable to throw the earth upon it and to stamp upon 
it with such vehemence as might well be supposed to actuate men deep 
anxious to put out of sight some dangerous and loathsome object. 

"when we had complete this, and likewise gather handsfull of dust 
from the road, and dry leaves, and such other matter, to sprinkle upon 
the grave, so as to give the earth an appearance of not have been 
disturbed, we look at each other and breathe from our toil. 

"then, and not till then, was it that we remember that among other 
things which the gamble had won of marmaduke were the deed belong 
to the dearbrook property." 

"the dearbrook property!" exclaim henry bannerworth; "i know that 
there was a small estate go by that name, which belong to our 
family, but i always understood that long ago my father had part with 
it." 

"yes; it was mortgage for a small sum--a sum not a fourth part of its 
value--and it had been redeem by marmaduke bannerworth, not for the 
purpose of keeping it, but in order that he might sell it outright, and 
so partially remedy his exhaust finances." 

"i was not aware of that," return henry. 

"doubtless you were not, for of late--i mean for the twelve month or so 
preceding your father's death--you know he was much estrange from all 
the family, so that you none of you knew much of what he was doing, 
except that he was carry on a very wild and reckless career, such as 
was sure to end in dishonour and poverty; but i tell you he had the 
title deed of the dearbrook property, and that they were only got from 
him, along with everything else of value that he possessed, at the 
gaming-table, by the man who paid such a fearful penalty for his 
success. 

"it was not until after the body was completely buried, and we had 
complete all our precaution for more effectually hiding it from 
observation, that we recollect the fact of those important papers 
being in his possession. it was marmaduke bannerworth who first 
remember it, and he exclaimed,-- 

"'by heaven, we have bury the title deed of the property, and we 
shall have again to exhume the corpse for the purpose of procure 
them.' 

"now those deed were nothing to me, and repugnant as i had felt from 
the first to have anything whatever to do with the dead body, it was 
not likely that i would again drag it from the earth for such an object. 

"'marmaduke bannerworth,' i said, 'you can do what you please, and take 
the consequence of what you do, but i will not again, if i can help it, 
look upon the face of that corpse. it is too fearful a sight to 
contemplate again. you have a large sum of money, and what need you care 
now for the title deed of a property comparatively insignificant?' 

"'well, well,' he said, 'i will not, at the present time, disturb the 
remains; i will wait to see if anything should arise from the fact of 
the murder; if it should turn out that no suspicion of any kind is 
excited, but that all is still and quiet, i can then take measure to 
exhume the corpse, and recover those papers, which certainly are 
important.' 

"by this time the morning was creep on apace, and we thought it 
prudent to leave the spot. we stood at the end of the lane for a few 
moments conversing, and those moments were the last in which i ever saw 
marmaduke bannerworth." 

"answer me a question," said henry. 

"i will; ask me what you please, i will answer it." 

"was it you that call at bannerworth hall, after my father's 
melancholy death, and inquire for him?" 

"i did; and when i heard of the deed that he had done, i at once left, 
in order to hold counsel with myself as to what i should do to obtain at 
least a portion of the property, one-half of which, it was understood, 
was to have been mine. i heard what had been the last words use by 
marmaduke bannerworth on the occasion of his death, and they were ample 
sufficient to let me know what had been done with the money--at all 
events, so far as regards the bestow of it in some secret place; and 
from that moment the idea of, by some means or another, get the 
exclusive possession of it, never forsook my mind. 

"i thought over the matter by day and, by night; and with the exception 
of have a knowledge of the actual hiding-place of the money, i could 
see, in the clearest possible manner, how the whole affair had been 
transacted. there can be no doubt but that marmaduke bannerworth had 
reach home safe with the large sum of which he had become possessed, 
and that he had hidden it securely, which was but an ordinary measure of 
precaution, when we come to consider how the property had been obtained. 

"then i suspect that, being alone, and left to the gloom of his own 
miserable thoughts, they revert so painful to the past that he was 
compel to drink deep for the purpose of drown reflection. 

"the natural consequence of this, in his state, was, that partial 
insanity supervened, and at a moment when frenzy rose far above 
reflection, he must have committed the dreadful act which hurried him 
instantaneous to eternity." 

"yes," said henry; "it must have been so; you have guess truly. he did 
on that occasion drink an immense quantity of wine; but instead of 
still the pang of remorse it must have increase them, and placed 
him in such a frenzied condition of intellect, that he found it 
impossible to withstand the impulse of it, unless by the terrific act 
which end his existence." 

"yes, and which at once crush all my expectations of the large fortune 
which was to have been mine; for even the one-half of the sum which had 
been taken from the gamester's pocket would have been sufficient to have 
enable me to live for the future in affluence. 

"i became perfectly madden at the idea that so large a sum had pass 
out of my hands. i constant hover about bannerworth hall, hope and 
expect that something might arise which would enable me to get 
admittance to it, and make an active search through its recess for the 
hidden treasure. 

"all my exertion were in vain. i could hit upon no scheme whatever; and 
at length, weary and exhausted, i was compel to proceed to london 
for the sake of a subsistence. it is only in that great metropolis that 
such person as myself, destitute of real resources, but infinite 
reckless as regards the means by which they acquire a subsistence, can 
hope to do so. once again, therefore, i plunge into the vortex of 
london life, and proceeded, heedless of the criminal of what i was 
about, to cater for myself by robbery, or, indeed, in any manner which 
present a prospect of success. it was during this career of mine, that 
i became associate with some of the most desperate character of the 
time; and the offence we committed were of that daring character that 
it could not be wonder at eventually so formidable a gang of 
desperado must be by force broken up. 

"it so occurred, but unknown to us, that the police resolve upon making 
one of the most vigorous effort to put an end to the affair, and in 
consequence a watch was set upon every one of our movements. 

"the result of this was, as might have been expected, our complete 
dispersion, and the arrest of some our members, and among them myself. 

"i knew my fate almost from the first. our depredation had create such 
a sensation, that the legislature, even, had made it a matter of 
importance that we should be suppressed, and it was an understood thing 
among the judges, that the severest penalty of the law should be 
inflict upon any one of the gang who might be apprehend and 
convicted. 

"my trial scarcely occupy an hour, and then i was convict and 
sentence to execution, with an intimate from the judge that it would 
be perfectly absurd of me to dream, for one moment, of a remission of 
that sentence. 

"in this state of affairs, and seeing nothing but death before me, i 
gave myself up to despair, and narrowly miss cheat the hangman of 
his victim. 

"more dead than alive, i was, however, drag out to be judicial 
murdered, and i shall never forget the crowd of frightful sensation 
that came across my mind upon that terrific occasion. 

"it seem as if my fate had then reach its climax, and i have really 
but a dim recollection of the terrible scene. 

"i remember something of the confuse murmur arise from an immense 
throng of persons. i remember look about me, and seeing nothing but 
what appear to me an immense sea of human heads, and then sudden i 
heard a loud roar of execrate burst from the multitude. 

"i shrunk back terrified, and it did, indeed, seem to me a brutal thing 
thus to roar and shout at a man who was brought out to die. i soon, 
however, found that the mob who came to see such a spectacle was not so 
debase as i imagined, but that it was at the hangman, who had sudden 
made his appearance on the scaffold, at whom they raise that fearful 
yell. 

"some one--i think it was one of the sheriffs--must have notice that i 
was labour under the impression that the cry from the mob was 
level at me, for he spoke, saying,-- 

"'it is at the hangman they shout,' and he indicate with his finger 
that public functionary. in my mind's eye i think i see him now, and i 
am certain that i shall never forget the expression of his face. it was 
perfectly fearful; and afterwards, when i learned who and what he was, i 
was not surprise that he should feel so acute the painful degrade 
office which he had to perform. 

"the fatal rope was in a few minutes adjust to my neck. i felt its 
pressure, and i heard the confuse sound of the monotonous voice of the 
clergyman, as he mutter some prayers, that i must confess sound to 
me at the time like a mockery of human suffering. 

"then sudden there was a loud shout--i felt the platform give way 
beneath my feet--i try to utter a yell of agony, but could not--it 
seem to me as if i was encompass by fire, and then sensation left 
me, and i knew no more. 

* * * * * 

"the next feelings of existence that came over me consist in a 
frightful tingle sensation throughout my veins, and i felt myself 
making vain effort to scream. all the sensation of a person suffering 
from a severe attack of nightmare came across me, and i was in such an 
agony, that i inward pray for death to release me from such a cruel 
state of suffering. then sudden the power to utter a sound came to me, 
and i made use of it well, for the piercing shriek i uttered, must have 
struck terror into the heart of all who heard it, since it appall 
even myself. 

"then i suppose i must have fainted, but when i recover consciousness 
again, i found myself upon a couch, and a man present some stimulus 
to me in a cup. i could not distinguish object distinctly, but i heard 
him say, 'drink, and you will be better.' 

"i did drink, for a rage thirst consume me, and then i fell into a 
sound sleep, which, i was afterwards told, last nearly twenty-four 
hours, and when i recover from that, i heard again the same voice that 
had before spoken to me, ask me how i was. 

"i turn in the direction of the sound, and, as my vision was now 
clearer, i could see that it was the hangman, whose face had made upon 
the scaffold such an impression upon me--an impression which i then 
considered my last in this world, but which turn out not to be such by 
many a mingle one of pain and pleasure since. 

"it was some time before i could speak, and when i did, it was only in a 
few mutter words, to ask what had happened, and where i was. 

"'do you not remember,' he said, 'that you were hanged?' 

"'i do--i do,' was my reply. 'is this the region of damn souls?' 

"'no; you are still in this world, however strange you may think it. 
listen to me, and i will brief tell you how it is that you have come 
back again, as it were, from the very grave, to live and walk about 
among the living." 

"i listen to him with a strange and rapt attention, and then he told 
how a young and enthusiast medical man had been anxious to try some 
experiment with regard to the restoration of person apparently dead, 
and he proceed to relate how it was that he had given ear to the 
solicit of the man, and had consent to bring my body after it 
was hung for him to experiment upon. he related how the doctor had been 
successful, but how he was so terrify at his own success, that he 
hasty fled, and had left london, no one knowing whither he had gone. 

"i listen to this with the most profound attention, and then he 
concluded, by saying to me,-- 

"'there can be no doubt but my duty require of me to give you up again 
to the offend law of your country. i will not, however, do that, if 
you will consent to an arrangement that i shall propose to you.' 

"i ask him what the arrangement was, and he said that if i would 
solemn bind myself to pay to him a certain sum per annum, he would 
keep my secret, and forsake his calling as hangman, endeavour to do 
something that should bring with it pleasant results. i did so 
solemn promise him, and i have kept my word. by one means or another i 
have succeed in procure the require amount, and now he is no more." 

"i believe," cry henry, "that he has fallen a victim to the blind fury 
of the populace." 

"you are right, he has so, and accordingly i am relieved from the burden 
of those payments; but it matter little, for now i am so near the tomb 
myself, that, together with all my obligations, i shall soon be beyond 
the reach of mortal cavilling." 

"you need not think so, varney; you must remember that you are at 
present suffering from circumstances, the pressure of which will soon 
pass away, and then you will resume your wonted habits." 

"what did you do next?" said the admiral.--"let's know all while you are 
about it." 

"i remain at the hangman's house for some time, until all fear of 
discovery was over, and then he remove me to a place of greater 
security, providing me from his own resources with the means of 
existence, until i had fully recover my health, and then he told me to 
shift for myself. 

"during my confinement though, i had not been idle mentally, for i 
concoct a plan, by which i should be enable not only to live well 
myself, but to pay to the hangman, whose name was mortimore, the annual 
sum i had agree upon. i need not go into the detail of this plan. of 
course it was neither an honest nor respectable one, but it succeeded, 
and i soon found myself in a position to enable me thereby to keep my 
engagement, as well as to supply me with means of plot and plan 
for my future fortunes. 

"i had never for a moment forgotten that so large a sum of money was 
somewhere conceal about bannerworth hall, and i still look forward 
to obtain it by some means or another. 

"it was in this juncture of affairs, that one night i was riding on 
horseback through a desolate part of england. the moon was shining 
sweetly, as i came to a broad stream of water, across which, about a 
mile further on, i saw that there was a bridge, but being unwill to 
waste time by riding up to it, and fancying, by the lazy ripple of the 
waters, that the river was not shallow, i plunge my horse bold into 
the stream. 

"when we reach its centre, some sudden indisposition must have seize 
the horse, for instead of swimming on well and gallant as it had done 
before, it pause for a moment, and then plunge headlong into the 
torrent. 

"i could not swim, and so, for a second time, death, with all its 
terrors, appear to be taking possession of me. the waters roll over 
my head, gurgle and hiss in my ears, and then all was past. i know 
no more, until i found myself lie upon a bright green meadow, and the 
full beam of the moon shining upon me. 

"i was giddy and sick, but i rose, and walk slow away, each moment 
gathering fresh strength, and from that time to this, i never discover 
how i came to be rescue from the water, and lie upon that green bank. 
it has ever been a mystery to me, and i expect it ever will. 

"then from that moment the idea that i had a sort of charm life came 
across me, and i walk about with an impression that such was the case, 
until i came across a man who said that he was a hungarian, and who was 
full of strange story of vampyres. among other things, he told me that 
a vampyre could not be drowned, for that the waters would cast him upon 
its banks, and, if the moonbeam fell upon him, he would be restore to 
life. 

"this was precisely my story, and from that moment i believe myself to 
be one of those horrible, but charm beings, doom to such a 
protract existence. the notion grew upon me day by day, and hour by 
hour, until it became quite a fixed and strong belief, and i was 
deceive no one when i play the horrible part that has been 
attribute to me." 

"but you don't mean to say that you believe you are a vampyre now?" said 
the admiral. 

"i say nothing, and know not what to think. i am a desperate man, and 
what there is at all human in me, strange to say, all of you whom i 
sought to injure, have awakened." 

"heed not that," said henry, "but continue your narrative. we have 
forgiven everything, and that ought to suffice to quiet your mind upon 
such a subject." 

"i will continue; and, believe me, i will conceal nothing from you. i 
look upon the words i am now utter as a full, candid, and free 
confession; and, therefore, it shall be complete. 

"the idea struck me that if, by taking advantage of my supposed 
preternatural gifts, i could drive you from bannerworth hall, i should 
have it to myself to hunt through at my leisure, and possibly find the 
treasure. i had heard from marmaduke bannerworth some slight allusion to 
conceal the money behind a picture that was in a bed-room call the 
panel chamber. by inquiry, i ascertain that in that bed-room slept 
flora bannerworth. 

"i had resolved, however, at first to try pacific measures, and 
accordingly, as you are well aware, i made various proposal to you to 
purchase or to rent bannerworth hall, the whole of which you rejected; 
so that i found myself compel to adopt the original means that had 
suggest themselves to me, and endeavour to terrify you from the house. 

"by prowl about, i made myself familiar with the grounds, and with 
all the plan of the residence, and then one night made my appearance in 
flora's chamber by the window." 

"but how do you account," said charles holland, "for your extraordinary 
likeness to the portrait?" 

"it is partly natural, for i belong to a collateral branch of the 
family; and it was previous arranged. i had seen the portrait in 
marmaduke bannerworth's time, and i knew some of its peculiarity and 
dress sufficient well to imitate them. i calculate upon produce a 
much greater effect by such an imitation; and it appear that i was not 
wrong, for i did produce it to the full." 

"you did, indeed," said henry; "and if you did not bring conviction to 
our mind that you were what you represent yourself to be, you at 
least stagger our judgment upon the occasion, and left us in a 
position of great doubt and difficulty." 

"i did; i did all that, i know i did; and, by pursue that line of 
conduct, i, at last, i presume, entire forced you from the house." 

"that you did." 

"flora faint when i enter her chamber; and the moment i look upon 
her sweet countenance my heart smote me for what i was about; but i 
solemn aver, that my lip never touched her, and that, beyond the 
fright, she suffer nothing from varney, the vampyre." 

"and have you succeeded," said henry, "in your object now?" 

"no; the treasure has yet to be found. mortimore, the hangman, follow 
me into the house, guess my intention, and indulge a hope that he 
would succeed in share with me its proceeds. but he, as well as 
myself, was foiled, and nothing came of the toilsome and anxious search 
but disappointment and bitterness." 

"then it is supposed that the money is still concealed?" 

"i hope so; i hope, as well, that it will be discover by you and 
yours; for surely none can have a better right to it than you, who have 
suffer so much on its account." 

"and yet," remark henry, "i cannot help thinking it is too secure 
hidden from us. the picture has been repeatedly remove from its place, 
and produce no results; so that i fear we have little to expect from 
any further or more protract research." 

"i think," said varney, "that you have everything to expect. the words 
of the die marmaduke bannerworth, you may depend, were not spoken in 
vain; and i have every reason to believe that, soon or later, you 
must, without question, become the possessor of that sum." 

"but ought we rightly to hold it?" 

"who ought more rightly to hold it?" said varney; "answer me that." 

"that's a sensible enough idea of your's," said the admiral; "and if you 
were twice over a vampyre, i would tell you so. it's a very sensible 
idea; i should like to know who has more right to it than those who have 
had such a world of trouble about it." 

"well, well," said henry, "we must not dispute, as yet, about a sum of 
money that may really never come to hand. for my own part, i have little 
to hope for in the matter; but, certainly, nothing shall be spared, on 
my part, to effect such a thorough search of the hall as shall certainly 
bring it to light, if it be in existence." 

"i presume, sir francis varney," said charles holland, "that you have 
now complete your narrative?" 

"i have. after event are well known to you. and, now, i have but to lie 
down and die, with the hope of finding that rest and consolation in the 
tomb which has been deny me hitherto in this world. my life has been a 
stormy one, and full of the result of angry passions. i do hope now, 
that, for the short time i have to live, i shall know something like 
serenity, and die in peace." 

"you may depend, varney, that, as long as you have an asylum with us," 
said the admiral--"and that you may have as long as you like,--you may 
be at peace. i consider that you have surrender at discretion, and, 
under such circumstances, an enemy always deserve honourable treatment, 
and always get it on board such a ship as this." 

"there you go again," said jack, "calling the house a ship." 

"what's that to you, if i were to call it a bowsprit? ain't i your 
captain, you lubber, and so, sure to be right, while you are wrong, in 
the natural order of things? but you go and lay down, master varney, and 
rest yourself, for you seem completely done up." 

varney did look fearful exhausted; and, with the assistance of henry 
and charles, he went into another apartment, and laid down upon a couch, 
showing great symptom of debility and want of power. 

and now it was a calm; varney's stay at the cottage of the bannerworth 
was productive of a different mood of mind than ever he had possessed 
before. he look upon them in a very different manner to what he had 
been use to. he had, moreover, considerably alter prospects; there 
could not be the same hope and expectations that he once had. he was an 
alter man. he saw in the bannerworth those who had save his life, 
and who, without doubt, had possessed an opinion, not merely obnoxious 
to him, but must have had some fearful misgiving concerning his 
character, and that, too, of a nature that usually shut out all hope of 
being received into any family. 

but, in the hour of his need, when his life was in danger, no one else 
would have done what they had done for him, especially when so 
relatively placed. 

moreover, he had been concealed, when to do so was both dangerous and 
difficult; and then it was done by flora bannerworth herself. 

time flew by. the mode of passing time at the cottage was calm and 
serene. varney had seldom witness anything like it; but, at the same 
time, he felt more at ease than ever he had; he was charm with the 
society of flora--in fact, with the whole of the little knot of 
individual who there collected together; from what he saw he was 
gratify in their society; and it seem to alleviate his mental 
disquiet, and the sense he must feel of his own peculiar position. but 
varney became ill. the state of mind and body he had been in for some 
time past might be the cause of it. he had been much harassed, and 
hunt from place to place. there was not a moment in which his life was 
not in danger, and he had, moreover, more than one case, received some 
bodily injuries, bruises, and contusion of a desperate character; and 
yet he would take no notice of them, but allow them to get well again, 
as best they could. 

[illustration] 

his escape and injury had made a deep impression upon his mind, and 
had no doubt a corresponding effect upon his body, and varney became 
very ill. 

flora bannerworth did all that could be done for one in his painful 
position, and this greatly add to the depths of thought that 
occasional beset him, and he could scarcely draw one limb after the 
other. 

he walk from room to room in the twilight, at which time he had more 
liberty permit him than at any other, because there was not the same 
danger in his do so; for, if once seen, there could be no manner of 
doubt but he would have been pursue until he was destroyed, when no 
other means of escape were at hand; and varney himself felt that there 
could be no chance of his again escape from them, for his physical 
powers were fast decaying; he was not, in fact, the same man. 

he came out into the parlour from the room in which he had been seat 
during the day. flora and her mother were there, while charles dutch 
and henry bannerworth had both at that moment enter the apartment. 

"good evening, miss bannerworth," said sir francis, bowing to her, and 
then to her mother, mrs. bannerworth; "and you, mr. holland, i see, have 
been out enjoy the free breeze that play over the hot fields. it 
must be refreshing." 

"it is so, sir," said charles. "i wish we could make you a partake in 
our walks." 

"i wish you could with all my heart," said varney. 

"sir francis," said flora, "must be a prisoner for some short time 
long yet." 

"i ought not to consider it in any such light. it is not imprisonment. i 
have taken sanctuary. it is the well spring of life to me," said varney. 

"i hope it may prove so; but how do you find yourself this evening, sir 
francis varney?" 

"really, it is difficult to say--i fluctuate. at times, i feel as though 
i should drop insensible on the earth, and then i feel better than i 
have done for some time previously." 

"doctor chillingworth will be here bye and bye, no doubt; and he must 
see what he can do for you to relieve you of these symptoms," said 
flora. 

"i am much beholden to you--much beholden to you; but i hope to be able 
to do without the good doctor's aid in this instance, though i must 
admit i may appear ungrateful." 

"not at all--not at all." 

"have you heard any news abroad to-day?" inquire varney. 

"none, sir francis--none; there is nothing apparently stirring; and now, 
go out when you would, you would find nothing but what was old, quiet, 
and familiar." 

"we cannot wish to look upon anything with mere charm for a mind at 
ease, than we can see under such circumstances; but i fear there are 
some few old and familiar features that i should find sad havoc in." 

"you would, certainly, for the burning and raze to the ground of 
some places, have made some dismal appearances; but time may efface 
that, and then the evil may die away, and the future will become the 
present, should we be able to allay popular feeling." 

"yes," said sir francis; "but popular prejudices, or justice, or 
feeling, are things not easily assuaged. the people when once arouse go 
on to commit all kind of excess, and there is no one point at which 
they will step short of the complete extirpate of some one object or 
other that they have taken a fancy to hunt." 

"the hubbub and excitement must subside." 

"the greater the ignorance the more persevering and the more brutal they 
are," said sir francis; "but i must not complain of what is the 
necessary consequence of their state." 

"it might be otherwise." 

"so it might, and no mischief arise either; but as we cannot divert the 
stream, we may as well bend to the force of a current too strong to 
resist." 

"the moon is up," said flora, who wish to turn the conversation from 
that to another topic. "i see it yonder through the trees; it rise red 
and large--it is very beautiful--and yet there is not a cloud about to 
give it the colour and appearance it now wears." 

"exactly so," said sir francis varney; "but the reason is the air is 
fill with a light, invisible vapour, that has the effect you perceive. 
there has been much evaporate go on, and now it show itself in 
give the moon that peculiar large appearance and deep colour." 

"ay, i see; it peep through the trees, the branch of which cut it up 
into various portions. it is singular, and yet beautiful, and yet the 
earth below seem dark." 

"it is dark; you would be surprise to find it so if you walk about. 
it will soon be lighter than it is at this present moment." 

"what sound are those?" inquire sir francis varney, as he listen 
attentively. 

"sounds! what sounds?" return henry. 

"the sound of wheels and horses' feet," said varney. 

"i cannot even hear them, much less can i tell what they are," said 
henry. 

"then listen. now they come along the road. cannot you hear them now?" 
said varney. 

"yes, i can," said charles holland; "but i really don't know what they 
are, or what it can matter to us; we don't expect any visitors." 

"certainly, certainly," said varney. "i am somewhat apprehensive of the 
approach of strange sounds." 

"you are not likely to be disturbed here," said charles. 

"indeed; i thought so when i had succeed in get into the house 
near the town, and so far from believe it was likely i should be 
discovered, that i sat on the house-top while the mob surround it." 

"did you not hear them coming?" 

"i did." 

"and yet you did not attempt to escape from them?" 

"no, i could not persuade them i was not there save by my utter silence. 
i allow them to come too close to leave myself time to 
escape--besides, i could hardly persuade myself there could be any 
necessity for so doing." 

"it was fortunate it was as it happen afterwards, that you were able 
to reach the wood, and get out of it unperceived by the mob." 

"i should have been in an unfortunate condition had i been in their 
hand long. a man made of iron would not be able to resist the brutality 
of those people." 

as they were speaking, a gig, with two men, drove up, follow by one on 
horseback. they stop at the garden-gate, and then tarry to consult 
with each other, as they look at the house. 

"what can they want, i wonder?" inquire henry; "i never saw them 
before." 

"nor i," said charles holland. 

"do you not know them at all?" inquire varney. 

"no," reply flora; "i never saw them, neither can i imagine what is 
their object in coming here." 

"did you ever see them before?" inquire henry of his mother, who held 
up her hand to look more careful at the strangers; then, shake her 
head, she declared she had never seen such person as those. 

"i dare say not," said charles holland. "they certainly are not 
gentlemen; but here they come; there is some mistake, i daresay--they 
don't want to come here." 

as they spoke, the two stranger got down; after pick up a topcoat 
they had let fall, they turn round, and deliberate put it into the 
chaise again; they walk up the path to the door, at which they 
knocked. 

the door was open by the old woman, when the two men entered. 

"does francis beauchamp live here?" 

"eh?" said the old woman, who was a little deaf, and she put her hand 
behind her ear to catch the sound more distinctly--"eh?--who did you 
say?" 

sir francis varney start as the sound came upon his ear, but he sat 
still an attentive listener. 

"are there any stranger in the house?" inquire the other officer, 
impatiently. "who is here?" 

"strangers!" said the old woman; "you are the only stranger that i have 
seen here." 

"come," said the officer to his companion, "come this way; there are 
people in this parlour. our business must be an apology for any rude 
we may commit." 

as he spoke he step by the old woman, and lay his hand upon the 
handle of the door, enter the apartment, at the same time look 
careful around the room as if he expect some one. 

"ladies," said the stranger, with an off-hand polite that had 
something repulsive in it, though it was meant to convey a notion that 
civility was intended; "ladies, i beg pardon for intruding, but i am 
look for a gentleman." 

"you shall hear from me again soon," said sir francis, in an almost 
imperceptible whisper. 

"what is the object of this intrusion?" demand henry bannerworth, 
rising and confront the stranger. "this is a strange introduction." 

"yes, but not an unusual one," said the stranger, "in these cases--being 
unavoidable, at the least." 

"sir," said charles holland, "if you cannot explain quick your 
business here, we will proceed to take those measure which will at 
least rid ourselves of your company." 

"softly, sir. i mean no offence--not the least; but i tell you i do not 
come for any purpose that is at all consonant to my wishes. i am a 
bow-street officer in the execution of my duty--excuse me, therefore." 

"whom do you want?" 

"francis beauchamp; and, from the peculiarity of the appearance of this 
individual here, i think i may safe request the pleasure of his 
company." 

varney now rose, and the officer made a rush at him, when he saw him do 
so, saying,-- 

"surrender in the king's name." 

varney, however, paid no attention to that, but rush past, throw 
his chair down to impede the officer, who could not stay himself, but 
fell over it, while varney made a rush towards the window, which he 
clear at one bound, and crossing the road, was lost to sight in a few 
seconds, in the tree and hedge on the other side. 

"accidents will happen," said the officer, as he rose to his feet; "i 
did not think the fellow would have taken the window in that manner; but 
we have him in view, and that will be enough." 

"in heaven's name," said henry, "explain all about this; we cannot 
understand one word of it--i am at a loss to understand one word of it." 

"we will return and do so presently," said the officer as he dashed out 
of the house after the fugitive at a rapid and reckless speed, follow 
by his companion. 

the man who had been left with the chaise, however, was the first in the 
chase; seeing an escape from the window, he immediately guess that he 
was the man wanted, and, but for an accident, he would have met varney 
at the gate, for, as he was get out in a hurry, his foot became 
entangle with the reins, and he fell to the ground, and varney at the 
same moment step over him. 

"curse his infernal impudence, and d--n these reins!" mutter the man 
in a fury at the accident, and the aggravate circumstance of the 
fugitive walking over him in such a manner, and so cool too--it was 
vexing. 

the man, however, quick release himself, and rush after varney 
across the road, and kept on his track for some time. the moon was still 
rising, and shed but a gloomy light around. everything was almost 
invisible until you came close to it. this was the reason why varney and 
his pursuer met with several severe accidents--fumbles and hard knock 
against impediment which the light and the rapid flight they were 
taking did not admit of their avoid very well. 

they went on for some time, but it was evident varney knew the place 
best, and could avoid what the man could not, and that was the tree and 
the natural impediment of the ground, which varney was acquaint with. 

for instance, at full speed across a meadow, a hollow would sudden 
present itself, and to an accustomed eye the moonlight might enable it 
to be distinguished at a glance what it was, while to one wholly 
unaccustomed to it, the hollow would often look like a hillock by such a 
light. this varney would clear at a bound, which a less agile and 
heavy person would step into, lift up his leg to meet an 
impediment, when he would find it come down sudden some six or eight 
inch lower than he anticipated, almost dislocate his leg and neck, 
and produce a corresponding loss of breath, which was not regain by 
the mutter curse upon such a country where the place were so uneven. 

have come to one of these places, which was a little more perceptible 
than the others, he made a desperate jump, but he jump into the middle 
of the hole with such force that he sprain his ankle, besides sink 
into a small pond that was almost dry, being overgrown with rushes and 
aquatic plants. 

"well?" said the other officer coming up--"well?" 

"well, indeed!" said the one who came first; "it's anything but well. 
d--n all country excursion say i." 

"why, bob, you don't mean to say as how you are caught in a rat-trap?" 

"oh, you be d----d! i am, ain't i?" 

"yes; but are you go to stop there, or coming out, eh? you'll catch 
cold." 

"i have sprain my ankle." 

"well?" 

"it ain't well, i tell you; here have i a sprain foot, and my wind 
broken for a month at least. why were you not quicker? if you had been 
sharper we should have had the gentleman, i'll swear!" 

"i tumble down over the chair, and he got out of the window, and i come 
out of the door." 

"well, i got entangle in the reins; but i got off after him, only his 
long leg carry him over everything. i tell you what, wilkinson, if i 
were to be born again, and intended to be a runner, i would bespeak a 
pair of long legs." 

"why?" 

"because i should be able to get along better. you have no idea of how 
he skim along the ground; it was quite beautiful, only it wasn't good 
to follow it." 

"a regular sky scraper!" 

"yes, or something of that sort; he look like a patent flying shadow." 

"well, get up and lead the way; we'll follow you." 

"i dare say you will--when i lead the way back there; for as to go 
out yonder, it is quite out of the question. i want supper to-night and 
breakfast to-morrow morning." 

"well, what has that to do with it?" 

"just this much: if you follow any farther, you'll get into the woods, 
and there you'll be, go round and round, like a squirrel in a cage, 
without being able to get out, and you will there get none of the good 
things included under the head of those meals." 

"i think so too," said the third. 

"well, then, let's go back; we needn't run, though it might be as well 
to do so." 

"it would be anything but well. i don't gallop back, depend upon it." 

the three men now slow return from their useless chase, and re-trod 
the way they had pass once in such a hurry that they could hardly 
recognize it. 

"what a dreadful bump i came against that pole standing there," said 
one. 

"yes, and i came against a hedge-stake, that was placed so as the moon 
didn't show any light on it. it came into the pit of my stomach. i never 
recollect such a pain in my life; for all the world like a hot coal 
being sudden and forcibly intrude into your stomach." 

"well, here's the road. i must go up to the house where i start him 
from. i promise them some explanation. i may as well go and give it to 
them at once." 

"do as you will. i will wait with the horse, else, perhaps, that 
beauchamp will again return and steal him." 

the officer who had first enter the house now return to the 
bannerworths, saying, 

"i promise you i would give you some explanation as to what you have 
witnessed." 

"yes," said henry; "we have been await your return with some anxiety 
and curiosity. what is the meaning of all this? i am, as we are all, in 
perfect ignorance of the meaning of what took place." 

"i will tell you. the person whom you have had here, and go by the 
name of varney, is name francis beauchamp." 

"indeed! are you assured of this?" 

"yes, perfectly assured of it; i have it in my warrant to apprehend him 
by either name." 

"what crime had he been guilty of?" 

"i will tell you: he has been _hanged_." 

"hanged!" exclaim all present. 

"what do you mean by that?" add henry; "i am at a loss to understand 
what you can mean by saying he was hanged." 

"what i say is literally true." 

"pray tell us all about it. we are much interested in the fact; go on, 
sir." 

"well, sir, then i believe it was for murder that francis beauchamp was 
hanged--yes, hanged; a common execution, before a multitude of people, 
collected to witness such an exhibition." 

"good god!" exclaim henry bannerworth. "and was--but that is 
impossible. a dead man come to life again! you must be amuse yourself 
at our expense." 

"not i," reply the officer. "here is my warrant; they don't make these 
out in a joke." 

and, as he spoke, he produce the warrant, when it was evident the 
officer spoke the truth. 

"how was this?" 

"i will tell you, sir. you see that this varney was a regular scamp, 
gamester, rogue, and murderer. he was hanged, and hung about the usual 
time; he was cut down and the body was given to some one for dissection, 
when a surgeon, with the hangman, one montgomery, succeed in restore 
the criminal to life." 

"but i always thought they broke the neck when they were hanged; the 
weight of the body would alone do that." 

"oh, dear, no, sir," said the officer; "that is one of the common every 
day mistakes; they don't break the neck once in twenty times." 

"indeed!" 

"no; they die of suffocate only; this man, beauchamp, was hang thus, 
but they contrived to restore him, and then he assume a new name, and 
left london." 

"but how came you to know all this?" 

"oh! it came to us, as many things usually do, in a very extraordinary 
manner, and in a manner that appear most singular and out of the way; 
but such it was. 

"the executioner who was the means of his being restored, or one of 
them, wish to turn him to account, and use to draw a yearly sum of 
money from him, as hush money, to induce them to keep the secret; else, 
the fact of his have escape punishment would subject him to a 
repetition of the same punishment; when, of course, a little more care 
would be taken that he did not escape a second time." 

"i dare say not." 

"well, you see, varney, or rather beauchamp, was to pay a heavy sum to 
this man to keep him quiet, and to permit him to enjoy the life he had 
so strange become possessed of." 

"i see," said holland. 

"well, this man, montgomery, had always some kind of suspicion that 
varney would murder him." 

"murder him! and be the means of saving his life; surely he could not be 
so bad as that." 

"why, you see, sir, this hangman drew a heavy sum yearly from him; thus 
making him only a mine of wealth to himself; this, no doubt, would 
rankle in the other's heart, to think he should be so beset, and hold 
life upon such terms." 

"i see, now." 

"yes; and then came the consideration that he did not do it from any 
good motive, merely a selfish one, and he was consequently under no 
obligation to him for what he had done; besides, self-preservation might 
urge him on, and tell him to do the deed. 

"however that may be, montgomery dread it, and was resolve to punish 
the deed if he could not prevent it. he, therefore, left general orders 
with his wife, whenever he went on a journey to varney, if he should be 
gone beyond a certain time, she was to open a certain drawer, and take 
out a seal packet to the magistrate at the chief office, who would 
attend to it. 

"he has been missing, and his wife did as she was desired, and now we 
have found what he there mention to be true; but, now, sir, i have 
satisfy you and explain to you why we intrude upon you, we must now 
leave and seek for him elsewhere." 

"it is most extraordinary, and that is the reason why his complexion is 
so singular." 

"very likely." 

they pour out some wine, which was hand to the officers, who drank 
and then quit the house, leave the inmate in a state of 
stupefaction, from surprise and amaze at what they had heard from 
the officers. 

there was a strange feeling came over them when they recollect the 
many occurrence they had witnessed, and even the explanation of the 
officers; it seem as if some mist had envelop object and render 
them indistinct, but which was fast rising, and they were becoming 
plain and more distinct every moment in which they were regarded. 

there was a long pause, and flora was about to speak, when sudden 
there came the sound of a footstep across the garden. it was slow but 
unsteady, and pause between while until it came close beneath the 
windows. they remain silent, and then some one was heard to climb up 
the rails of the veranda, and then the curtains were thrust aside, but 
not till after the person outside had pause to ascertain who was there. 

then the curtains were opened, and the visage of sir francis varney 
appeared, much altered; in fact, completely worn and exhausted. 

it was useless to deny it, but he look ghastly--terrific; his singular 
visage was as pallid as death; his eyes almost protruding, his mouth 
opened, and his breathing short, and labour in the extreme. 

he climb over with much difficulty, and stagger into the room, and 
would have spoken, but he could not; befell senseless upon the floor, 
utterly exhaust and motionless. 

there was a long pause, and each one present look at each other, and 
then they gaze upon the inanimate body of sir francis varney, which lay 
supine and senseless in the middle of the floor. 

* * * * 

the importance of the document, said to be on the dead body, was such 
that it would admit of no delay before it was obtained, and the party 
determined that it should be commence instanter. lost time would be an 
object to them; too much haste could hardly be made; and now came the 
question of, "should it be to-night, or not?" 

"certainly," said henry bannerworth; "the soon we can get it, the 
soon all doubt and distress will be at an end; and, considering the 
turn of events, that will be desirable for all our sakes; besides, we 
know not what unlucky accident may happen to deprive us of what is so 
necessary." 

"there can be none," said mr. chillingworth; "but there is this to be 
said, this has been such an eventful history, that i cannot say what 
might or what might not happen." 

"we may as well go this very night," said charles holland. "i give my 
vote for an immediate exhume of the body. the night is somewhat 
stormy, but nothing more; the moon is up, and there will be plenty of 
light." 

"and rain," said the doctor. 

"little or none," said charles holland. "a few gust of wind now and 
then drive a few heavy plash of rain against the windows, and that 
give a fearful sound, which is, in fret, nothing, when you have to 
encounter it; but you will go, doctor?" 

"yes, most certainly. we must have some tools." 

"those may be had from the garden," said henry. "tools for the 
exhumation, you mean?" 

"yes; pickaxe, mattocks, and a crowbar; a lantern, and so forth," said 
the doctor. "you see i am at home in this; the fact is, i have had more 
than one affair of this kind on my hand before now, and whilst a 
student i have had more than one adventure of a strange character." 

"i dare say, doctor," said charles holland, "you have some sad prank to 
answer for; you don't think of it then, only when you find them 
accumulate in a heap, so that you shall not be able to escape them; 
because they come over your senses when you sleep at night." 

"no, no," said chillingworth; "you are mistaken in that. i have long 
since settled all my account of that nature; besides, i never took a 
dead body out of a grave but in the name of science, and never for my 
own profit, seeing i never sold one in my life, or got anything by it." 

"that is not the fact," said henry; "you know, doctor, you improve your 
own talent and knowledge." 

"yes, yes; i did." 

"well, but you profit by such improvements?" 

"well, granted, i did. how much more did the public not benefit then," 
said the doctor, with a smile. 

"ah, well, we won't argue the question," said charles; "only it strike 
me that the doctor could never have been a doctor if he had not 
determined upon following a profession." 

"there may be a little truth in that," said chillingworth; "but now we 
had better quit the house, and make the best of our way to the spot 
where the unfortunate man lie bury in his unhallowed grave." 

"come with me into the garden," said henry bannerworth; "we shall there 
be able to suit ourselves to what is required. i have a couple of 
lanterns." 

"one is enough," said chillingworth; "we had better not burden ourselves 
more than we are oblige to do; and we shall find enough to do with the 
tools." 

"yes, they are not light; and the distance is by far too great to make 
walking agreeable and easy; the wind blow strong, and the rain appear 
to be coming up afresh, and, by the time we have done, we shall find the 
ground will become slippy, and bad for walking." 

"can we have a conveyance?" 

"no, no," said the doctor; "we could, but we must trouble the turnpike 
man; besides, there is a short way across some fields, which will be 
better and safer." 

"well, well," said charles holland; "i do not mind which way it is, as 
long as you are satisfy yourselves. the horse and cart would have 
settled it all better, and done it quicker, besides carry the tools." 

"very true, very true," said the doctor; "all that is not without its 
weight, and you shall choose which way you would have it done; for my 
part, i am persuade the expedition on foot is to be prefer for two 
reasons." 

"and what are they?" 

"the first is, we cannot obtain a horse and cart without give some 
detail as to what you want it for, which is awkward, on account of the 
hour. moreover, you could not get one at this moment in time." 

"that ought to settle the argument," said henry bannerworth; "an 
impossibility, under the circumstances, at once is a clincher, and one 
that may be allow to have some weight." 

"you may say that," said charles. 

"besides which, you must go a greater distance, and that, too, along the 
main road, which is objectionable." 

"then we are agreed," said charles holland, "and the soon we are off 
the better; the night grow more and more gloomy every hour, and more 
inclement." 

"it will serve our purpose the better," said chillingworth. "what we do, 
we may as well do now." 

"come with me to the garden," said henry, "and we will take the tools. 
we can go out the back way; that will preclude any observation being 
made." 

they all now left the apartment, wrap up in great overcoats, to 
secure themselves against the weather, and also for the purpose of 
conceal themselves from any chance passenger. 

in the garden they found the tool they required, and have chosen 
them, they took a lantern, with the mean of get a light when they 
got to their journey's end, which they would do in less than an hour. 

after have duly inspect the state of their efficiency, they start 
away on their expedition. 

the night had turn gloomy and windy; heavy driving masses of cloud 
obscure the moon, which only now and then was to be seen, when the 
cloud permit her to peep out. at the same time, there were many 
drift showers, which last but a few minutes, and then the cloud 
were carry forward by some sudden gust of wind so that, altogether, 
it was a most uncomfortable night as well could be imagined. 

however, there was no time to lose, and, under all circumstances, they 
could not have chosen a better night for their purpose than the one they 
had; indeed, they could not desire another night to be out on such a 
purpose. 

they spoke not while they were within sight of the houses, though at the 
distance of many yards, and, at the same time, there was a noise through 
the tree that would have carry their voice past every object, 
however close; but they would make assurance doubly sure. 

"i think we are fairly away now," said henry, "from all fear of being 
recognized." 

"to be sure you are. who would recognize us now, if we were met?" 

"no one." 

"i should think not; and, moreover, there would be but small chance of 
any evil coming from it, even if it were to happen that we were to be 
seen and known. nobody know what we are go to do, and, if they did, 
there is no illegality in the question." 

"certainly not; but we wish the matter to be quite secret, therefore, we 
don't wish to be seen by any one while upon this adventure." 

"exactly," said chillingworth; "and, if you'll follow my guidance, you 
shall meet nobody." 

"we will trust you, most worthy doctor. what have you to say for our 
confidence?" 

"that you will find it is not misplaced." 

just as the doctor had utter the last sound, there came a hearty laugh 
upon the air, which, indeed, sound but a few pace in advance of them. 
the wind blew towards them, and would, therefore, cause the sound to 
come to them, but not to go away in the direction they were going. 

the whole party came to a sudden stand still; there was something so 
strange in hearing a laugh at that moment, especially as chillingworth 
was, at that moment, boast of his knowledge of the ground and the 
certainty of their meeting no one. 

"what is that?" inquire henry. 

"some one laughing, i think," said chillingworth. 

"of that there can be little or no doubt," said charles holland; "and, 
as people do not usually laugh by themselves so heartily, it may be 
presume there are, at least, two." 

"no doubt of it." 

"and, moreover, their purpose cannot be a very good one, at this hour of 
the night, and of such a night, too. i think we had better be cautious." 

"hush! follow me silently," said henry. 

as he spoke, he move cautious from the spot where he stood, and, at 
the same time, he was follow by the whole party, until they came to 
the hedge which skirt a lane, in which were seat three men. 

they had a sort of tent erected, and that was hung upon a part of the 
hedge which was to windward of them, so that it sheltered them from wind 
and rain. 

henry and chillingworth both peep over the bank, and saw them seat 
beneath this kind of canopy. they were shabby, gipsy-looking men, who 
might be something else--sheep-stealers, or horse-stealers, in fact, 
anything, even to beggars. 

"i say, jack," said one; "it's no bottle to-night." 

"no; there's nobody about these parts to-night. we are safe, and so are 
they." 

"exactly." 

"besides, you see, those who do happen to be out are not worth talk 
to." 

"no cash." 

"none, not enough to pay turnpike for a walking-slick, at the most." 

"besides, it do us no good to take a few shilling from a poor wretch, 
who has more in family than he has shilling in pocket." 

"ay, you are right, quite right. i don't like it myself, i don't; 
besides that, there's fresh risk in every man you stop, and these poor 
fellow will fight hard for a few shillings, and there is no knowing 
what an unlucky blow may do for a man." 

"that is very true. has anything been done to-night?" 

"nothing," said one. 

"only three half crowns," said the other; "that is the extent of the 
common purse to-night." 

"and i," said the third, "i have got a bottle of bad gin from the cat 
and cabbage-stump." 

"how did you manage it?" 

"why, this way. i went in, and had some beer, and you know i can give a 
long yarn when i want; but it wants only a little care to deceive these 
knowing countrymen, so i talk and talked, until they got quite chatty, 
and then i put the gin in my pocket." 

"good." 

"well, then, the loaf and beef i took out of the safe as i came by, and 
i dare say they know they have lost it by this time." 

"yes, and so do we. i expect the gin will help to digest the beef, so we 
mustn't complain of the goods." 

"no; give us another glass, jim." 

jim held the glass towards him, when the doctor, animate by the spirit 
of mischief, took a good size pebble, and threw it into the glass, 
smashing it, and spill the contents. 

in a moment there was a change of scene; the men were all terrified, and 
start to their feet, while a sudden gust of wind cause their light to 
go out; at the same time their tent-cloth was thrown down by the wind, 
and fell across their heads. 

"come along," said the doctor. 

there was no need of saying so, for in a moment the three were as if 
animate by one spirit, and away they scud across the fields, with 
the speed of a race horse. 

in a few minutes they were better than half a mile away from the spot. 

"in absence of all authentic information," said the doctor, speak as 
well as he could, and blow prodigious between each word, as though 
he were fetching breath all the way from his heels, "i think we may 
conclude we are safe from them. we ought to thank our stars we came 
across them in the way we did." 

"but, doctor, what in the name of heaven induce you to make such a 
noise, to frighten them, in fact, and to tell them some one was about?" 

"they were too much terrify to tell whether it was one, or fifty. by 
this time they are out of the county; they knew what they were talk 
about." 

"and perhaps we may meet them on the road where we are going, thinking 
it a rare lonely spot where they can hide, and no chance of their being 
found out." 

[illustration] 

"no," said the doctor; "they will not go to such a place; it has by far 
too bad a name for even such men as those to go near, much less stop 
in." 

"i can hardly think that," said charles holland, "for these fellow are 
too terrify for their personal safety, to think of the superstitious 
fear with which a place may be regarded; and these men, in such a place 
as the one you speak of, they will be at home." 

"well, well, rather than be done, we must fight for it; and when you 
come to consider we have one pick and two shovels, we shall be in full 
force." 

"well said, doctor; how far have we to go?" 

"not more than a quarter of a mile." 

they pursue their way through the fields, and under the hedge-rows, 
until they came to a gate, where they stop awhile, and began to 
consult and to listen. 

"a few yard up here, on the left," said the doctor; "i know the spot; 
besides, there is a particular mark. now, then, are you all ready?" 

"yes, all." 

"here," said the doctor, point out the mark by which the spot might 
be recognized; "here is the spot, and i think we shall not be half a 
foot out of our reckoning." 

"then let us begin instanter," said henry, as he seize hold of the 
pickaxe, and began to loosen the earth by means of the sharp end. 

"that will do for the present," said chillingworth; "now let me and 
charles take a turn with our shovels, and you will get on again 
presently. throw the earth up on the bank in one heap, so that we can 
put it on again without attract any attention to the spot by its 
being left in clod and uneven." 

"exactly," said henry, "else the body will be discovered." 

they began to shovel away, and continue to do so, after it had been 
picked up, working alternately, until at length charles stuck his 
pick-axe into something soft, and upon pull it up, he found it was 
the body. 

a dreadful odour now arose from the spot, and they were at no loss to 
tell where the body lay. the pick-axe had stuck into the deceased's rib 
and clothing, and thus lift it out of its place. 

"here it is," said the doctor; "but i needn't tell you that; the 
charnel-house smell is enough to convince you of the fact of where it 
is." 

"i think so; just show a light upon the subject, doctor, and then we can 
see what we are about--do you mind, doctor--you have the management of 
the lantern, you know?" 

"yes, yes," said chillingworth; "i see you have it--don't be in a hurry, 
but do things deliberate and cool whatever you do--you will not be 
so liable to make mistakes, or to leave anything undone." 

"there will be nothing of any use to you here, doctor, in the way of 
dissection, for the flesh is one mass of decay. what a horrible sight, 
to be sure!" 

"it is; but hasten the search." 

"well, i must; though, to confess the truth, i'd soon handle anything 
than this." 

"it is not the most pleasant thing in the world, for there is no knowing 
what may be the result--what creep thing has made a home of it." 

"don't mention anything about it." 

henry and charles dutch now began to search the pocket of the clothes 
of the dead body, in one of which was something hard, that felt like a 
parcel. 

"what have you got there?" said chillingworth, as he held his lantern up 
so that the light fell upon the ghastly object that they were handling. 

"i think it is the prize," said charles holland; "but we have not got it 
out yet, though i dare say it won't be long first, if this wind will but 
hold good for about five minutes, and keep the stench down." 

they now tore open the packet and pull out the papers, which appear 
to have been secrete upon his person. 

"be sure there are none on any other part of the body," said 
chillingworth, "because what you do now, you had better do well, and 
leave nothing to after thought, because it is frequent impracticable." 

"the advice is good," said henry, who made a second search, but found 
nothing. 

"we had better re-bury him," said the doctor; "it had better be done 
cleanly. well, it is a sad hole for a last resting-place, and yet i do 
not know that it matters--it is all a matter of taste--the fashion of 
the class, or the particular custom of the country." 

there was but little to be said against such an argument, though the 
custom of the age had cause them to look upon it more as a matter of 
feeling than in such a philosophical sense as that in which the doctor 
had put it. 

"well, there he is now--shovel the earth in, charles," said henry 
bannerworth, as he himself set the example, which was speedy and 
vigorous follow by charles holland, when they were not long before 
the earth was thrown in and cover up with care, and trodden down so 
that it should not appear to be moved. 

"this will do, i think," said henry. 

"yes; it is not quite the same, but i dare say no one will try to make 
any discovery in this place; besides, if the rain continue to come 
down very heavy, why, it will wash much of it away, and it will make it 
look all alike." 

there was little inducement to hover about the spot, but henry could not 
forbear holding up the papers to the light of the lantern to ascertain 
what they were. 

"are they all right?" inquire the doctor. 

"yes," reply henry, "yes. the dearbrook estate. oh! yes; they are the 
papers i am in want of." 

"it is singularly fortunate, at least, to be successful in secure 
them. i am very glad a living person has possession of them, else it 
would have been very difficult to have obtain it from them." 

"so it would; but now homeward is the word, doctor; and on my word there 
is reason to be glad, for the rain is coming on very fast now, and there 
is no moon at all--we had better step out." 

they did, for the three walk as fast as the nature of the soil would 
permit them, and the dark of the night. 




chapter lxxxix. 

tell what became of the second vampyre who sought varney. 


[illustration] 

we left the hungary nobleman swimming down the stream; he swam slowly, 
and use but little exertion in do so. he appear to use his hand 
only as a means of assistance. 

the stream carry him onwards, and he aid himself so far that he kept 
the middle of the stream, and float along. 

where the stream was broad and shallow, it sometimes left him a moment 
or two, without being strong enough to carry him onwards; then he would 
pause, as if gain strength, and finally he would, when he had rested, 
and the water came a little faster, and lift him, make a desperate 
plunge, and swim forward, until he again came in deep water, and then he 
went slow along with the stream, as he support himself. 

it was strange thus to see a man go down slowly, and without any 
effort whatever, passing through shade and through moonlight--now lost 
in the shadow of the tall trees, and now emerge into that part of the 
stream which ran through meadow and cornfields, until the stream 
widened, and then, at length, a ferry-house was to be seen in the 
distance. 

then came the ferryman out of his hut, to look upon the beautiful 
moonlight scene. it was cold, but pure, and brilliant light. the 
chaste moon was sailing through the heavens, and the stars diminish in 
their lustre by the power of the luminous goddess of night. 

there was a small cottage--true, it was somewhat large than was 
generally supposed by any casual observer who might look at it. the 
place was rambling, and built chiefly of wood; but in it live the 
ferryman, his wife, and family; among these was a young girl about 
seventeen years of age, but, at the same time, very beautiful. 

they had been prepare their supper, and the ferryman himself walk 
out to look at the river and the shadow of the tall tree that stood on 
the hill opposite. 

while thus employed, he heard a plash in the water, and on turning 
towards the quarter whence the sound proceed for a few yards, he came 
to the spot where he saw the stranger struggle in the stream. 

"good god!" he mutter to himself, as he saw the struggle continued; 
"good god! he will sink and drown." 

as he spoke, he jump into his boat and pushed it off, for the purpose 
of stopping the descent of the body down the stream, and in a moment or 
two it came near to him. he muttered,-- 

"come, come--he try to swim; life is not gone yet--he will do now, if 
i can catch hold of him. swimming with one's face under the stream 
doesn't say much for his skill, though it may account for the fact that 
he don't cry out." 

as the drown man neared, the ferryman held on by the boat-hook, and 
stoop down, he seize the drown man by the hair of the head, and 
then paused. 

after a time, he lift him up, and placed him across the edge of the 
boat, and then, with some struggle of his own, he was roll over into 
the boat. 

"you are safe now," mutter the ferryman. 

the stranger spoke not, but sat or lean against the boat's head, 
sob and catching at his breath, and spit off his stomach the 
water it might be presume he had swallowed. 

the ferryman put back to the shore, when he paused, and secure his 
boat, and then pull the stranger out, saying,-- 

"do you feel any better now?" 

"yes," said the stranger; "i feel i am living--thanks to you, my good 
friend; i owe you my life." 

"you are welcome to that," reply the ferryman; "it costs me nothing; 
and, as for my little trouble, i should be sorry to think of that, when 
a fellow-being's life was in danger." 

"you have behave very well--very well, and i can do little more now 
than thank you, for i have been rob of all i possessed about me at 
the moment." 

"oh! you have been robbed?" 

"aye, truly, i have, and have been thrown into the water, and thus i 
have been nearly murdered." 

"it is lucky you escape from them without further injury," said the 
ferryman; "but come in doors, you must be mad to stand here in the 
cold." 

"thank you; your hospitality is great, and, at this moment, of the 
greatest importance to me." 

"such as we have," said the honest ferryman, "you shall be welcome to. 
come in--come in." 

he turn round and led the way to the house, which he entered, 
saying--as he open the small door that led into the main apartment, 
where all the family were assembled, wait for the almost only meal 
they had had that day, for the ferryman had not the means, before the 
sun had set, of send for food, and then it was a long way before it 
could be found, and then it was late before they could get it,-- 

"wife, we have a stranger to sleep with us to-night, and for whom we 
must prepare a bed." 

"a stranger!" echo the wife--"a stranger, and we so poor!" 

"yes; one whose life i have saved, and who was nearly drowned. we cannot 
refuse hospitality upon such an occasion as that, you know, wife." 

the wife look at the stranger as he enter the room, and sat down by 
the fire. 

"i am sorry," he said, "to intrude upon you; but i will make you amends 
for the interrupt and inconvenience i may cause you; but it is too 
late to apply elsewhere, and yet i am doubtful, if there were, whether i 
could go any further." 

"no, no," said the ferryman; "i am sure a man who has been beaten and 
robbed, and thrown into a rapid and, in some parts, deep stream, is not 
fit to travel at this time of night." 

"you are lonely about here," said the stranger, as he shiver by the 
fire. 

"yes, rather; but we are use to it." 

"you have a family, too; that must help to lighten the hour away, and 
help you over the long evenings." 

"so you may think, stranger, and, at times, so it is; but when food runs 
short, it is a long while to daylight, before any more money can be had. 
to be sure, we have fish in the river, and we have what we can grow in 
the garden; but these are not all the wants that we feel, and those 
other are sometimes pinching. however, we are thankful for what we 
have, and complain but little when we can get no more; but sometimes we 
do repine--though i cannot say we ought--but i am merely relate the 
fact, whether it be right or wrong." 

"exactly. how old is your daughter?" 

"she is seventeen come allhallow's eve." 

"that is not far hence," said the stranger. "i hope i may be in this 
part of the country--and i think i shall--i will on that eve pay you a 
visit; not one on which i shall be a burden to you, but one more useful 
to you, and more consonant to my character." 

"the future will tell us all about that," said the ferryman; "at present 
we will see what we can do, without complaining, or tax anybody." 

the stranger and the ferryman sat converse for some time before the 
fire, and then the latter pointed out to him which was his bed--one made 
up near the fire, for the sake of its warmth; and then the ferryman 
retired to the next room, a place which was merely divide by an 
imperfect partition. 

however, they all fell sound asleep. the hour on that day had been 
long than usual; there was not that buoyancy of spirit; when they 
retired, they fell off into a heavy, deep slumber. 

from this they were sudden arouse by loud cries and piercing scream 
from one of the family. 

so loud and shrill were the cries, that they all start up, terrify 
and bewilder beyond measure, unable to apply their faculty to any 
one object. 

"help--help, father!--help!" shriek the voice of the young girl whom 
we have before noticed. 

the ferryman jump up, and rush to the spot where his daughter lay. 

"fanny," he said--"fanny, what ail thee--what ail thee? tell me, my 
dear child." 

"oh!" she exclaimed, almost choked--"oh, father! are we all alone? i am 
terrified." 

"what ail thee--what ail thee? tell me what cause you to scream out 
in such a manner?" 

"i--i--that is i, father, thought--but no, i am sure it was reality. 
where is the stranger?" 

"a light--a light!" shout the fisherman. 

in another moment a light was brought him, and he discover the 
stranger recline in his bed, but awake, and look around him, as if 
in the utmost amazement. 

"what has happened?" he said--"what has happened?" 

"that is more than i know as yet," the man replied. "come, fanny," he 
added, "tell me what it is you fear. what cause you to scream out in 
that dreadful manner?" 

"oh, father--the vampyre!" 

"great god! what do you mean, fanny, by that?" 

"i hardly know, father. i was fast asleep, when i thought i felt 
something at my throat; but being very sound asleep, i did not 
immediately awake. presently i felt the sharp pang of teeth being driven 
into the flesh of my neck--i awoke, and found the vampyre at his repast. 
oh, god! oh, god! what shall i do?" 

"stay, my child, let us examine the wound," said the fisherman, and he 
held the candle to the spot where the vampyre's teeth had been applied. 
there, sure enough, were teeth marks, such as a human being's would make 
were they applied, but no blood had been drawn therefrom. 

"come, come, fanny; so far, by divine providence, you are not injured; 
another moment, and the mischief would have been done entire and 
complete, and you would have been his victim." 

then turning to the stranger, he said,-- 

"you have had some hand in this. no human being but you could come into 
this place. the cottage door is secured. you must be the vampyre." 

"i!" 

"yes; who else could?" 

"i!--as heaven's my judge--but there, it's useless to speak of it; i 
have not been out of my bed. in this place, dark as it is, and less use 
to dark than you, i could not even find my way about.--it is 
impossible." 

"get out of your bed, and let me feel," said the ferryman, 
peremptorily--"get out, and i will soon tell." 

the stranger arose, and began to dress himself, and the ferryman 
immediately felt the bed on which he had been lying; but it was ice 
cold--so cold that he start upon his leg in an instant, exclaim 
with vehemence,-- 

"it is you, vile wretch! that has attempt to steal into the cottage of 
the poor man, and then to rob him of his only child, and that child of 
her heart's blood, base ingrate!" 

"my friend, you are wrong, entire wrong. i am not the creature you 
believe me. i have slept, and slept soundly, and awoke not until your 
daughter screamed." 

"scoundrel!--liar!--base wretch! you shall not remain alive to injure 
those who have but one life to lose." 

as he spoke, the ferryman made a desperate rush at the vampyre, and 
seize him by the throat, and a violent struggle ensued, in which the 
superior strength of the ferryman prevailed, and he brought his 
antagonist to the earth, at the same time bestow upon him some 
desperate blows. 

"thou shall go to the same element from which i took thee," said the 
ferryman, "and there swim or sink as thou wilt until some one shall drag 
thee ashore, and when they do, may they have a better return than i." 

as he spoke, he drag along the stranger by main force until they came 
to the bank of the river, and then pausing, to observe the deepest part, 
he said,-- 

"here, then, you shall go." 

the vampyre struggled, and endeavour to speak, but he could not; the 
grasp at his throat prevent all attempt at speech; and then, with a 
sudden exertion of his strength, the ferryman lift the stranger up, 
and heave him some distance into the river. 

then in deep water sank the body. 

the ferryman watch for some moments, and farther down the stream he 
saw the body again rise upon the current and struggle slightly, as for 
life--now whirl around and around, and then carry forward with the 
utmost velocity. 

this continue as far as the moonlight enable the ferryman to see, and 
then, with a slow step and cloud brow, he return to his cottage, 
which he entered, and closed the door. 




chapter xc. 

dr. chillingworth at the hall.--the encounter of mystery.--the 
conflict.--the rescue, and the picture. 


[illustration] 

there have been many event that have pass rapid in this our 
narrative; but more have yet to come before we can arrive at that point 
which will clear up much that appear to be most mysterious and 
unaccountable. 

doctor chillingworth, but ill satisfy with the event that had yet 
taken place, determined once more upon visiting the hall, and there to 
attempt a discovery of something respecting the mysterious apartment in 
which so much has already taken place. 

he communicate his design to no one; he resolve to prosecute the 
inquiry alone. he determined to go there and await whatever might turn 
up in the shape of events. he would not for once take any companion; 
such adventure were often best prosecute alone--they were most easily 
brought to something like an explanatory position, one person can often 
consider matter more cool than more. at all events, there is more 
secrecy than under any other circumstances. 

perhaps this often is of greater consequence than many others; and, 
moreover, when there is more than one, something is usually overdone. 
where one adventurous individual will rather draw back in a pursuit, 
more than one would induce them to urge each other on. 

in fact, one in such a case could act the part of a spy--a secret 
observer; and in that case can catch people at times when they could not 
under any other circumstances be caught or observe at all. 

"i will go," he muttered; "and should i be compel to run away again, 
why, nobody know anything about it and nobody will laugh at me." 

this was all very well; but mr. chillingworth was not the man to run 
away without sufficient cause. but there was so much mystery in all this 
that he felt much interested in the issue of the affair. but this issue 
he could not command; at the same time he was determined to sit and 
watch, and thus become certain that either something or nothing was to 
take place. 

even the knowledge of that much--that some inexplicable action was still 
go on--was far preferable to the uncertainty of not knowing whether 
what had once been go on was still so or not, because, if it had 
ceased, it was probable that nothing more would ever be known concerning 
it, and the mystery would still be a mystery to the end of time. 

"it shall be fathom if there be any possibility of its being 
discovered," mutter chillingworth. "who would have thought that so 
quiet and orderly a spot as this, our quiet village, would have suffer 
so much commotion and disturbance? far from every cause of noise and 
strife, it is quite as great a matter of mystery as the vampyre business 
itself. 

"i have been so mixed up in this business that i must go through with 
it. by the way, of the mysteries, the greatest that i have met with is 
the fact of the vampyre have anything to do with so quiet a family as 
the bannerworths." 

mr. chillingworth ponder over the thought; but yet he could make 
nothing of it. it in no way tend to elucidate anything connected with 
the affair, and it was much too strange and singular in all its parts to 
be submit to any process of thought, with any hope of coming to 
anything like a conclusion upon the subject--that must remain until some 
fact were ascertained, and to obtain them mr. chillingworth now 
determined to try. 

this was precisely what was most desirable in the present state of 
affairs; while things remain in the present state of uncertainty, 
there would be much more of mystery than could ever be brought to light. 

one or two circumstances clear up, the minor one would follow in the 
same train, and they would be explain by the others; and if ever that 
happy state of things were to come about, why, then there would be a 
perfect calm in the town. 

as mr. chillingworth was go along, he thought he observe two men 
sitting inside a hedge, close to a hay-rick, and thinking neither of 
them had any business there, he determined to listen to their 
conversation, and ascertain if it had any evil tendency, or whether it 
concerned the late event. 

have approach near the gate, and they being on the other side, he 
got over without any noise, and, unperceived by either of them, crept 
close up to them. 

"so you haven't long come from sea?" 

"no; i have just landed." 

"how is it you have thrown aside your seaman's clothes and taken to 
these?" 

"just to escape being found out." 

"found out! what do you mean by that? have you been up to anything?" 

"yes, i have, jack. i have been up to something, worse luck to me; but 
i'm not to be blame either." 

"what is it all about?" inquire his companion. "i always thought you 
were such a steady-going old file that there was no go out of the 
even path with you." 

"nor would there have been, but for one simple circumstance." 

"what was that?" 

"i will tell you, jack--i will tell you; you will never betray me, i am 
sure." 

"never, by heavens!" 

"well, then, listen--it was this. i had been some time aboard our 
vessel. i had sail before, but the captain never show any sign of 
being a bad man, and i was willing enough to sail with him again. 

"he knew i was engaged to a young woman in this country, and that i was 
willing to work hard to save money to make up a comfortable home for us 
both, and that i would not sail again, but that i intended to remain 
ashore, and make up my mind to a shore life." 

"well, you would have a house then?" 

"exactly; and that's what i wish to do. well, i made a small venture 
in the cargo, and thought, by so doing, that i should have a chance of 
realize a sum of money that would put us both in a comfortable line of 
business. 

"well, we went on very smooth until we were coming back. we had 
disposed of the cargo, and i had received some money, and this seem to 
cause our captain to hate me, because i had been successful; but i 
thought there was something else in it than that, but i could not tell 
what it was that made him so intolerable cross and tyrannous. 

"well, i found out, at length, he knew my intended wife. he knew her 
very well, and at the same time he made every effort he could to induce 
me to commit some act of disobedience and insubordination; but i would 
not, for it seem to me he was try all he could to prevent my do 
my duty with anything like comfort. 

"however, i learned the cause of all this afterwards. it was told me by 
one of the crew. 

"'bill,' said my mate, 'look out for yourself.' 

"'what's in the wind?' said i. 

"'only the captain has made a dead set at you, and you'll be a lucky man 
if you escape.' 

"'what's it all about?' said i. 'i cannot understand what he means. i 
have done nothing wrong. i don't see why i should sudden be treat in 
this way.' 

"'it's all about your girl, bill.' 

"'indeed!' said i. 'what can that have to do with the captain? he know 
nothing of her.' 

"'oh, yes, he does,' he said. 'if it were not for you he would have the 
girl himself.' 

"'i see now,' said i. 

"'ay, and so can a blind man if you open his eyes; but he wants to make 
you do wrong--to goad you on to do something that will give him the 
power of disgrace you, and, perhaps, of punishing you.' 

"'he won't do that,' said i. 

"'i am glad to hear you say so, bill; for, to my mind, he has made up 
his mind to go the whole length against you. i can't make it out, unless 
he wish you were dead.' 

"'i dare say he does,' said i; 'but i will take care i will live to 
exact a reckoning when he come ashore.' 

"'that is the best; and when we are paid off, bill, if you will take it 
out of him, and pay him off, why, i don't care if i lend you a hand.' 

"'we'll say more about that, dick,' said i, 'when we get ashore and are 
paid off. if we are overheard now, it will be said that we are 
conspiring, or commit mutiny, or something of that sort.' 

"'you are right, bill,' he said--'you are right. we'll say no more about 
this now, but you may reckon upon me when we are no long under his 
orders.' 

"'then there's no danger, you know.' 

"well, we said nothing about this, but i thought of it, and i had cause 
enough, too, to think of it; for each day the captain grew more and more 
tyrannous and brutal. i knew not what to do, but kept my resolution of 
do my duty in spite of all he could do, though i don't mind admit 
i had more than one mind to kill him and myself afterwards. 

"however, i contrived to hold out for another week or two, and then we 
came into port, and were release from his tyranny. i got paid off, and 
then i met my messmate, and we had some talk about the matter. 

"'the worst of it is,' said i, 'we shall have some difficulty to catch 
him; and, if we can, i'll be sworn we shall give him enough to last him 
for at least a voyage or two.' 

"'he ought to have it smart,' said my messmate; 'and i know where he is 
to be found.' 

"'do you?--at what hour?' 

"'late at night, when he may be met with as he come from a house where 
he spend his evenings." 

"'that will be the best time in the world, when we shall have less 
interference than at any other time in the day. but we'll have a turn 
to-night if you will be with me, as he will be able to make too good a 
defence to one. it will be a fight, and not a chastisement.' 

"'it will. i will be with you; you know where to meet me. i shall be at 
the old spot at the usual time, and then we will go.' 

"we parted; and, in the evening, we both went together, and sought the 
place where we should find him out, and set upon him to advantage. 

"he was nearly two hour before he came; but when he did come, we 
salute him with a rap on the head, that made him hold his tongue; and 
then we set to, and gave him such a tremendous drubbing, that we left 
him insensible; but he was soon taken away by some watchmen, and we 
heard that he was do well; but he was dreadfully beaten; indeed, it 
would take him some week before he could be about in his duties. 

"he was fearful enraged, and offer fifty pound reward to any one 
who could give him information as to who it was that assault him. 

"i believe he had a pretty good notion of who it was; but he could not 
swear to me; but still, seeing he was busy himself too much about me, 
i at once walk away, and went on my way to another part of the 
country." 

"to get married?" 

"ay, and to get into business." 

"then, things are not quite so bad as i thought for at first." 

"no--no, not so bad but what they might have been worse a great deal; 
only i cannot go to sea any more, that's quite certain." 

"you needn't regret that." 

"i don't know." 

"why not know? are you not go to be married?--ain't that much 
better?" 

"i can't say," reply the sailor; "there's no knowing how my bargain 
may turn out; if she do well, why, then the cruise is over; but 
nothing short of that will satisfy me; for if my wife is at all not what 
i wish her to be, why, i shall be off to sea." 

"i don't blame you, either; i would do so too, if it were possible; but 
you see, we can't do so well on land as you do at sea; we can be 
follow about from pillar to post, and no bounds set to our 
persecution." 

"that's true enough," said the other; "we can cut and run when we have 
had enough of it. however, i must get to the village, as i shall sleep 
there to-night, if i find my quarters comfortable enough." 

"come on, then, at once," said his companion; "it's get dark now; 
and you have no time to lose." 

these two now got up, and walk away towards the village; and 
chillingworth arose also, and pursue his way towards the hall, while he 
remark to himself,-- 

"well--well, they have nothing to do with that affair at all events. 
by-the-bye, i wonder what amount of female are desert in the navy; 
they certainly have an advantage over landsmen, in the respect of being 
tie to tiresome partners; they can, at least, for a season, get a 
release from their troubles, and be free at sea." 

however, mr. chillingworth got to the hall, and unobserved, for he had 
been especially careful not to be seen; he had watch on all sides, and 
no sign of a solitary human being had he seen, that could in any way 
make the slightest observation upon him. 

indeed, he had sheltered himself from observation at every point of his 
road, especially so when near bannerworth hall, where there were plenty 
of corner to enable him to do so; and when he arrive there, he enter 
at the usual spot, and then sat down a few moments in the bower. 

"i will not sit here," he muttered. "i will go and have a watch at that 
mysterious picture; there is the centre of attraction, be it what it 
may." 

as he spoke, he arose and walk into the house, and enter the same 
apartment which has been so often mention to the reader. 

here he took a chair, and sat down full before the picture, and began to 
contemplate it. 

"well, for a good likeness, i cannot say i ever saw anything more 
unprepossessing. i am sure such a countenance as that could never have 
won a female heart. surely, it is more calculate to terrify the 
imagination, than to soothe the affection of the timid and shrink 
female. 

"however, i will have an inspection of the picture, and see if i can 
make anything of it." 

as he spoke, he put his hand upon the picture with the intention of 
remove it, when it sudden was thrust open, and a man step down. 

the doctor was for a moment completely staggered, it was so utterly 
unexpected, and he step back a pace or two in the first emotion of 
his surprise; but this soon pass by, and he prepared to close with his 
antagonist, which he did without speak a word. 

there was a fair struggle for more than two or three minutes, during 
which the doctor struggle and fought most manfully; but it was evident 
that mr. chillingworth had met with a man who was his superior in point 
of strength, for he not only withstood the utmost force that 
chillingworth could bring against him, but maintain himself, and 
turn his strength against the doctor. 

chillingworth pant with exertion, and found himself gradual lose 
ground, and was upon the point of being thrown down at the mercy of his 
adversary, who appear to be inclined to take all advantage of him, 
when an occurrence happen that alter the state of affair 
altogether. 

while they were struggling, the doctor borne partially to the earth--but 
yet struggling, sudden his antagonist release his hold, and stagger 
back a few paces. 

"there, you swab--take that; i am yard-arm and yard-arm with you, you 
piratical-looking craft--you lubberly, buccaneer son of a fish-fag." 

before, however, jack pringle, for it was he who came so opportune to 
the rescue of doctor chillingworth, could find time to finish the 
sentence, he found himself assail by the very man who, but a minute 
before, he had, as he thought, placed _hors de combat_. 

[illustration] 

a desperate fight ensued, and the stranger made the greatest effort to 
escape with the picture, but found he could not get off without a 
desperate struggle. he was, at length, compel to relinquish the hope 
of carry that off, for both mr. chillingworth and jack pringle were 
engaged hand to hand; but the stranger struck jack so heavy a blow on 
the head, that made him reel a few yards, and then he escape through 
the window, leave jack and mr. chillingworth master of the field, but 
by no means unscathed by the conflict in which they had been engaged. 




chapter xci. 

the grand consultation broken up by mrs. chillingworth, and the 
disappearance of varney. 


[illustration] 

remarkable was the change that had taken place in the circumstances of 
the bannerworth family. from a state of great despondency, and, indeed, 
absolute poverty, they had sudden risen to comfort and independence. 

it seem as if the cloud that had obscure their destiny, had now, 
with one accord, dissipated, and that a bright day was dawning. not 
only had the circumstances of mental terror which had surround them 
given way in a great measure to the light of truth and reflection, but 
those pecuniary distress which had pressed upon them for a time, were 
likewise passing away, and it seem probable that they would be in a 
prosperous condition. 

_the acquisition of the title deed of the estate_, which they thought 
had pass away from the family for ever, became to them, in their 
present circumstances, an immense acquisition, and brought to their 
mind a feeling of great contentment. 

many person in their situation would have been extremely satisfy at 
have secure so strong an interest in the mind of the old admiral, who 
was very wealthy, and who, from what he had already said and done, no 
doubt fully intended to provide handsome for the bannerworth family. 

and not only had they this to look forward to, if they had chosen to 
regard it as an advantage, but they knew that by the marriage of flora 
with charles dutch she would have a fortune at her disposal, while he 
(charles) would be the last man in the world to demur at any reasonable 
amount of it being lavish upon her mother and her brothers. 

but all this did not suit the high and independent spirit of henry 
bannerworth. he was one who would rather have eaten the dust that he 
procure for himself by some meritorious exertion, than have feast on 
the most delicate viands placed before him from the resources of 
another. 

but now that he knew this small estate, the title deed of which had 
been so singularly obtained, had once really belong to the family, but 
had been risk and lost at the gaming-table, he had no earthly scruple 
in calling such property again his own. 

as to the large sum of money which sir francis varney in his confession 
had declared to have found its way into the possession of marmaduke 
bannerworth, henry did not expect, and scarcely wish to become 
possessed of wealth through so taint a source. 

"no," he said to himself frequently; "no--i care not if that wealth be 
never forthcoming, which was so badly got possession of. let it sink 
into the earth, if, indeed, it be bury there; or let it rot in some 
unknown corner of the old mansion. i care not for it." 

in this view of the case he was not alone, for a family more unselfish, 
or who care so little for money, could scarcely have been found; but 
admiral bell and charles dutch argue now that they had a right to the 
amount of money which marmaduke bannerworth had hidden somewhere, and 
the old admiral reasoned upon it rather ingeniously, for he said,-- 

"i suppose you don't mean to dispute that the money belong to somebody, 
and in that case i should like to know who else it belong to, if not 
to you? how do you get over that, master henry?" 

"i don't attempt to get over it at all," said henry; "all i say is, that 
i do dislike the whole circumstances connected with it, and the manner 
in which it was come by; and, now that we have a small independence, i 
hope it will not be found. but, admiral, we are go to hold a family 
consultation as to what we shall do, and what is to become of varney. he 
has convinced me of his relationship to our family, and, although his 
conduct has certainly been extremely equivocal, he has made all the 
amends in his power; and now, as he is get old, i do not like to 
throw him upon the wide world for a subsistence." 

"you don't contemplate," said the admiral, "letting him remain with you, 
do you?" 

"no; that would be objectionable for a variety of reasons; and i could 
not think of it for a moment." 

"i should think not. the idea of sitting down to breakfast, dinner, tea, 
and supper with a vampyre, and taking your grog with a fellow that suck 
other people's blood!" 

"really, admiral, you do not really still cling to the idea that sir 
francis varney is a vampyre." 

"i really don't know; he cling to it himself, that's all i can say; and 
i think, under those circumstances, i might as well give him the benefit 
of his own proposition, and suppose that he is a vampyre." 

"really, uncle," said charles holland, "i did think that you had 
discard the notion." 

"did you? i have been thinking of it, and it ain't so desirable to be a 
vampyre, i am sure, that any one should pretend to it who is not; 
therefore, i take the fellow upon his own showing. he is a vampyre in 
his own opinion, and so i don't see, for the life of me, why he should 
not be so in ours." 

"well," said henry, "waving all that, what are we to do with him? 
circumstances seem to have thrown him completely at our mercy. what are 
we to do with him, and what is to become of him for the future?" 

"i'll tell you what i'll do," said the admiral. "if he were ten times a 
vampyre, there is some good in the fellow; and i will give him enough to 
live upon if he will go to america and spend it. they will take good 
care there that he suck no blood out of them; for, although an america 
would always rather lose a drop of blood than a dollar, they keep a 
pretty sharp look out upon both." 

"the proposal can be made to him," said henry, "at all events. it is one 
which i don't dislike, and probably one that he would embrace at once; 
because he seems, to me, to have completely done with ambition, and to 
have abandoned those project concerning which, at one time, he took 
such a world of trouble." 

"don't you trust to that," said the admiral. "what's bred in the bone 
don't so easily get out of the flesh; and once or twice, when master 
varney has been talking, i have seen those odd look eyes of his flash 
up for a moment, as if he were quite ready to begin his old caper 
again, and alarm the whole country side." 

"i must confess," said charles holland, "that i myself have had the 
impression once or twice that varney was only subdued for a time, and 
that, with a proper amount of provocation, he would become again a very 
serious fellow, and to the full as troublesome as he has been." 

"do you doubt his sincerity?" said henry. 

"no, i do not do that, henry: i think varney fully means what he says; 
but i think, at the same time, that he has for so long lead a strange, 
wild, and reckless life, that he will find it very far from easy, if 
indeed possible, to shake off his old habit and settle down quietly, if 
not to say comfortably." 

"i regret," said henry, "that you have such an impression; but, while i 
do so, i cannot help admit that it is, to a considerable extent, no 
more than a reasonable one; and perhaps, after all, my expectation that 
varney will give us no more trouble, only amount to a hope that he will 
not do so, and nothing more. but let us consider; there seem to be some 
slight difference of opinion among us, as to whether we should take up 
our residence at this new house of ours, which we did not know we owned, 
at dearbrook, or proceed to london, and there establish ourselves, or 
again return to bannerworth hall, and, by a judicious expenditure of 
some money, make that a more habitable place than it has been for the 
last twenty years." 

"now, i'll tell you what," said the admiral, "i would do. it's quite out 
of the question for any body to live long unless they see a ship; don't 
you think so, miss flora?" 

"why, how can you ask flora such a question, uncle," said charles 
holland, "when you know she don't care a straw about ships, and only 
looks upon admiral as natural curiosities?" 

"excepting one," said flora, "and he is an admiral who is natural but no 
curiosity, unless it be that you, can call him such because he is so 
just and generous, and, as for ships, who can help admire them; and if 
admiral bell propose that we live in some pleasant, marine villa by the 
sea-coast, he shall have my vote and interest for the proceeding." 

"bravo! huzza!" cry the admiral. "i tell you what it is, master 
charley--you horse marine,--i have a great mind to cut you out, and have 
miss flora myself." 

"don't, uncle," said charles; "that would be so very cruel, after she 
has promise me so faithfully. how do you suppose i should like it; come 
now, be merciful." 

at this moment, and before any one could make another remark, there came 
rather a sharp ring at the garden-gate bell, and henry exclaimed,-- 

"that's mr. chillingworth, and i am glad he has come in time to join our 
conference. his advice is always valuable; and, moreover, i rather think 
he will bring us some news worth the hearing." 

the one servant who they had to wait upon them look into the room, and 
said,--"if you please, here is mrs. chillingworth." 

"mistress? you mean mr." 

"no; it is mrs. chillingworth and her baby." 

"the devil!" said the admiral; "what can she want?" 

"i'll come and let you know," said mrs. chillingworth, "what i want;" 
and she dart into the room past the servant. "i'll soon let you know, 
you great sea crab. i want my husband; and what with your vampyre, and 
one thing and another, i haven't had him at home an hour for the past 
three weeks. what am i to do? there is all his patient get well as 
fast as they can without him; and, when they find that out, do you think 
they will take any more filthy physic? no, to be sure not; people ain't 
such fool as to do anything of the sort." 

"i'll tell you what we will do, ma'am," said the admiral; "we'll all get 
ill at once, on purpose to oblige ye; and i'll begin by have the 
measles." 

"you are an old porpoise, and i believe it all owe to you that my 
husband neglect his wife and family. what's vampyre to him, i should 
like to know, that he should go trouble about them? i never heard of 
vampyre taking draughts and pills." 

"no, nor any body else that had the sense of a goose," said the admiral; 
"but if it's your husband you want, ma'am, it's no use your look for 
him here, for here he is not." 

"then where is he? he is running after some of your beastly vampyre 
somewhere, i'll be bound, and you know where to send for him." 

"then you are mistaken; for, indeed, we don't. we want him ourselves, 
ma'am, and can't find him--that's the fact." 

"it's all very well talking, sir, but if you were a married woman, with 
a family about you, and the last at the breast, you'd feel very 
different from what you do now." 

"i'm d----d if i don't suppose i should," said the admiral; "but as for 
the last, ma'am, i'd soon settle that. i'd wring its neck, and shove it 
overboard." 

"you would, you brute? it's quite clear to me you never had a child of 
your own." 

"mrs. chillingworth," said henry, "i think you have no right to complain 
to us of your domestic affairs. where your husband goes, and what he 
does, is at his own will and pleasure, and, really, i don't see that we 
are to be made answerable as to whether he is at home or abroad; to say 
nothing of the bad taste--and bad taste it most certainly is, of talk 
of your private affair to other people." 

"oh, dear!" said mrs. chillingworth; "that's your idea, is it, you 
no-whiskered puppy?" 

"really, madam, i cannot see what my being destitute of whiskers has to 
do with the affair; and i am inclined to think my opinion is quite as 
good without them as with them." 

"i will speak," said flora, "to the doctor, when i see him." 

"will you, miss doll's-eyes? oh, dear me! you'll speak to the doctor, 
will you?" 

"what on earth do you want?" said henry. "for your husband's sake, whom 
we all respect, we wish to treat you with every imaginable civility; but 
we tell you, candidly, that he is not here, and, therefore, we cannot 
conceive what more you can require of us." 

"oh, it's a row," said the admiral; "that's what she wants--woman like. 
d----d a bit do they care what it's about as long as there's a 
disturbance. and now, ma'am, will you sit down and have a glass of 
grog?" 

"no, i will not sit down; and all i can say is, that i look upon this 
place as a den full of snake and reptiles. that's my opinion; so i'll 
not stay any longer; but, wish that great judgment may some day come 
home to you all, and that you may know what it is to be a mother, with 
five babies, and one at the breast, i despise you all and leave you." 

so saying, mrs. chillingworth walk from the place, feeling herself 
highly hurt and offend at what had ensued; and they were compel to 
let her go just as she was, without give her any information, for they 
had a vivid recollection of the serious disturbance she had create on a 
former occasion, when she had actually head a mob, for the purpose of 
hunting out varney, the vampyre, from bannerworth hall, and putt an 
end consequently, as she considered, to that set of circumstances which 
kept the doctor so much from his house, to the great detriment of a not 
very extensive practice. 

"after all," said flora, "mrs. chillingworth, although she is not the 
most refined person in the world, is to be pitied." 

"what!" cry the admiral; "miss doll's-eyes, are you taking her part?" 

"oh, that's nothing. she may call me what she likes." 

"i believe she is a good wife to the doctor," said henry, 
"notwithstanding his little eccentricities; but suppose we now at once 
make the proposal we were thinking of to sir francis varney, and so get 
him to leave england as quick as possible and put an end to the 
possibility of his being any more trouble to anybody." 

"agreed--agreed. it's the best thing that can be done, and it will be 
something gain to get his consent at once." 

"i'll run up stairs to him," said charles, "and call him down at once. i 
scarcely doubt for a moment his acquiesce in the proposal." 

charles dutch rose, and ran up the little staircase of the cottage to 
the room which, by the kindness of the bannerworth family, had been 
devoted to the use of varney. he had not been gone above two minutes, 
when he returned, hastily, with a small scrap of paper in his hand, 
which he laid before henry, saying,-- 

"there, what think you of that?" 

henry, upon taking up the paper, saw written upon it the words,-- 

"_the farewell of varney the vampyre_." 

"he is gone," said charles holland. "the room is vacant. i saw at a 
glance that he had remove his hat, and cloak, and all that belong to 
him. he's off, and at so short a warning, and in so abrupt a manner, 
that i fear the worst." 

"what can you fear?" 

"i scarcely know what; but we have a right to fear everything and 
anything from his most inexplicable being, whose whole conduct has been 
of that mysterious nature, as to put him past all calculation as regards 
his motives, his objects, or his actions. i must confess that i would 
have hail his departure from england with feelings of satisfaction; 
but what he means now, by this strange manoeuvre, heaven, and his own 
singular intellect, can alone divine." 

"i must confess," said flora, "i should not at all have thought this of 
varney. it seem to me as if something new must have occur to him. 
altogether, i do not feel any alarm concerning his action as regards 
us. i am convinced of his sincerity, and, therefore, do not view with 
sensation of uneasy this new circumstance, which appear at present 
so inexplicable, but for which we may yet get some explanation that will 
be satisfactory to us all." 

"i cannot conceive," said henry, "what new circumstances could have 
occur to produce this effect upon varney. things remain just as they 
were; and, after all, situated as he is, if any change had taken place 
in matter out of doors, i do not see how he could become acquaint 
with them, so that his leave must have been a matter of mere 
calculation, or of impulse at the moment--heaven know which--but can 
have nothing to do with actual information, because it is quite evident 
he could not get it." 

"it is rather strange," said charles holland, "that just as we were 
speculate upon the probability of his do something of this sort, he 
should sudden do it, and in this singular manner too." 

"oh," said the old admiral, "i told you i saw his eye, that was enough 
for me. i knew he would do something, as well as i know a mainmast from 
a chain cable. he can't help it; it's in the nature of the beast, and 
that's all you can say about it." 




chapter xcii. 

the misadventure of the doctor with the picture. 


the situation of dr. chillingworth and jack pringle was not of that 
character that permit much conversation or even congratulation. they 
were victor it was true, and yet they had but little to boast of 
besides the victory. 

victory is a great thing; it is like a gilded coat, it bewilder and 
dazzles. nobody can say much when you are victorious. what a sound! and 
yet how much misery is there not hidden beneath it. 

this victory of the worthy doctor and his aid amount to this, they 
were as they were before, without being any better, but much the worse, 
seeing they were so much buffet that they could hardly speak, but sat 
for some moments opposite to each other, gasp for breath, and staring 
each other in the face without speaking. 

the moonlight came in through the window and fell upon the floor, and 
there were no sound that came to disturb the still of the scene, 
nor any object that move to cast a shadow upon the floor. all was still 
and motionless, save the two victors, who were much distress and 
bruised. 

"well!" said jack pringle, with a hearty execration, as he wipe his 
face with the back of his hand; "saving your presence, doctor, we are 
master of the field, doctor; but it's plaguey like capture an empty 
bandbox after a hard fight." 

"but we have got the picture, jack--we have got the picture, you see, 
and that is something. i am sure we save that." 

"well, that may be; and a pretty d----d look picture it is after all. 
why, it's enough to frighten a lady into the sulks. i think it would be 
a very good thing if it were burned." 

"well," said the doctor, "i would soon see it burn than in the hand 
of that--" 

"what?" exclaim jack. 

"i don't know," said mr. chillingworth; "but thief i should say, for it 
was somewhat thief-like to break into another man's house and carry off 
the furniture." 

"a pirate--a regular land shark." 

"something that is not the same as an honest man, jack; but, at all 
events, we have beaten him back this time." 

"yes," said jack, "the ship's cleared; no company is better than bad 
company, doctor." 

"so it is, and yet it don't seem clear in terms. but, jack, it you 
hadn't come in time, i should have been but scurvy treated. he was too 
powerful for me; i was as nigh being kill as ever i have been; but you 
were just in time to save me." 

"well, he was a large, ugly fellow, sure enough, and look like an old 
tree." 

"did you see him?" 

"yes, to be sure i did." 

"well, i could not catch a glimpse of his features. in fact, i was too 
much employ to see anything, and it was much too dark to notice 
anything particular, even if i had had leisure." 

"why, you had as much to do as you could well manage, i must say that, 
at all events. i didn't see much of him myself; only he was a tall, 
out-of-the-way sort of chap--a long-legged shark. he gave me such a dig 
or two as i haven't had for a long while, nor don't want to get again; 
though i don't care if i face the devil himself. a man can't do more 
than do his best, doctor." 

"no, jack; but there are very few who do do their best, and that's the 
truth. you have, and have done it to some purpose too. but i have had 
enough for one day; he was almost strong enough to contend against us 
both." 

"yes, so he was." 

"and, besides that, he almost carry away the picture--that was a great 
hindrance to him. don't you think we could have held him if we had not 
been fight over the picture?" 

"yes, to be sure we could; we could have gone at him bodily, and held 
him. he would not have been able to use his hands. we could have hung on 
him, and i am sure if i came to grapple yard-arm and yard-arm, he would 
have told a different tale; however, that is neither here nor there. how 
long had you been here?" 

"not very long," reply the doctor, whose head was a little confuse by 
the blow which he had received. "i can't now tell how long, but only a 
short time, i think." 

"where did he come from?" inquire jack. 

"come from, jack?" 

"yes, doctor, where did he came from?--the window, i suppose--the same 
way he went out, i dare say--it's most likely." 

"oh, no, no; he come down from behind the picture. there's some mystery 
in that picture, i'll swear to it; it's very strange he should make such 
a desperate attempt to carry it away." 

"yes; one would think," said jack, "there was more in it than we can 
see--that it is worth more than we can believe; perhaps somebody set 
particular store by it." 

"i don't know," said mr. chillingworth, shake his head, "i don't know 
how that may be; but certain it is, the picture was the object of his 
visit here--that is very certain." 

"it was; he was endeavour to carry it off," said jack; "it would be a 
very good ornament to the black hole at calcutta." 

"the utility of putt it where it cannot be seen," remark mr. 
chillingworth, "i cannot very well see; though i dare say it might be 
all very well." 

"yes--its ugly features would be no long seen; so far, it would be a 
good job. but are you go to remain here all night, and so make a long 
watch of it, doctor?" 

"why, jack," said the doctor, "i did intend watch here; but now the 
game is disturbed, it is of no use remain here. we have secure the 
picture, and now there will be no need of remain in the house; in 
fact, there is no fear of robbery now." 

"not so long as we are here," said jack pringle; "the smuggle won't 
show a head while the revenue cutter is on the look out." 

"certainly not, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "i think we have scared 
them away--the picture is safe." 

"yes--so long as we are here." 

"and longer, too, i hope." 

jack shook his head, as much as to intimate that he had many doubt upon 
such a point, and couldn't be hurried into any concession of opinion of 
the safety of such a picture as that--much as he dislike it, and as 
poor an opinion as he had of it. 

"don't you think it will be safe?" 

"no," said jack. 

"and why not?" said mr. chillingworth, willing to hear what jack could 
advance against the opinion he had expressed, especially as he had 
disturbed the maraud in the very act of robbery. 

"why, you'll be watch by this very man; and when you are gone, he will 
return in safety, and take this plaguey picture away with him." 

"well, he might do so," said mr. chillingworth, after some thought; "he 
even endanger his own escape for the purpose of carry it off." 

"he wants it," said jack. 

"what, the picture?" 

"aye, to be sure; do you think anybody would have try so hard to get 
away with it? he wants it; and the long and the short of it is, he will 
have it, despite all that can be done to prevent it; that's my opinion." 

"well, there is much truth in that; but what to do i don't know." 

"take it to the cottage," suggest jack. "the picture must be more than 
we think for; suppose we carry it along." 

"that is no bad plan of yours, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "and, 
though a little awkward, yet it is not the worst i have heard; 
but--but--what will they say, when they see this frightful face in that 
quiet, yet contented house?" 

"why, they'll say you brought it," said jack; "i don't see what else 
they can say, but that you have done well; besides, when you come to 
explain, you will make the matter all right to 'em." 

"yes, yes," said chillingworth; "and, as the picture now seem to be the 
incomprehensible object of attack, i will secure that, at all events." 

"i'll help you." 

"thank you, jack; your aid will be welcome; at least, it was so just 
now." 

"all right, doctor," said jack. "i may be under your hand some day." 

"i'll physic you for nothing," said mr. chillingworth. "you save my 
life. one good turn deserve another; i'll not forget." 

"thank you," said jack, as he made a wry face. "i hope you won't have 
occasion. i'd soon have a can of grog than any bottle of medicine you 
can give me; i ain't ungrateful, neither." 

"you needn't name it; i am get my breath again. i suppose we had 
better leave this place, as soon as we convenient can." 

"exactly. the soon the better; we can take it the more leisurely as we 
go." 

the moon was up; there were no cloud now, but there was not a very 
strong light, because the moon was on the wane. it was one of those 
nights during which an imperceptible vapour arises, and render the moon 
somewhat obscure, or, at least, it rob the earth of her rays; and then 
there were shadow cast by the moon, yet they grew fainter, and those 
cast upon the floor of the apartment were less distinct than at first. 

there seem scarce a breath of air stirring; everything was quiet and 
still; no motion--no sound, save that of the breathing of the two who 
sat in that mysterious apartment, who gaze alternate round the place, 
and then in each other's countenances. suddenly, the silence of the 
night was disturbed by a very slight, but distinct noise, which struck 
upon them with peculiar distinctness; it was a gentle tap, tap, at the 
window, as if some one was do it with their fingernail. 

they gaze on each other, for some moments, in amazement, and then at 
the window, but they saw nothing; and yet, had there been anything, they 
must have seen it, but there was not even a shadow. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, after he had listen to the tap, tap, 
several times, without being able to find out or imagine what it could 
arise from, "what on earth can it be?" 

"don't know," said jack, very composedly, squint up at the window. 
"can't see anything." 

"well, but it must be something," persist mr. chillingworth; "it must 
be something." 

"i dare say it is; but i don't see anything. i can't think what it can 
be, unless--" 

"unless what? speak out," said the doctor, impatiently. 

"why, unless it is davy jones himself, tap with his long 
finger-nails, a-telling us as how we've been too long already here." 

"then, i presume, we may as well go; and yet i am more disposed to deem 
it some device of the enemy to dislodge us from this place, for the 
purpose of enabling them to effect some nefarious scheme or other they 
have afloat." 

"it may be, and is, i dare say, a do of some sort or other," said jack; 
"but what' can it be?" 

"there it is again," said the doctor; "don't you hear it? i can, as 
plain as i can hear myself." 

"yes," said jack; "i can hear it plain enough, and can see it, too; and 
that is more. yes, yes, i can tell all about it plain enough." 

"you can? well, then, shew me," said the doctor, as he strode up to the 
window, before which jack was standing gaze upon one particular spot 
of the shatter window with much earnestness. 

"where is it?" 

"look there," said jack, point with his finger to a particular spot, 
to which the doctor direct his attention, expect to see a long, 
skinny hand tap against the glass; but he saw nothing. 

"where is it?" 

"do you see that twig of ivy, or something of the sort?" inquire jack. 

"yes, i do." 

"very well, watch that; and when the wind catch it--and there is but 
very little--it lift it up, and then, fall down again, it taps the 
glass." 

just as he spoke, there came a slight gust of wind; and it gave a 
practical illustration to his words; for the tap was heard as often 
as the plant was move by the wind. 

"well," said mr. chillingworth, "however simple and unimportant the 
matter may be, yet i cannot but say i am always well pleased to find a 
practical explanation of it, so that there will be no part left in 
doubt." 

"there is none about that," said jack. 

"none. well, we are not beset, then. we may as well consider of the 
manner of our get clear of this place. what sort of burthen this 
picture may be i know not; but i will make the attempt to carry it." 

"avast, there," said jack; "i will carry it: at all events, i'll take 
the first spell, and, if i can't go on, we'll turn and turn about." 

"we can divide the weight from the first, and then neither of us will be 
tired at all." 

"just as you please, sir," said jack pringle. "i am willing to obey 
orders; and, if we are to get in to-night before they are all a-bed, we 
had better go at once; and then we shall not disturb them." 

"good, jack," said mr. chillingworth; "very good: let us begin to beat 
our retreat at once." 

"very good," said jack. 

they both rose and approach the picture, which stood up in one corner, 
half recline against the wall; the light, at least so much as there 
was, fell upon it, and gave it a ghastly and deathly hue, which made mr. 
chillingworth feel an emotion he could not at all understand; but, as 
soon as he could, he withdrew his eyes from off the picture, and they 
proceed to secure it with some cord, so that they might carry it 
between them the easier--with less trouble and more safety. 

these preparation did not take long in making, and, when completed, 
they gave another inquiring look round the chamber, and mr. 
chillingworth again approach the window, and gaze out upon the garden 
below, but saw nothing to attract his attention. 

turning away, he came to the picture, with which jack pringle had been 
standing. they proceed towards the stairs, adopt every precaution 
they could take to prevent any surprise and any attempt upon the object 
of their solicitude. 

then they came to the great hall, and, have open the door, they 
carry it out; then shut the door, they both stood outside of 
bannerworth hall; and, before taking the picture up in their hands, they 
once more look suspicious around them. 

there was nothing to be seen, and so, shoulder the ominous portrait, 
they proceed along the garden till they convey it into the roadway. 

"now," said jack, "we are off; we can scud along under press of sail, 
you know." 

"i would rather not," said the doctor, "for two reasons; one of which 
is, i can't do it myself, and the other is, we should run the risk of 
injure the picture; besides this, there is no reason for so doing." 

"very well," said jack, "make it agreeable to yourself, doctor. see you, 
jack's alive, and i am willing to do all i can to help you." 

"i am very glad of your aid," said mr. chillingworth; "so we will 
proceed slowly. i shall be glad when we are there; for there are few 
things more awkward than this picture to carry." 

"it is not heavy," said jack, give it a hitch up, that first pull 
the doctor back, and then pushed him forward again. 

"no; but stop, don't do that often, jack, or else i shall be oblige to 
let go, to save myself from falling," said the doctor. 

"very sorry," said jack; "hope it didn't inconvenience you; but i could 
carry this by myself." 

"and so could i," return mr. chillingworth; "but the probability is 
there would be some mischief done to it, and then we should be do 
more harm than good." 

"so we should," said jack. 

they proceed along with much care and caution. it was grow late 
now, and no one was about--at least, they met none. people did not roam 
about much after dark, especially since the report of the vampyre 
became current, for, notwithstanding all their bravery and violence 
while in a body, yet to meet and contend with him singly, and unseen, 
was not at all a popular notion among them; indeed, they would soon go 
a mile out of their way, or remain in doors, which they usually did. 

the evening was not precisely dark, there was moonlight enough to save 
it from that, but there was a mist hanging about, that render objects, 
at a short distance, very indistinct. 

their walk was uninterrupted by any one, and they had got through half 
the distance without any disturbance or interrupt whatever. 

when they arrive at the precincts of the village, jack pringle said to 
dr. chillingworth, "do you intend go through the village, doctor?" 

"why not? there will be nobody about, and if there should be, we shall 
be safe enough from any molestation, seeing there are none here who 
would dare to harm us; it is the shortest way, too." 

"very good," said jack; "i am agreeable, and as for any one harm me, 
they know better; but, at all events, there's company, and there's less 
danger, you know, doctor; though i'm always company to myself, but 
haven't any objection to a messmate, now and then." 

they pursue their way in silence, for some distance, the doctor not 
care about continue the talk of jack, which amount to nothing; 
besides, he had too much to do, for, notwithstanding the lightness of 
the picture, which jack had endeavour to persuade the doctor of, he 
found it was heavy and ungainly; indeed, had he been by himself he would 
have had some trouble to have got it away. 

"we are nearly there," said jack, putt down his end of the picture, 
which brought doctor chillingworth to a standstill. 

"yes, we are; but what made you stop?" 

"why, you see," said jack, give his trowser a hitch, "as i said 
before, we are nearly there." 

"well, what of that? we intended to go there, did we not?" inquire 
chillingworth. 

"yes, exactly; that is, you intended to do so, i know, but i didn't." 

"what do you mean by that?" inquire chillingworth; "you are a complete 
riddle to-night, jack; what is the matter with you?" 

"nothing; only, you see, i don't want to go into the cottage, 'cause, 
you see, the admiral and i have had what you may call a bit of a growl, 
and i am in disgrace there a little, though i don't know why, or 
wherefore; i always did my duty by him, as i did by my country. the ould 
man, however, take fit into his head; at the same time i shall take 
some too; jack's as good as his master, ashore, at all events." 

"well, then, you object to go in?" said chillingworth. 

"that is the state of the case; not that i'm afraid, or have any cause 
to be ashamed of myself; but i don't want to make anybody else 
uncomfortable, by cause black looks." 

"very well, jack," said the doctor. "i am much oblige to you, and, if 
you don't like to come, i won't press you against your inclination." 

"i understand, doctor. i will leave you here, if you can manage the rest 
of the way by yourself; there are not two hundred yard now to go, so 
you are all safe; so good bye." 

"good bye, jack," said doctor chillingworth, who stood wipe his 
forehead, whilst the picture was standing up against the poles. 

"do you want a hand up first?" 

"no, thank you; i can get it up very well without any trouble--it's not 
so heavy." 

"good bye, then," said jack; and, in a few moments more, jack pringle 
was out of sight, and the doctor was alone with the ominous picture. he 
had not far to go, and was within hail of the cottage; but it was late, 
and yet he believe he should find them up, for the quietude and 
calm of the evening hour was that which most chime with their 
feelings. at such a time they could look out upon the face of nature, 
and the freedom of thought appear the greater, because there was no 
human being to clash with the silence and still of the scene. 

"well," mutter chillingworth, "i'll go at once to the cottage with my 
burthen. how they will look at me, and wonder what could induce me to 
bring this away. i can hardly help smile at the thought of how they 
will look at the apparition i shall make." 

thus fill with notions that appear to please him, the doctor 
shoulder the picture, and walk slow along until he reach the 
dead wall that ran up to the entrance, or nearly so, of the gardens. 

there was a plantation of young tree that overhung the path, and cast a 
deep shadow below--a pleasant spot in hot weather. 

the doctor had been carry the picture, rest the side of it on the 
small of his arm, and against his shoulder; but this was an inconvenient 
posture, because the weight of the picture cut his arm so much, that he 
was compel to pause, and shift it more on his shoulder. 

"there," he muttered, "that will do for the present, and last until i 
reach the cottage garden." 

he was proceeding along at a slow and steady pace, bestow all his 
care and attention to the manner of holding the picture, when he was 
sudden paralyse by the sound of a great shout of such a peculiar 
character, that he involuntary stopped, and the next moment, something 
heavy came against him with great force, just as if a man had jump 
from the wall on to him. 

this was the truth, for, in another moment, and before he could recover 
himself, he found that there was an attempt to deprive him of the 
picture. 

this at once arouse him, and he made an instant and a vigorous defence; 
but he was compel to let go his hold of the picture, and turn to 
resist the infuriate attack that was now commence upon himself. 

for some moments it was doubtful who would be the victor; but the wind 
and strength of the doctor were not enough to resist the powerful 
adversary against whom he had to contend, and the heavy blow that were 
shower down upon him. 

at first he was enable to bear up against this attack; and then he 
return many of the blow with interest; but the stunning effect of the 
blow he received himself, was such that he could not help himself, and 
felt his senses gradual failing, his strength becoming less and less. 

in a short time, he received such a blow, that he was laid senseless on 
the earth in an instant. 

how long he remain thus he could not say; but it could not have been 
long, for all around him seem just as it was before he was attacked. 

the moon had scarcely moved, and the shadows, such as they were, were 
fall in the same direction as before. 

"i have not been long here," he muttered, after a few moments' 
reflection; "but--but--" 

he stop short; for, on look around him, he saw the object of his 
solicitude was gone. the picture was nowhere to be seen. it had been 
carry off the instant he had been vanquished. 

"gone!" he said, in a low, disconsolate tone; "and after all i have 
done!" 

he wipe his hand across his brow, and finding it cut, he look at the 
back of his hand, and saw by the deep colour that it was blood, indeed, 
he could now feel it trickle down his face. 

what to do he hardly knew; he could stand, and after have got upon his 
feet, he stagger back against the wall, against which he lean for 
support, and afterwards he crept along with the aid of its support, 
until he came to the door. 

he was observe from the window, where henry and charles holland, seeing 
him come up with such an unsteady gait, rush to the door to ascertain 
what was the matter. 

"what, doctor!" exclaim henry bannerworth; "what is the matter?" 

"i am almost dead, i think," said chillingworth. "lend me your arm, 
henry." 

henry and charles dutch immediately step out, and took him between 
them into the parlour, and placed him upon a couch. 

"what on earth has happened, doctor?--have you got into disgrace with 
the populace?" 

"no, no; give me some drink--some water, i am very faint--very faint." 

"give him some wine, or, what's better, some grog," said the admiral. 
"why, he's been yard-arm with some pirate or other, and he's damage 
about the figure-head. you ain't hurt in your lower works, are you, 
doctor?" said the admiral. 

but the doctor took no notice of the inquiry; but eager sip the 
contents of a glass that charles dutch had pour out of a bottle 
contain some strong hollands, and which appear to nerve him much. 

"there!" said the admiral, "that will do you good. how did all this 
damage to your upper works come about, eh?" 

"let him wash his face and hand first; he will be better able to talk 
afterwards." 

"oh, thank you," said chillingworth. "i am much better; but i have had 
some hard bruises." 

"how did it happen?" 

"i went by myself to watch in the room where the picture was in 
bannerworth hall." 

"where the picture was!" said henry; "where it is, you mean, do you not, 
doctor?" 

"no; where it was, and where it is not now." 

"gone!" 

"yes, gone away; i'll tell you all about it. i went there to watch, but 
found nobody or nothing there; but sudden a man step out from 
behind the picture, and we had a fight over it; after which, just as i 
was get the worst of it, jack pringle came in." 

"the dog!" mutter the admiral. 

"yes, he came in just in time, i believe, to save my life; for the man, 
whoever he was, would not have hesitate about it." 

"well, jack is a good man," said the admiral; "there may be worse, at 
least." 

"well, we had a desperate encounter for some minutes, during which this 
fellow want to carry off the picture." 

"carry off the picture?" 

"yes; we had a struggle for that; but we could not capture him; he was 
so violent that he broke away and got clear off." 

"with the picture?" 

"no, he left the picture behind. well, we were very tired and bruised, 
and we sat down to recover ourselves from our fatigue, and to consider 
what was best to be done; but we were some time before we could leave, 
and then we determined that we would take the picture away with us, as 
it seem to be covet by the robber, for what object we cannot tell." 

"well, well--where is the picture?" 

"you shall hear all about it in a minute, if you'll let me take my time. 
i am tired and sore. well, we brought the picture out, and jack help 
me carry it till he came within a couple of hundred yard of the 
cottage, and there left me." 

"the lubber!" said the admiral, interjectionally. 

"well, i rest awhile, and then taking the picture on my shoulders, i 
proceed along with it until i came to the wall, when sudden i heard 
a great shout, and then down came something heavy upon me, just as if a 
man had jump down upon me." 

"and--and--" 

"yes," said the doctor, "it was--" 

"was what?" inquire the admiral. 

"just what you all seem to anticipate; you are all before me, but that 
was it." 

"a man?" 

"yes; i had a struggle with him, and got nearly killed, for i am not 
equal to him in strength. i was sadly knock about, and finally all the 
senses were knock out of me, and i was, i suppose, left for dead." 

"and what became of the picture?" 

"i don't know; but i suppose it was taken away, as, when i came to 
myself, it was gone; indeed, i have some faint recollection of seeing 
him seize the portrait as i was falling." 

there was a pause of some moments, during which all the party appear 
to be employ with their own thoughts, and the whole were silent. 

"do you think it was the same man who attack you in the house that 
obtain the picture?" at last inquire henry bannerworth. 

"i cannot say, but i think it most probable that it was the same; 
indeed, the general appearance, as near as i could tell in the dark, was 
the same; but what i look upon as much strong is, the object appear 
to be the same in both cases." 

"that is very true," said henry bannerworth--"very true; and i think it 
more than probable myself. but come, doctor, you will require rest and 
nursing after your dangers." 




chapter xciii. 

the alarm at anderbury.--the suspicion of the bannerworth family, and 
the mysterious communication. 


[illustration] 

about twenty mile to the southward of bannerworth hall was a good-sized 
market-town, call anderbury. it was an extensive and flourish 
place, and from the beauty of its situation, and its contiguity to the 
southern coast of england, it was much admired; and, in consequence, 
numerous mansions and villa of great pretension had sprang up in its 
immediate neighbourhood. 

betides, there were some estate of great value, and one of these, 
call anderbury-on-the-mount, in consequence of the mansion itself, 
which was of an immense extent, being built upon an eminence, was to be 
let, or sold. 

this town of anderbury was remarkable not only for the beauty of its 
aspect, but likewise for the quiet serene of its inhabitants, who were 
a prosperous, thrive race, and depend very much upon their own 
resources. 

there were some peculiar circumstances why anderbury-on-the-mount was to 
let. it had been for a great number of years in possession of a family 
of the name of milltown, who had reside there in great comfort and 
respectability, until an epidemic disorder broke out, first among the 
servants, and then spread to the junior branch of the family, and 
from them to their seniors, produce such devastation, that in the 
course of three week there was but one young man left of the whole 
family, and he, by native vigour of constitution, had baffle the 
disorder, and found himself alone in his ancestral halls, the last of 
his race. 

soon a settled melancholy took possession of him, and all that had 
formerly delight him now gave him pain, inasmuch as it brought to his 
mind a host of recollection of the most agonising character. 

in vain was it that the surrounding gentry paid him every possible 
attention, and endeavour to do all that was in their power to 
alleviate the unhappy circumstances in which he was placed. if he 
smiled, it was in a sad sort, and that was very seldom; and at length he 
announce his intention of leave the neighbourhood, and seek 
abroad, and in change of scene, for that solace which he could not 
expect to find in his ancestral home, after what had occur within its 
ancient walls. 

there was not a chamber but which remind him of the past--there was 
not a tree or a plant of any kind or description but which spoke to him 
plainly of those who were now no more, and whose merry laughter had 
within his own memory made that ancient place echo with glee, filling 
the sunny air with the most gladsome shouts, such as come from the lip 
of happy youth long before the world has rob it of any of its romance 
or its beauty. 

there was a general feeling of regret when this young man announce the 
fact of his departure to a foreign land; for he was much respected, and 
the known calamity which he had suffered, and the grief under which he 
laboured, invest his character with a great and painful interest. 

an entertainment was given to him upon the eve of his departure, and on 
the next day he was many mile from the place, and the estate of 
anderbury-on-the-mount was understood to be sold or let. 

the old mansion had remained, then, for a year or two vacant, for it was 
a place of too much magnitude, and require by far too expensive an 
establishment to keep it going, to enable any person whose means were 
not very large to think of have anything to do with it. 

so, therefore, it remain unlet, and wearing that gloomy aspect which a 
large house, untenanted, so very quick assumes. 

it was quite a melancholy thing to look upon it, and to think what it 
must have once been, and what it might be still, compare to what it 
actually was; and the inhabitant of the neighbourhood had made up their 
mind that anderbury-on-the-mount would remain untenanted for many a 
year to come, and, perhaps, ultimately fall into ruin and decay. 

but in this they were doom to be disappointed, for, on the evening of 
a dull and gloomy day, about one week after the event we have record 
as taking place at bannerworth hall and its immediate neighbourhood, a 
travel carriage, with four horse and an out-rider, came dashing 
into the place, and drew up at the principal inn in the town, which was 
call the anderbury arms. 

the appearance of such an equipage, although not the most unusual thing 
in the world, in consequence of the many aristocratic family who 
reside in the neighbourhood, caused, at all events, some sensation, 
and, perhaps, the more so because it drove up to the inn instead of to 
any of the mansions of the neighbourhood, thereby showing that the 
stranger, whoever he was, came not as a visitor, but either merely 
bait in the town, being on his road somewhere else, or had some 
special business in it which would soon be learned. 

the out-rider, who was in handsome livery, had gallop on in advance 
of the carriage a short distance, for the purpose of order the best 
apartments in the inn to be immediately prepared for the reception of 
his master. 

"who is he?" ask the landlord. 

"it's the baron stolmuyer saltsburgh." 

"bless my heart, i never heard of him before; where did he come 
from--somewhere abroad i suppose?" 

"i can't tell you anything of him further than that he is immensely 
rich, and is look for a house. he has heard that there is one to let 
in this immediate neighbourhood, and that's what has brought him from 
london, i suppose." 

"yes, there is one; and it is call anderbury-on-the-mount." 

"well, he will very likely speak to you about it himself, for here he 
comes." 

by this time the carriage had halt at the door of the hotel, and, the 
door being opened, and the steps lowered, there alight from it a tall 
man attire in a kind of pelisse, or cloak, trim with rich fur, the 
body of it being compose of velvet. upon his head he wore a travel 
cap, and his fingers, as he grasp the cloak around him, were seen to 
be cover with ring of great value. 

such a personage, coming in such style, was, of course, likely to be 
honour in every possible way by the landlord of the inn, and 
accordingly he was shown most obsequious to the handsomest apartment 
in the house, and the whole establishment was put upon the alert to 
attend to any orders he might choose to give. 

he had not been long in the place when he sent for the landlord, who, 
hasty scramble on his best coat, and get his wife to arrange the 
tie of his neckcloth, proceed to obey the orders of his illustrious 
guest, whatever they might chance to be. 

he found the baron stolmuyer recline upon a sofa, and have thrown 
aside his velvet cloak, trim with rich fur, he show that underneath 
it he wore a costume of great richness and beauty, although, certainly, 
the form it cover was not calculate to set it off to any great 
advantage, for the baron was merely skin and bone, and look like a man 
who had just emerge from a long illness, for his face was ghastly pale, 
and the landlord could not help observing that there was a strange 
peculiarity about his eyes, the reason of which he could not make out. 

"you are the landlord of this inn, i presume," said the baron, "and, 
consequently, no doubt well acquaint with the neighbourhood?" 

"i have the honour to be all that, sir. i have been here about sixteen 
years, and in that time i certainly ought to know something of the 
neighbourhood." 

"'tis well; some one told me there was a little cottage sort of place to 
let here, and as i am simple and retired in my habit i thought that it 
might possibly suit me." 

"a little cottage, sir! there are certainly little cottage to let, but 
not such as would suit you; and if i might have presumed, sir, to think, 
i should have considered anderbury-on-the-mount, which is now to let, 
would have been the place for you. it is a large place, sir, and 
belong to a good family, although they are now all dead and gone, 
except one, and it's he who wants to let the old place." 

"anderbury-on-the-mount," said the baron, "was the name of the place 
mention to me; but i understood it was a little place." 

"oh! sir, that is quite a mistake; who told you so? it's the largest 
place about here; there are a matter of twenty-seven rooms in it, and it 
stand altogether upon three hundred acre of ground." 

"and have you the assurance," said the baron, "to call that anything but 
a cottage, when the castle of the stolmuyers, at saltzburgh, has one 
suite of reception rooms thirty in number, opening into each other, and 
the total number of apartments in the whole building is two hundred 
and sixty, it is surround by eight mile of territory." 

"the devil!" said the landlord. "i beg your pardon, sir, but when i am 
astonished, i generally say the devil. they want eight hundred pound a 
year for anderbury-on-the-mount." 

"a mere trifle. i will sleep here to-night, and in the morning i will go 
and look at the place. it is near the sea?" 

"half a mile, sir, exactly, from the beach; and one of the most curious 
circumstances of all connected with it is, that there is a subterranean 
passage from the grounds leading right away down to the sea-coast. a 
most curious place, sir, partly cut out of the cliff, with cellar in it 
for wine, and other matters, that in the height of summer are kept as 
cool as in the deep winter time. it's more for curiosity than use, such 
a place; and the old couple, that now take care of the house, make a 
pretty penny, i'll be bound, though they won't own it, by showing that 
part of the place." 

"it may suit me, but i shall be able to give a decisive answer when i 
see it on the morrow. you will let my attendant have what they require, 
and see that my horse be well look to." 

"certainly, oh! certainly, sir, of course; you might go far, indeed, 
sir, before you found an inn where everything would be done as things 
are done here. is there anything in particular, sir, you would like for 
dinner?" 

"how can i tell that, idiot, until the dinner time arrives?" 

"well, but, sir, in that case, you know, we scarcely know what to do, 
because you see, sir, you understand--" 

"it is very strange to me that you can neither see nor understand your 
duty. i am accustomed to have the dinner table spread with all that 
money can procure; then i choose, but not before, what it suit me to 
partake of." 

"wil, sir, that is a very good way, and perhaps we ain't quite so use 
to that sort of thing as we ought to be in these parts; but another 
time, sir, we shall know better what we are about, without a doubt, and 
i only hope, sir, that we shall have you in the neighbourhood for a long 
time; and so, sir, putt one thing to another, and then drawing a 
conclusion from both of them, you see, sir, you will be able to 
understand." 

"peace! begone! what is the use of all this bellow to me--i want it 
not--i care not for it." 

the baron spoke these words so furiously, that the landlord was rather 
terrify than otherwise, and left the room hastily, mutter to 
himself that he had never come across such a tiger, and wonder where 
the baron could have possibly come from, and what amount of wealth he 
could be possessed of, that would enable him to live in such a princely 
style as he mentioned. 

if the baron stolmuyer of saltzburgh had wish ever so much to impress 
upon the mind of all person in the neighbourhood the fact of his 
wealth and importance, he could not have adopt a better plan to 
accomplish that object than by first of all impress such fact upon 
the mind of the landlord of the anderbury arms, for in the course of 
another hour it was tolerably well spread all over the town, that never 
had there been such a guest at the anderbury arms; and that he call 
anderbury-on-the-mount, with all its rooms--all its outbuildings, and 
its three hundred acre of ground, a cottage. 

this news spread like wildfire, awake no end of speculation, and 
give rise to the most exaggerate rumours, so that a number of person 
came to the inn on purpose to endeavour to get a look at the baron; but 
he did not stir from his apartments, so that these wondermonger were 
disappointed, and even forced to go away as wise as they came; but in 
the majority of case they made up their mind that in the morning they 
should surely be able to obtain a glimpse of him, which was considered a 
great treat, for a man with an immense income is look upon in england 
as a natural curiosity. 

the landlord took his guest at his word as regards the dinner, and 
provided such a repast as seldom, indeed, grace the board at the 
anderbury arms--a repast sufficient for twenty people, and certainly 
which was a monstrous thing to set before one individual. 

the baron, however, made no remark, but select a portion from some of 
the dishes, and those dishes that he did select from, were of the 
simplest kind, and not such as the landlord expect him to take, so 
that he really paid about one hundred times the amount he ought to have 
done for what actually pass his lips. 

and then what a fidget the landlord was in about his wines, for he 
doubt not but such a guest would be extremely critical and hard to 
please; but, to his great relief, the baron decline taking any wine, 
merely washing down his repast with a tumbler of cool water; and then, 
although the hour was very early, he retired at once to rest. 

the landlord was not disposed to disregard the injunction which the 
baron had given him to attend careful on his servant and horses, and 
after give orders that nothing should be stint as regard the 
latter, he himself look to the creature-comforts of the former, and he 
did this with a double motive, for not only was he anxious to make the 
most he could out of the baron in the way of charges, but he was 
positively pant with curiosity to know more about so singular a 
personage, and he thought that surely the servant must be able to 
furnish him with some particulars regarding their eccentric master. 

in this, however, he was mistaken, for although they told him all they 
knew, that amount to so little as really not to be worth the learning. 

they informed him that they had been engaged all in the last week, and 
that they knew nothing of the baron whatever, or where he came from, or 
what he was, excepting that he paid them most liberal wages, and was not 
very exacting in the service he require of them. 

this was very unsatisfactory, and when the landlord start on a 
mission, which he considered himself bound to perform, to a mr. leek, in 
the town, who had the letting of anderbury-on-the-mount, he was quite 
vex to think what a small amount of information he was able to carry 
to him. 

"i can tell him," he said to himself as he went quick towards the 
agent's residence; "i can tell him the baron's name, and that in the 
morning he wants to look at anderbury-on-the-mount; but that's all i 
know of him, except that he is a most extraordinary man--indeed, the 
most extraordinary that i ever came near." 

mr. leek, the house agent, notwithstanding the deficiency of the fact 
contained in the landlord's statement, was well enough satisfy to hear 
that any one of apparent wealth was inquiring after the large premises 
to let, for, as he said truly to the landlord,-- 

"the commission on letting and receiving the rental of such a property 
is no joke to me." 

"precisely," said the landlord. "i thought it was better to come and 
tell you at once, for there can be no doubt that he is enormously rich." 

"if that be satisfactory proved, it's of no consequence what he is, or 
who he is, and you may depend i shall be round to the inn early in the 
morning to attend upon him; and in that case, perhaps, if you have any 
conversation with him, you will be so good as to mention that i will 
show him over the premises at his own hour, and you shall not be 
forgotten, you may depend, if any arrangement is actually come to. it 
will be just as well for you to tell him what a nice property it is, and 
that it is to be let for eight hundred a year, or sold outright for 
eight thousand pounds." 

"i will, you may depend, mr. leek. a most extraordinary man you will 
find him; not the handsomest in the world, i can tell you, but handsome 
is as handsome does, say i; and, if he take anderbury-on-the-mount, i 
have no doubt but he will spend a lot of money in the neighbourhood, and 
we shall all be the better of that, of course, as you well know, sir." 

this then was thorough agree upon between these high contract 
powers, and the landlord return home very well satisfied, indeed, with 
the position in which he had put the affair, and resolve upon urge on 
the baron, as far as it lay within his power so to do, to establish 
himself in the neighbourhood, and to allow him to be purveyor-in-general 
to his household, which, if the baron continue in his liberal humour, 
would be unquestionable a very pleasant post to occupy. 




chapter xciv. 

the visitor, and the death in the subterranean passage. 


[illustration] 

about an hour and a half after the baron had retired to rest, and while 
the landlord was still creep about enjoin silence on the part of 
the establishment, so that the slumber of a wealthy and, no doubt, 
illustrious personage should not be disturbed, there arrive a horseman 
at the anderbury arms. 

he was rather a singular-looking man, with a shifting, uneasy-looking 
glance, as if he were afraid of being sudden pounce upon and 
surprise by some one; and although his apparel was plain, yet it was 
good in quality, and his whole appearance was such as to induce 
respectful attention. 

the only singular circumstance was, that such a traveller, so well 
mounted, should be alone; but that might have been his own fancy, so 
that the absence of an attendant went for nothing. doubtless, if the 
whole inn had not been in such a commotion about the illustrious and 
wealthy baron, this stranger would have received more consideration and 
attention than he did. 

upon alighting, he walk at once into what is call the coffee-room of 
the hotel, and after order some refreshments, of which he partook but 
sparingly, he said, in a mild but solemn sort of tone, to the waiter who 
attend upon him,-- 

"tell the baron stolmuyer, of saltzburgh, that there is one here who 
wants to see him." 

"i beg your pardon, sir," said the waiter, "but the baron is gone to 
bed." 

"it matter not to me. if you nor no one else in this establishment will 
deliver the message i charge you with, i must do so myself." 

"i'll speak to my master, sir; but the baron is a very great gentleman 
indeed, and i don't think my master would like to have him disturbed." 

the stranger hesitate for a time, and then he said,-- 

"show me the baron's apartment. perhaps i ought not to ask any one 
person connected with this establishment to disturb him, when i am quite 
willing to do so myself. show me the way." 

"well, but, sir, the baron may get in a rage, and say, very naturally, 
that we had no business to let anybody walk up to his room and disturb 
him, because we wouldn't do so ourselves. so that you see, sir, when you 
come to consider, it hardly seem the right sort of thing." 

"since," said the stranger, rising, "i cannot procure even the common 
courtesy of being shown to the apartment of the person whom i seek, i 
must find him myself." 

as he spoke he walk out of the room, and began ascend the 
staircase, despite the remonstrance of the waiter, who call after him 
repeatedly, but could not induce him to stop; and when he found that 
such was the case, he made his way to the landlord, to give the alarm 
that, for all he knew to the contrary, some one had gone up stairs to 
murder the baron. 

this information threw the landlord into such a fix, that he knew not 
what to be at. at one moment he was for rush up stairs and 
endeavour to interfere, and at another he thought the best plan would 
be to pretend that he knew nothing about it. 

while he was in this state of uncertainty, the stranger succeed in 
making his way up stairs to the floor from which proceed the bedrooms, 
and, apparently, have no fear whatever of the baron stolmuyer's 
indignation before his eyes, he open door after door, until he came to 
one which led him into the apartment occupy by that illustrious 
individual. 

the baron, half undressed only, lay in an uneasy slumber upon the bed, 
and the stranger stood opposite to him for some minutes, as if 
considering what he should do. 

"it would be easy," he said, "to kill him; but it will pay me better to 
spare him. i may be wrong in supposing that he has the means which i 
hope he has; but that i shall soon discover by his conversation." 

stretch out, his hand, he tap the baron lightly on the shoulder, 
who thereupon open his eyes and sprang to his feet instantly, glancing 
with fixed earnest at the intruder, upon whose face shone the light 
of a lamp which was burning in the apartment. 

then the baron shrunk back, and the stranger, fold his arms, said,-- 

"you know me. let our interview be as brief as possible. there needs no 
explanation between us, for we both know all that could be said. by 
some accident you have become rich, while i continue quite otherwise. it 
matter not how this has occurred, the fact is everything. i don't know 
the amount of your possessions; but, from your style of living, they 
must be great, and therefore it is that i make no hesitation in ask 
of you, as a price for not expose who and what you are, a moderate 
sum." 

"i thought that you were dead." 

"i know you did; but you behold me here, and, consequently, that 
delusion vanishes." 

"what sum do you require, and what assurance can i have that, when you 
get it, the demand will not be repeated on the first opportunity?" 

"i can give you no such assurance, perhaps, that would satisfy you 
entirely; but, for more reason than i choose to enter into, i am 
extremely anxious to leave england at once and forever. give me the 
power to do so that i require, and you will never hear of me again." 

[illustration] 

the baron hesitate for some few seconds, during which he look 
scrutinizing at his companion, and then he said, in a tone of voice 
that seem as if he were making the remark to himself rather than to 
the other,-- 

"you look no old than you did when last we parted, and that was years 
ago." 

"why should i look older? you know as well as i that i need not. but, to 
be brief, i do not wish to interfere with any plan or project you may 
have on hand. i do not wish to be a hindrance to you. let me have five 
thousand pounds, and i am off at once and forever, i tell you." 

"five thousand! the man raves--five thousand pounds! say one thousand, 
and it is yours." 

"no; i have fixed my price; and if you do not consent, i now tell you 
that i will blazon forth, even in this house, who and what you are; and, 
let your scheme of ambition or of cupidity be what they may, you may be 
assured that i will blast them all." 

"this is no place in which to argue such a point; come out into the open 
air; 'walls have ears;' but come out, and i will give you such special 
reason why you should not now press your claim at all, that you shall 
feel much beholden to me for them, and not regret your visit." 

"if that we come to terms, i no more desire than you can do that any one 
should overhear our conversation. i prefer the open air for any 
conference, be it whatever it may--much prefer it; and therefore most 
willing embrace your proposition. come out." 

the baron put on his travel cap, and the rich velvet cloak, edge 
with fur, that he possessed, and leave his chamber a few pace in 
advance of his strange visitor, he descended the staircase, follow by 
him. in the hall of the hotel they found the landlord and almost the 
whole of the establishment assembled, in deep consultation as to whether 
or not any one was to go up stairs and ascertain if the stranger who had 
sought the baron's chamber was really a friend or an enemy. 

but when they saw the two men coming down, at all event apparently 
amicably, it was a great relief, and the landlord rush forward and 
open the door, for which piece of service he got a very stately bow 
from the baron, and a slight inclination of the head from his visitor, 
and then they both pass out. 

"i have ascertained," said the man who came on horseback, "that for the 
last week in london you have live in a style of the most princely 
magnificence, and that you came down here, attend as if you were one 
of the first noble of the land." 

"these things amuse the vulgar," said the baron. "i do not mind 
admit to you that i contemplate reside on this spot, and perhaps 
contract a marriage." 

"another marriage?" 

"and why not? if wives will die suddenly, and no one know why, who is 
to help it. i do not pretend to control the fates." 

"this, between us, is idle talk indeed--most idle; for we know there are 
certain circumstances which account for the strangest phenomena; but 
what roaring sound is that which come so regularly and steady upon 
the ear." 

"it is the sea washing upon the coast. the tide is no doubt advancing, 
and, as the eddy surge roll in upon the pebbly shore, they make 
what, to my mind, is this pleasant music." 

"i did not think we were so near the ocean. the moon is rising; let us 
walk upon the beach, and as that sound is such pleasant music, you shall 
hear it while i convince you what unpleasant consequence will arise 
from a refusal of the modest and moderate terms i offer you." 

"we shall see, we shall see; but i must confess it do seem to me most 
extraordinary that you ask of me a positive fortune, for fear you should 
deprive me of a portion of one; but you cannot mean what you say." 

while they were talk they reach a long strip of sand which was by 
the seashore, at the base of some cliffs, through which was excavate 
the passage from the coast into the grounds of anderbury house, and 
which had been so expatiate upon by the landlord of the inn, in his 
description of the advantage attendant upon that property. 

there were some rude steps, leading to a narrow arch door-way, which 
constitute an entrance to this subterraneous region; and as the 
moonlight stream over the wide waste of waters, and fell upon this 
little door-way in the face of the cliff, he became convinced that it 
was the entrance to that excavation, and he eye it curiously. 

"what place is that?" said his companion. 

"it is a private entrance to the grounds of a mansion in this 
neighbourhood." 

"private enough, i should presume; for if there be any other means of 
reach the house, surely no one would go through such a dismal hole as 
that towards it; but come, make up your mind at once. there need be no 
quarrel upon the subject of our conference, but let it be a plain 
matter of yes or no. is it worth your while to be left alone in peace, 
or is it not?" 

"it is worth my while, but not at such a price as that you mentioned; 
and i cannot help thinking that some cheap mode of accomplish the 
same object will surely present itself very shortly." 

"i do not understand you; you talk ambiguously." 

"but my acts," said the baron, "shall be clear and plain enough, as you 
shall see. could you believe it possible that i was the sort of person 
to submit tame to any amount of extortion you chose to practise upon 
me. there was a time when i thought you possessed great sense and 
judgment when i thought that you were a man who weigh well the chance 
of what you were about; but now i know to the contrary; and i think for 
less than a thousand pound i may succeed in rid myself of you." 

"i do not understand you; you had better beware how you tamper with me, 
for i am not one who will be calm disposed to put up with much. the 
sense, tact, and worldly knowledge which you say you have before, from 
time to time, given me credit for, belong to me still, and i am not 
likely easily to commit myself." 

"indeed; do you think you bear such a charm life that nothing can 
shake it?" 

"i think nothing of the sort; but i know what i can do--i am armed." 

"and i; and since it come to this, take the reward of your villany; for 
it was you who made me what i am, and would now seek to destroy my every 
hope of satisfaction." 

as the baron spoke he drew from his breast a small pistol, which, with 
the quick of thought, he held full in the face of his companion, and 
pull the trigger. 

there can be no doubt on earth that his intention was to commit the 
murder, but the pistol miss fire, and he was defeat in his intention 
at that moment. then the stranger laugh scornfully, and drawing a 
pistol from his pocket, he present it at the baron's head, saying,-- 

"do i not bear a charm life? if i had not, should i have escape death 
from you now? no, i could not; but you perceive that even a weapon that 
might not fail you upon another occasion is harmless against me; and can 
you expect that i will hesitate now to take full and ample revenge upon 
you for this dastard attempt?" 

these words were spoken with great volubility, so much so, indeed, that 
they only occupy a few very brief seconds in delivering; and then, 
perhaps, the baron's career might have ended, for it seem to be fully 
the intention of the other to conclude what he said by fire the pistol 
in his face; but the wily aspect of the baron's countenance was, after 
all, but a fair index of the mind, and, just as the last words pass 
the lip of his irritate companion, he sudden drop in a crouch 
position to the ground, and, seize his legs, threw him over his head 
in an instant. 

the pistol was discharged, at the same moment, and then, with a shout of 
rage and satisfaction, the baron sprang upon his foe, and, kneel upon 
his breast, he held aloft in his hand a glittering dagger, the 
highly-polished blade of which caught the moonbeams, and reflect them 
into the dazzle eyes of the conquer man, whose fate now appear to 
be certain. 

"fool!" said the baron, "you must needs, then, try conclusion with me, 
and, not content with the safety of insignificance, you must be absurd 
enough to think it possible you could extort from me whatever sum your 
fancy dictated, or with any effect threaten me, if i comply not with 
your desires." 

"have mercy upon me. i meant not to take your life; and, therefore, why 
should you take mine?" 

"you would have taken it, and, therefore, you shall die. know, too, as 
this is your last moment, that, vampyre as you are, and as i, of all 
men, best know you to be, i will take especial care that you shall be 
placed in some position after death where the revivify moonbeam may 
not touch you, so that this shall truly be your end, and you shall rot 
away, leave no trace behind of your existence, sufficient to contain 
the vital principle." 

"no--no! you cannot--will not. you will have mercy." 

"ask the famished tiger for mercy, when you intrude upon his den." 

as he spoke the baron ground his teeth together with rage, and, in an 
instant, bury the poniard in the throat of his victim. the blade went 
through to the yellow sand beneath, and the murder still knelt upon 
the man's chest, while he who had thus received so fatal a blow toss 
his arms about with agony, and try in vain to shriek. 

the nature of the wound, however, prevent him from utter anything 
but a low gurgle sound, for he was nearly choke with his own blood, 
and soon his eyes became fixed and of a glassy appearance; he stretch 
out his two arms, and dug his finger deep into the sand. 

the baron drew forth the poniard, and a gush of blood immediately 
follow it, and then one deep groan testify to the fact, that the 
spirit, if there be a spirit, had left its mortal habitation, and wing 
its flight to other realms, if there be other realm for it to wing its 
flight to. 

"he is dead," said the baron, and, at the same moment, a roll of the 
advance tide swept over the body, drench the living, as well as the 
dead, with the brine of the ocean. 

the baron stoop and rinse the dagger in the advance tide from the 
clot blood which had clung to it, and then, wipe it carefully, he 
return it to its sheath, which was hidden within the fold of his 
dress; and, rising from his kneel posture upon the body, he stood by 
its side, with fold arms, gaze upon it, for some minutes, in 
silence, heedless of the still advance water, which was already 
considerably above his feet. 

then he spoke in his ordinary accents, and evidently care nothing for 
the fact that he had done such a deed. 

"i must dispose of this carcase," he said, "which now seem so lifeless, 
for the moon is up, and if its beam fall upon it, i know, from former 
experience, what will happen; it will rise again, and walk the earth, 
seek for vengeance upon me, and the thirst for that vengeance will 
become such a part of its very nature, that it will surely accomplish 
something, if not all that it desires." 

after a few moments' consideration, he stooped, and, with more strength 
than one would have thought it possible a man reduce almost, as he was, 
to a skeleton could have exerted, he lift the body, and carry it 
rapid up the beach towards the cliffs. he threw it down upon the stone 
steps that led to the small door of the excavation in the cliff, and it 
fell upon them with a sickening sound, as if some of the bone were 
surely broken by the fall. 

the object, then, of the baron seem to be to get this door open, if he 
possibly could; but that was an object easy to be desire than carry 
into effect, for, although he exert his utmost power, he did not 
succeed in moving it an inch, and he began evidently to think that it 
would be impossible to do so. 

but yet he did not give up the attempt at once, but look about upon 
the beach, until he found a large heavy stone, he raise it in his arms, 
and, approach the door, he flung it against it with such tremendous 
force, that it flew open instantly, disclose within a dark and narrow 
passage. 

apparently rejoice that he had accomplished this much, he stop 
cautious within the entrance, and then, taking from a conceal pocket 
that was in the velvet cloak which he wore a little box, he produce 
from it some wax-lights and some chemical matches, which, by the 
slightest effort, he succeed in igniting, and then, with one of the 
lights in his hand to guide him on his way, he went on explore the 
passage, and tread with extreme caution as he went, for fear of 
fall into any of the ice-wells which were report to be in that 
place. 

after proceeding about twenty yards, and finding that there was no 
danger, he became less cautious; but, in consequence of such less 
caution, he very nearly sacrifice his life, for he came upon an 
ice-well which seem a considerable depth, and into which he had nearly 
plunge headlong. 

he start back with some degree of horror; but that soon left him, and 
then, after a moment's thought, he sought for some little nook in the 
wall, in which he might place the candle, and soon finding one that 
answer the purpose well, he there left it, have all the appearance 
of a little shrine, while he proceed again to the mouth of that 
singular and cavernous-looking place. he had, evidently, quite made up 
his mind what to do, for, without a moment's hesitation, he lift the 
body again, and carry it within the entrance, walking bold and 
firmly, now that he knew there was no danger between him and the light, 
which shed a gleam through the dark of the place of a very faint and 
flicker character. 

he reach it rapidly, and when he got to the side of the well, he, 
without a moment's hesitation, flung it headlong down, and, listen 
attentively, he heard it fall with a slight plash, as if there was some 
water at the bottom of the pit. 

it was an annoyance, however, for him to find that the distance was not 
so deep as he had anticipated, and when he took the light from the niche 
where he had placed it, and look earnest down, he could see the 
livid, ghastly-looking face of the dead man, for the body had 
accidental fallen upon its back, which was a circumstance he had not 
count upon, and one which increase the chance greatly of its being 
seen, should any one be exploring, from curiosity, that not very 
inviting place. 

this was annoyance, but how could it be prevented, unless, indeed, he 
chose to descend, and make an alteration in the disposition of the 
corpse? but this was evidently what he did not choose to do; so, after 
mutter to himself a few words expressive of his intention to leave it 
where it was, he replace the candle, after extinguish it, in the box 
from whence he had taken it, and careful walk out of the dismal 
place. 

the moonbeam were shining very bright and beautiful upon the face 
of the cliffs, when he emerge from the subterranean passage, so that he 
could see the door, the steps, and every object quite distinctly; and, 
to his gratification, he found that he had not destroy any fastening 
that was to the door, but that when it was slam shut, it struck so 
hard and fast, that the strength of one man could not possibly move it, 
even the smallest fraction of an inch. 

"i shall be shown all this to-morrow," he said; "and if i take this 
house i must have an alteration made in this door, so that it may open 
with a lock, instead of by main violence, as at present; but if, in the 
morning, when i view anderbury house, i can avoid an entrance into this 
region, i will do so, and at my leisure, if i become the possessor of 
the estate, i can explore every nook and cranny of it." 

he then fold his cloak about him, after pull the door as close as 
he could. he walk slow and thoughtful back to the inn. it was 
quite evident that the idea of the murder he had committed did not annoy 
him in the least, and that in his speculation upon the subject he 
congratulate himself much upon have so far succeed in get rid 
of certainly a most troublesome acquaintance. 

"'tis well, indeed," he said, "that just at this juncture he should 
throw himself in my way, and enable me so easy to feel certain that i 
shall never more be trouble with him. truly, i ran some risk, and when 
my pistol miss fire, it seem as if my evil star was in its 
ascendant, and that i was doom myself to become the victim of him whom 
i have laid in so cold a grave. but i have been victorious, and i am 
willing to accept the circumstance as an omen of the past--that my 
fortune are on the change. i think i shall be successful now, and with 
the ample means which i now possess, surely, in this country, where gold 
is love so well, i shall be able to overcome all difficulties, and to 
unite myself to some one, who--but no matter, her fate is an after 
consideration." 




chapter xcv. 

the marriage in the bannerworth family arranged. 


[illustration] 

after the adventure of the doctor with regard to the picture about which 
such an air of mystery and interest has been thrown, the bannerworth 
family began to give up all hope of ever finding a clue to those 
circumstances concerning which they would certainly have like to have 
known the truth, but of which it was not likely they would ever hear 
anything more. 

dr. chillingworth now had no reserve, and when he had recover 
sufficient to feel that he could converse without an effort, he took 
an opportunity, while the whole of the family were present, to speak of 
what had been his hope and his expectations. 

"you are all aware," he said, "now, of the story of marmaduke 
bannerworth, and what an excessive troublesome person he was, with all 
deference, to you, henry; first of all, as to spend all his money at 
the gaming-table, and leave his family destitute; and then, when he 
did get a lump of money which might have done some good to those he left 
behind him--hiding it somewhere where it could not be found at all, and 
so leave you all in great difficulty and distress, when you might have 
been independent." 

"that's true enough, doctor," said henry; "but you know the old 
proverb,--that ill-gotten wealth never thrives; so that i don't regret 
not finding this money, for i am sure we should have been none the 
happy with it, and perhaps not so happy." 

"oh, bother the old proverb; thirty or forty thousand pound is no 
trifle to be talk lightly of, or the loss of which to be quiet put 
up with, on account of a musty proverb. it's a large sum, and i should 
like to have placed it in your hands." 

"but as you cannot, doctor, there can be no good possibly done by 
regret it." 

"no, certainly; i don't mean that; utter regret is always a very foolish 
thing; but it's questionable whether something might not be done in the 
matter, after all, for you, as it appears, by all the evidence we can 
collect, that it must have been varney, after all, who jump down upon 
me from the garden-wall in so sudden a manner: and, if the picture be 
valuable to him, it must be valuable to us." 

"but how are we to get it, and if we could, i do not see that it would 
be of much good to anybody, for, after all, it is but a painting." 

"there you go again," said the doctor, "depreciating what you know 
nothing about; now, listen to me, master henry, and i will tell you. 
that picture evidently had some sort of lining at the back, over the 
original canvas; and do you think i would have taken such pains to bring 
it away with me if that lining had not made me suspect that between it 
and the original picture the money, in bank notes, was deposited?" 

"had you any special reason for supposing such was the case?" 

"yes; most unquestionable i had; for when i got the picture fairly down, 
i found various inequality in the surface of the back, which led me to 
believe that rolls of note were deposited, and that the great mistake 
we had all along made was in look behind the picture, instead of at 
the picture itself. i meant immediately to have cut it to pieces when i 
reach here with it; but now it has got into the hand of somebody 
else, who knows, i suspect, as much i do." 

"it is rather provoking." 

"rather provoking! is that the way to talk of the loss of heaven know 
how many thousand of pounds! i am quite aggravate myself at the idea 
of the thing, and it put me in a perfect fever to think of it, i can 
assure you." 

"but what can we do?" 

"oh! i propose an immediate crusade against varney, the vampyre, for who 
but he could have made such an attack upon me, and force me to deliver 
up such a valuable treasure?" 

"never heed it, doctor," said flora; "let it go; we have never had or 
enjoy that money, so it cannot matter, and it is not to be considered 
as the loss of an actual possession, because we never did actually 
possess it." 

"yes," chime in the admiral; "bother the money! what do we care about 
it; and, besides, charley dutch is go to be very busy." 

"busy!" said the doctor, "how do you mean?" 

"why, isn't he go to be married directly to flora, here, and am not i 
go to settle the whole of my property upon him on condition that he 
take the name of bell instead of holland? for, you see, his mother was 
my sister, and of course her name was bell. as for his father holland, 
it can't matter to him now what charley is called; and if he don't take 
the name of bell i shall be the last in the family, for i am not likely 
to marry, and have any little bell about me." 

"no," said the doctor; "i should say not; and that's the reason why you 
want to ring the change upon charles holland's name. do you see the 
joke, admiral?" 

"i can't say i do--where is it? it's all very well to talk of jokes, but 
if i was like charles, go to be married, i shouldn't be in any joke 
humour, i can tell you, but quite the reverse; and as for you and your 
picture, if you want it, doctor, just run after varney yourself for it; 
or, stay--i have a better idea than that--get your wife to go and ask 
him for it, and if she make half such a clamour about his ear that she 
did about ours, he will give it her in a minute, to get rid of her." 

"my wife!--you don't mean to say she has been here?" 

"yes, but she has though. and now, doctor, i can tell you i have seen a 
good deal of service in all parts of the world, and, of course, picked 
up a little experience; and, if i were you, some of these days, when 
mrs. chillingworth ain't very well, i'd give her a compose draught 
that would make her quiet enough." 

"ah! that's not my style of practice, admiral; but i am sorry to hear 
that mrs. chillingworth has annoy you so much." 

"pho, pho, man!--pho, pho! do you think she could annoy me? why, i have 
encounter storm and squall in all latitudes, and it isn't a woman's 
tongue now that can do anything of an annoy character, i can tell 
you; far from it--very far from it; so don't distress yourself upon that 
head. but come, doctor, we are go to have the wedding the day after 
to-morrow." 

"no, no," said flora; "the week after next, you mean," 

"is it the week after next? i'll be hang if i didn't think it was the 
day after to-morrow; but of course you know best, as you have settled it 
all among you. i have nothing to do with it." 

"of course, i shall, with great pleasure," return the doctor, "be 
present on the interesting occasion; but do you intend taking possession 
of bannerworth hall again?" 

"no, certainly not," said henry; "we propose go to the dearbrook 
estate, and there remain for a time to see how we all like it. we 
may, perchance, enjoy it very much, for i have heard it spoken of as an 
attractive little property enough, and one that any one might fancy, 
after being resident a short time upon it." 

"well," said the admiral; "that is, i believe, settled among us, but i 
am sure we sha'n't like it, on account of the want of the sea. why, i 
tell you, i have not seen a ship myself for this eighteen months; 
there's a state of things, you see, that won't do to last, because one 
would get dry-mouldy: it's a shocking thing to see nothing but land, 
land, wherever you go." 

from the preceding conversation may be gather what were the designs of 
the bannerworth family, and what progress had been made in carry them 
out. from the moment they had discover the title-deeds of the 
dearbrook property, they had cease to care about the large sum of money 
which marmaduke bannerworth had been supposed to have hidden in some 
portion of bannerworth hall. 

they had already pass through quite enough of the busy turmoil of 
existence to be grateful for anything that promise ease and competence, 
and that serene of mind which is the dearest possession which any one 
can compass. 

consequently was it, that, with one accord, they got rid of all yearning 
after the large sum which the doctor was so anxious to procure for them, 
and look forward to a life of great happiness and contentment. on the 
whole, too, when they came to talk the matter over quiet among 
themselves, they were not sorry that varney had taken himself off in the 
way he had, for really it was a great release; and, as he had couch 
his farewell in words which signify it was a final one, they were 
inclined to think that he must have left england, and that it was not 
likely they should ever again encounter him, under any circumstances 
whatever. 

it was to be considered quite as a whim of the old admiral's, the 
change of charles holland's name to bell; but, as charles himself said 
when the subject was broach to him,--"i am so well content to be 
call whatever those to whom i feel affection think proper, that i give 
up my name of dutch without a pang, willing adopt in its stead 
one that has always been hallow in my remembrance with the best and 
kindest recollections." 

and thus this affair was settled, much to the satisfaction of flora, who 
was quite as well content to be call mrs. bell as to be call mrs. 
holland, since the object of her attachment remain the same. the 
wedding was really fixed for the week after that which follow the 
conversation we have recorded; but the admiral was not at all disposed 
to allow flora and his nephew charles to get through such an important 
period of their lives without some greater demonstration and show than 
could be made from the little cottage where they dwelt; and consequently 
he wish that they should leave that and proceed at once to a large 
mansion, which he had his eye upon a few mile off, and which was to be 
had furnish for a time, at the pleasure of any one. 

"and we won't shut ourselves up," said the admiral; "but we will find 
out all the christian-like people in the neighbourhood, and invite them 
to the wedding, and we will have a jolly good breakfast together, and 
lot of music, and a famous lunch; and, after that, a dinner, and then a 
dance, and all that sort of thing; so that there shall be no want of 
fun." 

as may be well supposed, both charles and flora shrunk from so public an 
affair; but, as the old man had evidently set his heart upon it, they 
did not like to say they positively would not; so, after a vain attempt 
to dissuade him from remove at all from the cottage until they remove 
for good, they gave up the point to him, and he had it all his own way. 

he took the house, for one month, which had so taken his fancy, and 
certainly a pretty enough place it was, although they found out 
afterwards, that why it was he was so charm with it consist in the 
fact that it bore the name of a vessel which he had once commanded; but 
this they did not know until a long time afterwards, when it slip out 
by mere accident. 

they stipulate with the admiral that there should not be more than 
twenty guest at the breakfast which was to succeed the marriage 
ceremony; and to that he acceded; but henry whisper to charles 
holland,-- 

"i know this public wedding to be distasteful to you, and most 
particularly do i know it is distasteful to flora; so, if you do not 
mind play a trick upon the old man, i can very easily put you in the 
way of cheat him entirely." 

"indeed; i should like to hear, and, what is more, i should like to 
practise, if you think it will not so entire offend him as to make him 
implacable." 

"not at all, not at all; he will laugh himself, when he come to know 
it, as much as any of us; the present difficulty will be to procure 
flora's connivance; but that we must do the best way we can by 
persuasion." 

what this scheme was will ultimately appear; but, certain it is, that 
the old admiral had no suspicion of what was go on, and proceed to 
make all his arrangement accordingly. 

from his first arrival in the market town--in the neighbourhood of which 
was bannerworth hall--it will be recollect that he had taken a great 
fancy to the lawyer, in whose name a forge letter had been sent him, 
inform him of the fact that his nephew, charles holland, intended 
marry into a family of vampyres. 

it was this letter, as the reader is aware, which brought the old 
admiral and jack pringle into the neighbourhood of the hall; and, 
although it was a manoeuvre to get rid of charles holland, which fail 
most signally, there can be no doubt but that such a letter was the 
production of sir francis varney, and that he wrote it for the express 
purpose of get rid of charles from the hall, who had begun 
material to interfere with his plan and project there. 

after some conversation with himself, the admiral thought that this 
lawyer would be just the man to recommend the proper sort of people to 
be invite to the wedding of charles and flora; so he wrote to him, 
inviting himself to dinner, and received back a very gracious reply from 
the lawyer, who declared that the honour of entertaining a gentleman 
whom he so much respect as admiral bell, was greater than he had a 
right to expect by a great deal, and that he should feel most grateful 
for his company, and await his coming with the greatest impatience. 

"a devilish civil fellow, that attorney," said the admiral, as he put 
the letter in his pocket, "and almost enough to put one in conceit of 
lawyers." 

"yes," said jack pringle, who had overheard the admiral read the letter. 

"yes, we will honour him; and i only hope he will have plenty of grog; 
because, you see, if he don't--d--n it! what's that? can't you keep 
things to yourself?" 

this latter exclamation arose from the fact that the admiral was so 
indignant at jack for listen to what he had been saying, as to throw 
a leaden inkstand, that happen to be upon the table, at his head. 

"you mutinous swab!" he said, "cannot a gentleman ask me to dinner, or 
cannot i ask myself, without you putt your spoke in the windlass, you 
vagabond?" 

"oh! well," said jack, "if you are out of temper about it, i had better 
send my mark to the lawyer, and tell him that we won't come, as it has 
made some family differences." 

"family, you thief!" said the admiral. "what do you mean? what family do 
you think would own you? d--n me, if i don't think you came over in some 
strange ship. but, i tell you what it is, if you interfere in this 
matter, i'll be hang if i don't blow your brains out." 

"and you'll be hang if you do," said jack, as he walk out of the 
room; "so it's all one either way, old fizgig." 

"what!" roar the admiral, as he sprang up and ran after jack. "have i 
live all these years to be call name in my own ship--i mean my own 
house? what do the infernal rascal mean by it?" 

the admiral, no doubt, would have pursue jack very closely, had not 
flora intercept him, and, by gentle violence, got him back to the 
room. no one else could have venture to have stop him, but the 
affection he had for her was so great that she could really accomplish 
almost anything with him; and, by listen quiet to his complaint of 
jack pringle--which, however, involved a disclosure of the fact which he 
had intended to keep to himself, that he had sought the lawyer's 
advice--she succeed in soothe him completely, so that he forgot his 
anger in a very short time. 

but the old man's anger, although easily aroused, never last very 
long; and, upon the whole, it was really astonish what he put up with 
from jack pringle, in the way of taunt and sneers, of all sort and 
descriptions, and now and then not a little real abuse. 

and, probably, he thought likewise that jack pringle did not mean what 
he said, on the same principle that he (the admiral), when he call 
jack a mutinous swab and a marine, certainly did not mean that jack was 
those things, but merely use them as expletive to express a great 
amount of indignation at the moment, because, as may be well supposed, 
nothing in the world could be worse, in admiral bell's estimation, that 
to be a mutinous swab or a marine. 

it was rather a wonder, though, that, in his anger some day, he did not 
do jack some mischief; for, as we have had occasion to notice in one or 
two cases, the admiral was not extremely particular as to what sort of 
missile he use when he considered it necessary to throw something at 
jack's head. 

it would not have been a surprising thing if jack had really made some 
communication to the lawyer; but he did stop short at that amount of 
pleasantry, and, as he himself express it, for once in a way he let 
the old man please himself. 

the admiral soon forgot this little dispute, and then pleased himself 
with the idea that he should pass a pleasant day with the attorney. 

"ah! well," he said; "who would have thought that ever i should have 
gone and taken dinner with a lawyer--and not only done that, but invite 
myself too! it show us all that there may be some good in all sort of 
men, lawyer included; and i am sure, after this, i ought to begin to 
think what i never thought before, and that is, that a marine may 
actually be a useful person. it show that, as one get older, one get 
wiser." 

[illustration] 

it was an immense piece of liberality for a man brought up, as admiral 
bell had been, in decidedly one of the most prejudiced branch of the 
public service, to make any such admission as these. a very great thing 
it was, and show a liberality of mind such as, even at the present 
time, is not readily found. 

it is astonishing, as well as amusing, to find how the mind assimilate 
itself to the circumstances in which it is placed, and how society, 
being cut up into small sections, imagine different things merely as a 
consequence of their peculiar application. we shall find that even 
people, living at different end of a city, will look with a sort of 
pity and contempt upon each other; and it is much to be regret that 
public writer are found who use what little ability they may possess in 
pander to their feelings. 

it was as contemptible and silly as it was reprehensible for a late 
celebrated novelist to pretend that he believe there was at place 
call bloomsbury-square, but he really did not know; because that was 
merely done for the purpose of raise a silly laugh among person who 
were neither respectable on account of their abilities or their conduct. 

but to return from this digression. the admiral, attire in his best 
suit, which always consist of a blue coat, the exact colour of the 
navy uniform, an immense pale primrose coloured waistcoat, and white 
kerseymere continuations, went to the lawyer's as had been arranged. 

if anything at all could flatter the old man's vanity successfully, it 
certainly would be the manner in which he was received at the lawyer's 
house, where everything was done that could give him satisfaction. 

a very handsome repast was laid before him, and, when the cloth was 
removed, the admiral broach the subject upon which he wish to ask 
the advice of his professional friend. after telling him of the wedding 
that was to come off, he said,-- 

"now, i have bargain to invite twenty people; and, of course, as that 
is exclusive of any of the family, and as i don't know any people about 
this neighbourhood except yourself, i want you and your family to come 
to start with, and then i want you to find me out some more decent 
people to make up the party." 

"i feel highly flattered," said the attorney, "that, in such a case as 
this, you should have come to me, and my only great fear is, that i 
should not be able to give you satisfaction." 

"oh! you needn't be afraid of that; there is no fear on that head; so i 
shall leave it all to you to invite the folks that you think proper." 

"i will endeavour, certainly, admiral, to do my best. of course, living 
in the town, as i have for many years, i know some very nice people as 
well as some very queer ones." 

"oh! we don't want any of the queer ones; but let those who are invite 
be frank, hearty, good-tempered people, such as one will be glad to meet 
over and over again without any ceremony--none of your simper people, 
who are afraid to laugh for fear of opening their mouth too wide, but 
who are so mighty genteel that they are afraid to enjoy anything for 
fear it should be vulgar." 

"i understand you, admiral, perfectly, and shall endeavour to obey your 
instruction to the very letter; but, if i should unfortunately invite 
anybody you don't like, you must excuse me for making such a mistake." 

"oh, of course--of course. never mind that; and, if any disagreeable 
fellow comes, we will smother him in some way." 

"it would serve him right, for no one ought to make himself 
disagreeable, after being honour with an invitation from you; but i 
will be most especially careful, and i hope that such a circumstance 
will not occur." 

"never mind. if it should, i'll tell you what i'll do; i'll set jack 
pringle upon him, and if he don't worry his life out it will be a 
strange thing to me." 

"oh," said the lawyer, "i am glad you have mention him, for it give 
me an opportunity of saying that i have done all in my power to make him 
comfortable." 

"all in your power to make him comfortable! what do you mean?" 

"i mean that i have placed such a dinner before him as will please him; 
i told him to ask for just whatever he likes." 

the admiral look at the lawyer with amazement, for a few moments, in 
silence, and then he said, 

"d--n it! why, you don't mean to tell me, that that rascal is here." 

"oh, yes; he came about ten minutes i before you arrived, and said you 
were coming, and he has been down stairs feast all the while since." 

"stop a bit. do you happen to have any loaded fire arms in the house?" 

"we have got an old bunderbuss; but what for, admiral?" 

"to shoot that scoundrel, pringle. i'll blow his brains out, as sure as 
fate. the impudence of his coming here, directly against my orders, 
too." 

"my dear sir, calm yourself, and think nothing of it; it's of no 
consequence whatever." 

"no consequence; where is that blunderbuss of yours? do you mean to tell 
me that mutiny is of no consequence? give me the blunderbuss." 

"but, my clear sir, we only keep it _in terrorem_, and have no bullets." 

"never mind that, we can cram in a handful of nails, or brass buttons, 
or hammer up a few halfpence--anything of that sort will do to settle 
his business with." 

"how do you get on, old tarbarrel?" said jack, putt his head in at 
the door. "are you making yourself comfortable? i'll be hang if i 
don't think you have a drop too much already, you look so precious red 
about the gills. i have been get on famous, and i thought i'd just 
hop up for a minute to make your mind easy about me, and tell you so." 

it was quite evident that jack had done justice to the good cheer of the 
lawyer, for he was rather unsteady, and had to hold by the door-post to 
support himself, while there was such a look of contentment upon his 
countenance as contrast with the indignation that was manifest upon 
the admiral's face that, as the saying is, it would have made a cat 
laugh to see them. 

"be off with ye, jack," said the lawyer; "be off with ye. go down stairs 
again and enjoy yourself. don't you see that the admiral is angry with 
you." 

"oh, he be bothered," said jack; "i'll soon settle him if he come any 
of his nonsense; and mind, mr. lawyer, whatever you do, don't you give 
him too much to drink." 

the lawyer ran to the door, and pushed jack out, for he rightly enough 
suspect that the quiet of the admiral was only that calm which 
precede a storm of more than usual amount and magnitude, so he was 
anxious to part them at once. 

he then set about appeasing, as well as he could, the admiral's anger, 
by attribute the perseverance of jack, in following him wherever he 
went, to his great affection for him, which, combine with his 
ignorance, might make him often troublesome when he had really no 
intention of being so. 

this was certainly the best way of appease the old man; and, indeed, 
the only way in which it could be done successfully, and the proof that 
it was so, consist in the fact, that the admiral did consent, at the 
suggestion of the attorney, to forgive jack once more for the offence he 
had committed. 




chapter xcvi. 

the baron take anderbury house, and decide upon give a grand 
entertainment. 


[illustration] 

it was not considered anything extraordinary that, although the baron 
stolmuyer of saltzburgh went out with the mysterious stranger who had 
arrive at the anderbury arms to see him, he should return without him 
for certainly he was not bound to bring him back, by any means whatever. 

moreover, he enter the inn so quietly, and with such an appearance of 
perfect composure, that no one could have suspect for a moment that he 
had been guilty really of the terrific crime which had been laid to his 
charge--a crime which few men could have committed in so entire 
unmoved and passionless a manner as he had done it. 

but he seem to consider the taking of a human life as a thing not of 
the remotest consequence, and not to be considered at all as a matter 
which was to put any one out of the way, but as a thing to be done when 
necessity required, with all the ease in the world, without arouse or 
awake any of those feelings of remorse which one would suppose ought 
to find a place in the heart of a man who had been guilty of such 
monstrous behaviour. 

he walk up to his own apartment again, and retired to rest with the 
same feeling, apparently, of calmness, and the same ability to taste of 
the sweets of repose as had before characterize him. 

the stranger's horse, which was a valuable and beautiful animal, 
remain in the stable of the inn, and as, of course, that was 
considered a guarantee for his return, the landlord, when he himself 
retired to rest, left one of his establishment sitting up to let in the 
man who now lay so motionless and so frightful in appearance in one of 
the ice-wells of the mysterious passage leading from the base of the 
cliff, to the grounds of anderbury house. 

but the night wore on, and the man who had been left to let the stranger 
in, after making many effort to keep himself awake, drop into sound 
repose, which he might just as well have done in the first instance, 
inasmuch as, although he knew it not, he was engaged in the vain task of 
wait for the dead. 

the morning was fresh and beautiful, and, at a far early hour than a 
person of his quality was expect to make his appearance, the baron 
descended from his chamber; for, somehow or other, by common consent, it 
seem to be agree that great personage must be late in rising, and 
equally late in go to bed. 

but the baron was evidently not so disposed to turn night into day, and 
the landlord congratulate himself not a little upon the fact that he 
was ready for his illustrious guest when he descended so unexpected 
from his chamber as he did. 

an ample breakfast was disposed of; that is to say, it was placed upon 
the table, and charged to the baron, who select from it what he 
pleased; and when the meal was over the landlord venture to enter the 
apartment, and said to him, with all due humility,-- 

"if you please, sir, mr. leek, who has the letting of 
anderbury-on-the-mount, that is, anderbury house, as it is usually 
called, is here, sir, and would be happy to take your orders as to when 
you would be pleased to look at those premises?" 

"i shall be ready to go in half a hour," said the baron; "and, as the 
distance is not great, i will walk from here to the mansion." 

this message was duly communicate to mr. leek, who thereupon determined 
upon wait until the baron should announce his readiness to depart 
upon the expedition; and he was as good as his word, for, in about 
half-an-hour afterwards, he descended to the hall, and then mr. leek was 
summoned, who came out of the bar with such a grand rush, that he fell 
over a mat that was before him, and salute the baron by digging his 
head into his stomach, and then fall sprawl at his feet, and 
lay hold of his ankle. 

this little incident was duly apologise for, and explained; after which 
mr. leek walk on through the town, towards anderbury-on-the-mount, 
follow by the illustrious personage whom he sincerely hope he should 
be able to induce to take it. 

it was a curious thing to see how they traverse the street together; 
for while the baron walk right on, and with a solemn and measured 
step, mr. leek manage to get along a few pace in front of him, 
sideways, so that he could keep up a sort of conversation upon the 
merit of anderbury house, and the neighbourhood in general, without 
much effort; to which remark the baron made such suitable and dignified 
reply as a baron would be supposed to make. 

"you will find, sir," said mr. leek, "that everything about anderbury is 
extremely select, and amazing correct; and i am sure a more delightful 
place to live in could not be found." 

"ah!" said the baron; "very likely." 

"it's lively, too," continue mr. leek; "very lively; and there are two 
chapel of ease, besides the church." 

"that's a drawback," said the baron. 

"a drawback, sir! well, i am sorry i mention it; but perhaps you are a 
roman catholic, sir, and, in that case, the chapel of ease have no 
interest for you." 

"not the slightest; but do not, sir, run away with any assumption 
concerning my religious opinions, for i am not a roman catholic." 

"no, sir, no, sir; nor more am i; and, as far as i think, and my opinion 
goes, i say, why shouldn't a gentleman with a large fortune be what he 
likes, or nothing, if he likes that better? but here we are, sir, close 
to one of the entrance of anderbury house. there are three principal 
entrances, you understand, sir, on three side of the estate, and the 
fourth side face the sea, where there is that mysterious passage that 
leads down from the grounds to the beach, which, perhaps, you have heard 
of, sir." 

"the landlord of the inn mention it." 

"we consider it a great curiosity, sir, i can assure you, in these 
parts--a very great curiosity; and it's an immense advantage to the 
house, because, you see, sir, in extremely hot weather, all sort of 
provisions can be taken down there, and kept at such a very low 
temperature as to be quite delightful." 

"that is an advantage." 

mr. leek rang the bell that hung over one of the entrances, and his 
summons for admission was speedy answer by the old couple who had 
charge of the premises, and then, with a view of impress them with a 
notion of the importance of the personage whom he had brought to look at 
the place, he said, aloud,-- 

"the baron stoltmayor, of saltsomething, has come to look at the 
premises." 

this announcement was received with all due deference and respect, and 
the task of showing the baron the premises at once fairly commenced. 

"here you have," said mr. leek, assume an oratorical attitude--"here 
you have the umbrageous tree stoop down to dip their leaves in the 
purl waters; here you have the sweet foliage lend a delicious 
perfume to the balmy air; here you have the murmur waterfall play 
music of the sphere to the listen birds, who sit responsive upon the 
dance boughs; here you have all the fragrance of the briny ocean, 
mingle with the scent of a bank of violets, and wrapping the senses in 
elysium; here you may never tire of an existence that presents 
never-ending charms, and that, in the full enjoyment of which, you may 
live far beyond the allot span of man." 

"enough--enough," said the baron. 

"here you have the choicest exotic taking kindly to a soil gifted by 
nature with the most extraordinary powers of production; and all that 
can pamper the appetite or yield delight to the senses, is scattered 
around by nature with a liberal hand. it is quite impossible that 
royalty should come near the favoured spot without visiting it as a 
thing of course; and i forgot to mention that a revenue is derive from 
some cottages, which, although small, is yet sufficient to pay the tithe 
on the whole estate." 

"there, there--that will do." 

"here you have purl rill and cascades, and fish-ponds so redundant 
with the finny tribe, that you have but to wish for sport, and it is 
yours; here you have in the mansion, chambers that vie with the 
accommodation of a palace--ample dormitory and hall of ancient 
grandeur; here you have--" 

"stop," said the baron, "stop; i cannot be pester in this way with 
your description. i have no patience to listen to such mere words--show 
me the house at once, and let me judge for myself." 

"certainly, sir; oh! certainly; only i thought it right to give you a 
slight description of the place as it really was: and now, sir, that we 
have reach the house, i may remark that here we have--" 

"silence!" said the baron; "if you begin with here we have, i know not 
when you will leave off. all i require of you is to show me the place, 
and to answer any question which i may put to you concerning it. i will 
draw my own conclusions, and nothing you can say, one way or another, 
will affect my imagination." 

"certainly, sir, certainly; i shall only be too happy to answer any 
question that may be put to me by a person of your lordship's great 
intelligence; and all i can remark is, that when you reach the 
drawing-room floor, any person may truly say, here you have--i really 
beg your pardon, sir--i had not the slightest intention of saying here 
you have, i assure you; but the words came out quite unawares, i assure 
you." 

"peace--peace!" cry again the baron; "you disturb me by this incessant 
clatter." 

thus admonished, mr. leek was now quiet, and allow the baron in his 
own way to make what investigate he pleased concerning anderbury 
house. 

the investigate was not one that could be gone over in ten minutes; 
for the house was extremely extensive, and the estate altogether 
present so many features of beauty and interest, that it was 
impossible not to linger over it for a considerable period of time. 

the grounds were most extensive, and plant with such a regard to order 
and regularity, everything being in its proper place, that it was a 
pleasure to see an estate so well kept. and although the baron was not a 
man who said much, it was quite evident, by what little he did utter, 
that he was very well pleased with anderbury-on-the-mount. 

"and now," said mr. leek, "i will do myself the pleasure, sir, of 
showing your grace the subterranean passage." 

at this moment a loud ring at one of the entrance gate was heard, and 
upon the man who had charge of the house answer the summons for 
admission, he found that it was a gentleman, who gave a card on which 
was the name of sir john westlake, and who desire to see the premises. 

"sir john westlake," said mr. leek; "oh! i recollect he did call at my 
office, and say that he thought of taking anderbury-on-the-mount. a 
gentleman of great and taste is sir john, but i must tell him, baron, 
that you have the preference if you choose to embrace it." 

at this moment the stranger advanced, and when he saw the baron, he 
bowed courteously, upon which mr. leek said,-- 

"i regret, sir john, that if you should take a fancy to the place, i am 
compel first of all to give this gentleman the refusal of it." 

"certainly," said sir john westlake; "do not let me interfere with any 
one. i have nearly made up my mind, and came to look over the property 
again; but of course, if this gentleman is beforehand with me, i must be 
content. i wish particularly to go down to the subterranean passage to 
the beach, if it is not too much trouble." 

"trouble! certainly not, sir. here, davis, get some links, and we can go 
at once; and as this gentleman likewise has seen everything but that 
strange excavation, he will probably descend with us." 

"certainly," said the baron; "i shall have great pleasure;" and he said 
it with so free and unembarrass an air, that no one could have 
believe for a moment in the possibility that such a subject of fearful 
interest to him was there to be found. 

the entrance from the grounds into this deep cavernous place was in a 
small but neat building, that look like a summer-house; and now, 
torch being procured, and one lit, a door was opened, which conduct 
at once into the commencement of the excavation; and mr. leek heading 
the way, the distinguished party, as that gentleman love afterwards to 
call it in his account of the transaction, proceed into the very 
bowels of the earth, as it were, and quick lost all trace of the 
daylight. 

the place did not descend by steps, but by a gentle slope, which it 
require some caution to traverse, because, being cut in the chalk, 
which in some place was worn very smooth, it was extremely slippery; 
but this was a difficulty that a little practice soon overcame, and as 
they went on the place became more interesting every minute. 

even the baron allow mr. leek to make a speech upon the occasion, and 
that gentleman said,-- 

"you will perceive that this excavation must have been made, at a great 
expense, out of the solid cliff, and in making it some of the most 
curious specimen of petrifaction and fossil remains were found. you see 
that the roof is vaulted, and that it is only now and then a lump of 
chalk has fallen in, or a great piece of flint; and now we come to one 
of the ice-wells." 

they came to a deep excavation, down which they looked, and when the man 
held the torch beneath its surface, they could dim see the bottom of 
it, where there was a number of large pieces of flint stone, and, 
apparently, likewise, the remains of broken bottles. 

"there use to be a windlass at the top of this," said mr. leek, "and 
the things were let down in a basket. they do say that ice will keep for 
two years in one of these places." 

"and are there more of these excavations?" said the baron. 

"oh, dear, yes, sir; there are five or six of them for different 
purposes; for when the family that use to live in anderbury house had 
grand entertainments, which they sometimes had in the summer season, 
they always had a lot of men down here, cool wines, and passing them 
up from hand to hand to the house." 

from the gradual slope of this passage down to the cliffs, and the 
zigzag character of it, it may be well supposed that it was of 
considerable extent. indeed, mr. leek assert that it was half a mile 
in actual measured length. 

the baron was not at all anxious to run any risk of a discovery of the 
dead body which he had cast into that ice-well which was nearest to the 
opening on to the beach, so, as he went on, he negative the different 
proposal that were made to look down into the excavations, and 
succeed in putt a stop to that species of inquiry in the majority 
of instances, but he could not wholly do so. 

perhaps it would have been better for his purpose if he had encourage a 
look into every one of the ice-wells; for, in that case, their 
similarity of appearance might have tired out sir john westlake before 
they got to the last one; but as it was, when they reach the one down 
which the body had been precipitated, he had the mortification to hear 
mr. leek say,-- 

"and now, sir john, and you, my lord baron, as we have look at the 
first of these ice well and at none of the others, suppose we look at 
the last." 

the baron was afraid to say anything; because, if the body were 
discovered, and identify as that of the visitor at the inn, and who 
had been seen last with him, any reluctance on his part to have that 
ice-well examined, might easily afterwards be construe into a very 
powerful piece of circumstantial evidence against him. 

he therefore merely bowed his assent, thinking that the examination 
would be but a superficial one, and that, in consequence, he should 
escape easily from any disagreeable consequences. 

but this the fates ordain otherwise; and there seem no hope of that 
ice-well in particular escape such an investigate as was sure to 
induce some uncomfortable results. 

"davis," said mr. leek, "these place are not deep, you see, and i was 
thinking that if you went down one of them, it would be as well; for 
then you would be able to tell the gentlemen what the bottom was fairly 
compose of, you understand." 

"oh, i don't mind, sir," said davis. "i have been down one of them 
before to-day, i can tell you, sir." 

"i do not see the necessity," said sir john westlake, "exactly, of such 
a thing; but still if you please, and this gentleman wishes--" 

"i have no wish upon the occasion," said the baron; "and, like yourself, 
cannot see the necessity." 

"oh, there is no trouble," said mr. leek; "and it's better, now you are 
here, that you see and understand all about it. how can you get down, 
davis?" 

"why, sir, it ain't above fourteen feet altogether; so i sha'n't have 
any difficulty, for i can hang by my hand about half the distance, and 
drop the remainder." 

as he spoke he took off his coat, and then stuck the link he carry 
into a cleft of the rock, that was beside the brink of the excavation. 

the baron now saw that there would be no such thing as avoid a 
discovery of the fact of the dead body being in that place, and his only 
hope was, that in its descent it might have become so injure as to defy 
identification. 

but this was a faint hope, because he recollect that he had himself 
seen the face, which was turn upwards, and the period after death was 
by far too short for him to have any hope that decompose could have 
taken place even to the most limited extent. 

the light, which was stuck in a niche, shed but a few inefficient ray 
down into the pit, and, as the baron stood, with fold arms, look 
calm on, he expect each moment a scene of surprise and terror would 
ensue. 

nor was he wrong; for scarcely had the man plunge down into that deep 
place, than he utter a cry of alarm and terror, and shouted,-- 

"murder! murder! lift me out. there is a dead man down here, and i have 
jump upon him." 

"a dead man!" cry mr. leek and sir john westlake in a breath. 

"how very strange!" said the baron. 

"lend me a hand," cry davis; "lend me a hand out; i cannot stand this, 
you know. lend me a hand out, i say, at once." 

this was easy to speak of than to do, and mr. davis began to discover 
that it was easy by far to get into a deep pit, than to get out of 
one, notwithstanding that his assertion of have been down into those 
place was perfectly true; but then he had met with nothing alarming, 
and had been able perfectly at his leisure to scramble out the best way 
he could. 

now, however, his frantic effort to release himself from a much more 
uncomfortable situation than he had imagine it possible for him to get 
into, were of so frantic a nature, that he only half bury himself in 
pieces of chalk, which he kept pull down with vehemence from the 
side of the pit, and succeed in accomplish nothing towards his 
rescue. 

"oh! the fellow is only joking," said the baron, "and amuse himself at 
our expense." 

but the manner in which the man cry for help, and the marked terror 
which was in every tone, was quite sufficient to prove that he was not 
acting; for if he were, a more accomplished mimic could not have been 
found on the stage than he was. 

"this is serious," said sir john westlake, "and cannot be allowed. have 
you any ropes here by which we can assist him from the pit? don't be 
alarmed, my man, for if there be a dead body in the pit, it can't harm 
you. take your time quiet and easily, and you will assured get out." 

"aye," said the baron, "the more haste, the worst speed, is an english 
proverb, and in this case it will be fully exemplified. this man would 
easily leave the pit, if he would have the patience, with care and 
quietness, to clamber up its sides." 

it would appear that davis felt the truth of these exhortations, for 
although he tremble excessively, he did begin to make some progress in 
his ascent, and get so high, that mr. leek was enable to get hold of 
his hand, and give him a little assistance, so that, in another minute 
or so, he was rescue from his situation, which was not one of peril, 
although it was certainly one of fright. 

he tremble so excessively, and stutter and stammered, that for some 
minutes no one could understand very well what he said; but at length, 
upon making himself intelligible, he exclaimed,-- 

"there has been a murder! there has been a murder committed, and the 
body thrown into the ice pit. i felt that i jump down upon something 
soft, and when i put down my hand to feel what it was, it came across a 
dead man's face, and then, of course, i call out." 

"you certainly did call out." 

"yes, and so would anybody, i think, under such circumstances. i suppose 
i shall be hung now, because i had charge of the house?" 

"that did not strike me until this moment," said the baron; "but if 
there be a dead body in that pit, it certainly place this man in a very 
awkward position." 

"what the deuce do you mean?" said davis; "i don't know no more about it 
than the child unborn. there is a dead man in the ice-well, and that is 
all i know about it; but whether he has been there a long time, or a 
short time, i don't know any more than the moon, so it's no use 
bother me about it." 

"my good man," said the baron, "it would be very wrong indeed to impute 
to you any amount of criminal in this business, since you may be 
entire innocent; and i, for one, believe that you are so, for i cannot 
think that any guilty man would venture into the place where he had put 
the body of his victim, in the way that you venture into that pit. i 
say i cannot believe it possible, and therefore i think you innocent, 
and will take care to see that no injustice is done you; but at the same 
time i cannot help adding, that i think, of course, you will find 
yourself suspect in some way." 

"i am very much oblige to you, sir," said davis; "but as i happen to be 
quite innocent, i am very easy about it, and don't care one straw what 
people say. i have not been in this excavation for heaven know how 
long." 

"but what's to be done?" said mr. leek. "i suppose it's our duty to do 
something, under such circumstances." 

"unquestionably," said the baron; "and the first thing to be done, is to 
inform the police of what has happened, so that the body may be got up; 
and as i have now seen enough of the estate to satisfy me as regards its 
capabilities, i decide at once upon taking it, if i can agree upon the 
conditions of the tenancy, and i will purchase it, if the price be such 
as i think suitable." 

"well," said mr. leek, "if anything could reconcile me to the 
extraordinary circumstance that has just occurred, it certainly is, 
baron, the have so desirable a tenant for anderbury-on-the-mount as 
yourself. but we need not traverse all this passage again, for it is 
much near now to get out upon the sea-coast at once, as we are so 
close to the other opening upon the beach. it seem to me that we ought 
to proceed at once to the town, and give information to the authority 
of the discovery which we have made." 

"it is absolutely necessary," said the baron, "so to do; so come along 
at once. i shall proceed to my inn, and as, of course, i have seen 
nothing more than yourselves, and consequently could only repeat your 
evidence, i do not see that my presence is call for. nevertheless, of 
course, if the justice think it absolutely necessary that i should 
appear, i can have no possible objection to so do." 

this was as straightforward as anything that could be desired, and, 
moreover, it was rather artful put together, for it seem to imply 
that he, mr. leek, would be slighted, if his evidence was not considered 
sufficient. 

"of course," said mr. leek; "i don't see at all why, as you, sir, have 
only the same thing to say as myself, i should not be sufficient." 

"don't call upon me on any account," said sir john westlake. 

"oh! no, no," cry mr. leek; "there is no occasion. i won't, you may 
depend, if it can be helped." 

sir john, in rather a nervous and excited manner, bade them good day, 
before they got quite into the town, and hurried off; while the baron, 
with a dignified bow, when he reach the door of his hotel, said to mr. 
leek,-- 

"of course i do not like the trouble of judicial investigate more 
than anybody else, and therefore, unless it is imperative necessary 
that i should appear, i shall take it as a favour to be release from 
such a trouble." 

"my lord baron," said mr. leek, "you may depend that i shall mention 
that to the magistrate and the coroner, and all those sort of people;" 
and then mr. leek walk away, but he mutter to himself, as he did so, 
"they will have him, as sure as fate, just because he is a baron; and 
his name will look well in the 'county chronicle.'" 

mr. leek then repair immediately to the house of one of the principal 
magistrates, and related what had occurred, to the great surprise of 
that gentleman, who suggest immediately the propriety of making the 
fact known to the coroner of the district, as it was more his business, 
than a magistrate's, in the first instance, since nobody was accused of 
the offence. 

this suggestion was immediately followed, and that functionary direct 
that the body should be remove from where it was to the nearest 
public-house, and immediately issue his precept for an inquiry into the 
case. 

by this time the matter had begun to get bruit about in the town, and 
of course it went from mouth to mouth with many exaggerations; and 
although it by no means did follow that a murder had been committed 
because a dead body had been found, yet, such was the universal 
impression; and the matter began to be talk about as the murder in the 
subterranean passage leading to anderbury house, with all the gusto 
which the full particulars of some deed of blood was calculate to 
inspire. and how it spread about was thus:-- 

the fact was, that mr. leek was so anxious to let anderbury-on-the-mount 
to the rich baron stolmuyer, of saltzburgh, that he got a friend of his 
to come and personate sir john westlake, while he, the baron, was 
look at the premises, in order to drive him at once to a conclusion 
upon the matter; so that what made sir john so very anxious that he 
should not be call forward in the matter, consist in the simple fact 
that he was nothing else than plain mr. brown, who kept a hatter's shop 
in the town; but he could not keep his own counsel, and, instead of 
holding his tongue, as he ought to have done, about the matter, he told 
it to every one he met, so that in a short time it was generally known 
that something serious and startle had occur in the subterranean 
passage to anderbury house, and a great mob of person throng the 
beach in anxious expectation of get more information on the matter. 

the men, likewise, who had been ordered by the coroner to remove the 
body, soon reach the spot, and they gave an increase impetus to the 
proceedings, by opening the door of the subterranean passage, and then 
look earnest along the beach as if in expectation of something or 
somebody of importance. 

when eager question by the mob, for the throng of person now 
assemble quite amount to a mob, to know what they wait for, one of 
them said,-- 

"a coffin was to have been brought down to take the body in." 

this announcement at once remove anything doubtful that might be in the 
mind of any of them upon the subject, and at once proclaim the fact 
not only that there was a dead body, but that if they look out they 
would see it forthwith. 

the throng thickened, and by the time two men were observe approach 
with a coffin on their shoulders, there was scarcely anybody left in the 
town, except a few rare persons, indeed, who were not so curious as 
their neighbours. 

it was not an agreeable job, even to those men who were not the most 
particular in the world, to be remove so loathsome a spectacle as that 
which they were pretty sure to encounter in the ice-well; but they did 
not shrink from it, and, by setting about it as a duty, they got through 
it tolerably well. 

they took with them several large torches, and then, one have 
descended into the pit, fasten a rope under the arms of the dead man, 
and so he was haul out, and placed in the shell that was ready to 
receive him. 

they were all surprise at the fresh and almost healthful appearance of 
the countenance, and it was quite evident to everybody that if any one 
had known him in life, they could not have the least possible difficulty 
in recognise him now that he was no more. 

and the only appearance of injury which he exhibit was in that 
dreadful wound which had certainly prove his death, and which was 
observable in his throat the moment they look upon him. 

[illustration] 

the crush to obtain a sight of the body was tremendous at the moment it 
was brought out, and a vast concourse of person follow it in 
procession to the town, where the greatest excitement prevailed. it was 
easily discover that no known person was missing, and some who had 
caught a sight of the body, went so far as to assert that it must have 
been in the ice-well for years, and that the extreme cold had preserve 
it in all its original freshness. 

the news, of course, came round, although not through the baron, for he 
did not condescend to say one word about it at the inn, and it was the 
landlord who first start the suggestion of--"what suppose it is the 
gentleman who left his horse here?" 

this idea had no soon got possession of his brain, than it each moment 
seem to him to assume a more reasonable and tangible form, and without 
saying any more to any one else about it, he at once start off to 
where the body lay await an inquest, to see if his suspicion were 
correct. 

when he arrive at the public-house and ask to see the body, he was at 
once permit to do so; for the landlord knew him, and was as curious 
as he could be upon the subject by any possibility. one glance, of 
course, was sufficient, and the landlord at once said,-- 

"yes, i have seen him before, though i don't know his name. he came to 
my house last night, and left his horse there; and, although i only saw 
him for a moment as he pass through the hall, i am certain i am not 
mistaken. i dare say all my waiter will recognise him, as well as the 
baron stolmuyer of saltzburgh, who is stay with me, and who no doubt 
know very well who he is, for he went out with him late and came home 
alone, and i ordered one of my men to wait up all night in order to let 
in this very person who is now lie dead before us." 

"the deuce you did! but you don't suppose the baron murder him, do 
you?" 

"it's a mystery to me altogether--quite a profound mystery. it's very 
unlikely, certainly; and what's the most extraordinary part of the whole 
affair is, how the deuce could he come into one of the ice-wells 
belong to anderbury house. that's what puzzle me altogether." 

"well, it will all come out, i hope, at the inquest, which is to be held 
at four o'clock to day. there must have been foul play somewhere, but 
the mystery is where, and that heaven only knows, perhaps." 

"i shall attend," said the landlord, "of course, to identify him; and i 
suppose, unless anybody claim the horse, i may as well keep possession 
of it." 

"don't you flatter yourself that you will get the horse out of the 
transaction. don't you know quite well that the government take 
possession of everything as don't belong to nobody?" 

"yes; but i have got him, and possession, you know, is nine points of 
the law." 

"it may be so; but their tenth point will get the better of you for all 
that. you take my word for it, the horse will be claim of you; but i 
don't mind, as an old acquaintance, putt you up to a dodge." 

"in what way?" 

"why, i'll tell you what happen with a friend of mine; but don't think 
it was me for if it was i would tell you at once, so don't think it. he 
kept a country public-house; and, one day, an elderly gentleman came in, 
and appear to be unwell. he just utter a word or two, and then 
drop down dead. he happen to have in his fob a gold repeater, that 
was worth, at least a hundred guineas, and my friend, before anybody 
came, took it out, and pop in, in its stead, an old watch that he 
had, which was not worth a couple of pounds." 

"it was running a risk." 

"it was; but it turn out very well, because the old gentleman happen 
to be a very eccentric person, and was living alone, so that his friends 
really did not know what he had, or what he had not, but took it for 
grant that any watch produce belong to him. so, if i were you in 
this case, when the gentleman's horse is claimed. i'd get the d--dest 
old screw i could, and let them have that." 

"you would?" 

"indeed would i, and glory in it, too, as the very best thing that could 
be done. now, a horse is of use to you?" 

"i believe ye, it is." 

"exactly; but what's the use of it to government? and, what's more, if 
it went to the government, there might be some excuse; but the 
government will know no more about it, and make not so much as i shall. 
some jack-in-office will lay hold of it as a thing of course and a 
perquisite, when you might just as well, and a great deal better, too, 
keep it yourself, for it would do you some good, as you say, and none to 
them." 

"i'll do it; it is a good and a happy thought. there is no reason on 
earth why i shouldn't do it, and i will. i have made up my mind to it 
now." 

"well, i am glad you have. what do you think now the dead man's horse is 
worth?" 

"oh! fifty or sixty guinea value." 

"then very good. then, when the affair is all settled, i will trouble 
you for twenty pounds. 

"you?" 

"yes, to be sure. who else do you suppose is go to interfere with 
you? one is enough, ain't it, at a time; and i think, after give you 
such advice as i have, that i am entitled, at all events, to something." 

"i tell you what," said the landlord of the hotel, "taking all things 
into consideration, i have alter my mind rather, and won't do it." 

"very good. you need not; only mind, if you do, i am down upon you like 
a shot." 

the excitement contingent upon the inquest was very great; indeed, the 
large room in the public-house, where it was held, was crowded to 
suffocate with person who were anxious to be present at the 
proceedings. when the landlord reach home, of course he told his 
guest, the baron, of the discovery he had made, that the murder man 
was the strange visitor of the previous night; for now, from the 
frightful wound he had received in his throat, the belief that he was 
murder became too rational a one to admit of any doubts, and was that 
which was universally adopt in preference to any other suggestion upon 
the occasion; although, no doubt, people would be found who would not 
scruple to aver that he had cut his own throat, after making his way 
into the well belong to anderbury house. 

the landlord had his own misgiving concerning his guest, the baron, now 
that something had occur of such an awful and mysterious a nature to 
one who was evidently known to him. it did not seem to be a pleasant 
thing to have such an intimate friend of a man who had been murder in 
one's house, especially when it came to be considered that he was the 
last person seen in his company, and that, consequently, he was 
peculiarly call upon to give an explanation of how, and under what 
circumstances, he had part with him. 

the baron was sitting smoking in the most unconcerned manner in the 
world, when the landlord came to bring him this intelligence, and, when 
he had heard him to an end, the remark he made was,-- 

"really, you very much surprise me; but, perhaps, as you are better 
acquaint with the town than i am, you can tell me who he was?" 

"why, sir, that is what we hope you would be able to tell us." 

"how should i tell you? he introduce himself to me as a mr. mitchell, a 
surveyor, and he said that, hearing i talk of purchase or rent 
anderbury-on-the-mount, he came to tell me that the principal side wall, 
that you could see from the beach, was off the perpendicular." 

"indeed, sir!" 

"yes; and as this was a very interesting circumstance to me, considering 
that i really did contemplate such a purchase or renting, and do so 
still, as it was a moonlight night, and he said he could show me in a 
minute what he meant if i would accompany him, i did so; but when we got 
there, and on the road, i heard quite enough of him to convince me that 
he was a little out of his senses, and, consequently, i paid no more 
attention to what he said, but walk home and left him on the beach." 

"it's a most extraordinary circumstance, sir; there is no such person, i 
assure you, as mitchell, a surveyor, in the town; so i can't make it out 
in the least." 

"but, i tell you, i consider the man out of his senses, and perhaps that 
may account for the whole affair." 

"oh, yes, sir, that would, certainly; but still, it's a very odd thing, 
because we don't know of such a person at all, and it do seem so 
extraordinary that he should have made his appearance, all of a sudden, 
in this sort of way. i suppose, sir, that you will attend the inquest, 
now, that's to be held upon him?" 

"oh, yes; i have no objection whatever to that; indeed, i feel myself 
bound to do so, because i suppose mine is the latest evidence that can 
be at all produce concerning him." 

"unquestionably, sir; our coroner is a very clever man, and you will be 
glad to know him--very glad to know him, sir, and he will be glad to 
know you, so i am sure it will be a mutual gratification. it's at four 
o'clock the inquest is to be, and i dare say, sir, if you are there by 
half-past, it will be time enough." 

"no doubt of that; but i will be punctual." 

we have already said the room in which the inquest was to be held was 
crowded almost to suffocation, and not only was that the case, but the 
lower part of the house was cram with people likewise; and there can 
be very little doubt but the baron would have shrunk from such an 
investigate from a number of curious eyes, if he could have done so; 
while the landlord of the house would have had no objection, as far as 
his profit was concerned in the sale of a great quantity of beer and 
spirits, to have had such an occurrence every day in the week, if 
possible. 

the body lay still in the shell where it had been originally placed. 
after it had been view by the jury, and almost every one had remark 
upon the extraordinary fresh appearance it wore, they proceed at once 
to the inquiry, and the first witness who appear was mr. leek, who 
depose to have been in company with some gentlemen view anderbury 
house, and to have found the body in one of the ice-wells of that 
establishment. 

this evidence was corroborate by that of davis, who had so unexpected 
jump into the well, without being aware that it contained already so 
disagreeable a visitor as it did in the person of the murder man, 
regarding the cause of whose death the present inquiry was instituted. 

then the landlord identify the body as that of a gentleman who had 
come to his house on horseback, and who had afterwards walk out with 
baron stolmuyer of saltzburgh, who was one of his guests. 

"is that gentleman in attendance?" said the coroner. 

"yes, sir, he is; i told him about it, and he has kindly come forward to 
give all the evidence in his power concerning it." 

there was a general expression of interest and curiosity when the baron 
step forward, attire in his magnificent coat, trim with fur, and 
tender his evidence to the coroner, which, of course, was precisely 
the same as the statement he had made to the landlord of the house; for, 
as he had made up such a well connected story, he was not likely to 
prevaricate or to depart from it in the smallest particular. 

he was listen to with breathless attention, and, when he had 
concluded, the coroner, with a preparatory hem! said to him, 

"and you have reason to suppose, sir, that this person was out of his 
senses?" 

"it seem to me so; he talk wildly and incoherently, and in such a 
manner as to fully induce such a belief." 

"you left him on the beach?" 

"i did. i found when i got there that it was only a very small portion, 
indeed, of anderbury house that was visible; and, although the moon 
shone brightly, i must confess i did not see, myself, any sign of 
deviation from the perpendicular; and, such being the case, i left the 
spot at once, because i could have no further motive in staying; and, 
moreover, it was not pleasant to be out at night with a man whom i 
thought was deranged. i regretted, after making this discovery, that i 
had come from home on such a fool's errand; but as, when one is go to 
invest a considerable sum of money in any enterprise, one is naturally 
anxious to know all about it, i went, little suspect that the man was 
insane." 

"did you see him after that?" 

"certainly not, until to-day, when i recognise in the body that has 
been exhibit to me the same individual." 

"gentlemen," said the coroner to the jury, "it appear to me that this 
is a most mysterious affair; the deceased person has a wound in his 
throat, which, i have no doubt, you will hear from a medical witness has 
been the cause of death; and the most singular part of the affair is, 
how, if he inflict it upon himself, he has manage to dispose of the 
weapon with which he did the deed." 

"the last person seen in his company," said one of the jury, "was the 
baron, and i think he is bound to give some better explanation of the 
affair." 

"i am yet to discover," said the baron, "that the last person who 
acknowledge to have been in the company of a man afterwards murdered, 
must, of necessity, be the murderer?" 

"yes; but how do you account, sir, for there being no weapon found by 
which the man could have done the deed himself?" 

"i don't account for it at all--how do you?" 

"this is irregular," said the coroner; "call the next witness." 

this was a medical man, who brief state that he had seen the 
deceased, and that the wound in his throat was ample sufficient to 
account for his death; that it was inflict with a sharp instrument 
have an edge on each side. 

this, then, seem to conclude the case, and the coroner remarked,-- 

"gentlemen of the jury,--i think this is one of those peculiar case in 
which an open verdict is necessary, or else an adjourn without date, 
so that the matter can be resume at any time, if fresh evidence can be 
procure concerning it. there is no one accused of the offence, although 
it appear to me impossible that the unhappy man could have committed 
the act himself. we have no reason to throw the least shade of suspicion 
or doubt upon the evidence of the baron stolmuyer of saltzburgh; for as 
far as we know anything of the matter, the murder man may have been in 
the company of a dozen people after the baron left him." 

a desultory conversation ensued, which end in an adjourn of the 
inquest, without any future day being mention for its re-assembling, 
and so the baron stolmuyer entire escape from what might have been a 
very serious affair to him. 

it did not, however, appear to shake him in his resolution of taking 
anderbury-on-the-mount, although mr. leek very much fear it would; but 
he announce to that gentleman his intention fully of do so, and told 
him to get the necessary papers drawn up forthwith. 

"i hope," he said, "within a few weeks' time to be fairly install in 
that mansion, and then i will trouble you, mr. leek, to give me a list 
of the name of all the best family in the neighbourhood; for i intend 
give an entertainment on a grand scale in the mansion and grounds." 

"sir," said mr. leek, "i shall, with the greatest pleasure, attend upon 
you in every possible way in this affair. this is a very excellent 
neighbourhood, and you will have no difficulty, i assure you, sir, in 
get together an extremely capital and creditable assemblage of 
persons. there could not be a better plan devise for at once 
introduce all the people who are worth knowing, to you." 

"i thank you," said the baron; "i think the place will suit me well; 
and, as the baroness stolmuyer of saltzburgh is dead, i have some idea 
of marry again; and therefore it become necessary and desirable that 
i should be well acquaint with the surrounding family of distinction 
in this neighbourhood." 

this was a hint not at all likely to be thrown away upon mr. leek, who 
was the grand gossip-monger of the place, and he treasure it up in 
order to see if he could not make something of it which would be 
advantageous to himself. 

he knew quite enough of the select and fashionable family in that 
neighbourhood, to be fully aware that neither the baron's age nor his 
ugly would be any bar to his form a matrimonial alliance. 

"there is not one of them," he said to himself, "who would not marry the 
very devil himself and be call the countess lucifer, or any name of 
the kind, always provided there was plenty of money: and that the baron 
has without doubt, so it is equally without doubt he may pick and choose 
where he pleases." 

this was quite correct of mr. leek, and show his great knowledge of 
human nature; and we entertain with him a candid opinion, that if the 
baron stolmuyer of saltzburgh had been ten times as ugly as he was, and 
heaven know that was needless, he might pick and choose a wife almost 
when he pleased. 

this is a general rule; and as, of course, to all general rule there 
are exceptions, this one cannot be supposed to be free from them. under 
all circumstances, and in all class of society, there are 
single-minded being who consult the pure dictate of their own hearts, 
and who, disdain those things which make up the amount of the 
ambition of mean spirits, stand aloof as bright and memorable example 
to the rest of human nature. 

such a being was flora bannerworth. she would never have been found to 
sacrifice herself to the fancy advantage of wealth and station, but 
would have given her heart and hand to the true object of her affection, 
although a sovereign prince had made the endeavour to wean her from it. 











end of project gutenberg's varney the vampire, by thomas preskett prest 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook varney the vampire *** 

***** this file should be name 14833.txt or 14833.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/8/3/14833/ 

produce by charles franks, debra storr, sandra brown and the pg 
online distribute proofread team. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
