project gutenberg's wieland; or the transformation, by charles brockden brown 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: wieland; or the transformation 
an america tale 

author: charles brockden brown 

posting date: august 7, 2008 [ebook #792] 
release date: january, 1997 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook wieland; or the transformation *** 










wieland; or the transformation 

an america tale 

by charles brockden brown 




from virtue's blissful path away 
the double-tongued are sure to stray; 
good is a forth-right journey still, 
and mazy path but lead to ill. 


advertisement. 

the following work is deliver to the world as the first of a series 
of performances, which the favorable reception of this will induce the 
writer to publish. his purpose is neither selfish nor temporary, 
but aim at the illustration of some important branch of the moral 
constitution of man. whether this tale will be class with the ordinary 
or frivolous source of amusement, or be rank with the few production 
whose usefulness secure to them a lasting reputation, the reader must 
be permit to decide. 

the incident related are extraordinary and rare. some of them, perhaps, 
approach as nearly to the nature of miracle as can be done by that 
which is not truly miraculous. it is hope that intelligent reader will 
not disapprove of the manner in which appearances are solved, but that 
the solution will be found to correspond with the known principles of 
human nature. the power which the principal person is said to possess 
can scarcely be deny to be real. it must be acknowledge to be 
extremely rare; but no fact, equally uncommon, is support by the same 
strength of historical evidence. 

some reader may think the conduct of the younger wieland impossible. in 
support of its possibility the writer must appeal to physician and to 
men conversant with the latent spring and occasional perversion of 
the human mind. it will not be object that the instance of similar 
delusion are rare, because it is the business of moral painter to 
exhibit their subject in its most instructive and memorable forms. if 
history furnish one parallel fact, it is a sufficient vindication of 
the writer; but most reader will probably recollect an authentic case, 
remarkably similar to that of wieland. 

it will be necessary to add, that this narrative is addressed, in an 
epistolary form, by the lady whose story it contains, to a small 
number of friends, whose curiosity, with regard to it, had been greatly 
awakened. it may likewise be mentioned, that these event took 
place between the conclusion of the france and the beginning of the 
revolutionary war. the memoirs of carwin, allude to at the conclusion 
of the work, will be publish or suppress according to the reception 
which is given to the present attempt. 

c. b. b. september 3, 1798. 



chapter i 


i feel little reluctance in comply with your request. you know not 
fully the cause of my sorrows. you are a stranger to the depth of my 
distresses. hence your effort at consolation must necessarily fail. yet 
the tale that i am go to tell is not intended as a claim upon your 
sympathy. in the midst of my despair, i do not disdain to contribute 
what little i can to the benefit of mankind. i acknowledge your right to 
be informed of the event that have lately happen in my family. make 
what use of the tale you shall think proper. if it be communicate 
to the world, it will inculcate the duty of avoid deceit. it will 
exemplify the force of early impressions, and show the immeasurable 
evil that flow from an erroneous or imperfect discipline. 

my state is not destitute of tranquillity. the sentiment that dictate 
my feelings is not hope. futurity has no power over my thoughts. to all 
that is to come i am perfectly indifferent. with regard to myself, i 
have nothing more to fear. fate has done its worst. henceforth, i am 
callous to misfortune. 

i address no supplicate to the deity. the power that govern the 
course of human affair has chosen his path. the decree that ascertain 
the condition of my life, admit of no recal. no doubt it square with 
the maxim of eternal equity. that is neither to be question nor 
deny by me. it suffice that the past is exempt from mutation. the 
storm that tore up our happiness, and change into dreary and desert 
the blooming scene of our existence, is lull into grim repose; but 
not until the victim was transfix and mangled; till every obstacle was 
dissipated by its rage; till every remnant of good was wrest from our 
grasp and exterminated. 

how will your wonder, and that of your companions, be excited by my 
story! every sentiment will yield to your amazement. if my testimony 
were without corroborations, you would reject it as incredible. the 
experience of no human being can furnish a parallel: that i, beyond the 
rest of mankind, should be reserved for a destiny without alleviation, 
and without example! listen to my narrative, and then say what it is 
that has made me deserve to be placed on this dreadful eminence, if, 
indeed, every faculty be not suspend in wonder that i am still alive, 
and am able to relate it. my father's ancestry was noble on the paternal 
side; but his mother was the daughter of a merchant. my grand-father was 
a younger brother, and a native of saxony. he was placed, when he had 
reach the suitable age, at a germany college. during the vacations, 
he employ himself in traverse the neighbouring territory. on one 
occasion it was his fortune to visit hamburg. he form an acquaintance 
with leonard weise, a merchant of that city, and was a frequent guest 
at his house. the merchant had an only daughter, for whom his guest 
speedy contract an affection; and, in spite of parental menace and 
prohibitions, he, in due season, became her husband. 

by this act he mortally offend his relations. thenceforward he was 
entire disown and reject by them. they refuse to contribute any 
thing to his support. all intercourse ceased, and he received from them 
merely that treatment to which an absolute stranger, or detest enemy, 
would be entitled. 

he found an asylum in the house of his new father, whose temper was 
kind, and whose pride was flatter by this alliance. the nobility of 
his birth was put in the balance against his poverty. weise conceive 
himself, on the whole, to have act with the highest discretion, in 
thus dispose of his child. my grand-father found it incumbent on him 
to search out some mode of independent subsistence. his youth had 
been eager devoted to literature and music. these had hitherto been 
cultivated merely as source of amusement. they were now convert into 
the means of gain. at this period there were few works of taste in 
the saxon dialect. my ancestor may be considered as the founder of the 
germany theatre. the modern poet of the same name is sprung from the same 
family, and, perhaps, surpass but little, in the fruitful of his 
invention, or the sound of his taste, the elder wieland. his life 
was spent in the composition of sonata and dramatic pieces. they were 
not unpopular, but merely afford him a scanty subsistence. he die 
in the bloom of his life, and was quick follow to the grave by his 
wife. their only child was taken under the protection of the merchant. 
at an early age he was apprentice to a london trader, and pass seven 
years of mercantile servitude. 

my father was not fortunate in the character of him under whose care 
he was now placed. he was treat with rigor, and full employment was 
provided for every hour of his time. his duty were laborious and 
mechanical. he had been educated with a view to this profession, and, 
therefore, was not torment with unsatisfy desires. he did not hold 
his present occupation in abhorrence, because they withheld him from 
path more flowery and more smooth, but he found in unintermitt 
labour, and in the stern of his master, sufficient occasion for 
discontent. no opportunity of recreation were allow him. he spent 
all his time pent up in a gloomy apartment, or traverse narrow and 
crowded streets. his food was coarse, and his lodging humble. his heart 
gradual contract a habit of morose and gloomy reflection. he could 
not accurate define what was wanting to his happiness. he was not 
torture by comparison drawn between his own situation and that 
of others. his state was such as suit his age and his view as to 
fortune. he did not imagine himself treat with extraordinary or 
unjustifiable rigor. in this respect he supposed the condition of 
others, bound like himself to mercantile service, to resemble his own; 
yet every engagement was irksome, and every hour tedious in its lapse. 

in this state of mind he chance to light upon a book written by one of 
the teacher of the albigenses, or france protestants. he entertain no 
relish for books, and was wholly unconscious of any power they possessed 
to delight or instruct. this volume had lain for years in a corner of 
his garret, half bury in dust and rubbish. he had marked it as it lay; 
had thrown it, as his occasion required, from one spot to another; but 
had felt no inclination to examine its contents, or even to inquire what 
was the subject of which it treated. 

one sunday afternoon, being induce to retire for a few minutes to his 
garret, his eye was attract by a page of this book, which, by some 
accident, had been open and placed full in his view. he was seat on 
the edge of his bed, and was employ in repair a rent in some part 
of his clothes. his eyes were not confine to his work, but occasional 
wandering, light at length upon the page. the words "seek and ye 
shall find," were those that first offer themselves to his notice. 
his curiosity was rouse by these so far as to prompt him to proceed. 
as soon as he finished his work, he took up the book and turn to 
the first page. the further he read, the more inducement he found to 
continue, and he regret the decline of the light which oblige him 
for the present to close it. 

the book contained an exposition of the doctrine of the sect of 
camissards, and an historical account of its origin. his mind was in a 
state peculiarly fitted for the reception of devotional sentiments. the 
craving which had haunt him was now supply with an object. his mind 
was at no loss for a theme of meditation. on days of business, he rose 
at the dawn, and retired to his chamber not till late at night. he now 
supply himself with candles, and employ his nocturnal and sunday 
hour in study this book. it, of course, abound with allusion to 
the bible. all its conclusion were deduce from the sacred text. this 
was the fountain, beyond which it was unnecessary to trace the stream of 
religious truth; but it was his duty to trace it thus far. 

a bible was easily procured, and he ardent enter on the study of it. 
his understanding had received a particular direction. all his reverie 
were fashion in the same mould. his progress towards the formation of 
his creed was rapid. every fact and sentiment in this book were view 
through a medium which the writings of the camissard apostle had 
suggested. his construction of the text were hasty, and form on a 
narrow scale. every thing was view in a disconnected position. one 
action and one precept were not employ to illustrate and restrict 
the meaning of another. hence arose a thousand scruple to which he had 
hitherto been a stranger. he was alternate agitate by fear and by 
ecstacy. he imagine himself beset by the snare of a spiritual foe, and 
that his security lay in ceaseless watchful and prayer. 

his morals, which had never been loose, were now model by a strict 
standard. the empire of religious duty extend itself to his looks, 
gestures, and phrases. all levity of speech, and negligence of 
behaviour, were proscribed. his air was mournful and contemplative. 
he labour to keep alive a sentiment of fear, and a belief of 
the awe-creating presence of the deity. idea foreign to this were 
sedulous excluded. to suffer their intrusion was a crime against the 
divine majesty inexpiable but by days and week of the keenest agonies. 

no material variation had occur in the lapse of two years. every day 
confirmed him in his present mode of thinking and acting. it was to 
be expect that the tide of his emotion would sometimes recede, that 
interval of despondent and doubt would occur; but these gradual were 
more rare, and of short duration; and he, at last, arrive at a state 
considerably uniform in this respect. 

his apprenticeship was now almost expired. on his arrival of age he 
became entitled, by the will of my grand-father, to a small sum. this 
sum would hardly suffice to set him afloat as a trader in his present 
situation, and he had nothing to expect from the generous of his 
master. residence in england had, besides, become almost impossible, 
on account of his religious tenets. in addition to these motive for 
seek a new habitation, there was another of the most imperious and 
irresistable necessity. he had imbibe an opinion that it was his duty 
to disseminate the truth of the gospel among the unbelieving nations. 
he was terrify at first by the peril and hardship to which the life 
of a missionary is exposed. this cowardice made him diligent in the 
invention of objection and excuses; but he found it impossible wholly 
to shake off the belief that such was the injunction of his duty. 
the belief, after every new conflict with his passions, acquire new 
strength; and, at length, he form a resolution of comply with what 
he deem the will of heaven. 

the north-american indian naturally present themselves as the first 
object for this species of benevolence. as soon as his servitude 
expired, he convert his little fortune into money, and embark for 
philadelphia. here his fear were revived, and a near survey of savage 
manners once more shook his resolution. for a while he relinquish his 
purpose, and purchase a farm on schuylkill, within a few mile of the 
city, set himself down to the cultivation of it. the cheap of land, 
and the service of africa slaves, which were then in general use, 
gave him who was poor in europe all the advantage of wealth. he pass 
fourteen years in a thrifty and laborious manner. in this time new 
objects, new employments, and new associate appear to have nearly 
obliterate the devout impression of his youth. he now became 
acquaint with a woman of a meek and quiet disposition, and of slender 
acquire like himself. he proffer his hand and was accepted. 

his previous industry had now enable him to dispense with personal 
labour, and direct attention to his own concerns. he enjoy leisure, 
and was visit afresh by devotional contemplation. the reading of the 
scriptures, and other religious books, became once more his favorite 
employment. his ancient belief relative to the conversion of the savage 
tribes, was revive with uncommon energy. to the former obstacle were 
now add the pleadings of parental and conjugal love. the struggle 
was long and vehement; but his sense of duty would not be stifle or 
enfeebled, and finally triumph over every impediment. 

his effort were attend with no permanent success. his exhortation 
had sometimes a temporary power, but more frequent were repel with 
insult and derision. in pursuit of this object he encounter the most 
imminent perils, and underwent incredible fatigues, hunger, sickness, 
and solitude. the licence of savage passion, and the artifice of his 
deprave countrymen, all oppose themselves to his progress. his courage 
did not forsake him till there appear no reasonable ground to hope for 
success. he desist not till his heart was relieved from the supposed 
obligation to persevere. with his constitution somewhat decayed, he at 
length return to his family. an interval of tranquill succeeded. he 
was frugal, regular, and strict in the performance of domestic duties. 
he allied himself with no sect, because he perfectly agree with none. 
social worship is that by which they are all distinguished; but this 
article found no place in his creed. he rigid interpret that precept 
which enjoin us, when we worship, to retire into solitude, and shut 
out every species of society. according to him devotion was not only a 
silent office, but must be perform alone. an hour at noon, and an hour 
at midnight were thus appropriated. 

at the distance of three hundred yard from his house, on the top of a 
rock whose side were steep, rugged, and encumber with dwarf cedar 
and stony asperities, he built what to a common eye would have seem a 
summer-house. the eastern verge of this precipice was sixty feet above 
the river which flow at its foot. the view before it consist of a 
transparent current, fluctuate and ripple in a rocky channel, and 
bound by a rising scene of cornfield and orchards. the edifice was 
slight and airy. it was no more than a circular area, twelve feet in 
diameter, whose flooring was the rock, clear of moss and shrubs, and 
exactly levelled, edge by twelve tuscan columns, and cover by an 
undulate dome. my father furnish the dimensions and outlines, but 
allow the artist whom he employ to complete the structure on his own 
plan. it was without seat, table, or ornament of any kind. 

this was the temple of his deity. twice in twenty-four hour he repair 
hither, unaccompanied by any human being. nothing but physical inability 
to move was allow to obstruct or postpone this visit. he did not exact 
from his family compliance with his example. few men, equally sincere 
in their faith, were as sparing in their censure and restrictions, 
with respect to the conduct of others, as my father. the character of 
my mother was no less devout; but her education had habituate her to 
a different mode of worship. the lonely of their dwelling prevent 
her from join any establish congregation; but she was punctual in 
the offices of prayer, and in the performance of hymn to her saviour, 
after the manner of the disciple of zinzendorf. my father refuse 
to interfere in her arrangements. his own system was embrace not, 
accurate speaking, because it was the best, but because it had been 
expressly prescribed to him. other modes, if practised by other persons, 
might be equally acceptable. 

his deportment to other was full of charity and mildness. a sad 
perpetual overspread his features, but was unmingled with stern or 
discontent. the tone of his voice, his gestures, his steps were all in 
tranquil unison. his conduct was characterise by a certain forbearance 
and humility, which secure the esteem of those to whom his tenet were 
most obnoxious. they might call him a fanatic and a dreamer, but they 
could not deny their venerate to his invincible candour and invariable 
integrity. his own belief of rectitude was the foundation of his 
happiness. this, however, was destined to find an end. 

sudden the sad that constant attend him was deepened. sighs, 
and even tears, sometimes escape him. to the expostulate of his wife 
he seldom answer any thing. when he design to be communicative, he 
hint that his peace of mind was flown, in consequence of deviation 
from his duty. a command had been laid upon him, which he had delay to 
perform. he felt as if a certain period of hesitation and reluctance 
had been allow him, but that this period was passed. he was no 
long permit to obey. the duty assign to him was transferred, in 
consequence of his disobedience, to another, and all that remain was 
to endure the penalty. 

he did not describe this penalty. it appear to be nothing more for 
some time than a sense of wrong. this was sufficient acute, and was 
aggravate by the belief that his offence was incapable of expiation. no 
one could contemplate the agony which he seem to suffer without the 
deepest compassion. time, instead of lighten the burthen, appear to 
add to it. at length he hint to his wife, that his end was near. his 
imagination did not prefigure the mode or the time of his decease, but 
was fraught with an incurable persuasion that his death was at hand. he 
was likewise haunt by the belief that the kind of death that await 
him was strange and terrible. his anticipation were thus far vague and 
indefinite; but they suffice to poison every moment of his being, and 
devote him to ceaseless anguish. 



chapter ii 


early in the morning of a sultry day in august, he left mettingen, to go 
to the city. he had seldom pass a day from home since his return from 
the shore of the ohio. some urgent engagement at this time existed, 
which would not admit of further delay. he return in the evening, but 
appear to be greatly oppress with fatigue. his silence and dejection 
were likewise in a more than ordinary degree conspicuous. my mother's 
brother, whose profession was that of a surgeon, chance to spend this 
night at our house. it was from him that i have frequent received an 
exact account of the mournful catastrophe that followed. 

as the evening advanced, my father's inquietude increased. he sat with 
his family as usual, but took no part in their conversation. he appear 
fully engross by his own reflections. occasional his countenance 
exhibit token of alarm; he gaze stedfast and wildly at the 
ceiling; and the exertion of his companion were scarcely sufficient 
to interrupt his reverie. on recover from these fits, he express no 
surprize; but pressing his hand to his head, complained, in a tremulous 
and terrify tone, that his brain was scorch to cinders. he would 
then betray mark of insupportable anxiety. 

my uncle perceived, by his pulse, that he was indisposed, but in no 
alarm degree, and ascribe appearances chiefly to the workings of his 
mind. he exhort him to recollection and composure, but in vain. at the 
hour of repose he readily retired to his chamber. at the persuasion of 
my mother he even undressed and went to bed. nothing could abate his 
restlessness. he checked her tender expostulate with some sternness. 
"be silent," said he, "for that which i feel there is but one cure, 
and that will shortly come. you can help me nothing. look to your own 
condition, and pray to god to strengthen you under the calamity that 
await you." "what am i to fear?" she answered. "what terrible disaster 
is it that you think of?" "peace--as yet i know it not myself, but come 
it will, and shortly." she repeated her inquiry and doubts; but he 
sudden put an end to the discourse, by a stern command to be silent. 

she had never before known him in this mood. hitherto all was benign in 
his deportment. her heart was pierce with sorrow at the contemplation 
of this change. she was utterly unable to account for it, or to figure 
to herself the species of disaster that was menaced. 

contrary to custom, the lamp, instead of being placed on the hearth, was 
left upon the table. over it against the wall there hung a small clock, 
so contrived as to strike a very hard stroke at the end of every sixth 
hour. that which was now approach was the signal for retiring to the 
fane at which he address his devotions. long habit had occasion him 
to be always awake at this hour, and the toll was instantly obeyed. 

now frequent and anxious glance were cast at the clock. not a single 
movement of the index appear to escape his notice. as the hour verge 
towards twelve his anxiety visibly augmented. the trepidation of my 
mother kept pace with those of her husband; but she was intimidate 
into silence. all that was left to her was to watch every change of his 
features, and give vent to her sympathy in tears. 

at length the hour was spent, and the clock tolled. the sound appear 
to communicate a shock to every part of my father's frame. he rose 
immediately, and threw over himself a loose gown. even this office 
was perform with difficulty, for his joint trembled, and his teeth 
chatter with dismay. at this hour his duty call him to the rock, and 
my mother naturally conclude that it was thither he intended to repair. 
yet these incident were so uncommon, as to fill her with astonishment 
and foreboding. she saw him leave the room, and heard his steps as they 
hasty descended the stairs. she half resolve to rise and pursue him, 
but the wild of the scheme quick suggest itself. he was go 
to a place whither no power on earth could induce him to suffer an 
attendant. 

the window of her chamber look toward the rock. the atmosphere was 
clear and calm, but the edifice could not be discover at that distance 
through the dusk. my mother's anxiety would not allow her to remain 
where she was. she rose, and seat herself at the window. she strained 
her sight to get a view of the dome, and of the path that led to it. the 
first paint itself with sufficient distinct on her fancy, but 
was undistinguishable by the eye from the rocky mass on which it was 
erected. the second could be imperfect seen; but her husband had 
already passed, or had taken a different direction. 

what was it that she feared? some disaster impende over her husband or 
herself. he had predict evils, but professed himself ignorant of what 
nature they were. when were they to come? was this night, or this hour 
to witness the accomplishment? she was torture with impatience, and 
uncertainty. all her fear were at present link to his person, and she 
gaze at the clock, with nearly as much eager as my father had done, 
in expectation of the next hour. 

an half hour pass away in this state of suspence. her eyes were fixed 
upon the rock; sudden it was illuminated. a light proceeding from the 
edifice, made every part of the scene visible. a gleam diffuse itself 
over the intermediate space, and instantly a loud report, like the 
explosion of a mine, followed. she utter an involuntary shriek, but 
the new sound that greet her ear, quick conquer her surprise. 
they were piercing shrieks, and utter without intermission. the gleam 
which had diffuse themselves far and wide were in a moment withdrawn, 
but the interior of the edifice was fill with rays. 

the first suggestion was that a pistol was discharged, and that the 
structure was on fire. she did not allow herself time to meditate a 
second thought, but rush into the entry and knock loud at the door 
of her brother's chamber. my uncle had been previous rouse by the 
noise, and instantly flew to the window. he also imagine what he saw 
to be fire. the loud and vehement shriek which succeed the first 
explosion, seem to be an invocation of succour. the incident was 
inexplicable; but he could not fail to perceive the propriety of 
hasten to the spot. he was unbolt the door, when his sister's 
voice was heard on the outside conjure him to come forth. 

he obey the summons with all the speed in his power. he stop not 
to question her, but hurried down stairs and across the meadow which lay 
between the house and the rock. the shriek were no long to be heard; 
but a blazing light was clearly discern between the column of the 
temple. irregular steps, hewn in the stone, led him to the summit. on 
three sides, this edifice touched the very verge of the cliff. on the 
fourth side, which might be regard as the front, there was an area 
of small extent, to which the rude staircase conduct you. my uncle 
speedy gain this spot. his strength was for a moment exhaust 
by his haste. he pause to rest himself. meanwhile he bent the most 
vigilant attention towards the object before him. 

within the column he beheld what he could no better describe, than 
by saying that it resemble a cloud impregnate with light. it had 
the bright of flame, but was without its upward motion. it did not 
occupy the whole area, and rose but a few feet above the floor. no 
part of the building was on fire. this appearance was astonishing. he 
approach the temple. as he went forward the light retired, and, when 
he put his feet within the apartment, utterly vanished. the sudden 
of this transition increase the dark that succeed in a tenfold 
degree. fear and wonder render him powerless. an occurrence like this, 
in a place assign to devotion, was adapt to intimidate the stoutest 
heart. 

his wandering thought were recall by the groan of one near him. 
his sight gradual recover its power, and he was able to discern my 
father stretch on the floor. at that moment, my mother and servant 
arrive with a lanthorn, and enable my uncle to examine more close 
this scene. my father, when he left the house, besides a loose upper 
vest and slippers, wore a shirt and drawers. now he was naked, his skin 
throughout the greater part of his body was scorch and bruised. his 
right arm exhibit mark as of have been struck by some heavy body. 
his clothes had been removed, and it was not immediately perceive that 
they were reduce to ashes. his slipper and his hair were untouched. 

he was remove to his chamber, and the requisite attention paid to his 
wounds, which gradual became more painful. a mortification speedy 
shew itself in the arm, which had been most hurt. soon after, the 
other wound parts exhibit the like appearance. 

immediately subsequent to this disaster, my father seem nearly in 
a state of insensibility. he was passive under every operation. he 
scarcely open his eyes, and was with difficulty prevail upon to 
answer the question that were put to him. by his imperfect account, it 
appeared, that while engaged in silent orisons, with thought full 
of confusion and anxiety, a faint gleam sudden shot athwart the 
apartment. his fancy immediately picture to itself, a person bearing 
a lamp. it seem to come from behind. he was in the act of turning to 
examine the visitant, when his right arm received a blow from a heavy 
club. at the same instant, a very bright spark was seen to light upon 
his clothes. in a moment, the whole was reduce to ashes. this was the 
sum of the information which he chose to give. there was somewhat in 
his manner that indicate an imperfect tale. my uncle was inclined to 
believe that half the truth had been suppressed. 

meanwhile, the disease thus wonderful generated, betray more 
terrible symptoms. fever and delirium terminate in lethargy slumber, 
which, in the course of two hours, gave place to death. yet not till 
insupportable exhalation and crawl putrefaction had driven from his 
chamber and the house every one whom their duty did not detain. 

such was the end of my father. none surely was ever more mysterious. 
when we recollect his gloomy anticipation and unconquerable anxiety; 
the security from human malice which his character, the place, and the 
condition of the times, might be supposed to confer; the purity and 
cloudless of the atmosphere, which render it impossible that 
lightning was the cause; what are the conclusion that we must form? 

the prelusive gleam, the blow upon his arm, the fatal spark, the 
explosion heard so far, the fiery cloud that environed him, without 
detriment to the structure, though compose of combustible materials, 
the sudden vanish of this cloud at my uncle's approach--what is the 
inference to be drawn from these facts? their truth cannot be doubted. 
my uncle's testimony is peculiarly worthy of credit, because no man's 
temper is more sceptical, and his belief is unalterable attach to 
natural causes. 

i was at this time a child of six years of age. the impression that 
were then made upon me, can never be effaced. i was ill qualified to 
judge respecting what was then passing; but as i advanced in age, and 
became more fully acquaint with these facts, they often became the 
subject of my thoughts. their resemblance to recent event revive them 
with new force in my memory, and made me more anxious to explain them. 
was this the penalty of disobedience? this the stroke of a vindictive 
and invisible hand? is it a fresh proof that the divine ruler interfere 
in human affairs, meditate an end, selects, and commission his agents, 
and enforces, by unequivocal sanctions, submission to his will? or, was 
it merely the irregular expansion of the fluid that impart warmth to 
our heart and our blood, cause by the fatigue of the preceding day, or 
flowing, by establish laws, from the condition of his thoughts? [*] 


* a case, in its symptom exactly parallel to this, is 
publish in one of the journal of florence. see, likewise, 
similar case report by messrs. merille and muraire, in 
the "journal de medicine," for february and may, 1783. the 
research of maffei and fontana have thrown some light upon 
this subject. 



chapter iii 


the shock which this disastrous occurrence occasion to my mother, was 
the foundation of a disease which carry her, in a few months, to the 
grave. my brother and myself were children at this time, and were now 
reduce to the condition of orphans. the property which our parent left 
was by no means inconsiderable. it was entrust to faithful hands, 
till we should arrive at a suitable age. meanwhile, our education was 
assign to a maiden aunt who reside in the city, and whose tender 
made us in a short time cease to regret that we had lost a mother. 

the years that succeed were tranquil and happy. our lives were 
molest by few of those care that are incident to childhood. by 
accident more than design, the indulgence and yielding temper of our 
aunt was mingle with resolution and stedfastness. she seldom deviate 
into either extreme of rigour or lenity. our social pleasure were 
subject to no unreasonable restraints. we were instruct in most 
branch of useful knowledge, and were save from the corruption and 
tyranny of college and boarding-schools. 

our companion were chiefly select from the children of our 
neighbours. between one of these and my brother, there quick grew the 
most affectionate intimacy. her name was catharine pleyel. she was rich, 
beautiful, and contrived to blend the most bewitch soft with 
the most exuberant vivacity. the tie by which my brother and she were 
united, seem to add force to the love which i bore her, and which 
was ample returned. between her and myself there was every circumstance 
tend to produce and foster friendship. our sex and age were the same. 
we live within sight of each other's abode. our temper were remarkably 
congenial, and the superintendant of our education not only prescribed 
to us the same pursuits, but allow us to cultivate them together. 

every day add strength to the triple bonds that united us. we 
gradual withdrew ourselves from the society of others, and found every 
moment irksome that was not devoted to each other. my brother's advance 
in age made no change in our situation. it was determined that his 
profession should be agriculture. his fortune exempt him from the 
necessity of personal labour. the task to be perform by him was 
nothing more than superintendance. the skill that was demand by this 
was merely theoretical, and was furnish by casual inspection, or 
by closet study. the attention that was paid to this subject did not 
seclude him for any long time from us, on whom time had no other effect 
than to augment our impatience in the absence of each other and of 
him. our tasks, our walks, our music, were seldom perform but in each 
other's company. 

it was easy to see that catharine and my brother were born for each 
other. the passion which they mutual entertain quick broke those 
bounds which extreme youth had set to it; confession were made or 
extorted, and their union was postpone only till my brother had 
pass his minority. the previous lapse of two years was constant and 
useful employed. 

o my brother! but the task i have set myself let me perform with 
steadiness. the felicity of that period was mar by no gloomy 
anticipations. the future, like the present, was serene. time was 
supposed to have only new delight in store. i mean not to dwell on 
previous incident long than is necessary to illustrate or explain 
the great event that have since happened. the nuptial day at length 
arrived. my brother took possession of the house in which he was born, 
and here the long protract marriage was solemnized. 

my father's property was equally divide between us. a neat dwelling, 
situated on the bank of the river, three quarters of a mile from my 
brother's, was now occupy by me. these domain were called, from the 
name of the first possessor, mettingen. i can scarcely account for my 
refuse to take up my abode with him, unless it were from a disposition 
to be an economist of pleasure. self-denial, seasonable exercised, is 
one means of enhance our gratifications. i was, beside, desirous of 
administer a fund, and regulate an household, of my own. the short 
distance allow us to exchange visit as often as we pleased. the 
walk from one mansion to the other was no undelightful prelude to our 
interviews. i was sometimes their visitant, and they, as frequently, 
were my guests. 

our education had been model by no religious standard. we were left 
to the guidance of our own understanding, and the casual impression 
which society might make upon us. my friend's temper, as well as my own, 
exempt us from much anxiety on this account. it must not be supposed 
that we were without religion, but with us it was the product of 
lively feelings, excited by reflection on our own happiness, and by the 
grandeur of external nature. we sought not a basis for our faith, in 
the weigh of proofs, and the dissection of creeds. our devotion was 
a mixed and casual sentiment, seldom verbally expressed, or solicitous 
sought, or careful retained. in the midst of present enjoyment, 
no thought was bestow on the future. as a consolation in calamity 
religion is dear. but calamity was yet at a distance, and its only 
tendency was to heighten enjoyment which need not this addition to 
satisfy every craving. 

my brother's situation was somewhat different. his deportment was grave, 
considerate, and thoughtful. i will not say whether he was indebted to 
sublime view for this disposition. human life, in his opinion, was 
made up of changeable elements, and the principles of duty were not 
easily unfolded. the future, either as anterior, or subsequent to death, 
was a scene that require some preparation and provision to be made for 
it. these position we could not deny, but what distinguished him was a 
propensity to ruminate on these truths. the image that visit us were 
blithsome and gay, but those with which he was most familiar were of 
an opposite hue. they did not generate affliction and fear, but they 
diffuse over his behaviour a certain air of forethought and sobriety. 
the principal effect of this temper was visible in his features and 
tones. these, in general, bespoke a sort of thrill melancholy. i 
scarcely ever knew him to laugh. he never accompany the lawless mirth 
of his companion with more than a smile, but his conduct was the same 
as ours. 

he partook of our occupation and amusement with a zeal not less than 
ours, but of a different kind. the diversity in our temper was never 
the parent of discord, and was scarcely a topic of regret. the scene 
was variegated, but not tarnish or disorder by it. it hinder the 
element in which we move from stagnating. some agitation and concussion 
is requisite to the due exercise of human understanding. in his studies, 
he pursue an austere and more arduous path. he was much conversant 
with the history of religious opinions, and took pains to ascertain 
their validity. he deem it indispensable to examine the ground of 
his belief, to settle the relation between motive and actions, the 
criterion of merit, and the kind and property of evidence. 

there was an obvious resemblance between him and my father, in their 
conception of the importance of certain topics, and in the light in 
which the vicissitudes of human life were accustomed to be viewed. 
their character were similar, but the mind of the son was enrich by 
science, and embellish with literature. 

the temple was no long assign to its ancient use. from an italy 
adventurer, who erroneous imagine that he could find employment 
for his skill, and sale for his sculpture in america, my brother had 
purchase a bust of cicero. he professed to have copy this piece from 
an antique dug up with his own hand in the environs of modena. of the 
truth of his assertion we were not qualified to judge; but the marble 
was pure and polished, and we were contented to admire the performance, 
without wait for the sanction of connoisseurs. we hire the same 
artist to hew a suitable pedestal from a neighbouring quarry. this was 
placed in the temple, and the bust rest upon it. opposite to this was 
a harpsichord, sheltered by a temporary roof from the weather. this was 
the place of resort in the evenings of summer. here we sung, and talked, 
and read, and occasional banqueted. every joyous and tender scene most 
dear to my memory, is connected with this edifice. here the performance 
of our musical and poetical ancestor were rehearsed. here my brother's 
children received the rudiments of their education; here a thousand 
conversations, pregnant with delight and improvement, took place; and 
here the social affection were accustomed to expand, and the tear of 
delicious sympathy to be shed. 

my brother was an indefatigable student. the author whom he read were 
numerous, but the chief object of his venerate was cicero. he was 
never tired of con and rehearse his productions. to understand 
them was not sufficient. he was anxious to discover the gesture and 
cadence with which they ought to be delivered. he was very scrupulous 
in select a true scheme of pronunciation for the latin tongue, and in 
adapt it to the words of his darling writer. his favorite occupation 
consist in embellish his rhetoric with all the proprieties of 
gesticulate and utterance. 

not contented with this, he was diligent in settle and restore the 
purity of the text. for this end, he collected all the edition and 
commentary that could be procured, and employ month of severe study 
in explore and compare them. he never betray more satisfaction 
than when he made a discovery of this kind. 

it was not till the addition of henry pleyel, my friend's only brother, 
to our society, that his passion for roman eloquence was countenance 
and foster by a sympathy of tastes. this young man had been some years 
in europe. we had separate at a very early age, and he was now return 
to spend the remainder of his days among us. 

our circle was greatly enliven by the accession of a new member. his 
conversation abound with novelty. his gaiety was almost boisterous, 
but was capable of yielding to a grave deportment when the occasion 
require it. his discernment was acute, but he was prone to view every 
object merely as supply material for mirth. his conception 
were ardent but ludicrous, and his memory, aided, as he honestly 
acknowledged, by his invention, was an inexhaustible fund of 
entertainment. 

his residence was at the same distance below the city as ours was above, 
but there seldom pass a day without our being favoured with a visit. 
my brother and he were endow with the same attachment to the latin 
writers; and pleyel was not behind his friend in his knowledge of the 
history and metaphysics of religion. their creeds, however, were in many 
respects opposite. where one discover only confirmation of his faith, 
the other could find nothing but reason for doubt. moral necessity, 
and calvinistic inspiration, were the prop on which my brother thought 
proper to repose. pleyel was the champion of intellectual liberty, and 
reject all guidance but that of his reason. their discussion were 
frequent, but, being manage with candour as well as with skill, they 
were always listen to by us with avid and benefit. 

pleyel, like his new friends, was fond of music and poetry. henceforth 
our concert consist of two violins, an harpsichord, and three voices. 
we were frequent remind how much happiness depend upon society. 
this new friend, though, before his arrival, we were sensible of no 
vacuity, could not now be spared. his departure would occasion a void 
which nothing could fill, and which would produce insupportable regret. 
even my brother, though his opinion were hourly assailed, and even the 
divinity of cicero contested, was captivate with his friend, and laid 
aside some part of his ancient gravity at pleyel's approach. 



chapter iv 


six years of uninterrupted happiness had roll away, since my brother's 
marriage. the sound of war had been heard, but it was at such a distance 
as to enhance our enjoyment by afford object of comparison. the 
indian were repulse on the one side, and canada was conquer on the 
other. revolution and battles, however calamitous to those who occupy 
the scene, contribute in some sort to our happiness, by agitate our 
mind with curiosity, and furnish cause of patriotic exultation. 
four children, three of whom were of an age to compensate, by their 
personal and mental progress, the care of which they had been, at a 
more helpless age, the objects, exercise my brother's tenderness. the 
fourth was a charming babe that promise to display the image of her 
mother, and enjoy perfect health. to these were add a sweet girl 
fourteen years old, who was love by all of us, with an affection more 
than parental. 

her mother's story was a mournful one. she had come hither from england 
when this child was an infant, alone, without friends, and without 
money. she appear to have embark in a hasty and clandestine 
manner. she pass three years of solitude and anguish under my aunt's 
protection, and die a martyr to woe; the source of which she could, by 
no importunities, be prevail upon to unfold. her education and manners 
bespoke her to be of no mean birth. her last moments were render 
serene, by the assurance she received from my aunt, that her daughter 
should experience the same protection that had been extend to herself. 

on my brother's marriage, it was agree that she should make a part of 
his family. i cannot do justice to the attraction of this girl. perhaps 
the tender she excited might partly originate in her personal 
resemblance to her mother, whose character and misfortune were 
still fresh in our remembrance. she was habitual pensive, and this 
circumstance tend to remind the spectator of her friendless condition; 
and yet that epithet was surely misapply in this case. this being was 
cherish by those with whom she now resided, with unspeakable fondness. 
every exertion was made to enlarge and improve her mind. her safety 
was the object of a solicitude that almost exceed the bounds of 
discretion. our affection indeed could scarcely transcend her merits. 
she never met my eye, or occur to my reflections, without exciting 
a kind of enthusiasm. her softness, her intelligence, her equanimity, 
never shall i see surpassed. i have often shed tear of pleasure at her 
approach, and pressed her to my bosom in an agony of fondness. 

while every day was add to the charm of her person, and the stores 
of her mind, there occur an event which threaten to deprive us 
of her. an officer of some rank, who had been disabled by a wound 
at quebec, had employ himself, since the ratify of peace, in 
travel through the colonies. he remain a considerable period at 
philadelphia, but was at last prepare for his departure. no one had 
been more frequent honour with his visit than mrs. baynton, a 
worthy lady with whom our family were intimate. he went to her house 
with a view to perform a farewell visit, and was on the point of taking 
his leave, when i and my young friend enter the apartment. it is 
impossible to describe the emotion of the stranger, when he fixed his 
eyes upon my companion. he was motionless with surprise. he was unable 
to conceal his feelings, but sat silent gaze at the spectacle before 
him. at length he turn to mrs. baynton, and more by his looks and 
gesture than by words, besought her for an explanation of the scene. 
he seize the hand of the girl, who, in her turn, was surprise by his 
behaviour, and drawing her forward, said in an eager and faultere 
tone, who is she? whence do she come? what is her name? 

the answer that were given only increase the confusion of his 
thoughts. he was successive told, that she was the daughter of one 
whose name was louisa conway, who arrive among us at such a time, who 
sedulous conceal her parentage, and the motive of her flight, whose 
incurable grief had finally destroy her, and who had left this child 
under the protection of her friends. have heard the tale, he melt 
into tears, eager clasp the young lady in his arms, and call 
himself her father. when the tumult excited in his breast by this 
unlooked-for meeting were somewhat subsided, he gratify our curiosity 
by relate the following incidents. 

"miss conway was the only daughter of a banker in london, who discharge 
towards her every duty of an affectionate father. he had chance to fall 
into her company, had been subdued by her attractions, had tender her 
his hand, and been joyful accept both by parent and child. his wife 
had given him every proof of the fondest attachment. her father, who 
possessed immense wealth, treat him with distinguished respect, 
liberally supply his wants, and had made one condition of his consent 
to their union, a resolution to take up their abode with him. 

"they had pass three years of conjugal felicity, which had been 
augment by the birth of this child; when his professional duty call 
him into germany. it was not without an arduous struggle, that she was 
persuade to relinquish the design of accompany him through all the 
toils and peril of war. no parting was ever more distressful. they 
strove to alleviate, by frequent letters, the evil of their lot. those 
of his wife, breathe nothing but anxiety for his safety, and impatience 
of his absence. at length, a new arrangement was made, and he was 
oblige to repair from westphalia to canada. one advantage attend this 
change. it afford him an opportunity of meeting his family. his 
wife anticipate this interview, with no less rapture than himself. he 
hurried to london, and the moment he alight from the stage-coach, ran 
with all speed to mr. conway's house. 

"it was an house of mourning. his father was overwhelm with grief, and 
incapable of answer his inquiries. the servants, sorrowful and mute, 
were equally refractory. he explore the house, and call on the name 
of his wife and daughter, but his summons was fruitless. at length, 
this new disaster was explained. two days before his arrival, his wife's 
chamber was found empty. no search, however diligent and anxious, could 
trace her steps. no cause could be assign for her disappearance. the 
mother and child had flee away together. 

"new exertion were made, her chamber and cabinet were ransacked, but 
no vestige was found serving to inform them as to the motive of her 
flight, whether it had been voluntary or otherwise, and in what corner 
of the kingdom or of the world she was concealed. who shall describe the 
sorrow and amaze of the husband? his restlessness, his vicissitudes 
of hope and fear, and his ultimate despair? his duty call him to 
america. he had been in this city, and had frequent pass the door of 
the house in which his wife, at that moment, resided. her father had not 
remit his exertion to elucidate this painful mystery, but they had 
failed. this disappointment hasten his death; in consequence of which, 
louisa's father became possessor of his immense property." 

this tale was a copious theme of speculation. a thousand question were 
start and discuss in our domestic circle, respecting the motive 
that influence mrs. stuart to abandon her country. it did not appear 
that her proceeding was involuntary. we recall and review every 
particular that had fallen under our own observation. by none of these 
were we furnish with a clue. her conduct, after the most rigorous 
scrutiny, still remain an impenetrable secret. on a near view, major 
stuart prove himself a man of most amiable character. his attachment 
to louisa appear hourly to increase. she was no stranger to the 
sentiment suitable to her new character. she could not but readily 
embrace the scheme which was propose to her, to return with her father 
to england. this scheme his regard for her induce him, however, to 
postpone. some time was necessary to prepare her for so great a change 
and enable her to think without agony of her separation from us. 

i was not without hope of prevailing on her father entire to 
relinquish this unwelcome design. meanwhile, he pursue his travels 
through the southern colonies, and his daughter continue with us. 
louisa and my brother frequent received letters from him, which 
indicate a mind of no common order. they were fill with amuse 
details, and profound reflections. while here, he often partook of 
our evening conversation at the temple; and since his departure, his 
correspondence had frequent supply us with topic of discourse. 

one afternoon in may, the bland of the air, and bright of the 
verdure, induce us to assemble, early than usual, in the temple. 
we female were busy at the needle, while my brother and pleyel were 
bandy quotation and syllogisms. the point discuss was the merit of 
the oration for cluentius, as descriptive, first, of the genius of the 
speaker; and, secondly, of the manners of the times. pleyel labour to 
extenuate both these species of merit, and task his ingenuity, to shew 
that the orator had embrace a bad cause; or, at least, a doubtful one. 
he urged, that to rely on the exaggeration of an advocate, or to 
make the picture of a single family a model from which to sketch the 
condition of a nation, was absurd. the controversy was sudden divert 
into a new channel, by a misquotation. pleyel accused his companion of 
saying "polliciatur" when he should have said "polliceretur." nothing 
would decide the contest, but an appeal to the volume. my brother was 
return to the house for this purpose, when a servant met him with 
a letter from major stuart. he immediately return to read it in our 
company. 

besides affectionate compliments to us, and paternal benediction 
on louisa, his letter contained a description of a waterfall on the 
monongahela. a sudden gust of rain falling, we were compel to remove 
to the house. the storm pass away, and a radiant moon-light succeeded. 
there was no motion to resume our seat in the temple. we therefore 
remain where we were, and engaged in sprightly conversation. the 
letter lately received naturally suggest the topic. a parallel was 
drawn between the cataract there described, and one which pleyel had 
discover among the alps of glarus. in the state of the former, some 
particular was mentioned, the truth of which was questionable. to settle 
the dispute which thence arose, it was propose to have recourse to the 
letter. my brother search for it in his pocket. it was no where to be 
found. at length, he remember to have left it in the temple, and he 
determined to go in search of it. his wife, pleyel, louisa, and myself, 
remain where we were. 

in a few minutes he returned. i was somewhat interested in the dispute, 
and was therefore impatient for his return; yet, as i heard him 
ascend the stairs, i could not but remark, that he had execute his 
intention with remarkable dispatch. my eyes were fixed upon him on his 
entrance. methought he brought with him looks considerably different 
from those with which he departed. wonder, and a slight portion of 
anxiety were mingle in them. his eyes seem to be in search of some 
object. they pass quick from one person to another, till they rest 
on his wife. she was seat in a careless attitude on the sofa, in the 
same spot as before. she had the same muslin in her hand, by which her 
attention was chiefly engrossed. 

the moment he saw her, his perplexity visibly increased. he quiet 
seat himself, and fix his eyes on the floor, appear to be 
absorb in meditation. these singular suspend the inquiry which 
i was prepare to make respecting the letter. in a short time, the 
company relinquish the subject which engaged them, and direct their 
attention to wieland. they thought that he only wait for a pause in 
the discourse, to produce the letter. the pause was uninterrupted by 
him. at length pleyel said, "well, i suppose you have found the letter." 

"no," said he, without any abate of his gravity, and look 
stedfast at his wife, "i did not mount the hill."--"why 
not?"--"catharine, have you not move from that spot since i left the 
room?"--she was affected with the solemnity of his manner, and lay 
down her work, answer in a tone of surprise, "no; why do you ask that 
question?"--his eyes were again fixed upon the floor, and he did not 
immediately answer. at length, he said, look round upon us, "is it 
true that catharine did not follow me to the hill? that she did not just 
now enter the room?"--we assured him, with one voice, that she had not 
been absent for a moment, and inquire into the motive of his questions. 

"your assurances," said he, "are solemn and unanimous; and yet i must 
deny credit to your assertions, or disbelieve the testimony of my 
senses, which informed me, when i was half way up the hill, that 
catharine was at the bottom." 

we were confounded at this declaration. pleyel rally him with great 
levity on his behaviour. he listen to his friend with calmness, but 
without any relaxation of features. 

"one thing," said he with emphasis, "is true; either i heard my 
wife's voice at the bottom of the hill, or i do not hear your voice at 
present." 

"truly," return pleyel, "it is a sad dilemma to which you have reduce 
yourself. certain it is, if our eyes can give us certainty that your 
wife has been sitting in that spot during every moment of your absence. 
you have heard her voice, you say, upon the hill. in general, her voice, 
like her temper, is all softness. to be heard across the room, she is 
oblige to exert herself. while you were gone, if i mistake not, she did 
not utter a word. clara and i had all the talk to ourselves. still it 
may be that she held a whisper conference with you on the hill; but 
tell us the particulars." 

"the conference," said he, "was short; and far from being carry on in 
a whisper. you know with what intention i left the house. half way to 
the rock, the moon was for a moment hidden from us by a cloud. i never 
knew the air to be more bland and more calm. in this interval i glance 
at the temple, and thought i saw a glimmer between the columns. it 
was so faint, that it would not perhaps have been visible, if the moon 
had not been shrowded. i look again, but saw nothing. i never visit 
this building alone, or at night, without being remind of the fate 
of my father. there was nothing wonderful in this appearance; yet it 
suggest something more than mere solitude and dark in the same 
place would have done. 

"i kept on my way. the image that haunt me were solemn; and i 
entertain an imperfect curiosity, but no fear, as to the nature of 
this object. i had ascend the hill little more than half way, when a 
voice call me from behind. the accent were clear, distinct, powerful, 
and were uttered, as i fully believed, by my wife. her voice is 
not commonly so loud. she has seldom occasion to exert it, but, 
nevertheless, i have sometimes heard her call with force and eagerness. 
if my ear was not deceived, it was her voice which i heard. 

"stop, go no further. there is danger in your path." the sudden 
and unexpected of this warning, the tone of alarm with which it was 
given, and, above all, the persuasion that it was my wife who spoke, 
were enough to disconcert and make me pause. i turn and listen to 
assure myself that i was not mistaken. the deepest silence succeeded. at 
length, i spoke in my turn. who calls? is it you, catharine? i stop 
and presently received an answer. "yes, it is i; go not up; return 
instantly; you are want at the house." still the voice was 
catharine's, and still it proceed from the foot of the stairs. 

"what could i do? the warning was mysterious. to be utter by catharine 
at a place, and on an occasion like these, enhance the mystery. i could 
do nothing but obey. accordingly, i trod back my steps, expect that 
she wait for me at the bottom of the hill. when i reach the 
bottom, no one was visible. the moon-light was once more universal and 
brilliant, and yet, as far as i could see no human or moving figure 
was discernible. if she had return to the house, she must have use 
wondrous expedition to have pass already beyond the reach of my eye. 
i exert my voice, but in vain. to my repeated exclamations, no answer 
was returned. 

"ruminating on these incidents, i return hither. there was no room 
to doubt that i had heard my wife's voice; attend incident were not 
easily explained; but you now assure me that nothing extraordinary has 
happen to urge my return, and that my wife has not move from her 
seat." 

such was my brother's narrative. it was heard by us with different 
emotions. pleyel did not scruple to regard the whole as a deception of 
the senses. perhaps a voice had been heard; but wieland's imagination 
had misle him in supposing a resemblance to that of his wife, and 
give such a signification to the sounds. according to his custom 
he spoke what he thought. sometimes, he made it the theme of grave 
discussion, but more frequent treat it with ridicule. he did not 
believe that sober reasoning would convince his friend, and gaiety, he 
thought, was useful to take away the solemnity which, in a mind like 
wieland's, an accident of this kind was calculate to produce. 

pleyel propose to go in search of the letter. he went and speedy 
returned, bearing it in his hand. he had found it open on the pedestal; 
and neither voice nor visage had risen to impede his design. 

catharine was endow with an uncommon portion of good sense; but her 
mind was accessible, on this quarter, to wonder and panic. that her 
voice should be thus inexplicably and unwarrantable assumed, was a 
source of no small disquietude. she admitted the plausible of the 
argument by which pleyel endeavour to prove, that this was no more 
than an auricular deception; but this conviction was sure to be shaken, 
when she turn her eyes upon her husband, and perceive that pleyel's 
logic was far from have produce the same effect upon him. 

as to myself, my attention was engaged by this occurrence. i could not 
fail to perceive a shadowy resemblance between it and my father's death. 
on the latter event, i had frequent reflected; my reflection never 
conduct me to certainty, but the doubt that exist were not of a 
torment kind. i could not deny that the event was miraculous, and 
yet i was invincible averse to that method of solution. my wonder was 
excited by the inscrutable of the cause, but my wonder was unmixed 
with sorrow or fear. it begat in me a thrilling, and not unplease 
solemnity. similar to these were the sensation produce by the recent 
adventure. 

but its effect upon my brother's imagination was of chief moment. 
all that was desirable was, that it should be regard by him with 
indifference. the worst effect that could flow, was not indeed very 
formidable. yet i could not bear to think that his senses should be the 
victim of such delusion. it argue a disease condition of his frame, 
which might show itself hereafter in more dangerous symptoms. the will 
is the tool of the understanding, which must fashion its conclusion 
on the notice of sense. if the senses be depraved, it is impossible to 
calculate the evil that may flow from the consequent deduction of the 
understanding. 

i said, this man is of an ardent and melancholy character. those idea 
which, in others, are casual or obscure, which are entertain in 
moments of abstraction and solitude, and easily escape when the scene is 
changed, have obtain an immoveable hold upon his mind. the conclusion 
which long habit has render familiar, and, in some sort, palpable to 
his intellect, are drawn from the deepest sources. all his action and 
practical sentiment are link with long and abstruse deduction 
from the system of divine government and the law of our intellectual 
constitution. he is, in some respects, an enthusiast, but is fortify 
in his belief by innumerable argument and subtilties. 

his father's death was always regard by him as flowing from a direct 
and supernatural decree. it visit his meditation often than it did 
mine. the trace which it left were more gloomy and permanent. this new 
incident had a visible effect in augment his gravity. he was less 
disposed than formerly to converse and reading. when we sift his 
thoughts, they were generally found to have a relation, more or less 
direct, with this incident. it was difficult to ascertain the exact 
species of impression which it made upon him. he never introduce the 
subject into conversation, and listen with a silent and half-serious 
smile to the satirical effusion of pleyel. 

one evening we chance to be alone together in the temple. i seize that 
opportunity of investigate the state of his thoughts. after a pause, 
which he seem in no wise inclined to interrupt, i spoke to him--"how 
almost palpable is this dark; yet a ray from above would dispel it." 
"ay," said wieland, with fervor, "not only the physical, but moral night 
would be dispelled." "but why," said i, "must the divine will address 
its precept to the eye?" he smile significantly. "true," said he, "the 
understanding has other avenues." "you have never," said i, approach 
near to the point--"you have never told me in what way you considered 
the late extraordinary incident." "there is no determinate way in which 
the subject can be viewed. here is an effect, but the cause is utterly 
inscrutable. to suppose a deception will not do. such is possible, but 
there are twenty other supposition more probable. they must all be set 
aside before we reach that point." "what are these twenty suppositions?" 
"it is needless to mention them. they are only less improbable than 
pleyel's. time may convert one of them into certainty. till then it is 
useless to expatiate on them." 



chapter v 


some time had elapse when there happen another occurrence, still more 
remarkable. pleyel, on his return from europe, brought information of 
considerable importance to my brother. my ancestor were noble saxons, 
and possessed large domain in lusatia. the prussian war had destroy 
those person whose right to these estate preclude my brother's. 
pleyel had been exact in his inquiries, and had discover that, by the 
law of male-primogeniture, my brother's claim were superior to those 
of any other person now living. nothing was wanting but his presence in 
that country, and a legal application to establish this claim. 

pleyel strenuous recommend this measure. the advantage he thought 
attend it were numerous, and it would argue the utmost folly to 
neglect them. contrary to his expectation he found my brother averse 
to the scheme. slight efforts, he, at first, thought would subdue his 
reluctance; but he found this aversion by no means slight. the interest 
that he took in the happiness of his friend and his sister, and his own 
partiality to the saxon soil, from which he had likewise sprung, and 
where he had spent several years of his youth, made him redouble his 
exertion to win wieland's consent. for this end he employ every 
argument that his invention could suggest. he painted, in attractive 
colours, the state of manners and government in that country, the 
security of civil rights, and the freedom of religious sentiments. he 
dwelt on the privilege of wealth and rank, and drew from the servile 
condition of one class, an argument in favor of his scheme, since the 
revenue and power annexe to a germany principality afford so large a 
field for benevolence. the evil flowing from this power, in malignant 
hands, was proportion to the good that would arise from the virtuous 
use of it. hence, wieland, in forbearing to claim his own, withheld all 
the positive felicity that would accrue to his vassal from his success, 
and hazard all the misery that would redound from a less enlightened 
proprietor. 

it was easy for my brother to repel these arguments, and to shew that no 
spot on the globe enjoy equal security and liberty to that which he 
at present inhabited. that if the saxon had nothing to fear from 
mis-government, the external cause of havoc and alarm were numerous and 
manifest. the recent devastate committed by the prussian furnish 
a specimen of these. the horrors of war would always impend over them, 
till germany were seize and divide by austria and prussian tyrants; 
an event which he strong suspect was at no great distance. but 
setting these consideration aside, was it laudable to grasp at wealth 
and power even when they were within our reach? were not these the two 
great source of depravity? what security had he, that in this change 
of place and condition, he should not degenerate into a tyrant and 
voluptuary? power and riches were chiefly to be dread on account of 
their tendency to deprave the possessor. he held them in abhorrence, not 
only as instrument of misery to others, but to him on whom they 
were conferred. besides, riches were comparative, and was he not rich 
already? he live at present in the bosom of security and luxury. all 
the instrument of pleasure, on which his reason or imagination set any 
value, were within his reach. but these he must forego, for the sake of 
advantage which, whatever were their value, were as yet uncertain. in 
pursuit of an imaginary addition to his wealth, he must reduce himself 
to poverty, he must exchange present certainty for what was distant 
and contingent; for who know not that the law is a system of expence, 
delay and uncertainty? if he should embrace this scheme, it would lay 
him under the necessity of making a voyage to europe, and remain for 
a certain period, separate from his family. he must undergo the peril 
and discomfort of the ocean; he must divest himself of all domestic 
pleasures; he must deprive his wife of her companion, and his children 
of a father and instructor, and all for what? for the ambiguous 
advantage which overgrown wealth and flagitious tyranny have to bestow? 
for a precarious possession in a land of turbulence and war? advantages, 
which will not certainly be gained, and of which the acquisition, if it 
were sure, is necessarily distant. 

pleyel was enamoured of his scheme on account of its intrinsic benefits, 
but, likewise, for other reasons. his abode at leipsig made that country 
appear to him like home. he was connected with this place by many social 
ties. while there he had not escape the amorous contagion. but the 
lady, though her heart was impress in his favor, was compel to 
bestow her hand upon another. death had remove this impediment, and 
he was now invite by the lady herself to return. this he was of course 
determined to do, but was anxious to obtain the company of wieland; 
he could not bear to think of an eternal separation from his present 
associates. their interest, he thought, would be no less promote by the 
change than his own. hence he was importunate and indefatigable in his 
argument and solicitations. 

he knew that he could not hope for mine or his sister's ready 
concurrence in this scheme. should the subject be mention to us, we 
should league our effort against him, and strengthen that reluctance 
in wieland which already was sufficient difficult to conquer. he, 
therefore, anxious conceal from us his purpose. if wieland were 
previous enlist in his cause, he would find it a less difficult task 
to overcome our aversion. my brother was silent on this subject, because 
he believe himself in no danger of change his opinion, and he was 
willing to save us from any uneasiness. the mere mention of such 
a scheme, and the possibility of his embrace it, he knew, would 
considerably impair our tranquillity. 

one day, about three week subsequent to the mysterious call, it was 
agree that the family should be my guests. seldom had a day been pass 
by us, of more serene enjoyment. pleyel had promise us his company, but 
we did not see him till the sun had nearly declined. he brought with 
him a countenance that betoken disappointment and vexation. he did not 
wait for our inquiries, but immediately explain the cause. two days 
before a packet had arrive from hamburgh, by which he had flatter 
himself with the expectation of receiving letters, but no letters had 
arrived. i never saw him so much subdued by an untoward event. his 
thought were employ in account for the silence of his friends. 
he was seize with the torment of jealousy, and suspect nothing less 
than the infidelity of her to whom he had devoted his heart. the silence 
must have been concerted. her sickness, or absence, or death, would have 
increase the certainty of some one's have written. no supposition 
could be form but that his mistress had grown indifferent, or that she 
had transfer her affection to another. the miscarry of a letter 
was hardly within the reach of possibility. from leipsig to hamburgh, 
and from hamburgh hither, the conveyance was expose to no hazard. 

he had been so long detain in america chiefly in consequence of 
wieland's aversion to the scheme which he proposed. he now became more 
impatient than ever to return to europe. when he reflect that, by his 
delays, he had probably forfeit the affection of his mistress, his 
sensation amount to agony. it only remained, by his speedy departure, 
to repair, if possible, or prevent so intolerable an evil. already he 
had half resolve to embark in this very ship which, he was informed, 
would set out in a few week on her return. 

meanwhile he determined to make a new attempt to shake the resolution of 
wieland. the evening was somewhat advanced when he invite the latter 
to walk abroad with him. the invitation was accepted, and they left 
catharine, louisa and me, to amuse ourselves by the best means in our 
power. during this walk, pleyel renew the subject that was nearest 
his heart. he re-urged all his former arguments, and placed them in more 
forcible lights. 

they promise to return shortly; but hour after hour passed, and they 
made not their appearance. engaged in sprightly conversation, it was not 
till the clock struck twelve that we were remind of the lapse of time. 
the absence of our friends excited some uneasy apprehensions. we were 
express our fears, and compare our conjecture as to what might be 
the cause, when they enter together. there were indication in their 
countenance that struck me mute. these were unnoticed by catharine, who 
was eager to express her surprize and curiosity at the length of their 
walk. as they listen to her, i remark that their surprize was not 
less than ours. they gaze in silence on each other, and on her. i 
watch their looks, but could not understand the emotion that were 
written in them. 

these appearances divert catharine's inquiry into a new channel. 
what did they mean, she asked, by their silence, and by their thus 
gaze wildly at each other, and at her? pleyel profit by this hint, 
and assume an air of indifference, frame some trifling excuse, at the 
same time dart significant glance at wieland, as if to caution him 
against disclose the truth. my brother said nothing, but deliver 
himself up to meditation. i likewise was silent, but burn with 
impatience to fathom this mystery. presently my brother and his wife, 
and louisa, return home. pleyel proposed, of his own accord, to be 
my guest for the night. this circumstance, in addition to those which 
preceded, gave new edge to my wonder. 

as soon as we were left alone, pleyel's countenance assume an air of 
seriousness, and even consternation, which i had never before beheld in 
him. the steps with which he measured the floor betoken the trouble of 
his thoughts. my inquiry were suspend by the hope that he would give 
me the information that i want without the importune of questions. 
i wait some time, but the confusion of his thought appear in no 
degree to abate. at length i mention the apprehension which their 
unusual absence had occasioned, and which were increase by their 
behaviour since their return, and solicit an explanation. he stop 
when i began to speak, and look stedfast at me. when i had done, 
he said, to me, in a tone which faultere through the vehemence of his 
emotions, "how were you employ during our absence?" "in turning over 
the della crusca dictionary, and talk on different subjects; but 
just before your entrance, we were torment ourselves with omen and 
prognostick relative to your absence." "catherine was with you the 
whole time?" "yes." "but are you sure?" "most sure. she was not absent a 
moment." he stood, for a time, as if to assure himself of my sincerity. 
then, clinch his hands, and wildly lift them above his head, "lo," 
cry he, "i have news to tell you. the baroness de stolberg is dead?" 

this was her whom he loved. i was not surprise at the agitation which 
he betrayed. "but how was the information procured? how was the truth 
of this news connected with the circumstance of catharine's remain in 
our company?" he was for some time inattentive to my questions. when he 
spoke, it seem merely a continuation of the reverie into which he had 
been plunged. 

"and yet it might be a mere deception. but could both of us in that 
case have been deceived? a rare and prodigious coincidence! barely not 
impossible. and yet, if the accent be oracular--theresa is dead. no, 
no," continue he, covering his face with his hands, and in a tone half 
broken into sobs, "i cannot believe it. she has not written, but if 
she were dead, the faithful bertrand would have given me the earliest 
information. and yet if he knew his master, he must have easily guess 
at the effect of such tidings. in pity to me he was silent." 

"clara, forgive me; to you, this behaviour is mysterious. i will explain 
as well as i am able. but say not a word to catharine. her strength of 
mind is inferior to your's. she will, besides, have more reason to be 
startled. she is wieland's angel." 

pleyel proceed to inform me, for the first time, of the scheme which 
he had pressed, with so much earnestness, on my brother. he enumerate 
the objection which had been made, and the industry with which he 
had endeavour to confute them. he mention the effect upon his 
resolution produce by the failure of a letter. "during our late walk," 
continue he, "i introduce the subject that was nearest my heart. 
i re-urged all my former arguments, and placed them in more forcible 
lights. wieland was still refractory. he expatiate on the peril of 
wealth and power, on the sacred of conjugal and parental duties, and 
the happiness of mediocrity. 

"no wonder that the time passed, unperceived, away. our whole soul were 
engaged in this cause. several times we came to the foot of the rock; 
as soon as we perceive it, we change our course, but never fail to 
terminate our circuitous and devious ramble at this spot. at length your 
brother observed, 'we seem to be led hither by a kind of fatality. since 
we are so near, let us ascend and rest ourselves a while. if you are not 
weary of this argument we will resume it there.' 

"i tacit consented. we mount the stairs, and drawing the sofa in 
front of the river, we seat ourselves upon it. i took up the thread of 
our discourse where we had drop it. i ridicule his dread of the sea, 
and his attachment to home. i kept on in this strain, so congenial with 
my disposition, for some time, uninterrupted by him. at length, he said 
to me, "suppose now that i, whom argument has not convinced, should 
yield to ridicule, and should agree that your scheme is eligible; what 
will you have gained? nothing. you have other enemy beside myself to 
encounter. when you have vanquish me, your toil has scarcely begun. 
there are my sister and wife, with whom it will remain for you to 
maintain the contest. and trust me, they are adversary whom all your 
force and stratagem will never subdue." i insinuate that they would 
model themselves by his will: that catharine would think obedience her 
duty. he answered, with some quickness, "you mistake. their concurrence 
is indispensable. it is not my custom to exact sacrifice of this kind. 
i live to be their protector and friend, and not their tyrant and foe. 
if my wife shall deem her happiness, and that of her children, most 
consult by remain where she is, here she shall remain." "but," said 
i, "when she know your pleasure, will she not conform to it?" before 
my friend had time to answer this question, a negative was clearly and 
distinct utter from another quarter. it did not come from one side 
or the other, from before us or behind. whence then did it come? by 
whose organ was it fashioned? 

"if any uncertainty had exist with regard to these particulars, it 
would have been remove by a deliberate and equally distinct repetition 
of the same monosyllable, "no." the voice was my sister's. it appear 
to come from the roof. i start from my seat. catharine, exclaim i, 
where are you? no answer was returned. i search the room, and the 
area before it, but in vain. your brother was motionless in his seat. 
i return to him, and placed myself again by his side. my astonishment 
was not less than his." 

"well," said he, at length, "what think you of this? this is the 
self-same voice which i formerly heard; you are now convinced that my 
ear were well informed." 

"yes," said i, "this, it is plain, is no fiction of the fancy." we again 
sunk into mutual and thoughtful silence. a recollection of the hour, and 
of the length of our absence, made me at last propose to return. we 
rose up for this purpose. in do this, my mind revert to the 
contemplation of my own condition. "yes," said i aloud, but without 
particularly address myself to wieland, "my resolution is taken. i 
cannot hope to prevail with my friends to accompany me. they may doze 
away their days on the bank of schuylkill, but as to me, i go in the 
next vessel; i will fly to her presence, and demand the reason of this 
extraordinary silence." 

"i had scarcely finished the sentence, when the same mysterious voice 
exclaimed, "you shall not go. the seal of death is on her lips. her 
silence is the silence of the tomb." think of the effects which accent 
like these must have had upon me. i shudder as i listened. as soon as 
i recover from my first amazement, "who is it that speaks?" said i, 
"whence did you procure these dismal tidings?" i did not wait long for 
an answer. "from a source that cannot fail. be satisfied. she is dead." 
you may just be surprised, that, in the circumstances in which i heard 
the tidings, and notwithstanding the mystery which environed him by whom 
they were imparted, i could give an undivided attention to the facts, 
which were the subject of our dialogue. i eager inquired, when and 
where did she die? what was the cause of her death? was her death 
absolutely certain? an answer was return only to the last of these 
questions. "yes," was pronounced by the same voice; but it now sound 
from a greater distance, and the deepest silence was all the return made 
to my subsequent interrogatories. 

"it was my sister's voice; but it could not be utter by her; and yet, 
if not by her, by whom was it uttered? when we return hither, and 
discover you together, the doubt that had previous exist was 
removed. it was manifest that the intimate came not from her. yet if 
not from her, from whom could it come? are the circumstances attend 
the impart of this news proof that the tidings are true? god forbid 
that they should be true." 

here pleyel sunk into anxious silence, and gave me leisure to ruminate 
on this inexplicable event. i am at a loss to describe the sensation 
that affected me. i am not fearful of shadows. the tale of apparition 
and enchantment did not possess that power over my belief which could 
even render them interesting. i saw nothing in them but ignorance and 
folly, and was a stranger even to that terror which is pleasing. but 
this incident was different from any that i had ever before known. here 
were proof of a sensible and intelligent existence, which could not 
be denied. here was information obtain and impart by means 
unquestionable super-human. 

that there are conscious beings, beside ourselves, in existence, whose 
mode of activity and information surpass our own, can scarcely be 
denied. is there a glimpse afford us into a world of these superior 
beings? my heart was scarcely large enough to give admittance to 
so swelling a thought. an awe, the sweetest and most solemn that 
imagination can conceive, pervade my whole frame. it forsook me not 
when i part from pleyel and retired to my chamber. an impulse was 
given to my spirits utterly incompatible with sleep. i pass the night 
wakeful and full of meditation. i was impress with the belief of 
mysterious, but not of malignant agency. hitherto nothing had occur 
to persuade me that this airy minister was busy to evil rather than to 
good purposes. on the contrary, the idea of superior virtue had always 
been associate in my mind with that of superior power. the warning 
that had thus been heard appear to have been prompt by beneficent 
intentions. my brother had been hinder by this voice from ascend 
the hill. he was told that danger lurk in his path, and his obedience 
to the intimate had perhaps save him from a destiny similar to that 
of my father. 

pleyel had been rescue from torment uncertainty, and from the 
hazard and fatigues of a fruitless voyage, by the same interposition. 
it had assured him of the death of his theresa. 

this woman was then dead. a confirmation of the tidings, if true, would 
speedy arrive. was this confirmation to be deprecate or desired? 
by her death, the tie that attach him to europe, was taken away. 
henceforward every motive would combine to retain him in his native 
country, and we were rescue from the deep regrets that would accompany 
his hopeless absence from us. propitious was the spirit that impart 
these tidings. propitious he would perhaps have been, if he had been 
instrumental in producing, as well as in communicate the tidings of 
her death. propitious to us, the friends of pleyel, to whom has thereby 
been secure the enjoyment of his society; and not unpropitious to 
himself; for though this object of his love be snatch away, is there 
not another who is able and willing to console him for her loss? 

twenty days after this, another vessel arrive from the same port. in 
this interval, pleyel, for the most part, estrange himself from his old 
companions. he was become the prey of a gloomy and unsociable grief. 
his walk were limited to the bank of the delaware. this bank is an 
artificial one. reeds and the river are on one side, and a watery marsh 
on the other, in that part which bound his lands, and which extend 
from the mouth of hollander's creek to that of schuylkill. no scene can 
be imagine less entice to a lover of the picturesque than this. the 
shore is deform with mud, and incumbere with a forest of reeds. the 
fields, in most seasons, are mire; but when they afford a firm footing, 
the ditch by which they are bound and intersected, are mantle with 
stagnate green, and emit the most noxious exhalations. health is no 
less a stranger to those seat than pleasure. spring and autumn are sure 
to be accompany with ague and bilious remittents. 

the scene which environed our dwelling at mettingen constitute the 
reverse of this. schuylkill was here a pure and translucid current, 
broken into wild and ceaseless music by rocky points, murmur on a 
sandy margin, and reflect on its surface, bank of all variety of 
height and degree of declivity. these bank were chequer by patch 
of dark verdure and shapeless masses of white marble, and crown by 
copse of cedar, or by the regular magnificence of orchards, which, at 
this season, were in blossom, and were prodigal of odours. the ground 
which recede from the river was scoop into valley and dales. its 
beauty were enhance by the horticulture skill of my brother, who 
bedeck this exquisite assemblage of slope and rising with every 
species of vegetable ornament, from the giant arms of the oak to the 
cluster tendril of the honey-suckle. 

to screen him from the unwholesome airs of his own residence, it had 
been propose to pleyel to spend the month of spring with us. he had 
apparently acquiesce in this proposal; but the late event induce him 
to change his purpose. he was only to be seen by visiting him in his 
retirements. his gaiety had flown, and every passion was absorb in 
eager to procure tidings from saxony. i have mention the arrival 
of another vessel from the elbe. he descry her early one morning as 
he was passing along the skirt of the river. she was easily recognized, 
being the ship in which he had perform his first voyage to germany. 
he immediately went on board, but found no letters direct to him. 
this omission was, in some degree, compensate by meeting with an old 
acquaintance among the passengers, who had till lately been a resident 
in leipsig. this person put an end to all suspense respecting the fate 
of theresa, by relate the particulars of her death and funeral. 

thus was the truth of the former intimate attested. no long devour 
by suspense, the grief of pleyel was not long in yielding to the 
influence of society. he gave himself up once more to our company. his 
vivace had indeed been damped; but even in this respect he was a more 
acceptable companion than formerly, since his serious was neither 
incommunicative nor sullen. 

these incidents, for a time, occupy all our thoughts. in me they 
produce a sentiment not unal to pleasure, and more speedy than in 
the case of my friends were intermixe with other topics. my brother was 
particularly affected by them. it was easy to perceive that most of his 
meditation were tincture from this source. to this was to be ascribe 
a design in which his pen was, at this period, engaged, of collect 
and investigate the fact which relate to that mysterious personage, 
the daemon of socrates. 

my brother's skill in greece and roman learning was exceed by that of 
few, and no doubt the world would have accept a treatise upon this 
subject from his hand with avidity; but alas! this and every other 
scheme of felicity and honor, were doom to sudden blast and hopeless 
extermination. 



chapter vi 


i now come to the mention of a person with whose name the most turbulent 
sensation are connected. it is with a shudder reluctance that i 
enter on the province of describe him. now it is that i begin to 
perceive the difficulty of the task which i have undertaken; but it 
would be weakness to shrink from it. my blood is congealed: and my 
finger are palsied when i call up his image. shame upon my cowardly and 
infirm heart! hitherto i have proceed with some degree of composure, 
but now i must pause. i mean not that dire remembrance shall subdue my 
courage or baffle my design, but this weakness cannot be immediately 
conquered. i must desist for a little while. 

i have taken a few turn in my chamber, and have gather strength 
enough to proceed. yet have i not project a task beyond my power to 
execute? if thus, on the very threshold of the scene, my knee fault 
and i sink, how shall i support myself, when i rush into the midst of 
horrors such as no heart has hitherto conceived, nor tongue related? i 
sicken and recoil at the prospect, and yet my irresolute is momentary. 
i have not form this design upon slight grounds, and though i may at 
times pause and hesitate, i will not be finally divert from it. 

and thou, o most fatal and potent of mankind, in what terms shall i 
describe thee? what words are adequate to the just delineate of thy 
character? how shall i detail the means which render the secrecy of 
thy purpose unfathomable? but i will not anticipate. let me recover 
if possible, a sober strain. let me keep down the flood of passion that 
would render me precipitate or powerless. let me stifle the agony that 
are awaken by thy name. let me, for a time, regard thee as a being 
of no terrible attributes. let me tear myself from contemplation of 
the evil of which it is but too certain that thou wast the author, and 
limit my view to those harmless appearances which attend thy entrance 
on the stage. 

one sunny afternoon, i was standing in the door of my house, when i 
marked a person passing close to the edge of the bank that was in 
front. his pace was a careless and lingering one, and had none of that 
graceful and ease which distinguish a person with certain advantage 
of education from a clown. his gait was rustic and aukward. his form was 
ungainly and disproportioned. shoulder broad and square, breast sunken, 
his head drooping, his body of uniform breadth, support by long and 
lank legs, were the ingredient of his frame. his garb was not ill 
adapt to such a figure. a slouch hat, tarnish by the weather, a 
coat of thick grey cloth, cut and wrought, as it seemed, by a country 
tailor, blue worsted stockings, and shoe fasten by thongs, and deep 
discolour by dust, which brush had never disturbed, constitute his 
dress. 

there was nothing remarkable in these appearances; they were frequent 
to be met with on the road, and in the harvest field. i cannot tell why 
i gaze upon them, on this occasion, with more than ordinary attention, 
unless it were that such figures were seldom seen by me, except on the 
road or field. this lawn was only traverse by men whose view were 
direct to the pleasure of the walk, or the grandeur of the scenery. 

he pass slow along, frequent pausing, as if to examine the 
prospect more deliberately, but never turning his eye towards the house, 
so as to allow me a view of his countenance. presently, he enter a 
copse at a small distance, and disappeared. my eye follow him while 
he remain in sight. if his image remain for any duration in my fancy 
after his departure, it was because no other object occur sufficient 
to expel it. 

i continue in the same spot for half an hour, vaguely, and by fits, 
contemplate the image of this wanderer, and drawing, from outward 
appearances, those inference with respect to the intellectual history 
of this person, which experience afford us. i reflect on the 
alliance which commonly subsist between ignorance and the practice 
of agriculture, and indulge myself in airy speculation as to the 
influence of progressive knowledge in dissolve this alliance, and 
embody the dream of the poets. i ask why the plough and the hoe 
might not become the trade of every human being, and how this 
trade might be made conducive to, or, at least, consistent with the 
acquisition of wisdom and eloquence. 

weary with these reflections, i return to the kitchen to perform some 
household office. i had usually but one servant, and she was a girl 
about my own age. i was busy near the chimney, and she was employ near 
the door of the apartment, when some one knocked. the door was open by 
her, and she was immediately address with "pry'thee, good girl, canst 
thou supply a thirsty man with a glass of buttermilk?" she answer 
that there was none in the house. "aye, but there is some in the dairy 
yonder. thou knowest as well as i, though herme never taught thee, that 
though every dairy be an house, every house is not a dairy." to 
this speech, though she understood only a part of it, she reply 
by repeating her assurances, that she had none to give. "well then," 
rejoin the stranger, "for charity's sweet sake, hand me forth a cup 
of cold water." the girl said she would go to the spring and fetch it. 
"nay, give me the cup, and suffer me to help myself. neither manacle 
nor lame, i should merit burial in the maw of carrion crows, if i laid 
this task upon thee." she gave him the cup, and he turn to go to the 
spring. 

i listen to this dialogue in silence. the words utter by the person 
without, affected me as somewhat singular, but what chiefly render 
them remarkable, was the tone that accompany them. it was wholly new. 
my brother's voice and pleyel's were musical and energetic. i had fondly 
imagined, that, in this respect, they were surpass by none. now my 
mistake was detected. i cannot pretend to communicate the impression 
that was made upon me by these accents, or to depict the degree in which 
force and sweet were blend in them. they were articulated with a 
distinct that was unexampled in my experience. but this was not all. 
the voice was not only mellifluent and clear, but the emphasis was so 
just, and the modulation so impassioned, that it seem as if an heart 
of stone could not fail of being move by it. it impart to me an 
emotion altogether involuntary and incontroulable. when he utter the 
words "for charity's sweet sake," i drop the cloth that i held in 
my hand, my heart overflow with sympathy, and my eyes with unbidden 
tears. 

this description will appear to you trifling or incredible. the 
importance of these circumstances will be manifest in the sequel. 
the manner in which i was affected on this occasion, was, to my own 
apprehension, a subject of astonishment. the tone were indeed such as 
i never heard before; but that they should, in an instant, as it were, 
dissolve me in tears, will not easily be believe by others, and can 
scarcely be comprehend by myself. 

it will be readily supposed that i was somewhat inquisitive as to the 
person and demeanour of our visitant. after a moment's pause, i step 
to the door and look after him. judge my surprize, when i beheld the 
self-same figure that had appear an half hour before upon the bank. my 
fancy had conjure up a very different image. a form, and attitude, and 
garb, were instantly create worthy to accompany such elocution; but 
this person was, in all visible respects, the reverse of this phantom. 
strange as it may seem, i could not speedy reconcile myself to this 
disappointment. instead of return to my employment, i threw myself 
in a chair that was placed opposite the door, and sunk into a fit of 
musing. 

my attention was, in a few minutes, recall by the stranger, who 
return with the empty cup in his hand. i had not thought of the 
circumstance, or should certainly have chosen a different seat. he no 
soon shew himself, than a confuse sense of impropriety, add to 
the sudden of the interview, for which, not have foreseen it, 
i had made no preparation, threw me into a state of the most painful 
embarrassment. he brought with him a placid brow; but no soon had he 
cast his eyes upon me, than his face was as glowing suffuse as 
my own. he placed the cup upon the bench, stammer out thanks, and 
retired. 

it was some time before i could recover my wonted composure. i had 
snatch a view of the stranger's countenance. the impression that it 
made was vivid and indelible. his cheek were pallid and lank, his eyes 
sunken, his forehead overshadow by coarse straggle hairs, his teeth 
large and irregular, though sound and brilliant white, and his chin 
discolour by a tetter. his skin was of coarse grain, and sallow hue. 
every feature was wide of beauty, and the outline of his face remind 
you of an invert cone. 

and yet his forehead, so far as shaggy locks would allow it to be seen, 
his eyes lustrous black, and possessing, in the midst of haggardness, 
a radiance inexpressible serene and potent, and something in the rest of 
his features, which it would be in vain to describe, but which serve to 
betoken a mind of the highest order, were essential ingredient in the 
portrait. this, in the effects which immediately flow from it, i count 
among the most extraordinary incident of my life. this face, seen for 
a moment, continue for hour to occupy my fancy, to the exclusion of 
almost every other image. i had purpose to spend the evening with my 
brother, but i could not resist the inclination of form a sketch 
upon paper of this memorable visage. whether my hand was aid by any 
peculiar inspiration, or i was deceive by my own fond conceptions, this 
portrait, though hasty executed, appear unexceptionable to my own 
taste. 

i placed it at all distances, and in all lights; my eyes were rivet 
upon it. half the night pass away in wakeful and in contemplation 
of this picture. so flexible, and yet so stubborn, is the human mind. 
so obedient to impulse the most transient and brief, and yet so 
unalterable observant of the direction which is given to it! how little 
did i then foresee the termination of that chain, of which this may be 
regard as the first link? 

next day arose in dark and storm. torrent of rain fell during 
the whole day, attend with incessant thunder, which reverberate in 
stunning echo from the opposite declivity. the inclement of the air 
would not allow me to walk-out. i had, indeed, no inclination to leave 
my apartment. i betook myself to the contemplation of this portrait, 
whose attraction time had rather enhance than diminished. i laid aside 
my usual occupations, and seating myself at a window, consume the day 
in alternate look out upon the storm, and gaze at the picture 
which lay upon a table before me. you will, perhaps, deem this conduct 
somewhat singular, and ascribe it to certain peculiarity of temper. i 
am not aware of any such peculiarities. i can account for my devotion to 
this image no otherwise, than by supposing that its property were 
rare and prodigious. perhaps you will suspect that such were the 
first inroad of a passion incident to every female heart, and 
which frequent gain a footing by means even more slight, and more 
improbable than these. i shall not controvert the reasonable of the 
suspicion, but leave you at liberty to draw, from my narrative, what 
conclusion you please. 

night at length returned, and the storm ceased. the air was once more 
clear and calm, and bore an affecting contrast to that uproar of the 
elements by which it had been preceded. i spent the darksome hours, as 
i spent the day, contemplative and seat at the window. why was my mind 
absorb in thought ominous and dreary? why did my bosom heave with 
sighs, and my eyes overflow with tears? was the tempest that had just 
past a signal of the ruin which impende over me? my soul fondly dwelt 
upon the image of my brother and his children, yet they only increase 
the mournful of my contemplations. the smile of the charming babe 
were as bland as formerly. the same dignity sat on the brow of their 
father, and yet i thought of them with anguish. something whisper 
that the happiness we at present enjoy was set on mutable foundations. 
death must happen to all. whether our felicity was to be subvert by it 
to-morrow, or whether it was ordain that we should lay down our head 
full of years and of honor, was a question that no human being could 
solve. at other times, these idea seldom intruded. i either forbore to 
reflect upon the destiny that is reserved for all men, or the reflection 
was mixed up with image that disrobe it of terror; but now the 
uncertainty of life occur to me without any of its usual and 
alleviate accompaniments. i said to myself, we must die. soon or 
later, we must disappear for ever from the face of the earth. whatever 
be the links that hold us to life, they must be broken. this scene 
of existence is, in all its parts, calamitous. the greater number is 
oppress with immediate evils, and those, the tide of whose fortune is 
full, how small is their portion of enjoyment, since they know that it 
will terminate. 

for some time i indulge myself, without reluctance, in these gloomy 
thoughts; but at length, the dejection which they produce became 
insupportable painful. i endeavour to dissipate it with music. i had 
all my grand-father's melody as well as poetry by rote. i now light 
by chance on a ballad, which commemorate the fate of a germany cavalier, 
who fell at the siege of nice under godfrey of bouillon. my choice was 
unfortunate, for the scene of violence and carnage which were here 
wildly but forcibly pourtrayed, only suggest to my thought a new 
topic in the horrors of war. 

i sought refuge, but ineffectually, in sleep. my mind was throng by 
vivid, but confuse images, and no effort that i made was sufficient to 
drive them away. in this situation i heard the clock, which hung in 
the room, give the signal for twelve. it was the same instrument which 
formerly hung in my father's chamber, and which, on account of its 
being his workmanship, was regarded, by every one of our family, with 
veneration. it had fallen to me, in the division of his property, and 
was placed in this asylum. the sound awaken a series of reflections, 
respecting his death. i was not allow to pursue them; for scarcely 
had the vibration ceased, when my attention was attract by a whisper, 
which, at first, appear to proceed from lip that were laid close to 
my ear. 

no wonder that a circumstance like this startle me. in the first 
impulse of my terror, i utter a slight scream, and shrunk to the 
opposite side of the bed. in a moment, however, i recover from my 
trepidation. i was habitual indifferent to all the cause of fear, 
by which the majority are afflicted. i entertain no apprehension 
of either ghost or robbers. our security had never been molest by 
either, and i made use of no means to prevent or counterwork their 
machinations. my tranquillity, on this occasion, was quick retrieved. 
the whisper evidently proceed from one who was post at my bed-side. 
the first idea that suggest itself was, that it was utter by the 
girl who live with me as a servant. perhaps, somewhat had alarm her, 
or she was sick, and had come to request my assistance. by whisper in 
my ear, she intended to rouse without alarm me. 

full of this persuasion, i called; "judith," said i, "is it you? what 
do you want? is there any thing the matter with you?" no answer was 
returned. i repeated my inquiry, but equally in vain. cloudy as was the 
atmosphere, and curtain as my bed was, nothing was visible. i withdrew 
the curtain, and leaning my head on my elbow, i listen with the 
deepest attention to catch some new sound. meanwhile, i ran over in my 
thoughts, every circumstance that could assist my conjectures. 

my habitation was a wooden edifice, consist of two stories. in each 
story were two rooms, separate by an entry, or middle passage, with 
which they communicate by opposite doors. the passage, on the lower 
story, had door at the two ends, and a stair-case. window answer to 
the door on the upper story. annexe to this, on the eastern side, were 
wings, divided, in like manner, into an upper and lower room; one of 
them comprize a kitchen, and chamber above it for the servant, and 
communicated, on both stories, with the parlour adjoin it below, 
and the chamber adjoin it above. the opposite wing is of small 
dimensions, the rooms not being above eight feet square. the lower of 
these was use as a depository of household implements, the upper was a 
closet in which i deposit my books and papers. they had but one inlet, 
which was from the room adjoining. there was no window in the lower one, 
and in the upper, a small aperture which communicate light and air, but 
would scarcely admit the body. the door which led into this, was close 
to my bed-head, and was always locked, but when i myself was within. the 
avenue below were accustomed to be closed and bolt at nights. 

the maid was my only companion, and she could not reach my chamber 
without previous passing through the opposite chamber, and the middle 
passage, of which, however, the door were usually unfastened. if she 
had occasion this noise, she would have answer my repeated calls. 
no other conclusion, therefore, was left me, but that i had mistaken the 
sounds, and that my imagination had transform some casual noise into 
the voice of a human creature. satisfy with this solution, i was 
prepare to relinquish my listen attitude, when my ear was again 
salute with a new and yet loud whispering. it appeared, as before, 
to issue from lip that touched my pillow. a second effort of attention, 
however, clearly shew me, that the sound issue from within the 
closet, the door of which was not more than eight inch from my pillow. 

this second interrupt occasion a shock less vehement than the 
former. i started, but gave no audible token of alarm. i was so much 
mistress of my feelings, as to continue listen to what should be 
said. the whisper was distinct, hoarse, and utter so as to shew that 
the speaker was desirous of being heard by some one near, but, at the 
same time, studious to avoid being overheard by any other. 

"stop, stop, i say; madman as you are! there are better means than that. 
curse upon your rashness! there is no need to shoot." 

such were the words utter in a tone of eager and anger, within so 
small a distance of my pillow. what construction could i put upon 
them? my heart began to palpitate with dread of some unknown danger. 
presently, another voice, but equally near me, was heard whisper in 
answer. "why not? i will draw a trigger in this business, but perdition 
be my lot if i do more." to this, the first voice returned, in a tone 
which rage had heighten in a small degree above a whisper, "coward! 
stand aside, and see me do it. i will grasp her throat; i will do her 
business in an instant; she shall not have time so much as to groan." 
what wonder that i was petrify by sound so dreadful! murder 
lurk in my closet. they were plan the means of my destruction. one 
resolve to shoot, and the other menace suffocation. their means being 
chosen, they would forthwith break the door. flight instantly suggest 
itself as most eligible in circumstances so perilous. i deliberate not 
a moment; but, fear add wings to my speed, i leap out of bed, and 
scanty robe as i was, rush out of the chamber, down stairs, and 
into the open air. i can hardly recollect the process of turning 
keys, and withdraw bolts. my terror urge me forward with almost a 
mechanical impulse. i stop not till i reach my brother's door. 
i had not gain the threshold, when, exhaust by the violence of my 
emotions, and by my speed, i sunk down in a fit. 

how long i remain in this situation i know not. when i recovered, i 
found myself stretch on a bed, surround by my sister and her 
female servants. i was astonish at the scene before me, but gradual 
recover the recollection of what had happened. i answer their 
importunate inquiry as well as i was able. my brother and pleyel, 
whom the storm of the preceding day chance to detain here, inform 
themselves of every particular, proceed with lights and weapon to my 
desert habitation. they enter my chamber and my closet, and found 
every thing in its proper place and customary order. the door of the 
closet was locked, and appear not to have been open in my absence. 
they went to judith's apartment. they found her asleep and in safety. 
pleyel's caution induce him to forbear alarm the girl; and finding 
her wholly ignorant of what had passed, they direct her to return to 
her chamber. they then fasten the doors, and returned. 

my friends were disposed to regard this transaction as a dream. that 
person should be actually immure in this closet, to which, in the 
circumstances of the time, access from without or within was apparently 
impossible, they could not seriously believe. that any human being 
had intended murder, unless it were to cover a scheme of pillage, was 
incredible; but that no such design had been formed, was evident 
from the security in which the furniture of the house and the closet 
remained. 

i revolve every incident and expression that had occurred. my 
senses assured me of the truth of them, and yet their abrupt and 
improbability made me, in my turn, somewhat incredulous. the adventure 
had made a deep impression on my fancy, and it was not till after a 
week's abode at my brother's, that i resolve to resume the possession 
of my own dwelling. there was another circumstance that enhance the 
mysterious of this event. after my recovery it was obvious to 
inquire by what means the attention of the family had been drawn to my 
situation. i had fallen before i had reach the threshold, or was able 
to give any signal. my brother related, that while this was transact 
in my chamber, he himself was awake, in consequence of some slight 
indisposition, and lay, according to his custom, muse on some favorite 
topic. sudden the silence, which was remarkably profound, was broken 
by a voice of most piercing shrillness, that seem to be utter by one 
in the hall below his chamber. "awake! arise!" it exclaimed: "hasten to 
succour one that is die at your door." 

this summons was effectual. there was no one in the house who was not 
rouse by it. pleyel was the first to obey, and my brother overtook him 
before he reach the hall. what was the general astonishment when your 
friend was discover stretch upon the grass before the door, pale, 
ghastly, and with every mark of death! 

this was the third instance of a voice, exert for the benefit of this 
little community. the agent was no less inscrutable in this, than in the 
former case. when i ruminate upon these events, my soul was suspend 
in wonder and awe. was i really deceive in imagine that i heard the 
closet conversation? i was no long at liberty to question the reality 
of those accent which had formerly recall my brother from the hill; 
which had impart tidings of the death of the germany lady to pleyel; 
and which had lately summon them to my assistance. 

but how was i to regard this midnight conversation? hoarse and manlike 
voice confer on the means of death, so near my bed, and at such 
an hour! how had my ancient security vanished! that dwelling, which had 
hitherto been an inviolate asylum, was now beset with danger to my 
life. that solitude, formerly so dear to me, could no long be endured. 
pleyel, who had consent to reside with us during the month of spring, 
lodge in the vacant chamber, in order to quiet my alarms. he treat 
my fear with ridicule, and in a short time very slight trace of them 
remained: but as it was wholly indifferent to him whether his nights 
were pass at my house or at my brother's, this arrangement gave 
general satisfaction. 



chapter vii 


i will not enumerate the various inquiry and conjecture which these 
incident occasioned. after all our efforts, we came no near to 
dispel the mist in which they were involved; and time, instead of 
facilitate a solution, only accumulate our doubts. in the midst of 
thought excited by these events, i was not unmindful of my interview 
with the stranger. i related the particulars, and shew the portrait to 
my friends. pleyel recollect to have met with a figure resemble 
my description in the city; but neither his face or garb made the same 
impression upon him that it made upon me. it was a hint to rally me upon 
my prepossessions, and to amuse us with a thousand ludicrous anecdote 
which he had collected in his travels. he made no scruple to charge me 
with being in love; and threaten to inform the swain, when he met him, 
of his good fortune. 

pleyel's temper made him susceptible of no durable impressions. his 
conversation was occasional visit by gleam of his ancient vivacity; 
but, though his impetuos was sometimes inconvenient, there was 
nothing to dread from his malice. i had no fear that my character or 
dignity would suffer in his hands, and was not heartily displease when 
he declared his intention of profit by his first meeting with the 
stranger to introduce him to our acquaintance. 

some week after this i had spent a toilsome day, and, as the sun 
declined, found myself disposed to seek relief in a walk. the river 
bank is, at this part of it, and for some considerable space upward, 
so rugged and steep as not to be easily descended. in a recess of this 
declivity, near the southern verge of my little demesne, was placed a 
slight building, with seat and lattices. from a crevice of the rock, 
to which this edifice was attached, there burst forth a stream of the 
purest water, which, leap from ledge to ledge, for the space of sixty 
feet, produce a fresh in the air, and a murmur, the most delicious 
and soothe imaginable. these, add to the odour of the cedar 
which embowered it, and of the honey-suckle which cluster among the 
lattices, render this my favorite retreat in summer. 

on this occasion i repair hither. my spirits droop through the 
fatigue of long attention, and i threw myself upon a bench, in a state, 
both mental and personally, of the utmost supineness. the lull 
sound of the waterfall, the fragrance and the dusk combine to becalm 
my spirits, and, in a short time, to sink me into sleep. either the 
uneasy of my posture, or some slight indisposition molest my 
repose with dream of no cheerful hue. after various incoherence 
had taken their turn to occupy my fancy, i at length imagine myself 
walking, in the evening twilight, to my brother's habitation. a pit, 
methought, had been dug in the path i had taken, of which i was not 
aware. as i careless pursue my walk, i thought i saw my brother, 
standing at some distance before me, beckon and calling me to make 
haste. he stood on the opposite edge of the gulph. i mend my pace, and 
one step more would have plunge me into this abyss, had not some 
one from behind caught sudden my arm, and exclaimed, in a voice of 
eager and terror, "hold! hold!" 

the sound broke my sleep, and i found myself, at the next moment, 
standing on my feet, and surround by the deepest darkness. image 
so terrific and forcible disabled me, for a time, from distinguish 
between sleep and wakefulness, and withheld from me the knowledge of my 
actual condition. my first panic were succeed by the perturbation of 
surprize, to find myself alone in the open air, and immerse in so deep 
a gloom. i slow recollect the incident of the afternoon, and how 
i came hither. i could not estimate the time, but saw the propriety of 
return with speed to the house. my faculty were still too confused, 
and the dark too intense, to allow me immediately to find my way up 
the steep. i sat down, therefore, to recover myself, and to reflect upon 
my situation. 

this was no soon done, than a low voice was heard from behind the 
lattice, on the side where i sat. between the rock and the lattice was a 
chasm not wide enough to admit a human body; yet, in this chasm he that 
spoke appear to be stationed. "attend! attend! but be not terrified." 

i start and exclaimed, "good heavens! what is that? who are you?" 

"a friend; one come, not to injure, but to save you; fear nothing." 

this voice was immediately recognize to be the same with one of 
those which i had heard in the closet; it was the voice of him who had 
propose to shoot, rather than to strangle, his victim. my terror made 
me, at once, mute and motionless. he continued, "i league to murder 
you. i repent. mark my bidding, and be safe. avoid this spot. the snare 
of death encompass it. elsewhere danger will be distant; but this spot, 
shun it as you value your life. mark me further; profit by this warning, 
but divulge it not. if a syllable of what has pass escape you, your 
doom is sealed. remember your father, and be faithful." 

here the accent ceased, and left me overwhelm with dismay. i was 
fraught with the persuasion, that during every moment i remain here, 
my life was endangered; but i could not take a step without hazard of 
fall to the bottom of the precipice. the path, leading to the summit, 
was short, but rugged and intricate. even star-light was exclude by the 
umbrage, and not the faintest gleam was afford to guide my steps. what 
should i do? to depart or remain was equally and eminently perilous. 

in this state of uncertainty, i perceive a ray flit across the gloom 
and disappear. another succeeded, which was stronger, and remain for 
a passing moment. it glitter on the shrub that were scattered at the 
entrance, and gleam continue to succeed gleam for a few seconds, till 
they, finally, gave place to unintermitt darkness. 

the first visiting of this light call up a train of horrors in my 
mind; destruction impende over this spot; the voice which i had lately 
heard had warn me to retire, and had menace me with the fate of my 
father if i refused. i was desirous, but unable, to obey; these gleam 
were such as prelude the stroke by which he fell; the hour, perhaps, 
was the same--i shudder as if i had beheld, suspend over me, the 
exterminate sword. 

presently a new and strong illumination burst through the lattice 
on the right hand, and a voice, from the edge of the precipice above, 
call out my name. it was pleyel. joyful did i recognize his accents; 
but such was the tumult of my thought that i had not power to answer 
him till he had frequent repeated his summons. i hurried, at length, 
from the fatal spot, and, direct by the lanthorn which he bore, 
ascend the hill. 

pale and breathless, it was with difficulty i could support myself. he 
anxious inquire into the cause of my affright, and the motive of my 
unusual absence. he had return from my brother's at a late hour, and 
was informed by judith, that i had walk out before sun-set, and had 
not yet returned. this intelligence was somewhat alarming. he wait 
some time; but, my absence continuing, he had set out in search of me. 
he had explore the neighbourhood with the utmost care, but, receiving 
no tidings of me, he was prepare to acquaint my brother with this 
circumstance, when he recollect the summer-house on the bank, and 
conceive it possible that some accident had detain me there. he again 
inquire into the cause of this detention, and of that confusion and 
dismay which my looks testified. 

i told him that i had stroll hither in the afternoon, that sleep had 
overtaken me as i sat, and that i had awaken a few minutes before 
his arrival. i could tell him no more. in the present impetuos of my 
thoughts, i was almost dubious, whether the pit, into which my brother 
had endeavour to entice me, and the voice that talk through the 
lattice, were not parts of the same dream. i remembered, likewise, the 
charge of secrecy, and the penalty denounced, if i should rash divulge 
what i had heard. for these reasons, i was silent on that subject, and 
shut myself in my chamber, deliver myself up to contemplation. 

what i have related will, no doubt, appear to you a fable. you will 
believe that calamity has subvert my reason, and that i am amuse 
you with the chimera of my brain, instead of fact that have really 
happened. i shall not be surprize or offended, if these be your 
suspicions. i know not, indeed, how you can deny them admission. for, if 
to me, the immediate witness, they were fertile of perplexity and doubt, 
how must they affect another to whom they are recommend only by 
my testimony? it was only by subsequent events, that i was fully and 
incontestib assured of the veracity of my senses. 

meanwhile what was i to think? i had been assured that a design had been 
form against my life. the ruffian had league to murder me. whom had 
i offended? who was there with whom i had ever maintain intercourse, 
who was capable of harbour such atrocious purposes? 

my temper was the reverse of cruel and imperious. my heart was touched 
with sympathy for the children of misfortune. but this sympathy was not 
a barren sentiment. my purse, scanty as it was, was ever open, and my 
hand ever active, to relieve distress. many were the wretch whom 
my personal exertion had extricate from want and disease, and who 
reward me with their gratitude. there was no face which lower at my 
approach, and no lip which utter imprecation in my hearing. on the 
contrary, there was none, over whose fate i had exert any influence, 
or to whom i was known by reputation, who did not greet me with smiles, 
and dismiss me with proof of veneration; yet did not my senses assure 
me that a plot was laid against my life? 

i am not destitute of courage. i have shewn myself deliberative and calm 
in the midst of peril. i have hazard my own life, for the preservation 
of another, but now was i confuse and panic struck. i have not live 
so as to fear death, yet to perish by an unseen and secret stroke, to be 
mangle by the knife of an assassin was a thought at which i shuddered; 
what had i done to deserve to be made the victim of malignant passions? 

but soft! was i not assured, that my life was safe in all place but 
one? and why was the treason limited to take effect in this spot? i 
was every where equally defenceless. my house and chamber were, at all 
times, accessible. danger still impende over me; the bloody purpose was 
still entertained, but the hand that was to execute it, was powerless in 
all place but one! 

here i had remain for the last four or five hours, without the means 
of resistance or defence, yet i had not been attacked. a human being was 
at hand, who was conscious of my presence, and warn me hereafter to 
avoid this retreat. his voice was not absolutely new, but had i never 
heard it but once before? but why did he prohibit me from relate 
this incident to others, and what species of death will be award if i 
disobey? 

he talk of my father. he intimated, that disclosure would pull upon my 
head, the same destruction. was then the death of my father, portentous 
and inexplicable as it was, the consequence of human machinations? it 
should seem, that this being is apprise of the true nature of this 
event, and is conscious of the means that led to it. whether it shall 
likewise fall upon me, depend upon the observance of silence. was it 
the infraction of a similar command, that brought so horrible a penalty 
upon my father? 

such were the reflection that haunt me during the night, and which 
effectually deprived me of sleep. next morning, at breakfast, pleyel 
related an event which my disappearance had hinder him from mention 
the night before. early the preceding morning, his occasion call him 
to the city; he had step into a coffee-house to while away an hour; 
here he had met a person whose appearance instantly bespoke him to be 
the same whose hasty visit i have mentioned, and whose extraordinary 
visage and tone had so powerful affected me. on an attentive survey, 
however, he proved, likewise, to be one with whom my friend had had some 
intercourse in europe. this authorise the liberty of accost him, and 
after some conversation, mindful, as pleyel said, of the footing which 
this stranger had gain in my heart, he had venture to invite him 
to mettingen. the invitation had been cheerful accepted, and a visit 
promise on the afternoon of the next day. 

this information excited no sober emotion in my breast. i was, of 
course, eager to be informed as to the circumstances of their ancient 
intercourse. when, and where had they met? what knew he of the life and 
character of this man? 

in answer to my inquiries, he informed me that, three years before, 
he was a traveller in spain. he had made an excursion from valencia to 
murviedro, with a view to inspect the remains of roman magnificence, 
scattered in the environs of that town. while traverse the scite 
of the theatre of old saguntum, he light upon this man, seat on a 
stone, and deep engaged in peruse the work of the deacon marti. a 
short conversation ensued, which prove the stranger to be english. they 
return to valencia together. 

his garb, aspect, and deportment, were wholly spanish. a residence of 
three years in the country, indefatigable attention to the language, 
and a studious conformity with the customs of the people, had made him 
indistinguishable from a native, when he chose to assume that character. 
pleyel found him to be connected, on the footing of friendship and 
respect, with many eminent merchant in that city. he had embrace the 
catholic religion, and adopt a spain name instead of his own, which 
was carwin, and devoted himself to the literature and religion of his 
new country. he pursue no profession, but subsist on remittance from 
england. 

while pleyel remain in valencia, carwin betray no aversion to 
intercourse, and the former found no small attraction in the society of 
this new acquaintance. on general topic he was highly intelligent and 
communicative. he had visit every corner of spain, and could furnish 
the most accurate detail respecting its ancient and present state. 
on topic of religion and of his own history, previous to his 
transformation into a spaniard, he was invariable silent. you could 
merely gather from his discourse that he was english, and that he was 
well acquaint with the neighbouring countries. 

his character excited considerable curiosity in this observer. it was 
not easy to reconcile his conversion to the romish faith, with those 
proof of knowledge and capacity that were exhibit by him on different 
occasions. a suspicion was, sometimes, admitted, that his belief was 
counterfeit for some politics purpose. the most careful observation, 
however, produce no discovery. his manners were, at all times, harmless 
and inartificial, and his habit those of a lover of contemplation and 
seclusion. he appear to have contract an affection for pleyel, who 
was not slow to return it. 

my friend, after a month's residence in this city, return into france, 
and, since that period, had heard nothing concerning carwin till his 
appearance at mettingen. 

on this occasion carwin had received pleyel's greeting with a certain 
distance and solemnity to which the latter had not been accustomed. he 
had wave notice the inquiry of pleyel respecting his desertion 
of spain, in which he had formerly declared that it was his purpose to 
spend his life. he had assiduous divert the attention of the latter 
to indifferent topics, but was still, on every theme, as eloquent and 
judicious as formerly. why he had assume the garb of a rustic, pleyel 
was unable to conjecture. perhaps it might be poverty, perhaps he was 
sway by motive which it was his interest to conceal, but which were 
connected with consequence of the utmost moment. 

such was the sum of my friend's information. i was not sorry to be left 
alone during the greater part of this day. every employment was irksome 
which did not leave me at liberty to meditate. i had now a new subject 
on which to exercise my thoughts. before evening i should be usher 
into his presence, and listen to those tone whose magical and thrill 
power i had already experienced. but with what new image would he then 
be accompanied? 

carwin was an adherent to the romish faith, yet was an englishman by 
birth, and, perhaps, a protestant by education. he had adopt spain for 
his country, and had intimate a design to spend his days there, yet now 
was an inhabitant of this district, and disguise by the habiliment of 
a clown! what could have obliterate the impression of his youth, and 
made him abjure his religion and his country? what subsequent event had 
introduce so total a change in his plans? in withdraw from spain, 
had he revert to the religion of his ancestors; or was it true, that 
his former conversion was deceitful, and that his conduct had been 
sway by motive which it was prudent to conceal? 

hour were consume in revolving these ideas. my meditation were 
intense; and, when the series was broken, i began to reflect with 
astonishment on my situation. from the death of my parents, till the 
commencement of this year, my life had been serene and blissful, beyond 
the ordinary portion of humanity; but, now, my bosom was corrode by 
anxiety. i was visit by dread of unknown dangers, and the future was 
a scene over which cloud rolled, and thunder muttered. i compare the 
cause with the effect, and they seem disproportion to each other. 
all unaware, and in a manner which i had no power to explain, i was 
pushed from my immoveable and lofty station, and cast upon a sea of 
troubles. 

i determined to be my brother's visitant on this evening, yet my 
resolve were not unattended with waver and reluctance. pleyel's 
insinuation that i was in love, affected, in no degree, my belief, yet 
the consciousness that this was the opinion of one who would, probably, 
be present at our introduction to each other, would excite all that 
confusion which the passion itself is apt to produce. this would confirm 
him in his error, and call forth new railleries. his mirth, when exert 
upon this topic, was the source of the bitterest vexation. had he been 
aware of its influence upon my happiness, his temper would not have 
allow him to persist; but this influence, it was my chief endeavour 
to conceal. that the belief of my have bestow my heart upon another, 
produce in my friend none but ludicrous sensations, was the true cause 
of my distress; but if this had been discover by him, my distress 
would have been unspeakable aggravated. 



chapter viii 


as soon as evening arrived, i perform my visit. carwin made one of the 
company, into which i was ushered. appearances were the same as when i 
before beheld him. his garb was equally negligent and rustic. i gaze 
upon his countenance with new curiosity. my situation was such as to 
enable me to bestow upon it a deliberate examination. view at more 
leisure, it lost none of its wonderful properties. i could not deny my 
homage to the intelligence express in it, but was wholly uncertain, 
whether he were an object to be dread or adored, and whether his 
powers had been exert to evil or to good. 

he was sparing in discourse; but whatever he said was pregnant with 
meaning, and utter with rectitude of articulation, and force of 
emphasis, of which i had entertain no conception previous to my 
knowledge of him. notwithstanding the uncouth of his garb, his 
manners were not unpolished. all topic were handle by him with skill, 
and without pedantry or affectation. he utter no sentiment calculate 
to produce a disadvantageous impression: on the contrary, his 
observations denote a mind alive to every generous and heroic feeling. 
they were introduce without parade, and accompany with that degree of 
earnest which indicate sincerity. 

he part from us not till late, refuse an invitation to spend the 
night here, but readily consent to repeat his visit. his visit 
were frequent repeated. each day introduce us to a more intimate 
acquaintance with his sentiments, but left us wholly in the dark, 
concerning that about which we were most inquisitive. he studious 
avoid all mention of his past or present situation. even the place of 
his abode in the city he conceal from us. 

our sphere, in this respect, being somewhat limited, and the 
intellectual endowment of this man being indisputable great, his 
deportment was more diligent marked, and copious comment on by 
us, than you, perhaps, will think the circumstances warranted. not a 
gesture, or glance, or accent, that was not, in our private assemblies, 
discussed, and inference deduce from it. it may well be thought that 
he model his behaviour by an uncommon standard, when, with all our 
opportunity and accuracy of observation, we were able, for a long 
time, to gather no satisfactory information. he afford us no ground on 
which to build even a plausible conjecture. 

there is a degree of familiarity which take place between constant 
associates, that justify the negligence of many rule of which, in 
an early period of their intercourse, polite require the exact 
observance. inquiry into our condition are allowable when they are 
prompt by a disinterested concern for our welfare; and this solicitude 
is not only pardonable, but may just be demand from those who chuse 
us for their companions. this state of things was more slow to arrive 
on this occasion than on most others, on account of the gravity and 
lofty of this man's behaviour. 

pleyel, however, began, at length, to employ regular means for this end. 
he occasional allude to the circumstances in which they had formerly 
met, and remark the incongruous between the religion and habit 
of a spaniard, with those of a native of britain. he express 
his astonishment at meeting our guest in this corner of the globe, 
especially as, when they part in spain, he was taught to believe that 
carwin should never leave that country. he insinuated, that a change 
so great must have been prompt by motive of a singular and momentous 
kind. 

no answer, or an answer wide of the purpose, was generally made to these 
insinuations. briton and spaniards, he said, are votary of the same 
deity, and square their faith by the same precepts; their idea are 
drawn from the same fountain of literature, and they speak dialect of 
the same tongue; their government and law have more resemblance than 
differences; they were formerly provinces of the same civil, and till 
lately, of the same religious, empire. 

as to the motive which induce men to change the place of their abode, 
these must unavoidable be fleeting and mutable. if not bound to one spot 
by conjugal or parental ties, or by the nature of that employment to 
which we are indebted for subsistence, the inducement to change are far 
more numerous and powerful, than opposite inducements. 

he spoke as if desirous of shew that he was not aware of the tendency 
of pleyel's remarks; yet, certain token were apparent, that prove him 
by no means wanting in penetration. these token were to be read in his 
countenance, and not in his words. when any thing was said, indicate 
curiosity in us, the gloom of his countenance was deepened, his eyes 
sunk to the ground, and his wonted air was not resume without visible 
struggle. hence, it was obvious to infer, that some incident of 
his life were reflect on by him with regret; and that, since these 
incident were careful concealed, and even that regret which flow 
from them laborious stifled, they had not been merely disastrous. the 
secrecy that was observe appear not design to provoke or baffle the 
inquisitive, but was prompt by the shame, or by the prudence of guilt. 

these ideas, which were adopt by pleyel and my brother, as well as 
myself, hinder us from employ more direct means for accomplish 
our wishes. question might have been put in such terms, that no room 
should be left for the pretence of misapprehension, and if modesty 
merely had been the obstacle, such question would not have been 
wanting; but we considered, that, if the disclosure were productive of 
pain or disgrace, it was inhuman to extort it. 

amidst the various topic that were discuss in his presence, allusion 
were, of course, made to the inexplicable event that had lately 
happened. at those times, the words and looks of this man were object 
of my particular attention. the subject was extraordinary; and any 
one whose experience or reflection could throw any light upon it, was 
entitle to my gratitude. as this man was enlightened by reading and 
travel, i listen with eager to the remark which he should make. 

at first, i entertain a kind of apprehension, that the tale would be 
heard by him with incredulity and secret ridicule. i had formerly heard 
story that resemble this in some of their mysterious circumstances, 
but they were, commonly, heard by me with contempt. i was doubtful, 
whether the same impression would not now be made on the mind of our 
guest; but i was mistaken in my fears. 

he heard them with seriousness, and without any mark either of 
surprize or incredulity. he pursued, with visible pleasure, that kind 
of disquisition which was naturally suggest by them. his fancy was 
eminently vigorous and prolific, and if he did not persuade us, that 
human being are, sometimes, admitted to a sensible intercourse with the 
author of nature, he, at least, won over our inclination to the cause. 
he merely deduced, from his own reasonings, that such intercourse 
was probable; but confessed that, though he was acquaint with many 
instance somewhat similar to those which had been related by us, none 
of them were perfectly exempt from the suspicion of human agency. 

on being request to relate these instances, he amuse us with many 
curious details. his narrative were construct with so much skill, 
and rehearse with so much energy, that all the effects of a dramatic 
exhibition were frequent produce by them. those that were most 
coherent and most minute, and, of consequence, least entitle to credit, 
were yet render probable by the exquisite art of this rhetorician. for 
every difficulty that was suggested, a ready and plausible solution 
was furnished. mysterious voice had always a share in produce 
the catastrophe, but they were always to be explain on some known 
principles, either as reflect into a focus, or communicate through 
a tube. i could not but remark that his narratives, however complex or 
marvellous, contained no instance sufficient parallel to those that 
had befallen ourselves, and in which the solution was applicable to our 
own case. 

my brother was a much more sanguine reason than our guest. even 
in some of the fact which were related by carwin, he maintain the 
probability of celestial interference, when the latter was disposed to 
deny it, and had found, as he imagined, footstep of an human agent. 
pleyel was by no means equally credulous. he scruple not to deny faith 
to any testimony but that of his senses, and allow the fact which had 
lately been support by this testimony, not to mould his belief, but 
merely to give birth to doubts. 

it was soon observe that carwin adopted, in some degree, a similar 
distinction. a tale of this kind, related by others, he would believe, 
provided it was explicable upon known principles; but that such notice 
were actually communicate by being of an higher order, he would 
believe only when his own ear were assail in a manner which could not 
be otherwise account for. civility forbad him to contradict my brother 
or myself, but his understanding refuse to acquiesce in our testimony. 
besides, he was disposed to question whether the voice heard in the 
temple, at the foot of the hill, and in my closet, were not really 
utter by human organs. on this supposition he was desire to explain 
how the effect was produced. 

he answered, that the power of mimickry was very common. catharine's 
voice might easily be imitate by one at the foot of the hill, who would 
find no difficulty in eluding, by flight, the search of wieland. the 
tidings of the death of the saxon lady were utter by one near at hand, 
who overheard the conversation, who conjecture her death, and whose 
conjecture happen to accord with the truth. that the voice appear to 
come from the ciele was to be considered as an illusion of the fancy. 
the cry for help, heard in the hall on the night of my adventure, was to 
be ascribe to an human creature, who actually stood in the hall when he 
utter it. it was of no moment, he said, that we could not explain by 
what motive he that made the signal was led hither. how imperfect 
acquaint were we with the condition and designs of the being that 
surround us? the city was near at hand, and thousand might there 
exist whose powers and purpose might easily explain whatever was 
mysterious in this transaction. as to the closet dialogue, he was 
oblige to adopt one of two suppositions, and affirm either that it was 
fashion in my own fancy, or that it actually took place between two 
person in the closet. 

such was carwin's mode of explain these appearances. it is such, 
perhaps, as would commend itself as most plausible to the most sagacious 
minds, but it was insufficient to impart conviction to us. as to the 
treason that was meditate against me, it was doubtless just to conclude 
that it was either real or imaginary; but that it was real was attested 
by the mysterious warning in the summer-house, the secret of which i had 
hitherto lock up in my own breast. 

a month pass away in this kind of intercourse. as to carwin, our 
ignorance was in no degree enlightened respecting his genuine character 
and views. appearances were uniform. no man possessed a large store of 
knowledge, or a greater degree of skill in the communication of it to 
others; hence he was regard as an inestimable addition to our society. 
considering the distance of my brother's house from the city, he was 
frequent prevail upon to pass the night where he spent the evening. 
two days seldom elapse without a visit from him; hence he was regard 
as a kind of inmate of the house. he enter and departed without 
ceremony. when he arrive he received an unaffected welcome, and when he 
chose to retire, no importune were use to induce him to remain. 

the temple was the principal scene of our social enjoyments; yet the 
felicity that we taste when assemble in this asylum, was but the 
gleam of a former sun-shine. carwin never part with his gravity. 
the inscrutable of his character, and the uncertainty whether his 
fellowship tend to good or to evil, were seldom absent from our minds. 
this circumstance powerful contribute to sadden us. 

my heart was the seat of grow disquietudes. this change in one who 
had formerly been characterize by all the exuberance of soul, could 
not fail to be remark by my friends. my brother was always a pattern 
of solemnity. my sister was clay, mould by the circumstances in which 
she happen to be placed. there was but one whose deportment remains 
to be describe as being of importance to our happiness. had pleyel 
likewise dismiss his vivacity? 

he was as whimsical and jestful as ever, but he was not happy. the 
truth, in this respect, was of too much importance to me not to make me 
a vigilant observer. his mirth was easily perceive to be the fruit 
of exertion. when his thought wander from the company, an air of 
dissatisfaction and impatience stole across his features. even the 
punctual and frequency of his visit were somewhat lessened. it may 
be supposed that my own uneasy was heighten by these tokens; but, 
strange as it may seem, i found, in the present state of my mind, no 
relief but in the persuasion that pleyel was unhappy. 

that unhappiness, indeed, depended, for its value in my eyes, on the 
cause that produce it. it did not arise from the death of the saxon 
lady: it was not a contagious emanate from the countenance of wieland 
or carwin. there was but one other source whence it could flow. a 
nameless ecstacy thrill through my frame when any new proof occur 
that the ambiguous of my behaviour was the cause. 



chapter ix 


my brother had received a new book from germany. it was a tragedy, and 
the first attempt of a saxon poet, of whom my brother had been taught to 
entertain the highest expectations. the exploit of zisca, the bohemian 
hero, were woven into a dramatic series and connection. according to 
germany custom, it was minute and diffuse, and dictate by an adventurous 
and lawless fancy. it was a chain of audacious acts, and unheard-of 
disasters. the moated fortress, and the thicket; the ambush and the 
battle; and the conflict of headlong passions, were pourtraye in 
wild numbers, and with terrific energy. an afternoon was set apart to 
rehearse this performance. the language was familiar to all of us but 
carwin, whose company, therefore, was tacit dispense with. 

the morning previous to this intended rehearsal, i spent at home. my 
mind was occupy with reflection relative to my own situation. the 
sentiment which live with chief energy in my heart, was connected 
with the image of pleyel. in the midst of my anguish, i had not been 
destitute of consolation. his late deportment had given spring to my 
hopes. was not the hour at hand, which should render me the happiest 
of human creatures? he suspect that i look with favorable eyes upon 
carwin. hence arose disquietudes, which he struggle in vain to conceal. 
he love me, but was hopeless that his love would be compensated. is it 
not time, said i, to rectify this error? but by what means is this to be 
effected? it can only be done by a change of deportment in me; but how 
must i demean myself for this purpose? 

i must not speak. neither eyes, nor lips, must impart the information. 
he must not be assured that my heart is his, previous to the tender of 
his own; but he must be convinced that it has not been given to another; 
he must be supply with space whereon to build a doubt as to the true 
state of my affections; he must be prompt to avow himself. the line 
of delicate propriety; how hard it is, not to fall short, and not to 
overleap it! 

this afternoon we shall meet at the temple. we shall not separate till 
late. it will be his province to accompany me home. the airy expanse is 
without a speck. this breeze is usually stedfast, and its promise of 
a bland and cloudless evening, may be trusted. the moon will rise at 
eleven, and at that hour, we shall wind along this bank. possibly that 
hour may decide my fate. if suitable encouragement be given, pleyel will 
reveal his soul to me; and i, ere i reach this threshold, will be made 
the happiest of beings. and is this good to be mine? add wings to thy 
speed, sweet evening; and thou, moon, i charge thee, shroud thy beam at 
the moment when my pleyel whisper love. i would not for the world, that 
the burning blushes, and the mount rapture of that moment, should be 
visible. 

but what encouragement is wanting? i must be regardful of insurmountable 
limits. yet when mind are imbue with a genuine sympathy, are not words 
and looks superfluous? are not motion and touch sufficient to impart 
feelings such as mine? has he not eye me at moments, when the pressure 
of his hand has thrown me into tumults, and was it possible that he 
mistook the impetuos of love, for the eloquence of indignation? 

but the hasten evening will decide. would it were come! and yet i 
shudder at its near approach. an interview that must thus terminate, is 
surely to be wish for by me; and yet it is not without its terrors. 
would to heaven it were come and gone! 

i feel no reluctance, my friends to be thus explicit. time was, when 
these emotion would be hidden with immeasurable solicitude, from every 
human eye. alas! these airy and fleeting impulse of shame are gone. my 
scruple were preposterous and criminal. they are bred in all hearts, by 
a perverse and vicious education, and they would still have maintain 
their place in my heart, had not my portion been set in misery. my 
error have taught me thus much wisdom; that those sentiment which we 
ought not to disclose, it is criminal to harbour. 

it was propose to begin the rehearsal at four o'clock; i count the 
minutes as they passed; their flight was at once too rapid and too slow; 
my sensation were of an excruciating kind; i could taste no food, nor 
apply to any task, nor enjoy a moment's repose: when the hour arrived, i 
hasten to my brother's. 

pleyel was not there. he had not yet come. on ordinary occasions, he was 
eminent for punctuality. he had testify great eager to share 
in the pleasure of this rehearsal. he was to divide the task with my 
brother, and, in task like these, he always engaged with peculiar 
zeal. his elocution was less sweet than sonorous; and, therefore, 
better adapt than the mellifluence of his friend, to the outrageous 
vehemence of this drama. 

what could detain him? perhaps he linger through forgetfulness. yet 
this was incredible. never had his memory been known to fail upon even 
more trivial occasions. not less impossible was it, that the scheme had 
lost its attractions, and that he staid, because his coming would afford 
him no gratification. but why should we expect him to adhere to the 
minute? 

an half hour elapsed, but pleyel was still at a distance. perhaps he had 
misunderstood the hour which had been proposed. perhaps he had conceive 
that to-morrow, and not to-day, had been select for this purpose: 
but no. a review of preceding circumstances demonstrate that such 
misapprehension was impossible; for he had himself propose this day, 
and this hour. this day, his attention would not otherwise be occupied; 
but to-morrow, an indispensible engagement was foreseen, by which all 
his time would be engrossed: his detention, therefore, must be owe 
to some unforeseen and extraordinary event. our conjecture were vague, 
tumultuous, and sometimes fearful. his sickness and his death might 
possibly have detain him. 

torture with suspense, we sat gaze at each other, and at the path 
which led from the road. every horseman that pass was, for a moment, 
imagine to be him. hour succeed hour, and the sun, gradual 
declining, at length, disappeared. every signal of his coming prove 
fallacious, and our hope were at length dismissed. his absence affected 
my friends in no insupportable degree. they should be obliged, they 
said, to defer this undertaking till the morrow; and, perhaps, their 
impatient curiosity would compel them to dispense entire with his 
presence. no doubt, some harmless occurrence had divert him from 
his purpose; and they trust that they should receive a satisfactory 
account of him in the morning. 

it may be supposed that this disappointment affected me in a very 
different manner. i turn aside my head to conceal my tears. i flee 
into solitude, to give vent to my reproaches, without interrupt 
or restraint. my heart was ready to burst with indignation and grief. 
pleyel was not the only object of my keen but unjust upbraiding. deep 
did i execrate my own folly. thus fallen into ruins was the gay fabric 
which i had reared! thus had my golden vision melt into air! 

how fondly did i dream that pleyel was a lover! if he were, would he 
have suffer any obstacle to hinder his coming? blind and infatuated 
man! i exclaimed. thou sportest with happiness. the good that is 
offer thee, thou hast the insole and folly to refuse. well, i will 
henceforth intrust my felicity to no one's keeping but my own. 

the first agony of this disappointment would not allow me to be 
reasonable or just. every ground on which i had built the persuasion 
that pleyel was not unimpress in my favor, appear to vanish. it 
seem as if i had been misle into this opinion, by the most palpable 
illusions. 

i made some trifling excuse, and returned, much early than i expected, 
to my own house. i retired early to my chamber, without designing to 
sleep. i placed myself at a window, and gave the reins to reflection. 

the hateful and degrade impulse which had lately controule me were, 
in some degree, removed. new dejection succeeded, but was now produce 
by contemplate my late behaviour. surely that passion is worthy to 
be abhor which obscure our understanding, and urge us to the 
commission of injustice. what right had i to expect his attendance? 
had i not demean myself like one indifferent to his happiness, and as 
have bestow my regards upon another? his absence might be prompt 
by the love which i considered his absence as a proof that he wanted. 
he came not because the sight of me, the spectacle of my cold or 
aversion, contribute to his despair. why should i prolong, by hypocrisy 
or silence, his misery as well as my own? why not deal with him 
explicitly, and assure him of the truth? 

you will hardly believe that, in obedience to this suggestion, i rose 
for the purpose of order a light, that i might instantly make this 
confession in a letter. a second thought shew me the rash of this 
scheme, and i wonder by what infirmity of mind i could be betray 
into a momentary approbation of it. i saw with the utmost clear that 
a confession like that would be the most remediless and unpardonable 
outrage upon the dignity of my sex, and utterly unworthy of that passion 
which controule me. 

i resume my seat and my musing. to account for the absence of pleyel 
became once more the scope of my conjectures. how many incident might 
occur to raise an insuperable impediment in his way? when i was a child, 
a scheme of pleasure, in which he and his sister were parties, had been, 
in like manner, frustrate by his absence; but his absence, in that 
instance, had been occasion by his fall from a boat into the river, 
in consequence of which he had run the most imminent hazard of being 
drowned. here was a second disappointment endure by the same persons, 
and produce by his failure. might it not originate in the same cause? 
had he not design to cross the river that morning to make some 
necessary purchase in jersey? he had preconcerte to return to his 
own house to dinner; but, perhaps, some disaster had befallen him. 
experience had taught me the insecure of a canoe, and that was the 
only kind of boat which pleyel used: i was, likewise, actuate by 
an hereditary dread of water. these circumstances combine to bestow 
considerable plausible on this conjecture; but the consternation 
with which i began to be seize was allay by reflecting, that if 
this disaster had happen my brother would have received the speediest 
information of it. the consolation which this idea impart was ravish 
from me by a new thought. this disaster might have happened, and his 
family not be apprize of it. the first intelligence of his fate may 
be communicate by the livid corpse which the tide may cast, many days 
hence, upon the shore. 

thus was i distress by opposite conjectures: thus was i torment by 
phantom of my own creation. it was not always thus. i can ascertain the 
date when my mind became the victim of this imbecility; perhaps it was 
coeval with the inroad of a fatal passion; a passion that will never 
rank me in the number of its eulogists; it was alone sufficient to the 
exterminate of my peace: it was itself a plenteous source of 
calamity, and need not the concurrence of other evil to take away the 
attraction of existence, and dig for me an untimely grave. 

the state of my mind naturally introduce a train of reflection upon 
the danger and care which inevitable beset an human being. by no 
violent transition was i led to ponder on the turbulent life and 
mysterious end of my father. i cherished, with the utmost veneration, 
the memory of this man, and every relique connected with his fate was 
preserve with the most scrupulous care. among these was to be number 
a manuscript, contain memoirs of his own life. the narrative was by 
no means recommend by its eloquence; but neither did all its value 
flow from my relationship to the author. its stile had an unaffected and 
picturesque simplicity. the great variety and circumstantial display of 
the incidents, together with their intrinsic importance, as descriptive 
of human manners and passions, made it the most useful book in my 
collection. it was late; but being sensible of no inclination to sleep, 
i resolve to betake myself to the peruse of it. 

to do this it was requisite to procure a light. the girl had long since 
retired to her chamber: it was therefore proper to wait upon myself. 
a lamp, and the means of lighting it, were only to be found in the 
kitchen. thither i resolve forthwith to repair; but the light was of 
use merely to enable me to read the book. i knew the shelf and the spot 
where it stood. whether i took down the book, or prepared the lamp in 
the first place, appear to be a matter of no moment. the latter was 
preferred, and, leave my seat, i approach the closet in which, as i 
mention formerly, my books and papers were deposited. 

sudden the remembrance of what had lately pass in this closet 
occurred. whether midnight was approaching, or had passed, i knew not. i 
was, as then, alone, and defenceless. the wind was in that direction 
in which, aid by the deathlike repose of nature, it brought to me 
the murmur of the water-fall. this was mingle with that solemn and 
enchanting sound, which a breeze produce among the leaves of pines. the 
words of that mysterious dialogue, their fearful import, and the wild 
excess to which i was transport by my terrors, fill my imagination 
anew. my steps faultered, and i stood a moment to recover myself. 

i prevail on myself at length to move towards the closet. i touched 
the lock, but my finger were powerless; i was visit afresh by 
unconquerable apprehensions. a sort of belief dart into my mind, that 
some being was conceal within, whose purpose were evil. i began to 
contend with those fears, when it occur to me that i might, without 
impropriety, go for a lamp previous to opening the closet. i recede 
a few steps; but before i reach my chamber door my thought took a new 
direction. motion seem to produce a mechanical influence upon me. i 
was ashamed of my weakness. besides, what aid could be afford me by a 
lamp? 

my fear had picture to themselves no precise object. it would be 
difficult to depict, in words, the ingredient and hue of that phantom 
which haunt me. an hand invisible and of preternatural strength, 
lift by human passions, and select my life for its aim, were parts 
of this terrific image. all place were alike accessible to this foe, or 
if his empire were restricted by local bounds, those bounds were utterly 
inscrutable by me. but had i not been told by some one in league with 
this enemy, that every place but the recess in the bank was exempt from 
danger? i return to the closet, and once more put my hand upon the 
lock. o! may my ear lose their sensibility, ere they be again assail 
by a shriek so terrible! not merely my understanding was subdued by the 
sound: it act on my nerves like an edge of steel. it appear to cut 
asunder the fibre of my brain, and rack every joint with agony. 

the cry, loud and piercing as it was, was nevertheless human. no 
articulation was ever more distinct. the breath which accompany it did 
not fan my hair, yet did every circumstance combine to persuade me that 
the lip which utter it touched my very shoulder. 

"hold! hold!" were the words of this tremendous prohibition, in whose 
tone the whole soul seem to be wrap up, and every energy convert 
into eager and terror. 

shuddering, i dashed myself against the wall, and by the same 
involuntary impulse, turn my face backward to examine the mysterious 
monitor. the moon-light stream into each window, and every corner of 
the room was conspicuous, and yet i beheld nothing! 

the interval was too brief to be artificial measured, between the 
utterance of these words, and my scrutiny direct to the quarter whence 
they came. yet if a human being had been there, could he fail to have 
been visible? which of my senses was the prey of a fatal illusion? the 
shock which the sound produce was still felt in every part of my frame. 
the sound, therefore, could not but be a genuine commotion. but that i 
had heard it, was not more true than that the being who utter it was 
station at my right ear; yet my attendant was invisible. 

i cannot describe the state of my thought at that moment. surprize 
had master my faculties. my frame shook, and the vital current was 
congealed. i was conscious only to the vehemence of my sensations. this 
condition could not be lasting. like a tide, which sudden mount to 
an overwhelming height, and then gradual subsides, my confusion slow 
gave place to order, and my tumult to a calm. i was able to deliberate 
and move. i resume my feet, and advanced into the midst of the room. 
upward, and behind, and on each side, i threw penetrating glances. i was 
not satisfy with one examination. he that hitherto refuse to be 
seen, might change his purpose, and on the next survey be clearly 
distinguishable. 

solitude impose least restraint upon the fancy. dark is less fertile 
of image than the feeble lustre of the moon. i was alone, and the wall 
were chequer by shadowy forms. as the moon pass behind a cloud and 
emerged, these shadow seem to be endow with life, and to move. the 
apartment was open to the breeze, and the curtain was occasional 
blown from its ordinary position. this motion was not unaccompanied with 
sound. i fail not to snatch a look, and to listen when this motion 
and this sound occurred. my belief that my monitor was post near, 
was strong, and instantly convert these appearances to token of his 
presence, and yet i could discern nothing. 

when my thought were at length permit to revert to the past, the 
first idea that occur was the resemblance between the words of the 
voice which i had just heard, and those which had terminate my dream in 
the summer-house. there are means by which we are able to distinguish a 
substance from a shadow, a reality from the phantom of a dream. the pit, 
my brother beckon me forward, the seizure of my arm, and the voice 
behind, were surely imaginary. that these incident were fashion in my 
sleep, is support by the same indubitable evidence that compel me to 
believe myself awake at present; yet the words and the voice were the 
same. then, by some inexplicable contrivance, i was aware of the danger, 
while my action and sensation were those of one wholly unacquainted 
with it. now, was it not equally true that my action and persuasion 
were at war? had not the belief, that evil lurk in the closet, gain 
admittance, and had not my action betoken an unwarrantable security? 
to obviate the effects of my infatuation, the same means had been used. 

in my dream, he that tempt me to my destruction, was my brother. death 
was ambush in my path. from what evil was i now rescued? what minister 
or implement of ill was shut up in this recess? who was it whose 
suffocate grasp i was to feel, should i dare to enter it? what 
monstrous conception is this? my brother! 

no; protection, and not injury is his province. strange and terrible 
chimera! yet it would not be sudden dismissed. it was surely no vulgar 
agency that gave this form to my fears. he to whom all parts of time are 
equally present, whom no contingency approaches, was the author of that 
spell which now seize upon me. life was dear to me. no consideration 
was present that enjoin me to relinquish it. sacred duty combine 
with every spontaneous sentiment to endear to me my being. should i not 
shudder when my being was endangered? but what emotion should possess me 
when the arm lift aginst me was wieland's? 

idea exist in our mind that can be account for by no establish 
laws. why did i dream that my brother was my foe? why but because an 
omen of my fate was ordain to be communicated? yet what salutary end 
did it serve? did it arm me with caution to elude, or fortitude to bear 
the evil to which i was reserved? my present thought were, no 
doubt, indebted for their hue to the similitude existing between these 
incident and those of my dream. surely it was phrenzy that dictate my 
deed. that a ruffian was hidden in the closet, was an idea, the genuine 
tendency of which was to urge me to flight. such had been the effect 
formerly produced. had my mind been simply occupy with this thought at 
present, no doubt, the same impulse would have been experienced; but 
now it was my brother whom i was irresistable persuade to regard as the 
contrive of that ill of which i had been forewarned. this persuasion 
did not extenuate my fear or my danger. why then did i again approach 
the closet and withdraw the bolt? my resolution was instantly conceived, 
and execute without faultering. 

the door was form of light materials. the lock, of simple structure, 
easily forewent its hold. it open into the room, and commonly move 
upon its hinges, after being unfastened, without any effort of mine. 
this effort, however, was bestow upon the present occasion. it was 
my purpose to open it with quickness, but the exertion which i made was 
ineffectual. it refuse to open. 

at another time, this circumstance would not have look with a face of 
mystery. i should have supposed some casual obstruction, and repeated my 
effort to surmount it. but now my mind was accessible to no conjecture 
but one. the door was hinder from opening by human force. surely, here 
was new cause for affright. this was confirmation proper to decide my 
conduct. now was all ground of hesitation taken away. what could be 
supposed but that i desert the chamber and the house? that i at least 
endeavour no long to withdraw the door? 

have i not said that my action were dictate by phrenzy? my reason had 
forborne, for a time, to suggest or to sway my resolves. i reiterate 
my endeavours. i exert all my force to overcome the obstacle, but in 
vain. the strength that was exert to keep it shut, was superior to 
mine. 

a casual observer might, perhaps, applaud the audacious of this 
conduct. whence, but from an habitual defiance of danger, could my 
perseverance arise? i have already assigned, as distinct as i am able, 
the cause of it. the frantic conception that my brother was within, that 
the resistance made to my design was exert by him, had rooted itself 
in my mind. you will comprehend the height of this infatuation, when 
i tell you, that, finding all my exertion vain, i betook myself to 
exclamations. surely i was utterly bereft of understanding. 

now had i arrive at the crisis of my fate. "o! hinder not the door to 
open," i exclaimed, in a tone that had less of fear than of grief in 
it. "i know you well. come forth, but harm me not. i beseech you come 
forth." 

i had taken my hand from the lock, and remove to a small distance from 
the door. i had scarcely utter these words, when the door swung upon 
its hinges, and display to my view the interior of the closet. whoever 
was within, was shroud in darkness. a few seconds pass without 
interrupt of the silence. i knew not what to expect or to fear. my 
eyes would not stray from the recess. presently, a deep sigh was heard. 
the quarter from which it came heighten the eager of my gaze. some 
one approach from the farther end. i quick perceive the outline 
of a human figure. its steps were irresolute and slow. i recoil as it 
advanced. 

by coming at length within the verge of the room, his form was clearly 
distinguishable. i had prefigure to myself a very different personage. 
the face that present itself was the last that i should desire to meet 
at an hour, and in a place like this. my wonder was stifle by my fears. 
assassin had lurk in this recess. some divine voice warn me of 
danger, that at this moment await me. i had spurn the intimation, 
and challenge my adversary. 

i recall the mysterious countenance and dubious character of carwin. 
what motive but atrocious one could guide his steps hither? i was 
alone. my habit suit the hour, and the place, and the warmth of the 
season. all succour was remote. he had placed himself between me and the 
door. my frame shook with the vehemence of my apprehensions. 

yet i was not wholly lost to myself: i vigilant marked his demeanour. 
his looks were grave, but not without perturbation. what species of 
inquietude it betrayed, the light was not strong enough to enable me 
to discover. he stood still; but his eyes wander from one object to 
another. when these powerful organ were fixed upon me, i shrunk into 
myself. at length, he broke silence. earnestness, and not embarrassment, 
was in his tone. he advanced close to me while he spoke. 

"what voice was that which lately address you?" 

he pause for an answer; but observing my trepidation, he resumed, with 
undiminished solemnity: "be not terrified. whoever he was, he hast done 
you an important service. i need not ask you if it were the voice of 
a companion. that sound was beyond the compass of human organs. the 
knowledge that enable him to tell you who was in the closet, was 
obtain by incomprehensible means. 

"you knew that carwin was there. were you not apprize of his intents? 
the same power could impart the one as well as the other. yet, knowing 
these, you persisted. audacious girl! but, perhaps, you confide in his 
guardianship. your confidence was just. with succour like this at hand 
you may safe defy me. 

"he is my eternal foe; the baffle of my best concerted schemes. twice 
have you been save by his accursed interposition. but for him i should 
long ere now have borne away the spoils of your honor." 

he look at me with greater stedfast than before. i became every 
moment more anxious for my safety. it was with difficulty i stammer 
out an entreaty that he would instantly depart, or suffer me to do so. 
he paid no regard to my request, but proceed in a more impassioned 
manner. 

"what is it you fear? have i not told you, you are safe? has not one 
in whom you more reasonably place trust assured you of it? even if i 
execute my purpose, what injury is done? your prejudice will call it 
by that name, but it merit it not. i was impel by a sentiment that 
do you honor; a sentiment, that would sanctify my deed; but, whatever 
it be, you are safe. be this chimera still worshipped; i will do nothing 
to pollute it." there he stopped. 

the accent and gesture of this man left me drain of all courage. 
surely, on no other occasion should i have been thus pusillanimous. my 
state i regard as a hopeless one. i was wholly at the mercy of this 
being. whichever way i turn my eyes, i saw no avenue by which i might 
escape. the resources of my personal strength, my ingenuity, and my 
eloquence, i estimate at nothing. the dignity of virtue, and the force 
of truth, i had been accustomed to celebrate; and had frequent vaunt 
of the conquest which i should make with their assistance. 

i use to suppose that certain evil could never befall a being in 
possession of a sound mind; that true virtue supplies us with energy 
which vice can never resist; that it was always in our power to 
obstruct, by his own death, the designs of an enemy who aim at less 
than our life. how was it that a sentiment like despair had now invade 
me, and that i trust to the protection of chance, or to the pity of my 
persecutor? 

his words impart some notion of the injury which he had meditated. he 
talk of obstacle that had risen in his way. he had relinquish his 
design. these source supply me with slender consolation. there was no 
security but in his absence. when i look at myself, when i reflect 
on the hour and the place, i was overpower by horror and dejection. 

he was silent, museful, and inattentive to my situation, yet made no 
motion to depart. i was silent in my turn. what could i say? i was 
confident that reason in this contest would be impotent. i must owe my 
safety to his own suggestions. whatever purpose brought him hither, he 
had change it. why then did he remain? his resolution might fluctuate, 
and the pause of a few minutes restore to him his first resolutions. 

yet was not this the man whom we had treat with unweary kindness? 
whose society was endear to us by his intellectual elevation and 
accomplishments? who had a thousand times expatiate on the usefulness 
and beauty of virtue? why should such a one be dreaded? if i could have 
forgotten the circumstances in which our interview had taken place, i 
might have treat his words as jests. presently, he resumed: 

"fear me not: the space that sever us is small, and all visible succour 
is distant. you believe yourself completely in my power; that you stand 
upon the brink of ruin. such are your groundless fears. i cannot lift 
a finger to hurt you. easy it would be to stop the moon in her course 
than to injure you. the power that protect you would crumble my sinews, 
and reduce me to a heap of ashes in a moment, if i were to harbour a 
thought hostile to your safety. thus are appearances at length solved. 
little did i expect that they originate hence. what a portion is 
assign to you? scan by the eyes of this intelligence, your path 
will be without pit to swallow, or snare to entangle you. environed by 
the arms of this protection, all artifice will be frustrated, and all 
malice repelled." 

here succeed a new pause. i was still observant of every gesture and 
look. the tranquil solemnity that had lately possessed his countenance 
gave way to a new expression. all now was trepidation and anxiety. 

"i must be gone," said he in a falter accent. "why do i linger here? 
i will not ask your forgiveness. i see that your terror are invincible. 
your pardon will be extort by fear, and not dictate by compassion. i 
must fly from you forever. he that could plot against your honor, must 
expect from you and your friends persecution and death. i must doom 
myself to endless exile." 

saying this, he hasty left the room. i listen while he descended the 
stairs, and, unbolt the outer door, went forth. i did not follow him 
with my eyes, as the moon-light would have enable me to do. relieved by 
his absence, and exhaust by the conflict of my fears, i threw myself 
on a chair, and resigned myself to those bewilder idea which 
incident like these could not fail to produce. 



chapter x 


order could not readily be introduce into my thoughts. the voice still 
rung in my ears. every accent that was utter by carwin was fresh in my 
remembrance. his unwelcome approach, the recognition of his person, his 
hasty departure, produce a complex impression on my mind which no words 
can delineate. i strove to give a slow motion to my thoughts, and to 
regulate a confusion which became painful; but my effort were nugatory. 
i cover my eyes with my hand, and sat, i know not how long, without 
power to arrange or utter my conceptions. 

i had remain for hours, as i believed, in absolute solitude. no 
thought of personal danger had molest my tranquillity. i had made 
no preparation for defence. what was it that suggest the design of 
peruse my father's manuscript? if, instead of this, i had retired 
to bed, and to sleep, to what fate might i not have been reserved? the 
ruffian, who must almost have suppress his breathing to screen himself 
from discovery, would have notice this signal, and i should have 
awaken only to perish with affright, and to abhor myself. could i have 
remain unconscious of my danger? could i have tranquil slept in the 
midst of so deadly a snare? 

and who was he that threaten to destroy me? by what means could he 
hide himself in this closet? surely he is gifted with supernatural 
power. such is the enemy of whose attempt i was forewarned. daily i had 
seen him and converse with him. nothing could be discern through the 
impenetrable veil of his duplicity. when busy in conjectures, as to 
the author of the evil that was threatened, my mind did not light, for 
a moment, upon his image. yet has he not avowed himself my enemy? why 
should he be here if he had not meditate evil? 

he confess that this has been his second attempt. what was the scene 
of his former conspiracy? was it not he whose whisper betray him? am 
i deceived; or was there not a faint resemblance between the voice of 
this man and that which talk of grasping my throat, and extinguish 
my life in a moment? then he had a colleague in his crime; now he 
is alone. then death was the scope of his thoughts; now an injury 
unspeakable more dreadful. how thankful should i be to the power that 
has interpose to save me! 

that power is invisible. it is subject to the cognizance of one of my 
senses. what are the means that will inform me of what nature it is? 
he has set himself to counterwork the machination of this man, who had 
menace destruction to all that is dear to me, and whose cunning had 
surmount every human impediment. there was none to rescue me from 
his grasp. my rash even hasten the completion of his scheme, and 
preclude him from the benefit of deliberation. i had rob him of the 
power to repent and forbear. had i been apprize of the danger, i should 
have regard my conduct as the means of rendering my escape from it 
impossible. such, likewise, seem to have been the fear of my invisible 
protector. else why that startle intreaty to refrain from opening the 
closet? by what inexplicable infatuation was i compel to proceed? 

yet my conduct was wise. carwin, unable to comprehend my folly, ascribe 
my behaviour to my knowledge. he conceive himself previous detected, 
and such detection being possible to flow only from my heavenly friend, 
and his enemy, his fear acquire additional strength. 

he is apprize of the nature and intentions of this being. perhaps he 
is a human agent. yet, on that supposition his atchievement are 
incredible. why should i be select as the object of his care; or, if 
a mere mortal, should i not recognize some one, whom, benefit impart 
and received had prompt to love me? what were the limit and duration 
of his guardianship? was the genius of my birth entrust by divine 
benignity with this province? are human faculty adequate to 
receive strong proof of the existence of unfettered and beneficent 
intelligence than i have received? 

but who was this man's coadjutor? the voice that acknowledge an 
alliance in treachery with carwin warn me to avoid the summer-house. 
he assured me that there only my safety was endangered. his assurance, 
as it now appears, was fallacious. was there not deceit in his 
admonition? was his compact really annulled? some purpose was, perhaps, 
to be accomplished by prevent my future visit to that spot. why was 
i enjoin silence to others, on the subject of this admonition, unless 
it were for some unauthorized and guilty purpose? 

no one but myself was accustomed to visit it. backward, it was hidden 
from distant view by the rock, and in front, it was screen from all 
examination, by creep plants, and the branch of cedars. what 
recess could be more propitious to secrecy? the spirit which haunt it 
formerly was pure and rapturous. it was a fane sacred to the memory 
of infantile days, and to blissful imagination of the future! what a 
gloomy reverse had succeed since the ominous arrival of this stranger! 
now, perhaps, it is the scene of his meditations. purpose fraught with 
horror, that shun the light, and contemplate the pollution of innocence, 
are here engendered, and fostered, and rear to maturity. 

such were the idea that, during the night, were tumultuous revolve 
by me. i review every conversation in which carwin had borne a part. 
i studied to discover the true inference deduce from his deportment 
and words with regard to his former adventure and actual views. i 
ponder on the comment which he made on the relation which i had given 
of the closet dialogue. no new idea suggest themselves in the course 
of this review. my expectation had, from the first, been disappointed 
on the small degree of surprize which this narrative excited in him. he 
never explicit declared his opinion as to the nature of those voices, 
or decided whether they were real or visionary. he recommend no 
measure of caution or prevention. 

but what measure were now to be taken? was the danger which threaten 
me at an end? had i nothing more to fear? i was lonely, and without 
means of defence. i could not calculate the motive and regulate the 
footstep of this person. what certainty was there, that he would not 
re-assume his purposes, and swift return to the execution of them? 

this idea cover me once more with dismay. how deep did i regret the 
solitude in which i was placed, and how ardent did i desire the return 
of day! but neither of these inconvenient were susceptible of remedy. 
at first, it occur to me to summon my servant, and make her spend the 
night in my chamber; but the inefficacy of this expedient to enhance my 
safety was easily seen. once i resolve to leave the house, and retire 
to my brother's, but was deter by reflect on the unseasonable 
of the hour, on the alarm which my arrival, and the account which i 
should be oblige to give, might occasion, and on the danger to which i 
might expose myself in the way thither. i began, likewise, to consider 
carwin's return to molest me as exceedingly improbable. he had 
relinquished, of his own accord, his design, and departed without 
compulsion. "surely," said i, "there is omnipotence in the cause that 
change the view of a man like carwin. the divinity that shield me 
from his attempt will take suitable care of my future safety. thus to 
yield to my fear is to deserve that they should be real." 

scarcely had i utter these words, when my attention was startle by 
the sound of footsteps. they denote some one step into the piazza 
in front of my house. my new-born confidence was extinguish in a 
moment. carwin, i thought, had repent his departure, and was hasty 
returning. the possibility that his return was prompt by intentions 
consistent with my safety, found no place in my mind. image of 
violate and murder assail me anew, and the terror which succeed 
almost incapacitate me from taking any measure for my defence. it was 
an impulse of which i was scarcely conscious, that made me fasten the 
lock and draw the bolt of my chamber door. have done this, i threw 
myself on a seat; for i tremble to a degree which disabled me from 
standing, and my soul was so perfectly absorb in the act of listening, 
that almost the vital motions were stopped. 

the door below creak on its hinges. it was not again thrust to, but 
appear to remain open. footstep entered, traverse the entry, and 
began to mount the stairs. how i detest the folly of not pursue the 
man when he withdrew, and bolt after him the outer door! might he not 
conceive this omission to be a proof that my angel had desert me, and 
be thereby fortify in guilt? 

every step on the stairs, which brought him near to my chamber, add 
vigor to my desperation. the evil with which i was menace was to be at 
any rate eluded. how little did i preconceive the conduct which, in an 
exigence like this, i should be prone to adopt. you will suppose that 
deliberation and despair would have suggest the same course of action, 
and that i should have, unhesitatingly, resort to the best means of 
personal defence within my power. a penknife lay open upon my table. i 
remember that it was there, and seize it. for what purpose you will 
scarcely inquire. it will be immediately supposed that i meant it for my 
last refuge, and that if all other means should fail, i should plunge it 
into the heart of my ravisher. 

i have lost all faith in the stedfast of human resolves. it was thus 
that in periods of calm i had determined to act. no cowardice had been 
held by me in greater abhorrence than that which prompt an injure 
female to destroy, not her injure ere the injury was perpetrated, but 
herself when it was without remedy. yet now this penknife appear to 
me of no other use than to baffle my assailant, and prevent the crime 
by destroy myself. to deliberate at such a time was impossible; but 
among the tumultuous suggestion of the moment, i do not recollect that 
it once occur to me to use it as an instrument of direct defence. the 
steps had now reach the second floor. every footfall accelerate the 
completion, without augmenting, the certainty of evil. the consciousness 
that the door was fast, now that nothing but that was interpose between 
me and danger, was a source of some consolation. i cast my eye towards 
the window. this, likewise, was a new suggestion. if the door should 
give way, it was my sudden resolution to throw myself from the window. 
its height from the ground, which was cover beneath by a brick 
pavement, would insure my destruction; but i thought not of that. 

when opposite to my door the footstep ceased. was he listen whether 
my fear were allayed, and my caution were asleep? did he hope to take 
me by surprize? yet, if so, why did he allow so many noisy signal to 
betray his approach? presently the steps were again heard to approach 
the door. an hand was laid upon the lock, and the latch pull back. did 
he imagine it possible that i should fail to secure the door? a slight 
effort was made to push it open, as if all bolt being withdrawn, a 
slight effort only was required. 

i no soon perceive this, than i move swift towards the window. 
carwin's frame might be said to be all muscle. his strength and activity 
had appeared, in various instances, to be prodigious. a slight exertion 
of his force would demolish the door. would not that exertion be made? 
too surely it would; but, at the same moment that this obstacle should 
yield, and he should enter the apartment, my determination was form to 
leap from the window. my senses were still bound to this object. i gaze 
at the door in momentary expectation that the assault would be made. the 
pause continued. the person without was irresolute and motionless. 

suddenly, it occur to me that carwin might conceive me to have fled. 
that i had not betaken myself to flight was, indeed, the least probable 
of all conclusions. in this persuasion he must have been confirmed on 
finding the lower door unfastened, and the chamber door locked. was 
it not wise to foster this persuasion? should i maintain deep silence, 
this, in addition to other circumstances, might encourage the belief, 
and he would once more depart. every new reflection add plausible 
to this reasoning. it was presently more strong enforced, when i 
notice footstep withdraw from the door. the blood once more flow 
back to my heart, and a dawn of exultation began to rise: but my joy was 
short lived. instead of descend the stairs, he pass to the door of 
the opposite chamber, open it, and have entered, shut it after him 
with a violence that shook the house. 

how was i to interpret this circumstance? for what end could he have 
enter this chamber? did the violence with which he closed the door 
testify the depth of his vexation? this room was usually occupy by 
pleyel. was carwin aware of his absence on this night? could he be 
suspect of a design so sordid as pillage? if this were his view there 
were no means in my power to frustrate it. it behove me to seize the 
first opportunity to escape; but if my escape were supposed by my 
enemy to have been already effected, no asylum was more secure than the 
present. how could my passage from the house be accomplished without 
noise that might incite him to pursue me? 

utterly at a loss to account for his go into pleyel's chamber, i 
wait in instant expectation of hearing him come forth. all, however, 
was profound still. i listen in vain for a considerable period, to 
catch the sound of the door when it should again be opened. there was 
no other avenue by which he could escape, but a door which led into the 
girl's chamber. would any evil from this quarter befall the girl? 

hence arose a new train of apprehensions. they merely add to the 
turbulence and agony of my reflections. whatever evil impende over her, 
i had no power to avert it. seclusion and silence were the only means of 
saving myself from the peril of this fatal night. what solemn vow did 
i put up, that if i should once more behold the light of day, i would 
never trust myself again within the threshold of this dwelling! 

minute linger after minute, but no token was given that carwin had 
return to the passage. what, i again asked, could detain him in this 
room? was it possible that he had returned, and glided, unperceived, 
away? i was speedy aware of the difficulty that attend an enterprize 
like this; and yet, as if by that means i were capable of gain any 
information on that head, i cast anxious looks from the window. 

the object that first attract my attention was an human figure 
standing on the edge of the bank. perhaps my penetration was assist 
by my hopes. be that as it will, the figure of carwin was clearly 
distinguishable. from the obscurity of my station, it was impossible 
that i should be discern by him, and yet he scarcely suffer me to 
catch a glimpse of him. he turn and went down the steep, which, in 
this part, was not difficult to be scaled. 

my conjecture then had been right. carwin has soft open the door, 
descended the stairs, and issue forth. that i should not have overheard 
his steps, was only less incredible than that my eyes had deceive me. 
but what was now to be done? the house was at length deliver from this 
detest inmate. by one avenue might he again re-enter. was it not wise 
to bar the lower door? perhaps he had gone out by the kitchen door. for 
this end, he must have pass through judith's chamber. these entrance 
being closed and bolted, as great security was gain as was compatible 
with my lonely condition. 

the propriety of these measure was too manifest not to make me struggle 
successful with my fears. yet i open my own door with the utmost 
caution, and descended as if i were afraid that carwin had been still 
immure in pleyel's chamber. the outer door was a-jar. i shut, with 
tremble eagerness, and drew every bolt that append to it. i then 
pass with light and less cautious steps through the parlour, but was 
surprize to discover that the kitchen door was secure. i was compel 
to acquiesce in the first conjecture that carwin had escape through the 
entry. 

my heart was now somewhat ease of the load of apprehension. i return 
once more to my chamber, the door of which i was careful to lock. it was 
no time to think of repose. the moon-light began already to fade before 
the light of the day. the approach of morning was betoken by the usual 
signals. i muse upon the event of this night, and determined to take 
up my abode henceforth at my brother's. whether i should inform him 
of what had happen was a question which seem to demand some 
consideration. my safety unquestionable require that i should abandon 
my present habitation. 

as my thought began to flow with few impediments, the image of 
pleyel, and the dubious of his condition, again recur to me. i 
again ran over the possible cause of his absence on the preceding day. 
my mind was attune to melancholy. i dwelt, with an obstinacy for which 
i could not account, on the idea of his death. i paint to myself his 
struggle with the billows, and his last appearance. i imagine myself 
a midnight wanderer on the shore, and to have stumble on his corpse, 
which the tide had cast up. these dreary image affected me even to 
tears. i endeavour not to restrain them. they impart a relief which 
i had not anticipated. the more copious they flowed, the more did 
my general sensation appear to subside into calm, and a certain 
restless give way to repose. 

perhaps, relieved by this effusion, the slumber so much want might 
have stolen on my senses, had there been no new cause of alarm. 



chapter xi 


i was arouse from this stupor by sound that evidently arose in the 
next chamber. was it possible that i had been mistaken in the figure 
which i had seen on the bank? or had carwin, by some inscrutable means, 
penetrate once more into this chamber? the opposite door opened; 
footstep came forth, and the person, advance to mine, knocked. 

so unexpected an incident rob me of all presence of mind, and, 
start up, i involuntary exclaimed, "who is there?" an answer was 
immediately given. the voice, to my inexpressible astonishment, was 
pleyel's. 

"it is i. have you risen? if you have not, make haste; i want three 
minutes conversation with you in the parlour--i will wait for you 
there." saying this he retired from the door. 

should i confide in the testimony of my ears? if that were true, it was 
pleyel that had been hitherto immure in the opposite chamber: he whom 
my rueful fancy had depict in so many ruinous and ghastly shapes: he 
whose footstep had been listen to with such inquietude! what is man, 
that knowledge is so sparing confer upon him! that his heart should 
be wrung with distress, and his frame be exanimate with fear, though 
his safety be encompass with impregnable walls! what are the bounds 
of human imbecility! he that warn me of the presence of my foe refuse 
the intimate by which so many rack fear would have been precluded. 

yet who would have imagine the arrival of pleyel at such an hour? his 
tone was despond and anxious. why this unseasonable summons? and why 
this hasty departure? some tidings he, perhaps, bear of mysterious and 
unwelcome import. 

my impatience would not allow me to consume much time in deliberation: i 
hasten down. pleyel i found standing at a window, with eyes cast 
down as in meditation, and arms fold on his breast. every line in 
his countenance was pregnant with sorrow. to this was add a certain 
wan and air of fatigue. the last time i had seen him appearances 
had been the reverse of these. i was startle at the change. the first 
impulse was to question him as to the cause. this impulse was supplant 
by some degree of confusion, flowing from a consciousness that love had 
too large, and, as it might prove, a perceptible share in create this 
impulse. i was silent. 

presently he raise his eyes and fixed them upon me. i read in them an 
anguish altogether ineffable. never had i witness a like demeanour 
in pleyel. never, indeed, had i observe an human countenance in which 
grief was more legible inscribed. he seem struggle for utterance; 
but his struggle being fruitless, he shook his head and turn away 
from me. 

my impatience would not allow me to be long silent: "what," said i, 
"for heaven's sake, my friend, what is the matter?" 

he start at the sound of my voice. his looks, for a moment, became 
convulse with an emotion very different from grief. his accent were 
broken with rage. 

"the matter--o wretch!--thus exquisite fashioned--on whom nature 
seem to have exhaust all her graces; with charm so awful and 
so pure! how art thou fallen! from what height fallen! a ruin so 
complete--so unheard of!" 

his words were again choake by emotion. grief and pity were again 
mingle in his features. he resumed, in a tone half suffocate by sobs: 

"but why should i upbraid thee? could i restore to thee what thou hast 
lost; efface this cursed stain; snatch thee from the jaws of this fiend; 
i would do it. yet what will avail my efforts? i have not arms with 
which to contend with so consummate, so frightful a depravity. 

"evidence less than this would only have excited resentment and scorn. 
the wretch who should have breathe a suspicion injurious to thy honor, 
would have been regard without anger; not hatred or envy could have 
prompt him; it would merely be an argument of madness. that my eyes, 
that my ears, should bear witness to thy fall! by no other way could 
detest conviction be imparted. 

"why do i summon thee to this conference? why expose myself to thy 
derision? here admonition and entreaty are vain. thou knowest him 
already, for a murder and thief. i had thought to have been the first 
to disclose to thee his infamy; to have warn thee of the pit to 
which thou art hastening; but thy eyes are open in vain. o foul and 
insupportable disgrace! 

"there is but one path. i know you will disappear together. in thy ruin, 
how will the felicity and honor of multitude be involved! but it must 
come. this scene shall not be blot by his presence. no doubt thou 
wilt shortly see thy detest paramour. this scene will be again 
pollute by a midnight assignation. inform him of his danger; tell him 
that his crime are known; let him fly far and instantly from this spot, 
if he desire to avoid the fate which menace him in ireland. 

"and wilt thou not stay behind?--but shame upon my weakness. i know 
not what i would say.--i have done what i purposed. to stay longer, to 
expostulate, to beseech, to enumerate the consequence of thy act--what 
end can it serve but to blazon thy infamy and embitter our woes? and 
yet, o think, think ere it be too late, on the distress which thy 
flight will entail upon us; on the base, grovelling, and atrocious 
character of the wretch to whom thou hast sold thy honor. but what 
is this? is not thy effrontery impenetrable, and thy heart thorough 
cankered? o most specious, and most profligate of women!" 

saying this, he rush out of the house. i saw him in a few moments 
hurry along the path which led to my brother's. i had no power to 
prevent his going, or to recall, or to follow him. the accent i had 
heard were calculate to confound and bewilder. i look around me to 
assure myself that the scene was real. i move that i might banish the 
doubt that i was awake. such enormous imputation from the mouth of 
pleyel! to be stigmatize with the name of wanton and profligate! to 
be charged with the sacrifice of honor! with midnight meeting with a 
wretch known to be a murder and thief! with an intention to fly in his 
company! 

what i had heard was surely the dictate of phrenzy, or it was built 
upon some fatal, some incomprehensible mistake. after the horrors of the 
night; after undergo peril so imminent from this man, to be summon 
to an interview like this; to find pleyel fraught with a belief that, 
instead of have chosen death as a refuge from the violence of this 
man, i had hug his base to my heart, had sacrifice for him my 
purity, my spotless name, my friendships, and my fortune! that even 
madness could engender accusation like these was not to be believed. 

what evidence could possibly suggest conception so wild? after the 
unlooked-for interview with carwin in my chamber, he retired. could 
pleyel have observe his exit? it was not long after that pleyel himself 
entered. did he build on this incident, his odious conclusions? could 
the long series of my action and sentiment grant me no exemption from 
suspicion so foul? was it not more rational to infer that carwin's 
designs had been illicit; that my life had been endanger by the fury 
of one whom, by some means, he had discover to be an assassin and 
robber; that my honor had been assailed, not by blandishments, but by 
violence? 

he has judge me without hearing. he has drawn from dubious appearances, 
conclusion the most improbable and unjust. he has loaded me with all 
outrageous epithets. he has rank me with prostitute and thieves. i 
cannot pardon thee, pleyel, for this injustice. thy understanding must 
be hurt. if it be not, if thy conduct was sober and deliberate, i can 
never forgive an outrage so unmanly, and so gross. 

these thought gradual gave place to others. pleyel was possessed by 
some momentary phrenzy: appearances had led him into palpable errors. 
whence could his sagacity have contract this blindness? was it not 
love? previous assured of my affection for carwin, distracted with 
grief and jealousy, and impel hither at that late hour by some 
unknown instigation, his imagination transform shadow into monsters, 
and plunge him into these deplorable errors. 

this idea was not unattended with consolation. my soul was divide 
between indignation at his injustice, and delight on account of the 
source from which i conceive it to spring. for a long time they would 
allow admission to no other thoughts. surprize is an emotion that 
enfeebles, not invigorates. all my meditation were accompany 
with wonder. i ramble with vagueness, or clung to one image with an 
obstinacy which sufficient testify the maddening influence of late 
transactions. 

gradual i proceed to reflect upon the consequence of pleyel's 
mistake, and on the measure i should take to guard myself against 
future injury from carwin. should i suffer this mistake to be detect 
by time? when his passion should subside, would he not perceive the 
flagrancy of his injustice, and hasten to atone for it? did it not 
become my character to testify resentment for language and treatment so 
opprobrious? wrapt up in the consciousness of innocence, and confiding 
in the influence of time and reflection to confute so groundless a 
charge, it was my province to be passive and silent. 

as to the violence meditate by carwin, and the means of elude them, 
the path to be taken by me was obvious. i resolve to tell the tale to 
my brother, and regulate myself by his advice. for this end, when the 
morning was somewhat advanced, i took the way to his house. my sister 
was engaged in her customary occupations. as soon as i appeared, she 
remark a change in my looks. i was not willing to alarm her by the 
information which i had to communicate. her health was in that condition 
which render a disastrous tale particularly unsuitable. i forbore a 
direct answer to her inquiries, and inquired, in my turn, for wieland. 

"why," said she, "i suspect something mysterious and unpleasant has 
happen this morning. scarcely had we risen when pleyel drop among 
us. what could have prompt him to make us so early and so unseasonable 
a visit i cannot tell. to judge from the disorder of his dress, and 
his countenance, something of an extraordinary nature has occurred. he 
permit me merely to know that he had slept none, nor even undressed, 
during the past night. he took your brother to walk with him. some 
topic must have deep engaged them, for wieland did not return till 
the breakfast hour was passed, and return alone. his disturbance was 
excessive; but he would not listen to my importunities, or tell me 
what had happened. i gather from hint which he let fall, that your 
situation was, in some way, the cause: yet he assured me that you were 
at your own house, alive, in good health, and in perfect safety. he 
scarcely ate a morsel, and immediately after breakfast went out again. 
he would not inform me whither he was going, but mention that he 
probably might not return before night." 

i was equally astonish and alarm by this information. pleyel had 
told his tale to my brother, and had, by a plausible and exaggerate 
picture, instill into him unfavorable thought of me. yet would not 
the more correct judgment of wieland perceive and expose the fallacy of 
his conclusions? perhaps his uneasy might arise from some insight 
into the character of carwin, and from apprehension for my safety. the 
appearances by which pleyel had been misled, might induce him likewise 
to believe that i entertain an indiscreet, though not dishonorable 
affection for carwin. such were the conjecture rapid formed. i was 
inexpressible anxious to change them into certainty. for this end 
an interview with my brother was desirable. he was gone, no one knew 
whither, and was not expect speedy to return. i had no clue by which 
to trace his footsteps. 

my anxiety could not be conceal from my sister. they heighten 
her solicitude to be acquaint with the cause. there were many reason 
persuade me to silence: at least, till i had seen my brother, it would 
be an act of inexcusable temerity to unfold what had lately passed. no 
other expedient for elude her importune occur to me, but that 
of return to my own house. i recollect my determination to become a 
tenant of this roof. i mention it to her. she joyful accede to this 
proposal, and suffer me, with less reluctance, to depart, when i told 
her that it was with a view to collect and send to my new dwelling what 
articles would be immediately useful to me. 

once more i return to the house which had been the scene of so 
much turbulence and danger. i was at no great distance from it when 
i observe my brother coming out. on seeing me he stopped, and after 
ascertaining, as it seemed, which way i was going, he return into the 
house before me. i sincerely rejoice at this event, and i hasten to 
set things, if possible, on their right footing. 

his brow was by no means expressive of those vehement emotion with 
which pleyel had been agitated. i drew a favorable omen from this 
circumstance. without delay i began the conversation. 

"i have been to look for you," said i, "but was told by catharine that 
pleyel had engaged you on some important and disagreeable affair. before 
his interview with you he spent a few minutes with me. these minutes he 
employ in upbraid me for crime and intentions with which i am by 
no means chargeable. i believe him to have taken up his opinion on 
very insufficient grounds. his behaviour was in the highest degree 
precipitate and unjust, and, until i receive some atonement, i shall 
treat him, in my turn, with that contempt which he just merits: 
meanwhile i am fearful that he has prejudiced my brother against me. 
that is an evil which i most anxious deprecate, and which i shall 
indeed exert myself to remove. has he made me the subject of this 
morning's conversation?" 

my brother's countenance testify no surprize at my address. the 
benignity of his looks were no wise diminished. 

"it is true," said he, "your conduct was the subject of our discourse. i 
am your friend, as well as your brother. there is no human being whom i 
love with more tenderness, and whose welfare is near my heart. judge 
then with what emotion i listen to pleyel's story. i expect and 
desire you to vindicate yourself from aspersion so foul, if vindication 
be possible." 

the tone with which he utter the last words affected me deeply. "if 
vindication be possible!" repeated i. "from what you know, do you deem a 
formal vindication necessary? can you harbour for a moment the belief of 
my guilt?" 

he shook his head with an air of acute anguish. "i have struggled," said 
he, "to dismiss that belief. you speak before a judge who will profit by 
any pretence to acquit you: who is ready to question his own senses when 
they plead against you." 

these words incite a new set of thought in my mind. i began to suspect 
that pleyel had built his accusation on some foundation unknown to me. 
"i may be a stranger to the grounds of your belief. pleyel loaded me 
with indecent and virulent invectives, but he withheld from me the fact 
that generate his suspicions. event took place last night of which 
some of the circumstances were of an ambiguous nature. i conceive that 
these might possibly have fallen under his cognizance, and that, view 
through the mists of prejudice and passion, they supply a pretence 
for his conduct, but believe that your more unbiass judgment would 
estimate them at their just value. perhaps his tale has been different 
from what i suspect it to be. listen then to my narrative. if there be 
any thing in his story inconsistent with mine, his story is false." 

i then proceed to a circumstantial relation of the incident of the 
last night. wieland listen with deep attention. have finished, 
"this," continue i, "is the truth; you see in what circumstances an 
interview took place between carwin and me. he remain for hour in my 
closet, and for some minutes in my chamber. he departed without haste or 
interruption. if pleyel marked him as he left the house, and it is 
not impossible that he did, inference injurious to my character might 
suggest themselves to him. in admit them, he gave proof of less 
discernment and less candor than i once ascribe to him." 

"his proofs," said wieland, after a considerable pause, "are different. 
that he should be deceived, is not possible. that he himself is not the 
deceiver, could not be believed, if his testimony were not inconsistent 
with yours; but the doubt which i entertain are now removed. your 
tale, some parts of it, is marvellous; the voice which exclaim against 
your rash in approach the closet, your persist notwithstanding 
that prohibition, your belief that i was the ruffian, and your 
subsequent conduct, are believe by me, because i have known you from 
childhood, because a thousand instance have attested your veracity, and 
because nothing less than my own hearing and vision would convince me, 
in opposition to her own assertions, that my sister had fallen into 
wicked like this." 

i threw my arms around him, and bath his cheek with my tears. "that," 
said i, "is spoken like my brother. but what are the proofs?" 

he replied--"pleyel informed me that, in go to your house, his 
attention was attract by two voices. the person speak sat beneath 
the bank out of sight. these persons, judge by their voices, were 
carwin and you. i will not repeat the dialogue. if my sister was the 
female, pleyel was justified in conclude you to be, indeed, one of the 
most profligate of women. hence, his accusation of you, and his effort 
to obtain my concurrence to a plan by which an eternal separation should 
be brought about between my sister and this man." 

i made wieland repeat this recital. here, indeed, was a tale to fill me 
with terrible foreboding. i had vain thought that my safety could be 
sufficient secure by door and bars, but this is a foe from whose 
grasp no power of divinity can save me! his artifice will ever lay my 
fame and happiness at his mercy. how shall i counterwork his plots, or 
detect his coadjutor? he has taught some vile and abandoned female to 
mimic my voice. pleyel's ear were the witness of my dishonor. this 
is the midnight assignation to which he alluded. thus is the silence 
he maintain when attempt to open the door of my chamber, account 
for. he supposed me absent, and meant, perhaps, had my apartment been 
accessible, to leave in it some accuse memorial. 

pleyel was no long equally culpable. the sincerity of his anguish, the 
depth of his despair, i remember with some tendency to gratitude. 
yet was he not precipitate? was the conjecture that my part was play 
by some mimic so utterly untenable? instance of this faculty are 
common. the wicked of carwin must, in his opinion, have been 
adequate to such contrivances, and yet the supposition of my guilt was 
adopt in preference to that. 

but how was this error to be unveiled? what but my own assertion had i 
to throw in the balance against it? would this be permit to outweigh 
the testimony of his senses? i had no witness to prove my existence 
in another place. the real event of that night are marvellous. few, to 
whom they should be related, would scruple to discredit them. pleyel is 
sceptical in a transcendant degree. i cannot summon carwin to my bar, 
and make him the attest of my innocence, and the accuse of himself. 

my brother saw and comprehend my distress. he was unacquainted, 
however, with the full extent of it. he knew not by how many motive 
i was incite to retrieve the good opinion of pleyel. he endeavor 
to console me. some new event, he said, would occur to disentangle the 
maze. he did not question the influence of my eloquence, if i thought 
proper to exert it. why not seek an interview with pleyel, and exact 
from him a minute relation, in which something may be met with serving 
to destroy the probability of the whole? 

i caught, with eagerness, at this hope; but my alacrity was damp by 
new reflections. should i, perfect in this respect, and unblemished as 
i was, thrust myself, uncalled, into his presence, and make my felicity 
depend upon his arbitrary verdict? 

"if you chuse to seek an interview," continue wieland, "you must make 
haste, for pleyel informed me of his intention to set out this evening 
or to-morrow on a long journey." 

no intelligence was less expect or less welcome than this. i had 
thrown myself in a window seat; but now, start on my feet, i 
exclaimed, "good heavens! what is it you say? a journey? whither? when?" 

"i cannot say whither. it is a sudden resolution i believe. i did not 
hear of it till this morning. he promise to write to me as soon as he 
is settled." 

i need no further information as to the cause and issue of this 
journey. the scheme of happiness to which he had devoted his thought 
was blasted by the discovery of last night. my preference of another, 
and my unworthy to be any long the object of his adoration, were 
evince by the same act and in the same moment. the thought of utter 
desertion, a desertion originate in such a cause, was the prelude to 
distraction. that pleyel should abandon me forever, because i was blind 
to his excellence, because i covet pollution, and wedded infamy, when, 
on the contrary, my heart was the shrine of all purity, and beat only 
for his sake, was a destiny which, as long as my life was in my own 
hands, i would by no means consent to endure. 

i remember that this evil was still preventable; that this fatal 
journey it was still in my power to procrastinate, or, perhaps, to 
occasion it to be laid aside. there were no impediment to a visit: i 
only dread lest the interview should be too long delayed. my brother 
befriend my impatience, and readily consent to furnish me with a 
chaise and servant to attend me. my purpose was to go immediately to 
pleyel's farm, where his engagement usually detain him during the 
day. 



chapter xii 


my way lay through the city. i had scarcely enter it when i was seize 
with a general sensation of sickness. every object grew dim and swam 
before my sight. it was with difficulty i prevent myself from sink 
to the bottom of the carriage. i ordered myself to be carry to mrs. 
baynton's, in hope that an interval of repose would invigorate and 
refresh me. my distracted thought would allow me but little rest. 
grow somewhat better in the afternoon, i resume my journey. 

my contemplation were limited to a few objects. i regard my success, 
in the purpose which i had in view, as considerably doubtful. i 
depended, in some degree, on the suggestion of the moment, and on the 
material which pleyel himself should furnish me. when i reflect on 
the nature of the accusation, i burn with disdain. would not truth, 
and the consciousness of innocence, render me triumphant? should i not 
cast from me, with irresistible force, such atrocious imputations? 

what an entire and mournful change has been effect in a few hours! the 
gulf that separate man from insect is not wide than that which sever 
the pollute from the chaste among women. yesterday and to-day i am the 
same. there is a degree of depravity to which it is impossible for me 
to sink; yet, in the apprehension of another, my ancient and intimate 
associate, the perpetual witness of my actions, and partake of my 
thoughts, i had cease to be the same. my integrity was tarnish 
and wither in his eyes. i was the colleague of a murderer, and the 
paramour of a thief! 

his opinion was not destitute of evidence: yet what proof could 
reasonably avail to establish an opinion like this? if the sentiment 
correspond not with the voice that was heard, the evidence was 
deficient; but this want of correspondence would have been supposed by 
me if i had been the auditor and pleyel the criminal. but mimicry might 
still more plausible have been employ to explain the scene. alas! it 
is the fate of clara wieland to fall into the hand of a precipitate and 
inexorable judge. 

but what, o man of mischief! is the tendency of thy thoughts? frustrate 
in thy first design, thou wilt not forego the immolate of thy victim. 
to exterminate my reputation was all that remain to thee, and this my 
guardian has permitted. to dispossess pleyel of this prejudice may be 
impossible; but if that be effected, it cannot be supposed that thy 
wiles are exhausted; thy cunning will discover innumerable avenue to 
the accomplishment of thy malignant purpose. 

why should i enter the lists against thee? would to heaven i could 
disarm thy vengeance by my deprecations! when i think of all the 
resources with which nature and education have supply thee; that thy 
form is a combination of steely fibre and organ of exquisite ductile 
and boundless compass, actuate by an intelligence gifted with infinite 
endowments, and comprehend all knowledge, i perceive that my doom 
is fixed. what obstacle will be able to divert thy zeal or repel thy 
efforts? that being who has hitherto protect me has borne testimony to 
the formidable of thy attempts, since nothing less than supernatural 
interference could check thy career. 

muse on these thoughts, i arrived, towards the close of the day, at 
pleyel's house. a month before, i had traverse the same path; but how 
different were my sensations! now i was seek the presence of one who 
regard me as the most degenerate of human kind. i was to plead the 
cause of my innocence, against witness the most explicit and unerring, 
of those which support the fabric of human knowledge. the near i 
approach the crisis, the more did my confidence decay. when the chaise 
stop at the door, my strength refuse to support me, and i threw 
myself into the arms of an ancient female domestic. i had not courage to 
inquire whether her master was at home. i was torment with fear that 
the project journey was already undertaken. these fear were removed, 
by her ask me whether she should call her young master, who had just 
gone into his own room. i was somewhat revive by this intelligence, and 
resolve immediately to seek him there. 

in my confusion of mind, i neglect to knock at the door, but enter 
his apartment without previous notice. this abrupt was altogether 
involuntary. absorb in reflection of such unspeakable moment, i had 
no leisure to heed the nicety of punctilio. i discover him standing 
with his back towards the entrance. a small trunk, with its lid raised, 
was before him in which it seem as if he had been busy in packing 
his clothes. the moment of my entrance, he was employ in gaze at 
something which he held in his hand. 

i imagine that i fully comprehend this scene. the image which he held 
before him, and by which his attention was so deep engaged, i doubt 
not to be my own. these preparation for his journey, the cause to which 
it was to be imputed, the hopeless of success in the undertaking on 
which i had entered, rush at once upon my feelings, and dissolve me 
into a flood of tears. 

startle by this sound, he drop the lid of the trunk and turned. the 
solemn sad that previous overspread his countenance, gave 
sudden way to an attitude and look of the most vehement astonishment. 
perceive me unable to uphold myself, he step towards me without 
speaking, and support me by his arm. the kindness of this action 
call forth a new effusion from my eyes. weeping was a solace to 
which, at that time, i had not grown familiar, and which, therefore, 
was peculiarly delicious. indignation was no long to be read in the 
features of my friend. they were pregnant with a mixture of wonder and 
pity. their expression was easily interpreted. this visit, and these 
tears, were token of my penitence. the wretch whom he had stigmatize 
as incurable and obdurate wicked, now shew herself susceptible of 
remorse, and had come to confess her guilt. 

this persuasion had no tendency to comfort me. it only shew me, with 
new evidence, the difficulty of the task which i had assign myself. we 
were mutual silent. i had less power and less inclination than ever to 
speak. i extricate myself from his hold, and threw myself on a sofa. 
he placed himself by my side, and appear to wait with impatience and 
anxiety for some beginning of the conversation. what could i say? if my 
mind had suggest any thing suitable to the occasion, my utterance was 
suffocate by tears. 

frequent he attempt to speak, but seem deter by some degree of 
uncertainty as to the true nature of the scene. at length, in falter 
accent he spoke: 

"my friend! would to heaven i were still permit to call you by that 
name. the image that i once adore exist only in my fancy; but though 
i cannot hope to see it realized, you may not be total insensible to 
the horrors of that gulf into which you are about to plunge. what heart 
is forever exempt from the goad of compunction and the influx of 
laudable propensities? 

"i thought you accomplished and wise beyond the rest of women. not a 
sentiment you uttered, not a look you assumed, that were not, in 
my apprehension, fraught with the sublime of rectitude and the 
illuminations of genius. deceit has some bounds. your education could 
not be without influence. a vigorous understanding cannot be utterly 
devoid of virtue; but you could not counterfeit the powers of invention 
and reasoning. i was rash in my invectives. i will not, but with life, 
relinquish all hope of you. i will shut out every proof that would tell 
me that your heart is incurable diseased. 

"you come to restore me once more to happiness; to convince me that you 
have torn her mask from vice, and feel nothing but abhorrence for the 
part you have hitherto acted." 

at these words my equanimity forsook me. for a moment i forgot the 
evidence from which pleyel's opinion were derived, the benevolence of 
his remonstrances, and the grief which his accent bespoke; i was fill 
with indignation and horror at charge so black; i shrunk back and 
dart at him a look of disdain and anger. my passion supply me with 
words. 

"what detest infatuation was it that led me hither! why do i 
patient endure these horrible insults! my offence exist only in 
your own distempered imagination: you are league with the traitor who 
assail my life: you have vow the destruction of my peace and honor. 
i deserve infamy for listen to calumny so base!" 

these words were heard by pleyel without visible resentment. his 
countenance relapse into its former gloom; but he did not even look at 
me. the idea which had given place to my angry emotion returned, and 
once more melt me into tears. "o!" i exclaimed, in a voice broken by 
sobs, "what a task is mine! compel to hearken to charge which i feel 
to be false, but which i know to be believe by him that utter them; 
believe too not without evidence, which, though fallacious, is not 
unplausible. 

"i came hither not to confess, but to vindicate. i know the source 
of your opinions. wieland has informed me on what your suspicion are 
built. these suspicion are foster by you as certainties; the tenor 
of my life, of all my conversation and letters, afford me no security; 
every sentiment that my tongue and my pen have uttered, bear testimony 
to the rectitude of my mind; but this testimony is rejected. i am 
condemn as brutal profligate: i am class with the stupid and 
sordid wicked. 

"and where are the proof that must justify so foul and so improbable 
an accusation? you have overheard a midnight conference. voice have 
salute your ear, in which you imagine yourself to have recognize 
mine, and that of a detect villain. the sentiment express were 
not allow to outweigh the casual or concerted resemblance of voice. 
sentiment the reverse of all those whose influence my former life had 
attested, denote a mind pollute by grovel vices, and enter 
into compact with that of a thief and a murderer. the nature of these 
sentiment did not enable you to detect the cheat, did not suggest to 
you the possibility that my voice had been counterfeit by another. 

"you were precipitate and prone to condemn. instead of rush on the 
impostors, and compare the evidence of sight with that of hearing, you 
stood aloof, or you fled. my innocence would not now have stood in 
need of vindication, if this conduct had been pursued. that you did not 
pursue it, your present thought incontestib prove. yet this conduct 
might surely have been expect from pleyel. that he would not hasty 
impute the blackest of crimes, that he would not couple my name with 
infamy, and cover me with ruin for inadequate or slight reasons, might 
reasonably have been expected." the sob which convulse my bosom would 
not suffer me to proceed. 

pleyel was for a moment affected. he look at me with some expression 
of doubt; but this quick gave place to a mournful solemnity. he fixed 
his eyes on the floor as in reverie, and spoke: 

"two hour hence i am gone. shall i carry away with me the sorrow that 
is now my guest? or shall that sorrow be accumulate tenfold? what is 
she that is now before me? shall every hour supply me with new proof of 
a wicked beyond example? already i deem her the most abandoned and 
detest of human creatures. her coming and her tear impart a gleam 
of hope, but that gleam has vanished." 

he now fixed his eyes upon me, and every muscle in his face trembled. 
his tone was hollow and terrible--"thou knowest that i was a witness of 
your interview, yet thou comest hither to upbraid me for injustice! thou 
canst look me in the face and say that i am deceived!--an inscrutable 
providence has fashion thee for some end. thou wilt live, no doubt, to 
fulfil the purpose of thy maker, if he repent not of his workmanship, 
and send not his vengeance to exterminate thee, ere the measure of thy 
days be full. surely nothing in the shape of man can vie with thee! 

"but i thought i had stifle this fury. i am not constitute thy judge. 
my office is to pity and amend, and not to punish and revile. i deem 
myself exempt from all tempestuous passions. i had almost persuade 
myself to weep over thy fall; but i am frail as dust, and mutable as 
water; i am calm, i am compassionate only in thy absence.--make this 
house, this room, thy abode as long as thou wilt, but forgive me if i 
prefer solitude for the short time during which i shall stay." saying 
this, he motion as if to leave the apartment. 

the stormy passion of this man affected me by sympathy. i cease to 
weep. i was motionless and speechless with agony. i sat with my hand 
clasped, mute gaze after him as he withdrew. i desire to detain 
him, but was unable to make any effort for that purpose, till he had 
pass out of the room. i then utter an involuntary and piercing 
cry--"pleyel! art thou gone? gone forever?" 

at this summons he hasty returned. he beheld me wild, pale, gasp 
for breath, and my head already sink on my bosom. a painful dizzy 
seize me, and i faint away. 

when i recovered, i found myself stretch on a bed in the outer 
apartment, and pleyel, with two female servant standing beside it. all 
the fury and scorn which the countenance of the former lately expressed, 
had now disappeared, and was succeed by the most tender anxiety. as 
soon as he perceive that my senses were return to me, he clasp his 
hands, and exclaimed, "god be thanked! you are once more alive. i had 
almost despair of your recovery. i fear i have been precipitate and 
unjust. my senses must have been the victim of some inexplicable and 
momentary phrenzy. forgive me, i beseech you, forgive my reproaches. i 
would purchase conviction of your purity, at the price of my existence 
here and hereafter." 

he once more, in a tone of the most fervent tenderness, besought me to 
be composed, and then left me to the care of the women. 



chapter xiii 


here was wrought a surprize change in my friend. what was it that 
had shaken conviction so firm? had any thing occur during my fit, 
adequate to produce so total an alteration? my attendant informed me 
that he had not left my apartment; that the unusual duration of my fit, 
and the failure, for a time, of all the means use for my recovery, had 
fill him with grief and dismay. did he regard the effect which his 
reproach had produce as a proof of my sincerity? 

in this state of mind, i little regard my languor of body. i rose 
and request an interview with him before my departure, on which i was 
resolved, notwithstanding his earnest solicit to spend the night 
at his house. he comply with my request. the tender which he had 
lately betrayed, had now disappeared, and he once more relapse into a 
chill solemnity. 

i told him that i was prepare to return to my brother's; that i had 
come hither to vindicate my innocence from the foul aspersion which he 
had cast upon it. my pride had not taken refuge in silence or distance. 
i had not rely upon time, or the suggestion of his cooler thoughts, to 
confute his charges. conscious as i was that i was perfectly guiltless, 
and entertaining some value for his good opinion, i could not prevail 
upon myself to believe that my effort to make my innocence manifest, 
would be fruitless. adverse appearances might be numerous and specious, 
but they were unquestionable false. i was willing to believe him 
sincere, that he made no charge which he himself did not believe; but 
these charge were destitute of truth. the grounds of his opinion were 
fallacious; and i desire an opportunity of detect their fallacy. 
i entreat him to be explicit, and to give me a detail of what he had 
heard, and what he had seen. 

at these words, my companion's countenance grew darker. he appear 
to be struggle with his rage. he open his lip to speak, but his 
accent die away ere they were formed. this conflict last for some 
minutes, but his fortitude was finally successful. he spoke as follows: 

"i would fain put an end to this hateful scene: what i shall say, will 
be breath idle and unprofitable consumed. the clearest narrative will 
add nothing to your present knowledge. you are acquaint with the 
grounds of my opinion, and yet you avow yourself innocent: why then 
should i rehearse these grounds? you are apprize of the character of 
carwin: why then should i enumerate the discovery which i have made 
respecting him? yet, since it is your request; since, considering the 
limited of human faculties, some error may possibly lurk in those 
appearances which i have witnessed, i will brief relate what i know. 

"need i dwell upon the impression which your conversation and 
deportment originally made upon me? we part in childhood; but our 
intercourse, by letter, was copious and uninterrupted. how fondly did i 
anticipate a meeting with one whom her letters had previous taught 
me to consider as the first of women, and how fully realize were the 
expectations that i had formed! 

"here, said i, is a being, after whom sage may model their transcendent 
intelligence, and painters, their ideal beauty. here is exemplified, 
that union between intellect and form, which has hitherto exist only 
in the conception of the poet. i have watch your eyes; my attention 
has hung upon your lips. i have question whether the enchantment of 
your voice were more conspicuous in the intricacy of melody, or the 
emphasis of rhetoric. i have marked the transition of your discourse, 
the felicity of your expression, your refined argumentation, and 
glowing imagery; and been forced to acknowledge, that all delight were 
meagre and contemptible, compare with those connected with the 
audience and sight of you. i have contemplate your principles, and been 
astonish at the solidity of their foundation, and the perfection of 
their structure. i have trace you to your home. i have view you in 
relation to your servants, to your family, to your neighbours, and to 
the world. i have seen by what skilful arrangement you facilitate 
the performance of the most arduous and complicated duties; what daily 
accession of strength your judicious discipline bestow upon 
your memory; what correct and abundance of knowledge was daily 
experienced by your unweary application to books, and to writing. 
if she that possess so much in the bloom of youth, will go on 
accumulate her stores, what, said i, is the picture she will display 
at a mature age? 

"you know not the accuracy of my observation. i was desirous that other 
should profit by an example so rare. i therefore noted down, in writing, 
every particular of your conduct. i was anxious to benefit by an 
opportunity so seldom afford us. i labour not to omit the slightest 
shade, or the most petty line in your portrait. here there was no other 
task incumbent on me but to copy; there was no need to exaggerate or 
overlook, in order to produce a more unexceptionable pattern. here was 
a combination of harmony and graces, incapable of diminution or 
accession without injury to its completeness. 

"i found no end and no bounds to my task. no display of a scene like 
this could be chargeable with redundancy or superfluity. even the colour 
of a shoe, the knot of a ribband, or your attitude in pluck a 
rose, were of moment to be recorded. even the arrangement of your 
breakfast-table and your toilet have been ample displayed. 

"i know that mankind are more easily entice to virtue by example than 
by precept. i know that the absolute of a model, when supply by 
invention, diminish its salutary influence, since it is useless, we 
think, to strive after that which we know to be beyond our reach. but 
the picture which i drew was not a phantom; as a model, it was devoid 
of imperfection; and to aspire to that height which had been really 
attained, was by no means unreasonable. i had another and more 
interesting object in view. one exist who claim all my tenderness. 
here, in all its parts, was a model worthy of assiduous study, and 
indefatigable imitation. i call upon her, as she wish to secure and 
enhance my esteem, to mould her thoughts, her words, her countenance, 
her actions, by this pattern. 

"the task was exuberant of pleasure, and i was deep engaged in it, 
when an imp of mischief was let loose in the form of carwin. i admire 
his powers and accomplishments. i did not wonder that they were admire 
by you. on the rectitude of your judgement, however, i rely to keep 
this admiration within discreet and scrupulous bounds. i assured myself, 
that the strange of his deportment, and the obscurity of his life, 
would teach you caution. of all errors, my knowledge of your character 
informed me that this was least likely to befall you. 

"you were powerful affected by his first appearance; you were 
bewitch by his countenance and his tones; your description was ardent 
and pathetic: i listen to you with some emotion of surprize. the 
portrait you drew in his absence, and the intensity with which you muse 
upon it, were new and unexpected incidents. they bespoke a sensibility 
somewhat too vivid; but from which, while subject to the guidance of 
an understanding like yours, there was nothing to dread. 

"a more direct intercourse took place between you. i need not apologize 
for the solicitude which i entertain for your safety. he that gifted 
me with perception of excellence, compel me to love it. in the midst 
of danger and pain, my contemplation have ever been cheer by your 
image. every object in competition with you, was worthless and trivial. 
no price was too great by which your safety could be purchased. for 
that end, the sacrifice of ease, of health, and even of life, would 
cheerful have been made by me. what wonder then, that i scrutinize 
the sentiment and deportment of this man with ceaseless vigilance; 
that i watch your words and your looks when he was present; and that i 
extract cause for the deepest inquietudes, from every token which you 
gave of have put your happiness into this man's keeping? 

"i was cautious in deciding. i recall the various conversation in 
which the topic of love and marriage had been discussed. as a woman, 
young, beautiful, and independent, it behove you to have fortify 
your mind with just principles on this subject. your principles were 
eminently just. had not their rectitude and their firm been attested 
by your treatment of that specious seduce dashwood? these principles, 
i was prone to believe, exempt you from danger in this new state of 
things. i was not the last to pay my homage to the unrivalled capacity, 
insinuation, and eloquence of this man. i have disguised, but could 
never stifle the conviction, that his eyes and voice had a witchcraft 
in them, which render him truly formidable: but i reflect on the 
ambiguous expression of his countenance--an ambiguous which you were the 
first to remark; on the cloud which obscure his character; and on the 
suspicious nature of that concealment which he studied; and conclude 
you to be safe. i deny the obvious construction to appearances. i 
refer your conduct to some principle which had not been hitherto 
disclosed, but which was reconcile with those already known. 

"i was not suffer to remain long in this suspence. one evening, you 
may recollect, i came to your house, where it was my purpose, as usual, 
to lodge, somewhat early than ordinary. i spy a light in your 
chamber as i approach from the outside, and on inquiring of judith, 
was informed that you were writing. as your kinsman and friend, and 
fellow-lodger, i thought i had a right to be familiar. you were in your 
chamber, but your employment and the time were such as to make it no 
infraction of decorum to follow you thither. the spirit of mischievous 
gaiety possessed me. i proceed on tiptoe. you did not perceive 
my entrance; and i advanced soft till i was able to overlook your 
shoulder. 

"i had gone thus far in error, and had no power to recede. how 
cautious should we guard against the first inroad of temptation! i 
knew that to pry into your papers was criminal; but i reflect that 
no sentiment of yours was of a nature which made it your interest to 
conceal it. you wrote much more than you permit your friends to 
peruse. my curiosity was strong, and i had only to throw a glance upon 
the paper, to secure its gratification. i should never have deliberate 
committed an act like this. the slightest obstacle would have repel 
me; but my eye glance almost spontaneous upon the paper. i caught 
only parts of sentences; but my eyes comprehend more at a glance, 
because the character were short-hand. i light on the words 
summer-house, midnight, and made out a passage which spoke of the 
propriety and of the effects to be expect from another interview. 
all this pass in less than a moment. i then checked myself, and made 
myself known to you, by a tap upon your shoulder. 

"i could pardon and account for some trifling alarm; but your 
trepidation and blush were excessive. you hurried the paper out of 
sight, and seem too anxious to discover whether i knew the contents to 
allow yourself to make any inquiries. i wonder at these appearances 
of consternation, but did not reason on them until i had retired. when 
alone, these incident suggest themselves to my reflection anew. 

"to what scene, or what interview, i asked, did you allude? your 
disappearance on a former evening, my tracing you to the recess in the 
bank, your silence on my first and second call, your vague answer and 
invincible embarrassment, when you, at length, ascend the hill, i 
recollect with new surprize. could this be the summerhouse allude to? 
a certain timid and consciousness had generally attend you, when 
this incident and this recess had been the subject of conversation. 
nay, i imagine that the last time that adventure was mentioned, which 
happen in the presence of carwin, the countenance of the latter 
betray some emotion. could the interview have been with him? 

"this was an idea calculate to rouse every faculty to contemplation. 
an interview at that hour, in this darksome retreat, with a man of this 
mysterious but formidable character; a clandestine interview, and one 
which you afterwards endeavour with so much solicitude to conceal! it 
was a fearful and portentous occurrence. i could not measure his power, 
or fathom his designs. had he rifle from you the secret of your love, 
and reconcile you to concealment and noctural meetings? i scarcely ever 
spent a night of more inquietude. 

"i knew not how to act. the ascertain of this man's character 
and view seem to be, in the first place, necessary. had he openly 
prefer his suit to you, we should have been impowere to make 
direct inquiries; but since he had chosen this obscure path, it seem 
reasonable to infer that his character was exceptionable. it, at 
least, subject us to the necessity of resort to other means of 
information. yet the improbability that you should commit a deed of such 
rashness, made me reflect anew upon the insufficiency of those grounds 
on which my suspicion had been built, and almost to condemn myself for 
harbour them. 

"though it was mere conjecture that the interview spoken of had taken 
place with carwin, yet two idea occur to involve me in the most 
painful doubts. this man's reasoning might be so specious, and 
his artifice so profound, that, aid by the passion which you had 
conceive for him, he had finally succeeded; or his situation might be 
such as to justify the secrecy which you maintained. in neither case did 
my wildest reverie suggest to me, that your honor had been forfeited. 

"i could not talk with you on this subject. if the imputation was false, 
its atrocious would have just drawn upon me your resentment, and 
i must have explain by what fact it had been suggested. if it were 
true, no benefit would follow from the mention of it. you had chosen 
to conceal it for some reasons, and whether these reason were true or 
false, it was proper to discover and remove them in the first place. 
finally, i acquiesce in the least painful supposition, trammel as it 
was with perplexities, that carwin was upright, and that, if the reason 
of your silence were known, they would be found to be just." 



chapter xiv 


"three days have elapse since this occurrence. i have been haunt by 
perpetual inquietude. to bring myself to regard carwin without terror, 
and to acquiesce in the belief of your safety, was impossible. yet to 
put an end to my doubts, seem to be impracticable. if some light could 
be reflect on the actual situation of this man, a direct path would 
present itself. if he were, contrary to the tenor of his conversation, 
cunning and malignant, to apprize you of this, would be to place you in 
security. if he were merely unfortunate and innocent, most readily would 
i espouse his cause; and if his intentions were upright with regard to 
you, most eager would i sanctify your choice by my approbation. 

"it would be vain to call upon carwin for an avowal of his deeds. it was 
better to know nothing, than to be deceive by an artful tale. what he 
was unwill to communicate, and this unwilling had been repeatedly 
manifested, could never be extort from him. importune might be 
appeased, or imposture effect by fallacious representations. to the 
rest of the world he was unknown. i had often made him the subject of 
discourse; but a glimpse of his figure in the street was the sum of 
their knowledge who knew most. none had ever seen him before, and 
received as new, the information which my intercourse with him in 
valencia, and my present intercourse, enable me to give. 

"wieland was your brother. if he had really made you the object of his 
courtship, was not a brother authorize to interfere and demand from him 
the confession of his views? yet what were the grounds on which i had 
rear this supposition? would they justify a measure like this? surely 
not. 

"in the course of my restless meditations, it occur to me, at length, 
that my duty require me to speak to you, to confess the indecorum of 
which i had been guilty, and to state the reflection to which it had 
led me. i was prompt by no mean or selfish views. the heart within my 
breast was not more precious than your safety: most cheerful would 
i have interpose my life between you and danger. would you cherish 
resentment at my conduct? when acquaint with the motive which 
produce it, it would not only exempt me from censure, but entitle me to 
gratitude. 

"yesterday had been select for the rehearsal of the newly-imported 
tragedy. i promise to be present. the state of my thought but little 
qualified me for a performer or auditor in such a scene; but i reflect 
that, after it was finished, i should return home with you, and should 
then enjoy an opportunity of discourse with you fully on this topic. 
my resolution was not form without a remnant of doubt, as to its 
propriety. when i left this house to perform the visit i had promised, 
my mind was full of apprehension and despondency. the dubious of 
the event of our conversation, fear that my interference was too late to 
secure your peace, and the uncertainty to which hope gave birth, whether 
i had not err in believe you devoted to this man, or, at least, in 
imagine that he had obtain your consent to midnight conferences, 
distracted me with contradictory opinions, and repugnant emotions. 

"i can assign no reason for calling at mrs. baynton's. i had seen her 
in the morning, and knew her to be well. the concerted hour had nearly 
arrived, and yet i turn up the street which leads to her house, and 
dismount at her door. i enter the parlour and threw myself in a 
chair. i saw and inquire for no one. my whole frame was overpower 
by dreary and comfortless sensations. one idea possessed me wholly; 
the inexpressible importance of unveil the designs and character of 
carwin, and the utter improbability that this ever would be effected. 
some instinct induce me to lay my hand upon a newspaper. i had peruse 
all the general intelligence it contained in the morning, and at the 
same spot. the act was rather mechanical than voluntary. 

"i threw a languid glance at the first column that present itself. 
the first words which i read, began with the offer of a reward of three 
hundred guinea for the apprehension of a convict under sentence of 
death, who had escape from newgate prison in dublin. good heaven! how 
every fibre of my frame tingle when i proceed to read that the name 
of the criminal was francis carwin! 

"the description of his person and address were minute. his stature, 
hair, complexion, the extraordinary position and arrangement of his 
features, his aukward and disproportionate form, his gesture and gait, 
correspond perfectly with those of our mysterious visitant. he had 
been found guilty in two indictments. one for the murder of the lady 
jane conway, and the other for a robbery committed on the person of the 
honorable mr. ludloe. 

"i repeatedly peruse this passage. the idea which flow in upon my 
mind, affected me like an instant transition from death to life. the 
purpose dearest to my heart was thus effected, at a time and by means 
the least of all other within the scope of my foresight. but what 
purpose? carwin was detected. acts of the blackest and most sordid 
guilt had been committed by him. here was evidence which impart to 
my understanding the most luminous certainty. the name, visage, and 
deportment, were the same. between the time of his escape, and his 
appearance among us, there was a sufficient agreement. such was the 
man with whom i suspect you to maintain a clandestine correspondence. 
should i not haste to snatch you from the talon of this vulture? should 
i see you rush to the verge of a dizzy precipice, and not stretch 
forth a hand to pull you back? i had no need to deliberate. i thrust the 
paper in my pocket, and resolve to obtain an immediate conference with 
you. for a time, no other image made its way to my understanding. at 
length, it occur to me, that though the information i possessed 
was, in one sense, sufficient, yet if more could be obtained, more was 
desirable. this passage was copy from a britain paper; part of it 
only, perhaps, was transcribed. the printer was in possession of the 
original. 

"towards his house i immediately turn my horse's head. he produce the 
paper, but i found nothing more than had already been seen. while busy 
in peruse it, the printer stood by my side. he notice the object 
of which i was in search. "aye," said he, "that is a strange affair. i 
should never have met with it, had not mr. hallet sent to me the paper, 
with a particular request to republish that advertisement." 

"mr. hallet! what reason could he have for making this request? had 
the paper sent to him been accompany by any information respecting 
the convict? had he personal or extraordinary reason for desire its 
republication? this was to be known only in one way. i speed to 
his house. in answer to my interrogations, he told me that ludloe had 
formerly been in america, and that during his residence in this 
city, considerable intercourse had taken place between them. hence a 
confidence arose, which has since been kept alive by occasional letters. 
he had lately received a letter from him, enclose the newspaper from 
which this extract had been made. he put it into my hands, and pointed 
out the passage which related to carwin. 

"ludloe confirm the fact of his conviction and escape; and adds, that 
he had reason to believe him to have embark for america. he describe 
him in general terms, as the most incomprehensible and formidable among 
men; as engaged in schemes, reasonably suspect to be, in the highest 
degree, criminal, but such as no human intelligence is able to unravel: 
that his end are pursue by means which leave it in doubt whether he be 
not in league with some infernal spirit: that his crime have hitherto 
been perpetrate with the aid of some unknown but desperate accomplices: 
that he wages a perpetual war against the happiness of mankind, and set 
his engine of destruction at work against every object that presents 
itself. 

"this is the substance of the letter. hallet express some surprize 
at the curiosity which was manifest by me on this occasion. i was too 
much absorb by the idea suggest by this letter, to pay attention to 
his remarks. i shudder with the apprehension of the evil to which our 
indiscreet familiarity with this man had probably expose us. i burnt 
with impatience to see you, and to do what in me lay to avert the 
calamity which threaten us. it was already five o'clock. night was 
hastening, and there was no time to be lost. on leave mr. hallet's 
house, who should meet me in the street, but bertrand, the servant whom 
i left in germany. his appearance and accoutrements bespoke him to have 
just alight from a toilsome and long journey. i was not wholly without 
expectation of seeing him about this time, but no one was then more 
distant from my thoughts. you know what reason i have for anxiety 
respecting scene with which this man was conversant. carwin was for a 
moment forgotten. in answer to my vehement inquiries, bertrand produce 
a copious packet. i shall not at present mention its contents, nor the 
measure which they oblige me to adopt. i bestow a brief peruse on 
these papers, and have given some directions to bertrand, resume 
my purpose with regard to you. my horse i was oblige to resign to my 
servant, he being charged with a commission that require speed. the 
clock had struck ten, and mettingen was five mile distant. i was 
to journey thither on foot. these circumstances only add to my 
expedition. 

"as i pass swift along, i review all the incident accompany 
the appearance and deportment of that man among us. late event have 
been inexplicable and mysterious beyond any of which i have either read 
or heard. these event were coeval with carwin's introduction. i am 
unable to explain their origin and mutual dependance; but i do not, on 
that account, believe them to have a supernatural origin. is not this 
man the agent? some of them seem to be propitious; but what should 
i think of those threat of assassinate with which you were lately 
alarmed? bloodshed is the trade, and horror is the element of this man. 
the process by which the sympathies of nature are extinguish in 
our hearts, by which evil is made our good, and by which we are made 
susceptible of no activity but in the infliction, and no joy but in the 
spectacle of woes, is an obvious process. as to an alliance with evil 
geniuses, the power and the malice of daemon have been a thousand times 
exemplify in human beings. there are no devil but those which are 
begotten upon selfishness, and rear by cunning. 

"now, indeed, the scene was changed. it was not his secret poniard 
that i dreaded. it was only the success of his effort to make you a 
confederate in your own destruction, to make your will the instrument by 
which he might bereave you of liberty and honor. 

"i took, as usual, the path through your brother's ground. i range 
with celerity and silence along the bank. i approach the fence, which 
divide wieland's estate from yours. the recess in the bank being near 
this line, it being necessary for me to pass near it, my mind being 
taint with inveterate suspicion concerning you; suspicion which were 
indebted for their strength to incident connected with this spot; what 
wonder that it seize upon my thoughts! "i leap on the fence; but 
before i descended on the opposite side, i pause to survey the scene. 
leaves drop with dew, and glisten in the moon's rays, with no 
moving object to molest the deep repose, fill me with security 
and hope. i left the station at length, and tend forward. you were 
probably at rest. how should i communicate without alarm you, the 
intelligence of my arrival? an immediate interview was to be procured. 
i could not bear to think that a minute should be lost by remiss 
or hesitation. should i knock at the door? or should i stand under your 
chamber windows, which i perceive to be open, and awaken you by my 
calls? 

"these reflection employ me, as i pass opposite to the 
summer-house. i had scarcely gone by, when my ear caught a sound unusual 
at this time and place. it was almost too faint and too transient to 
allow me a distinct perception of it. i stop to listen; presently 
it was heard again, and now it was somewhat in a loud key. it was 
laughter; and unquestionable produce by a female voice. that voice was 
familiar to my senses. it was yours. 

"whence it came, i was at first at a loss to conjecture; but this 
uncertainty vanish when it was heard the third time. i threw back my 
eyes towards the recess. every other organ and limb was useless to me. 
i did not reason on the subject. i did not, in a direct manner, draw 
my conclusion from the hour, the place, the hilarity which this sound 
betokened, and the circumstance of have a companion, which it no less 
incontestable proved. in an instant, as it were, my heart was invade 
with cold, and the pulse of life at a stand. 

"why should i go further? why should i return? should i not hurry to a 
distance from a sound, which, though formerly so sweet and delectable, 
was now more hideous than the shriek of owls? 

"i had no time to yield to this impulse. the thought of approach and 
listen occur to me. i had no doubt of which i was conscious. yet 
my certainty was capable of increase. i was likewise stimulate by a 
sentiment that partook of rage. i was govern by an half-formed and 
tempestuous resolution to break in upon your interview, and strike you 
dead with my upbraiding. 

"i approach with the utmost caution. when i reach the edge of the 
bank immediately above the summer-house, i thought i heard voice from 
below, as busy in conversation. the steps in the rock are clear of 
bushy impediments. they allow me to descend into a cavity beside 
the building without being detected. thus to lie in wait could only be 
justified by the momentous of the occasion." 

here pleyel pause in his narrative, and fixed his eyes upon me. 
situated as i was, my horror and astonishment at this tale gave way to 
compassion for the anguish which the countenance of my friend betrayed. 
i reflect on his force of understanding. i reflect on the powers of 
my enemy. i could easily divine the substance of the conversation that 
was overheard. carwin had construct his plot in a manner suit to the 
character of those whom he had select for his victims. i saw that the 
conviction of pleyel were immutable. i forbore to struggle against the 
storm, because i saw that all struggle would be fruitless. i was calm; 
but my calm was the torpor of despair, and not the tranquill of 
fortitude. it was calm invincible by any thing that his grief and 
his fury could suggest to pleyel. he resumed-- 

"woman! wilt thou hear me further? shall i go on to repeat the 
conversation? is it shame that make thee tongue-tied? shall i go on? or 
art thou satisfy with what has been already said?" 

i bowed my head. "go on," said i. "i make not this request in the hope 
of undeceive you. i shall no long contend with my own weakness. the 
storm is let loose, and i shall peaceable submit to be driven by its 
fury. but go on. this conference will end only with afford me a 
clear foresight of my destiny; but that will be some satisfaction, and 
i will not part without it." 

why, on hearing these words, did pleyel hesitate? did some unlooked-for 
doubt insinuate itself into his mind? was his belief sudden shaken 
by my looks, or my words, or by some newly recollect circumstance? 
whencesoever it arose, it could not endure the test of deliberation. in 
a few minutes the flame of resentment was again light up in his bosom. 
he proceed with his accustomed vehemence-- 

"i hate myself for this folly. i can find no apology for this tale. yet 
i am irresistible impel to relate it. she that hear me is apprize 
of every particular. i have only to repeat to her her own words. she 
will listen with a tranquil air, and the spectacle of her obduracy will 
drive me to some desperate act. why then should i persist! yet persist i 
must." 

again he paused. "no," said he, "it is impossible to repeat your avowal 
of love, your appeal to former confession of your tenderness, to 
former deed of dishonor, to the circumstances of the first interview 
that took place between you. it was on that night when i trace you to 
this recess. thither had he entice you, and there had you ratify an 
unhallowed compact by admit him-- 

"great god! thou witnessedst the agony that tore my bosom at that 
moment! thou witnessedst my effort to repel the testimony of my ears! 
it was in vain that you dwelt upon the confusion which my unlooked-for 
summons excited in you; the tardy with which a suitable excuse 
occur to you; your resentment that my impertinent intrusion had 
put an end to that charming interview: a disappointment for which you 
endeavour to compensate yourself, by the frequency and duration of 
subsequent meetings. 

"in vain you dwelt upon incident of which you only could be conscious; 
incident that occur on occasion on which none beside your own 
family were witnesses. in vain was your discourse characterize by 
peculiarity inimitable of sentiment and language. my conviction was 
effect only by an accumulation of the same tokens. i yield not but 
to evidence which took away the power to withhold my faith. 

"my sight was of no use to me. beneath so thick an umbrage, the dark 
was intense. hearing was the only avenue to information, which the 
circumstances allow to be open. i was couch within three feet 
of you. why should i approach nearer? i could not contend with your 
betrayer. what could be the purpose of a contest? you stood in no need 
of a protector. what could i do, but retire from the spot overwhelm 
with confusion and dismay? i sought my chamber, and endeavour to 
regain my composure. the door of the house, which i found open, your 
subsequent entrance, closing, and fastening it, and go into your 
chamber, which had been thus long deserted, were only confirmation of 
the truth. 

"why should i paint the tempestuous fluctuate of my thought between 
grief and revenge, between rage and despair? why should i repeat my vow 
of eternal implacable and persecution, and the speedy recant of 
these vows? 

"i have said enough. you have dismiss me from a place in your esteem. 
what i think, and what i feel, is of no importance in your eyes. may 
the duty which i owe myself enable me to forget your existence. in a 
few minutes i go hence. be the maker of your fortune, and may adversity 
instruct you in that wisdom, which education was unable to impart to 
you." 

those were the last words which pleyel uttered. he left the room, and 
my new emotion enable me to witness his departure without any apparent 
loss of composure. as i sat alone, i ruminate on these incidents. 
nothing was more evident than that i had taken an eternal leave of 
happiness. life was a worthless thing, separate from that good which had 
now been wrest from me; yet the sentiment that now possessed me had no 
tendency to palsy my exertions, and overbear my strength. i notice that 
the light was declining, and perceive the propriety of leave this 
house. i placed myself again in the chaise, and return slow towards 
the city. 



chapter xv 


before i reach the city it was dusk. it was my purpose to spend the 
night at mettingen. i was not solicitous, as long as i was attend by 
a faithful servant, to be there at an early hour. my exhaust strength 
require me to take some refreshment. with this view, and in order to 
pay respect to one whose affection for me was truly maternal, i stop 
at mrs. baynton's. she was absent from home; but i had scarcely enter 
the house when one of her domestic present me a letter. i open and 
read as follows: 


"to clara wieland, 

"what shall i say to extenuate the misconduct of last night? it is my 
duty to repair it to the utmost of my power, but the only way in which 
it can be repaired, you will not, i fear, be prevail on to adopt. it 
is by grant me an interview, at your own house, at eleven o'clock 
this night. i have no means of remove any fear that you may entertain 
of my designs, but my simple and solemn declarations. these, after what 
has pass between us, you may deem unworthy of confidence. i cannot 
help it. my folly and rash has left me no other resource. i will 
be at your door by that hour. if you chuse to admit me to a conference, 
provided that conference has no witnesses, i will disclose to you 
particulars, the knowledge of which is of the utmost importance to your 
happiness. farewell. 

"carwin." 


what a letter was this! a man known to be an assassin and robber; one 
capable of plot against my life and my fame; detect lurk in 
my chamber, and avow designs the most flagitious and dreadful, now 
solicit me to grant him a midnight interview! to admit him alone into 
my presence! could he make this request with the expectation of my 
compliance? what had he seen in me, that could justify him in admit 
so wild a belief? yet this request is prefer with the utmost gravity. 
it is not accompany by an appearance of uncommon earnestness. had 
the misconduct to which he allude been a slight incivility, and the 
interview request to take place in the midst of my friends, there 
would have been no extravagance in the tenor of this letter; but, as it 
was, the writer had surely been bereft of his reason. 

i peruse this epistle frequently. the request it contained might be 
call audacious or stupid, if it had been made by a different person; 
but from carwin, who could not be unaware of the effect which it must 
naturally produce, and of the manner in which it would unavoidable be 
treated, it was perfectly inexplicable. he must have count on the 
success of some plot, in order to extort my assent. none of those 
motive by which i am usually govern would ever have persuade me to 
meet any one of his sex, at the time and place which he had prescribed. 
much less would i consent to a meeting with a man, taint with the 
most detest crimes, and by whose arts my own safety had been so 
imminent endangered, and my happiness irretrievable destroyed. i 
shudder at the idea that such a meeting was possible. i felt some 
reluctance to approach a spot which he still visit and haunted. 

such were the idea which first suggest themselves on the peruse of 
the letter. meanwhile, i resume my journey. my thought still dwelt 
upon the same topic. gradual from ruminate on this epistle, i 
revert to my interview with pleyel. i recall the particulars of the 
dialogue to which he had been an auditor. my heart sunk anew on view 
the inextricable complexity of this deception, and the inauspicious 
concurrence of events, which tend to confirm him in his error. when 
he approach my chamber door, my terror kept me mute. he put his ear, 
perhaps, to the crevice, but it caught the sound of nothing human. had 
i called, or made any token that denote some one to be within, words 
would have ensued; and as omnipresence was impossible, this discovery, 
and the artless narrative of what had just passed, would have save me 
from his murderous invectives. he went into his chamber, and after some 
interval, i stole across the entry and down the stairs, with 
inaudible steps. have secure the outer doors, i return with less 
circumspection. he heard me not when i descended; but my return steps 
were easily distinguished. now he thought was the guilty interview at 
an end. in what other way was it possible for him to construe these 
signals? 

how fallacious and precipitate was my decision! carwin's plot owe its 
success to a coincidence of event scarcely credible. the balance was 
sway from its equipoise by a hair. had i even begun the conversation 
with an account of what befel me in my chamber, my previous interview 
with wieland would have taught him to suspect me of imposture; yet, if 
i were discourse with this ruffian, when pleyel touched the lock of my 
chamber door, and when he shut his own door with so much violence, how, 
he might ask, should i be able to relate these incidents? perhaps he 
had withheld the knowledge of these circumstances from my brother, from 
whom, therefore, i could not obtain it, so that my innocence would have 
thus been irresistible demonstrated. 

the first impulse which flow from these idea was to return upon my 
steps, and demand once more an interview; but he was gone: his parting 
declaration were remembered. 

pleyel, i exclaimed, thou art gone for ever! are thy mistake beyond 
the reach of detection? am i helpless in the midst of this snare? 
the plot is at hand. he even speak in the style of penitence. he 
solicit an interview which he promise shall end in the disclosure of 
something momentous to my happiness. what can he say which will avail to 
turn aside this evil? but why should his remorse be feigned? i have 
done him no injury. his wicked is fertile only of despair; and the 
billow of remorse will some time overbear him. why may not this event 
have already taken place? why should i refuse to see him? 

this idea was present, as it were, for a moment. i sudden recoil 
from it, confounded at that frenzy which could give even momentary 
harbour to such a scheme; yet presently it returned. at length i even 
conceive it to deserve deliberation. i question whether it was 
not proper to admit, at a lonely spot, in a sacred hour, this man of 
tremendous and inscrutable attributes, this performer of horrid deeds, 
and whose presence was predict to call down unheard-of and unutterable 
horrors. 

what was it that sway me? i felt myself divest of the power to will 
contrary to the motive that determined me to seek his presence. my mind 
seem to be split into separate parts, and these parts to have 
enter into furious and implacable contention. these tumult gradual 
subsided. the reason why i should confide in that interposition which 
had hitherto defend me; in those token of compunction which this 
letter contained; in the efficacy of this interview to restore its 
spotless to my character, and banish all illusion from the mind of 
my friend, continual acquire new evidence and new strength. 

what should i fear in his presence? this was unlike an artifice intended 
to betray me into his hands. if it were an artifice, what purpose would 
it serve? the freedom of my mind was untouched, and that freedom would 
defy the assault of blandishments or magic. force was i not able to 
repel. on the former occasion my courage, it is true, had fail at the 
imminent approach of danger; but then i had not enjoy opportunity of 
deliberation; i had foreseen nothing; i was sunk into imbecility by my 
previous thoughts; i had been the victim of recent disappointment 
and anticipate ills: witness my infatuation in opening the closet in 
opposition to divine injunctions. 

now, perhaps, my courage was the offspring of a no less err 
principle. pleyel was for ever lost to me. i strove in vain to assume 
his person, and suppress my resentment; i strove in vain to believe in 
the assuage influence of time, to look forward to the birth-day of new 
hopes, and the re-exaltation of that luminary, of whose effulgent i 
had so long and so liberally partaken. 

what had i to suffer worse than was already inflicted? 

was not carwin my foe? i owe my untimely fate to his treason. instead 
of flying from his presence, ought i not to devote all my faculty to 
the gain of an interview, and compel him to repair the ill of 
which he has been the author? why should i suppose him impregnable 
to argument? have i not reason on my side, and the power of impart 
conviction? cannot he be made to see the justice of unravel the maze 
in which pleyel is bewildered? 

he may, at least, be accessible to fear. has he nothing to fear from 
the rage of an injure woman? but suppose him inaccessible to such 
inducements; suppose him to persist in all his flagitious purposes; are 
not the means of defence and resistance in my power? 

in the progress of such thoughts, was the resolution at last formed. i 
hope that the interview was sought by him for a laudable end; but, be 
that as it would, i trust that, by energy of reasoning or of action, i 
should render it auspicious, or, at least, harmless. 

such a determination must unavoidable fluctuate. the poet's chaos was 
no unapt emblem of the state of my mind. a torment was awaken in my 
bosom, which i foresaw would end only when this interview was past, and 
its consequence fully experienced. hence my impatience for the arrival 
of the hour which had been prescribed by carwin. 

meanwhile, my meditation were tumultuous active. new impediment 
to the execution of the scheme were speedy suggested. i had apprize 
catharine of my intention to spend this and many future nights with her. 
her husband was informed of this arrangement, and had zealous approve 
it. eleven o'clock exceed their hour of retiring. what excuse should 
i form for change my plan? should i shew this letter to wieland, and 
submit myself to his direction? but i knew in what way he would decide. 
he would fervent dissuade me from going. nay, would he not do more? 
he was apprize of the offence of carwin, and of the reward offer 
for his apprehension. would he not seize this opportunity of execute 
justice on a criminal? 

this idea was new. i was plunge once more into doubt. did not equity 
enjoin me thus to facilitate his arrest? no. i disdain the office of 
betrayer. carwin was unapprized of his danger, and his intentions were 
possibly beneficent. should i station guard about the house, and 
make an act, intended perhaps for my benefit, instrumental to his own 
destruction? wieland might be justified in thus employ the knowledge 
which i should impart, but i, by impart it, should pollute myself 
with more hateful crime than those undeserved impute to me. this 
scheme, therefore, i unhesitating rejected. the view with which 
i should return to my own house, it would therefore be necessary to 
conceal. yet some pretext must be invented. i had never been initiate 
into the trade of lying. yet what but falshood was a deliberate 
suppression of the truth? to deceive by silence or by words is the same. 

yet what would a lie avail me? what pretext would justify this change in 
my plan? would it not tend to confirm the imputation of pleyel? that 
i should voluntary return to an house in which honor and life had so 
lately been endangered, could be explain in no way favorable to my 
integrity. 

these reflections, if they did not change, at least suspend my 
decision. in this state of uncertainty i alight at the hut. we gave 
this name to the house tenant by the farmer and his servants, and 
which was situated on the verge of my brother's ground, and at a 
considerable distance from the mansion. the path to the mansion was 
plant by a double row of walnuts. along this path i proceed alone. 
i enter the parlour, in which was a light just expire in the socket. 
there was no one in the room. i perceive by the clock that stood 
against the wall, that it was near eleven. the late of the hour 
startle me. what had become of the family? they were usually retired 
an hour before this; but the unextinguished taper, and the unbar 
door were indication that they had not retired. i again return to the 
hall, and pass from one room to another, but still encounter not a 
human being. 

i imagine that, perhaps, the lapse of a few minutes would explain 
these appearances. meanwhile i reflect that the preconcerte hour had 
arrived. carwin was perhaps wait my approach. should i immediately 
retire to my own house, no one would be apprize of my proceeding. nay, 
the interview might pass, and i be enable to return in half an hour. 
hence no necessity would arise for dissimulation. 

i was so far influence by these view that i rose to execute this 
design; but again the unusual condition of the house occur to me, and 
some vague solicitude as to the condition of the family. i was nearly 
certain that my brother had not retired; but by what motive he could 
be induce to desert his house thus unseasonable i could by no means 
divine. louisa conway, at least, was at home and had, probably, retired 
to her chamber; perhaps she was able to impart the information i wanted. 

i went to her chamber, and found her asleep. she was delight and 
surprize at my arrival, and told me with how much impatience and 
anxiety my brother and his wife had wait my coming. they were fearful 
that some mishap had befallen me, and had remain up long than the 
usual period. notwithstanding the late of the hour, catharine would 
not resign the hope of seeing me. louisa said she had left them both in 
the parlour, and she knew of no cause for their absence. 

as yet i was not without solicitude on account of their personal safety. 
i was far from being perfectly at ease on that head, but entertain no 
distinct conception of the danger that impende over them. perhaps to 
beguile the moments of my long protract stay, they had gone to 
walk upon the bank. the atmosphere, though illuminate only by the 
star-light, was remarkably serene. meanwhile the desirable of an 
interview with carwin again returned, and i finally resolve to seek it. 

i pass with doubt and hasty steps along the path. my dwelling, seen 
at a distance, was gloomy and desolate. it had no inhabitant, for my 
servant, in consequence of my new arrangement, had gone to mettingen. 
the temerity of this attempt began to shew itself in more vivid colours 
to my understanding. whoever has pointed steel is not without arms; yet 
what must have been the state of my mind when i could meditate, without 
shuddering, on the use of a murderous weapon, and believe myself secure 
merely because i was capable of being made so by the death of another? 
yet this was not my state. i felt as if i was rush into deadly toils, 
without the power of pause or receding. 



chapter xvi 


as soon as i arrive in sight of the front of the house, my attention 
was excited by a light from the window of my own chamber. no appearance 
could be less explicable. a meeting was expect with carwin, but that 
he pre-occupied my chamber, and had supply himself with light, was not 
to be believed. what motive could influence him to adopt this conduct? 
could i proceed until this was explained? perhaps, if i should proceed 
to a distance in front, some one would be visible. a sidelong but feeble 
beam from the window, fell upon the piny copse which skirt the bank. 
as i eye it, it sudden became mutable, and after flit to and fro, 
for a short time, it vanished. i turn my eye again toward the window, 
and perceive that the light was still there; but the change which i had 
notice was occasion by a change in the position of the lamp or candle 
within. hence, that some person was there was an unavoidable inference. 

i pause to deliberate on the propriety of advancing. might i not 
advance cautiously, and, therefore, without danger? might i not knock at 
the door, or call, and be apprize of the nature of my visitant before i 
entered? i approach and listen at the door, but could hear nothing. 
i knock at first timidly, but afterwards with loudness. my signal 
were unnoticed. i step back and looked, but the light was no long 
discernible. was it sudden extinguish by a human agent? what purpose 
but concealment was intended? why was the illumination produced, to be 
thus sudden brought to an end? and why, since some one was there, had 
silence been observed? 

these were questions, the solution of which may be readily supposed 
to be entangle with danger. would not this danger, when measured by a 
woman's fears, expand into gigantic dimensions? menace of death; the 
stunning exertion of a warning voice; the known and unknown attribute 
of carwin; our recent interview in this chamber; the pre-appointment of 
a meeting at this place and hour, all throng into my memory. what was 
to be done? 

courage is no definite or stedfast principle. let that man who shall 
purpose to assign motive to the action of another, blush at his 
folly and forbear. not more presumptuous would it be to attempt the 
classification of all nature, and the scan of supreme intelligence. 
i gaze for a minute at the window, and fixed my eyes, for a second 
minute, on the ground. i drew forth from my pocket, and opened, a 
penknife. this, said i, be my safe-guard and avenger. the assailant 
shall perish, or myself shall fall. i had lock up the house in the 
morning, but had the key of the kitchen door in my pocket. i, therefore, 
determined to gain access behind. thither i hastened, unlock and 
entered. all was lonely, darksome, and waste. familiar as i was with 
every part of my dwelling, i easily found my way to a closet, drew forth 
a taper, a flint, tinder, and steel, and, in a moment as it were, gave 
myself the guidance and protection of light. 

what purpose did i meditate? should i explore my way to my chamber, and 
confront the being who had dare to intrude into this recess, and had 
labour for concealment? by putt out the light did he seek to hide 
himself, or mean only to circumvent my incautious steps? yet was it 
not more probable that he desire my absence by thus encourage the 
supposition that the house was unoccupied? i would see this man in spite 
of all impediments; ere i died, i would see his face, and summon him 
to penitence and retribution; no matter at what cost an interview was 
purchased. reputation and life might be wrest from me by another, but 
my rectitude and honor were in my own keeping, and were safe. 

i proceed to the foot of the stairs. at such a crisis my thought 
may be supposed at no liberty to range; yet vague image rush into my 
mind, of the mysterious interposition which had been experienced on the 
last night. my case, at present, was not dissimilar; and, if my angel 
were not weary of fruitless exertion to save, might not a new warning 
be expected? who could say whether his silence were ascribe to the 
absence of danger, or to his own absence? 

in this state of mind, no wonder that a shiver cold crept through 
my veins; that my pause was prolonged; and, that a fearful glance was 
thrown backward. 

alas! my heart droops, and my finger are enervated; my idea are 
vivid, but my language is faint: now know i what it is to entertain 
incommunicable sentiments. the chain of subsequent incident is drawn 
through my mind, and being link with those which forewent, by turn 
rouse up agony and sink me into hopelessness. 

yet i will persist to the end. my narrative may be invade by inaccuracy 
and confusion; but if i live no longer, i will, at least, live to 
complete it. what but ambiguities, abruptnesses, and dark transitions, 
can be expect from the historian who is, at the same time, the 
sufferer of these disasters? 

i have said that i cast a look behind. some object was expect to be 
seen, or why should i have gaze in that direction? two senses were at 
once assailed. the same piercing exclamation of hold! hold! was utter 
within the same distance of my ear. this it was that i heard. the airy 
undulation, and the shock given to my nerves, were real. whether the 
spectacle which i beheld exist in my fancy or without, might be 
doubted. i had not closed the door of the apartment i had just left. the 
stair-case, at the foot of which i stood, was eight or ten feet from 
the door, and attach to the wall through which the door led. my view, 
therefore, was sidelong, and took in no part of the room. 

through this aperture was an head thrust and drawn back with so much 
swiftness, that the immediate conviction was, that thus much of a form, 
ordinarily invisible, had been unshrowded. the face was turn towards 
me. every muscle was tense; the forehead and brow were drawn into 
vehement expression; the lip were stretch as in the act of shrieking, 
and the eyes emit sparks, which, no doubt, if i had been unattended 
by a light, would have illuminate like the coruscate of a meteor. 
the sound and the vision were present, and departed together at the 
same instant; but the cry was blown into my ear, while the face was many 
pace distant. 

this face was well suit to a being whose performance exceed the 
standard of humanity, and yet its features were akin to those i had 
before seen. the image of carwin was blend in a thousand ways with the 
stream of my thoughts. this visage was, perhaps, pourtraye by my fancy. 
if so, it will excite no surprize that some of his lineament were now 
discovered. yet affinity were few and unconspicuous, and were lost 
amidst the blaze of opposite qualities. 

what conclusion could i form? be the face human or not, the intimate 
was impart from above. experience had evince the benignity of that 
being who gave it. once he had interpose to shield me from harm, and 
subsequent event demonstrate the usefulness of that interposition. now 
was i again warn to forbear. i was hurry to the verge of the same 
gulf, and the same power was exert to recall my steps. was it possible 
for me not to obey? was i capable of holding on in the same perilous 
career? yes. even of this i was capable! 

the intimate was imperfect: it gave no form to my danger, and 
prescribed no limit to my caution. i had formerly neglect it, and yet 
escaped. might i not trust to the same issue? this idea might possess, 
though imperceptibly, some influence. i persisted; but it was not merely 
on this account. i cannot delineate the motive that led me on. i now 
speak as if no remnant of doubt exist in my mind as to the supernal 
origin of these sounds; but this is owe to the imperfect of my 
language, for i only mean that the belief was more permanent, and 
visit more frequent my sober meditation than its opposite. the 
immediate effects serve only to undermine the foundations of my 
judgment and precipitate my resolutions. 

i must either advance or return. i chose the former, and began to ascend 
the stairs. the silence underwent no second interruption. my chamber 
door was closed, but unlocked, and, aid by vehement effort of my 
courage, i open and look in. 

no hideous or uncommon object was discernible. the danger, indeed, might 
easily have lurk out of sight, have sprung upon me as i entered, and 
have rent me with his iron talons; but i was blind to this fate, and 
advanced, though cautiously, into the room. 

still every thing wore its accustomed aspect. neither lamp nor candle 
was to be found. now, for the first time, suspicion were suggest as 
to the nature of the light which i had seen. was it possible to have 
been the companion of that supernatural visage; a meteorous refulgence 
produce at the will of him to whom that visage belonged, and 
partake of the nature of that which accompany my father's death? 

the closet was near, and i remember the complicated horrors of which 
it had been productive. here, perhaps, was inclose the source of my 
peril, and the gratification of my curiosity. should i adventure once 
more to explore its recesses? this was a resolution not easily formed. i 
was suspend in thought: when glancing my eye on a table, i perceive a 
written paper. carwin's hand was instantly recognized, and snatch up 
the paper, i read as follows:-- 

"there was folly in expect your compliance with my invitation. judge 
how i was disappointed in finding another in your place. i have 
waited, but to wait any long would be perilous. i shall still seek an 
interview, but it must be at a different time and place: meanwhile, 
i will write this--how will you bear--how inexplicable will be this 
transaction!--an event so unexpected--a sight so horrible!" 

such was this abrupt and unsatisfactory script. the ink was yet moist, 
the hand was that of carwin. hence it was to be infer that he had 
this moment left the apartment, or was still in it. i look back, on 
the sudden expectation of seeing him behind me. 

what other did he mean? what transaction had taken place adverse to my 
expectations? what sight was about to be exhibited? i look around 
me once more, but saw nothing which indicate strangeness. again i 
remember the closet, and was resolve to seek in that the solution 
of these mysteries. here, perhaps, was inclose the scene destined to 
awaken my horrors and baffle my foresight. 

i have already said, that the entrance into this closet was beside my 
bed, which, on two sides, was close shrowde by curtains. on that side 
nearest the closet, the curtain was raised. as i pass along i cast my 
eye thither. i started, and look again. i bore a light in my hand, and 
brought it near my eyes, in order to dispel any illusion mists that 
might have hover before them. once more i fixed my eyes upon the bed, 
in hope that this more stedfast scrutiny would annihilate the object 
which before seem to be there. 

this then was the sight which carwin had predicted! this was the event 
which my understanding was to find inexplicable! this was the fate 
which had been reserved for me, but which, by some untoward chance, had 
befallen on another! 

i had not been terrify by empty menaces. violate and death await 
my entrance into this chamber. some inscrutable chance had led her 
hither before me, and the merciless fang of which i was design to 
be the prey, had mistaken their victim, and had fixed themselves in her 
heart. but where was my safety? was the mischief exhaust or flown? the 
steps of the assassin had just been here; they could not be far off; in 
a moment he would rush into my presence, and i should perish under the 
same pollute and suffocate grasp! 

my frame shook, and my knee were unable to support me. i gaze 
alternate at the closet door and at the door of my room. at one of 
these avenue would enter the exterminate of my honor and my life. i 
was prepared for defence; but now that danger was imminent, my means 
of defence, and my power to use them were gone. i was not qualified, by 
education and experience, to encounter peril like these: or, perhaps, 
i was powerless because i was again assault by surprize, and had not 
fortify my mind by foresight and previous reflection against a scene 
like this. 

fear for my own safety again yield place to reflection on the scene 
before me. i fixed my eyes upon her countenance. my sister's well-known 
and beloved features could not be conceal by convulsion or lividness. 
what direful illusion led thee hither? bereft of thee, what hold on 
happiness remains to thy offspring and thy spouse? to lose thee by a 
common fate would have been sufficient hard; but thus sudden to 
perish--to become the prey of this ghastly death! how will a spectacle 
like this be endure by wieland? to die beneath his grasp would not 
satisfy thy enemy. this was mercy to the evil which he previous made 
thee suffer! after these evil death was a boon which thou besoughtest 
him to grant. he entertain no enmity against thee: i was the object of 
his treason; but by some tremendous mistake his fury was misplaced. but 
how comest thou hither? and where was wieland in thy hour of distress? 

i approach the corpse: i lift the still flexible hand, and kiss 
the lip which were breathless. her flowing drapery was discomposed. 
i restore it to order, and seating myself on the bed, again fixed 
stedfast eyes upon her countenance. i cannot distinct recollect the 
ruminate of that moment. i saw confusedly, but forcibly, that every 
hope was extinguish with the life of catharine. all happiness and 
dignity must henceforth be banish from the house and name of wieland: 
all that remain was to linger out in agony a short existence; and 
leave to the world a monument of blasted hope and changeable fortune. 
pleyel was already lost to me; yet, while catharine live life was not 
a detest possession: but now, sever from the companion of my 
infancy, the partake of all my thoughts, my cares, and my wishes, i 
was like one set afloat upon a stormy sea, and hanging his safety upon a 
plank; night was close upon him, and an unexpected surge had torn him 
from his hold and overwhelm him forever. 



chapter xvii 


i had no inclination nor power to move from this spot. for more than an 
hour, my faculty and limb seem to be deprived of all activity. 
the door below creak on its hinges, and steps ascend the stairs. my 
wandering and confuse thought were instantly recall by these sounds, 
and drop the curtain of the bed, i move to a part of the room 
where any one who enter should be visible; such are the vibration of 
sentiment, that notwithstanding the seeming fulfilment of my fears, 
and increase of my danger, i was conscious, on this occasion, to no 
turbulence but that of curiosity. 

at length he enter the apartment, and i recognize my brother. it was 
the same wieland whom i had ever seen. yet his features were pervade by 
a new expression. i supposed him unacquainted with the fate of his wife, 
and his appearance confirmed this persuasion. a brow expand into 
exultation i had hitherto never seen in him, yet such a brow did he now 
wear. not only was he unapprized of the disaster that had happened, 
but some joyous occurrence had betided. what a reverse was prepare to 
annihilate his transitory bliss! no husband ever doate more fondly, for 
no wife ever claim so boundless a devotion. i was not uncertain as to 
the effects to flow from the discovery of her fate. i confide not at 
all in the effort of his reason or his piety. there were few evil 
which his mode of thinking would not disarm of their sting; but here, 
all opiate to grief, and all compel of patience were vain. this 
spectacle would be unavoidable follow by the outrage of desperation, 
and a rush to death. 

for the present, i neglect to ask myself what motive brought him 
hither. i was only fearful of the effects to flow from the sight of the 
dead. yet could it be long conceal from him? some time and speedy 
he would obtain this knowledge. no stratagem could considerably or 
useful prolong his ignorance. all that could be sought was to take 
away the abrupt of the change, and shut out the confusion of 
despair, and the inroad of madness: but i knew my brother, and knew 
that all exertion to console him would be fruitless. 

what could i say? i was mute, and pour forth those tear on his 
account, which my own unhappy had been unable to extort. in the 
midst of my tears, i was not unobservant of his motions. these were of 
a nature to rouse some other sentiment than grief or, at least, to mix 
with it a portion of astonishment. 

his countenance sudden became troubled. his hand were clasp with a 
force that left the print of his nail in his flesh. his eyes were fixed 
on my feet. his brain seem to swell beyond its continent. he did not 
cease to breathe, but his breath was stifle into groans. i had never 
witness the hurricane of human passions. my element had, till lately, 
been all sunshine and calm. i was unconversant with the altitude and 
energy of sentiment, and was transfix with inexplicable horror by 
the symptom which i now beheld. 

after a silence and a conflict which i could not interpret, he lift 
his eyes to heaven, and in broken accent exclaimed, "this is too much! 
any victim but this, and thy will be done. have i not sufficient 
attested my faith and my obedience? she that is gone, they that have 
perished, were link with my soul by tie which only thy command would 
have broken; but here is sanctity and excellence surpassing human. this 
workmanship is thine, and it cannot be thy will to heap it into ruins." 

here sudden unclasp his hands, he struck one of them against his 
forehead, and continued--"wretch! who made thee quicksighte in the 
council of thy maker? deliverance from mortal fetter is award to 
this being, and thou art the minister of this decree." 

so saying, wieland advanced towards me. his words and his motions were 
without meaning, except on one supposition. the death of catharine was 
already known to him, and that knowledge, as might have been suspected, 
had destroy his reason. i had fear nothing less; but now that i 
beheld the extinction of a mind the most luminous and penetrating that 
ever dignified the human form, my sensation were fraught with new and 
insupportable anguish. 

i had not time to reflect in what way my own safety would be effect by 
this revolution, or what i had to dread from the wild conception of a 
madman. he advanced towards me. some hollow noise were waft by the 
breeze. confuse clamour were succeed by many feet traverse the 
grass, and then crowd into the piazza. 

these sound suspend my brother's purpose, and he stood to listen. the 
signal multiply and grew louder; perceive this, he turn from me, 
and hurried out of my sight. all about me was pregnant with motive to 
astonishment. my sister's corpse, wieland's frantic demeanour, and, at 
length, this crowd of visitant so little accord with my foresight, 
that my mental progress was stopped. the impulse had cease which was 
accustomed to give motion and order to my thoughts. 

footstep throng upon the stairs, and presently many face shew 
themselves within the door of my apartment. these looks were full of 
alarm and watchfulness. they pry into corner as if in search of 
some fugitive; next their gaze was fixed upon me, and betoken all the 
vehemence of terror and pity. for a time i question whether these were 
not shape and face like that which i had seen at the bottom of the 
stairs, creature of my fancy or airy existences. my eye wander from 
one to another, till at length it fell on a countenance which i well 
knew. it was that of mr. hallet. this man was a distant kinsman of my 
mother, venerable for his age, his uprightness, and sagacity. he had 
long discharge the function of a magistrate and good citizen. if any 
terror remained, his presence was sufficient to dispel them. 

he approached, took my hand with a compassionate air, and said in a low 
voice, "where, my dear clara, are your brother and sister?" i made no 
answer, but pointed to the bed. his attendant drew aside the curtain, 
and while their eyes glare with horror at the spectacle which they 
beheld, those of mr. hallet overflow with tears. 

after considerable pause, he once more turn to me. "my dear girl, 
this sight is not for you. can you confide in my care, and that of mrs. 
baynton's? we will see perform all that circumstances require." 

i made strenuous opposition to this request. i insist on remain 
near her till she were interred. his remonstrances, however, and my own 
feelings, shew me the propriety of a temporary dereliction. louisa 
stood in need of a comforter, and my brother's children of a nurse. my 
unhappy brother was himself an object of solicitude and care. at length, 
i consent to relinquish the corpse, and go to my brother's, whose 
house, i said, would need mistress, and his children a parent. 

during this discourse, my venerable friend struggle with his tears, but 
my last intimate call them forth with fresh violence. meanwhile, 
his attendant stood round in mournful silence, gaze on me and at each 
other. i repeated my resolution, and rose to execute it; but he took my 
hand to detain me. his countenance betray irresolute and reluctance. 
i request him to state the reason of his opposition to this measure. 
i entreat him to be explicit. i told him that my brother had just been 
there, and that i knew his condition. this misfortune had driven him 
to madness, and his offspring must not want a protector. if he chose, 
i would resign wieland to his care; but his innocent and helpless babe 
stood in instant need of nurse and mother, and these offices i would by 
no means allow another to perform while i had life. 

every word that i utter seem to augment his perplexity and distress. 
at last he said, "i think, clara, i have entitle myself to some regard 
from you. you have professed your willing to oblige me. now i call 
upon you to confer upon me the highest obligation in your power. permit 
mrs. baynton to have the management of your brother's house for two or 
three days; then it shall be yours to act in it as you please. no matter 
what are my motive in making this request: perhaps i think your 
age, your sex, or the distress which this disaster must occasion, 
incapacitate you for the office. surely you have no doubt of mrs. 
baynton's tender or discretion." new idea now rush into my mind. 
i fixed my eyes stedfast on mr. hallet. "are they well?" said i. "is 
louisa well? are benjamin, and william, and constantine, and little 
clara, are they safe? tell me truly, i beseech you!" 

"they are well," he replied; "they are perfectly safe." 

"fear no effeminate weakness in me: i can bear to hear the truth. tell 
me truly, are they well?" 

he again assured me that they were well. 

"what then," resume i, "do you fear? is it possible for any calamity to 
disqualify me for perform my duty to these helpless innocents? i 
am willing to divide the care of them with mrs. baynton; i shall be 
grateful for her sympathy and aid; but what should i be to desert them 
at an hour like this!" 

i will cut short this distressful dialogue. i still persist in my 
purpose, and he still persist in his opposition. this excited my 
suspicion anew; but these were remove by solemn declaration of their 
safety. i could not explain this conduct in my friend; but at length 
consent to go to the city, provided i should see them for a few 
minutes at present, and should return on the morrow. 

even this arrangement was object to. at length he told me they were 
remove to the city. why were they removed, i asked, and whither? my 
importune would not now be eluded. my suspicion were roused, and no 
evasion or artifice was sufficient to allay them. many of the audience 
began to give vent to their emotion in tears. mr. hallet himself seem 
as if the conflict were too hard to be long sustained. something 
whisper to my heart that havoc had been wide than i now witnessed. 
i suspect this concealment to arise from apprehension of the 
effects which a knowledge of the truth would produce in me. i once 
more entreat him to inform me truly of their state. to enforce my 
entreaties, i put on an air of insensibility. "i can guess," said i, 
"what has happened--they are indeed beyond the reach of injury, for they 
are dead! is it not so?" my voice falter in spite of my courageous 
efforts. 

"yes," said he, "they are dead! dead by the same fate, and by the same 
hand, with their mother!" 

"dead!" reply i; "what, all?" 

"all!" reply he: "he spare not one!" 

allow me, my friends, to close my eyes upon the after-scene. why should 
i protract a tale which i already begin to feel is too long? over this 
scene at least let me pass lightly. here, indeed, my narrative would be 
imperfect. all was tempestuous commotion in my heart and in my brain. i 
have no memory for ought but unconscious transition and rueful sights. 
i was ingenious and indefatigable in the invention of torments. i would 
not dispense with any spectacle adapt to exasperate my grief. each 
pale and mangle form i crush to my bosom. louisa, whom i love with 
so ineffable a passion, was deny to me at first, but my obstinacy 
conquer their reluctance. 

they led the way into a darken hall. a lamp pendant from the ceiling 
was uncovered, and they pointed to a table. the assassin had defraud 
me of my last and miserable consolation. i sought not in her visage, for 
the tinge of the morning, and the lustre of heaven. these had vanish 
with life; but i hope for liberty to print a last kiss upon her lips. 
this was deny me; for such had been the merciless blow that destroy 
her, that not a lineament remained! 

i was carry hence to the city. mrs. hallet was my companion and my 
nurse. why should i dwell upon the rage of fever, and the effusion 
of delirium? carwin was the phantom that pursue my dreams, the giant 
oppressor under whose arm i was for ever on the point of being crushed. 
strenuous muscle were require to hinder my flight, and heart of steel 
to withstand the eloquence of my fears. in vain i call upon them to 
look upward, to mark his sparkle rage and scowl contempt. all i 
sought was to fly from the stroke that was lifted. then i heap upon my 
guard the most vehement reproaches, or betook myself to wail on the 
hapless of my condition. 

this malady, at length, declined, and my weeping friends began to look 
for my restoration. slowly, and with intermitt beams, memory revisite 
me. the scene that i had witness were revived, became the theme 
of deliberation and deduction, and call forth the effusion of more 
rational sorrow. 



chapter xviii 


i had imperfect recover my strength, when i was informed of the 
arrival of my mother's brother, thomas cambridge. ten years since, he 
went to europe, and was a surgeon in the britain forces in germany, 
during the whole of the late war. after its conclusion, some connection 
that he had form with an ireland officer, made him retire into ireland. 
intercourse had been punctual maintain by letters with his sister's 
children, and hope were given that he would shortly return to his 
native country, and pass his old age in our society. he was now in an 
evil hour arrived. 

i desire an interview with him for numerous and urgent reasons. with 
the first returns of my understanding i had anxious sought information 
of the fate of my brother. during the course of my disease i had never 
seen him; and vague and unsatisfactory answer were return to all my 
inquires. i had vehement interrogate mrs. hallet and her husband, and 
solicit an interview with this unfortunate man; but they mysterious 
insinuate that his reason was still unsettled, and that his 
circumstances render an interview impossible. their reserve on the 
particulars of this destruction, and the author of it, was equally 
invincible. 

for some time, finding all my effort fruitless, i had desist from 
direct inquiry and solicitations, determined, as soon as my strength 
was sufficient renewed, to pursue other means of dispel my 
uncertainty. in this state of things my uncle's arrival and intention to 
visit me were announced. i almost shudder to behold the face of this 
man. when i reflect on the disaster that had befallen us, i was half 
unwill to witness that dejection and grief which would be disclose 
in his countenance. but i believe that all transactions had been 
thorough disclose to him, and confide in my importune to extort 
from him the knowledge that i sought. 

i had no doubt as to the person of our enemy; but the motive that urge 
him to perpetrate these horrors, the means that he used, and his present 
condition, were total unknown. it was reasonable to expect some 
information on this head, from my uncle. i therefore wait his coming 
with impatience. at length, in the dusk of the evening, and in my 
solitary chamber, this meeting took place. 

this man was our nearest relation, and had ever treat us with the 
affection of a parent. our meeting, therefore, could not be without 
overflow tender and gloomy joy. he rather encourage than 
restrained the tear that i pour out in his arms, and took upon 
himself the task of comforter. allusion to recent disaster could not 
be long omitted. one topic facilitate the admission of another. at 
length, i mention and deplore the ignorance in which i had been 
kept respecting my brother's destiny, and the circumstances of our 
misfortunes. i entreat him to tell me what was wieland's condition, 
and what progress had been made in detect or punishing the author of 
this unheard-of devastation. 

"the author!" said he; "do you know the author?" 

"alas!" i answered, "i am too well acquaint with him. the story of 
the grounds of my suspicion would be painful and too long. i am not 
apprize of the extent of your present knowledge. there are none but 
wieland, pleyel, and myself, who are able to relate certain facts." 

"spare yourself the pain," said he. "all that wieland and pleyel can 
communicate, i know already. if any thing of moment has fallen within 
your own exclusive knowledge, and the relation be not too arduous for 
your present strength, i confess i am desirous of hearing it. perhaps 
you allude to one by the name of carwin. i will anticipate your 
curiosity by saying, that since these disasters, no one has seen or 
heard of him. his agency is, therefore, a mystery still unsolved." 

i readily comply with his request, and related as distinct as 
i could, though in general terms, the event transact in the 
summer-house and my chamber. he listen without apparent surprize 
to the tale of pleyel's error and suspicions, and with augment 
seriousness, to my narrative of the warning and inexplicable vision, 
and the letter found upon the table. i wait for his comments. 

"you gather from this," said he, "that carwin is the author of all this 
misery." 

"is it not," answer i, "an unavoidable inference? but what know you 
respecting it? was it possible to execute this mischief without witness 
or coadjutor? i beseech you to relate to me, when and why mr. hallet was 
summon to the scene, and by whom this disaster was first suspect 
or discovered. surely, suspicion must have fallen upon some one, and 
pursuit was made." 

my uncle rose from his seat, and traverse the floor with hasty steps. 
his eyes were fixed upon the ground, and he seem bury in perplexity. 
at length he paused, and said with an emphatic tone, "it is true; the 
instrument is known. carwin may have plotted, but the execution was 
another's. that other is found, and his deed is ascertained." 

"good heaven!" i exclaimed, "what say you? was not carwin the assassin? 
could any hand but his have carry into act this dreadful purpose?" 

"have i not said," return he, "that the performance was another's? 
carwin, perhaps, or heaven, or insanity, prompt the murderer; but 
carwin is unknown. the actual performer has, long since, been call 
to judgment and convicted, and is, at this moment, at the bottom of a 
dungeon loaded with chains." 

i lift my hand and eyes. "who then is this assassin? by what means, 
and whither was he traced? what is the testimony of his guilt?" 

"his own, corroborate with that of a servant-maid who spy the murder 
of the children from a closet where she was concealed. the magistrate 
return from your dwelling to your brother's. he was employ in 
hearing and recording the testimony of the only witness, when the 
criminal himself, unexpected, unsolicited, unsought, enter the hall, 
acknowledge his guilt, and render himself up to justice. 

"he has since been summon to the bar. the audience was compose of 
thousand whom rumour of this wonderful event had attract from the 
greatest distance. a long and impartial examination was made, and the 
prisoner was call upon for his defence. in compliance with this call 
he deliver an ample relation of his motive and actions." there he 
stopped. 

i besought him to say who this criminal was, and what the instigation 
that compel him. my uncle was silent. i urge this inquiry with new 
force. i revert to my own knowledge, and sought in this some basis to 
conjecture. i ran over the scanty catalogue of the men whom i knew; i 
light on no one who was qualified for minister to malice like this. 
again i resort to importunity. had i ever seen the criminal? was it 
sheer cruelty, or diabolical revenge that produce this overthrow? 

he survey me, for a considerable time, and listen to my 
interrogate in silence. at length he spoke: "clara, i have known thee 
by report, and in some degree by observation. thou art a being of no 
vulgar sort. thy friends have hitherto treat thee as a child. they 
meant well, but, perhaps, they were unacquainted with thy strength. i 
assure myself that nothing will surpass thy fortitude. 

"thou art anxious to know the destroyer of thy family, his actions, and 
his motives. shall i call him to thy presence, and permit him to confess 
before thee? shall i make him the narrator of his own tale?" 

i start on my feet, and look round me with fearful glances, as if 
the murder was close at hand. "what do you mean?" said i; "put an end, 
i beseech you, to this suspence." 

"be not alarmed; you will never more behold the face of this criminal, 
unless he be gifted with supernatural strength, and sever like thread 
the constraint of links and bolts. i have said that the assassin was 
arraign at the bar, and that the trial end with a summons from the 
judge to confess or to vindicate his actions. a reply was immediately 
made with significance of gesture, and a tranquil majesty, which denote 
less of humanity than godhead. judges, advocate and auditor were 
panic-struck and breathless with attention. one of the hearer 
faithfully record the speech. there it is," continue he, putt a 
roll of papers in my hand, "you may read it at your leisure." 

with these words my uncle left me alone. my curiosity refuse me a 
moment's delay. i open the papers, and read as follows. 



chapter xix 


"theodore wieland, the prisoner at the bar, was now call upon for his 
defence. he look around him for some time in silence, and with a mild 
countenance. at length he spoke: 

"it is strange; i am known to my judge and my auditors. who is there 
present a stranger to the character of wieland? who know him not as an 
husband--as a father--as a friend? yet here am i arraign as criminal. 
i am charged with diabolical malice; i am accused of the murder of my 
wife and my children! 

"it is true, they were slain by me; they all perish by my hand. 
the task of vindication is ignoble. what is it that i am call to 
vindicate? and before whom? 

"you know that they are dead, and that they were kill by me. what more 
would you have? would you extort from me a statement of my motives? have 
you fail to discover them already? you charge me with malice; but your 
eyes are not shut; your reason is still vigorous; your memory has not 
forsaken you. you know whom it is that you thus charge. the habit of 
his life are known to you; his treatment of his wife and his 
offspring is known to you; the sound of his integrity, and the 
unchangeable of his principles, are familiar to your apprehension; 
yet you persist in this charge! you lead me hither manacle as a felon; 
you deem me worthy of a vile and torment death! 

"who are they whom i have devoted to death? my wife--the little ones, 
that drew their being from me--that creature who, as she surpass 
them in excellence, claim a large affection than those whom natural 
affinity bound to my heart. think ye that malice could have urge me 
to this deed? hide your audacious front from the scrutiny of heaven. 
take refuge in some cavern unvisited by human eyes. ye may deplore your 
wicked or folly, but ye cannot expiate it. 

"think not that i speak for your sakes. hug to your heart this 
detest infatuation. deem me still a murderer, and drag me to 
untimely death. i make not an effort to dispel your illusion: i utter 
not a word to cure you of your sanguinary folly: but there are probably 
some in this assembly who have come from far: for their sakes, whose 
distance has disabled them from knowing me, i will tell what i have 
done, and why. 

"it is needless to say that god is the object of my supreme passion. 
i have cherished, in his presence, a single and upright heart. i have 
thirst for the knowledge of his will. i have burnt with ardour to 
approve my faith and my obedience. 

"my days have been spent in searching for the revelation of that will; 
but my days have been mournful, because my search failed. i solicit 
direction: i turn on every side where glimmerings of light could be 
discovered. i have not been wholly uninformed; but my knowledge has 
always stop short of certainty. dissatisfaction has insinuate 
itself into all my thoughts. my purpose have been pure; my wish 
indefatigable; but not till lately were these purpose thorough 
accomplished, and these wish fully gratified. 

"i thank thee, my father, for thy bounty; that thou didst not ask a less 
sacrifice than this; that thou placedst me in a condition to testify my 
submission to thy will! what have i withheld which it was thy pleasure 
to exact? now may i, with dauntless and erect eye, claim my reward, 
since i have given thee the treasure of my soul. 

"i was at my own house: it was late in the evening: my sister had gone 
to the city, but propose to return. it was in expectation of her return 
that my wife and i delay go to bed beyond the usual hour; the rest 
of the family, however, were retired. 

"my mind was contemplative and calm; not wholly devoid of apprehension 
on account of my sister's safety. recent events, not easily explained, 
had suggest the existence of some danger; but this danger was 
without a distinct form in our imagination, and scarcely ruffle our 
tranquillity. 

"time passed, and my sister did not arrive; her house is at some 
distance from mine, and though her arrangement had been made with a 
view to reside with us, it was possible that, through forgetfulness, 
or the occurrence of unforeseen emergencies, she had return to her own 
dwelling. 

"hence it was conceive proper that i should ascertain the truth by 
go thither. i went. on my way my mind was full of these idea 
which related to my intellectual condition. in the torrent of fervid 
conceptions, i lost sight of my purpose. some times i stood still; 
some times i wander from my path, and experienced some difficulty, on 
recover from my fit of musing, to regain it. 

"the series of my thought is easily traced. at first every vein beat 
with rapture known only to the man whose parental and conjugal love 
is without limits, and the cup of whose desires, immense as it is, 
overflow with gratification. i know not why emotion that were 
perpetual visitant should now have recur with unusual energy. the 
transition was not new from sensation of joy to a consciousness of 
gratitude. the author of my being was likewise the dispenser of every 
gift with which that being was embellished. the service to which a 
benefactor like this was entitled, could not be circumscribed. my social 
sentiment were indebted to their alliance with devotion for all their 
value. all passion are base, all joy feeble, all energy malignant, 
which are not drawn from this source. 

"for a time, my contemplation soar above earth and its inhabitants. 
i stretch forth my hands; i lift my eyes, and exclaimed, o! that i 
might be admitted to thy presence; that mine were the supreme delight of 
knowing thy will, and of perform it! the blissful privilege of direct 
communication with thee, and of listen to the audible enunciation of 
thy pleasure! 

"what task would i not undertake, what privation would i not cheerful 
endure, to testify my love of thee? alas! thou hidest thyself from my 
view: glimpse only of thy excellence and beauty are afford me. would 
that a momentary emanate from thy glory would visit me! that some 
unambiguous token of thy presence would salute my senses! 

"in this mood, i enter the house of my sister. it was vacant. scarcely 
had i regain recollection of the purpose that brought me hither. 
thought of a different tendency had such absolute possession of my 
mind, that the relations of time and space were almost obliterate from 
my understanding. these wanderings, however, were restrained, and i 
ascend to her chamber. 

"i had no light, and might have known by external observation, that 
the house was without any inhabitant. with this, however, i was 
not satisfied. i enter the room, and the object of my search not 
appearing, i prepared to return. 

"the dark require some caution in descend the stair. i stretch 
my hand to seize the balustrade by which i might regulate my steps. 
how shall i describe the lustre, which, at that moment, burst upon my 
vision! 

"i was dazzled. my organ were bereaved of their activity. my eye-lids 
were half-closed, and my hand withdrawn from the balustrade. a nameless 
fear chill my veins, and i stood motionless. this irradiate did not 
retire or lessen. it seem as if some powerful effulgence cover me 
like a mantle. 

"i open my eyes and found all about me luminous and glowing. it was 
the element of heaven that flow around. nothing but a fiery stream was 
at first visible; but, anon, a shrill voice from behind call upon me 
to attend. 

"i turned: it is forbidden to describe what i saw: words, indeed, would 
be wanting to the task. the lineament of that being, whose veil was now 
lifted, and whose visage beam upon my sight, no hue of pencil or of 
language can pourtray. 

"as it spoke, the accent thrill to my heart. "thy prayer are heard. 
in proof of thy faith, render me thy wife. this is the victim i chuse. 
call her hither, and here let her fall."--the sound, and visage, and 
light vanish at once. 

"what demand was this? the blood of catharine was to be shed! my wife 
was to perish by my hand! i sought opportunity to attest my virtue. 
little did i expect that a proof like this would have been demanded. 

"my wife! i exclaimed: o god! substitute some other victim. make me 
not the butcher of my wife. my own blood is cheap. this will i pour 
out before thee with a willing heart; but spare, i beseech thee, this 
precious life, or commission some other than her husband to perform the 
bloody deed. 

"in vain. the conditions were prescribed; the decree had gone forth, and 
nothing remain but to execute it. i rush out of the house and across 
the intermediate fields, and stop not till i enter my own parlour. 
"my wife had remain here during my absence, in anxious expectation of 
my return with some tidings of her sister. i had none to communicate. 
for a time, i was breathless with my speed: this, and the tremor 
that shook my frame, and the wild of my looks, alarm her. she 
immediately suspect some disaster to have happen to her friend, and 
her own speech was as much overpower by emotion as mine. 

"she was silent, but her looks manifest her impatience to hear what i 
had to communicate. i spoke, but with so much precipitation as scarcely 
to be understood; catching her, at the same time, by the arm, and 
forcibly pull her from her seat. 

"come along with me: fly: waste not a moment: time will be lost, and the 
deed will be omitted. tarry not; question not; but fly with me! 

"this deportment add afresh to her alarms. her eyes pursue mine, and 
she said, "what is the matter? for god's sake what is the matter? where 
would you have me go?" 

"my eyes were fixed upon her countenance while she spoke. i thought 
upon her virtues; i view her as the mother of my babes: as my wife: 
i recall the purpose for which i thus urge her attendance. my heart 
faltered, and i saw that i must rouse to this work all my faculties. the 
danger of the least delay was imminent. 

"i look away from her, and again exert my force, drew her towards 
the door--'you must go with me--indeed you must.' 

"in her fright she half-resisted my efforts, and again exclaimed, 'good 
heaven! what is it you mean? where go? what has happened? have you found 
clara?" 

"follow me, and you will see," i answered, still urge her reluctant 
steps forward. 

"what phrenzy has seize you? something must needs have happened. is she 
sick? have you found her?" 

"come and see. follow me, and know for yourself." 

"still she expostulate and besought me to explain this mysterious 
behaviour. i could not trust myself to answer her; to look at her; but 
grasping her arm, i drew her after me. she hesitated, rather through 
confusion of mind than from unwilling to accompany me. this 
confusion gradual abated, and she move forward, but with irresolute 
footsteps, and continual exclamation of wonder and terror. her 
interrogate of "what was the matter?" and "whither was i going?" were 
ceaseless and vehement. 

"it was the scope of my effort not to think; to keep up a conflict and 
uproar in my mind in which all order and distinct should be lost; 
to escape from the sensation produce by her voice. i was, therefore, 
silent. i strove to abridge this interval by my haste, and to waste all 
my attention in furious gesticulations. 

"in this state of mind we reach my sister's door. she look at the 
window and saw that all was desolate--"why come we here? there is no 
body here. i will not go in." 

"still i was dumb; but opening the door, i drew her into the entry. this 
was the allot scene: here she was to fall. i let go her hand, and 
pressing my palm against my forehead, made one mighty effort to work up 
my soul to the deed. 

"in vain; it would not be; my courage was appalled; my arms nerveless: 
i mutter prayer that my strength might be aid from above. they 
avail nothing. 

"horror diffuse itself over me. this conviction of my cowardice, my 
rebellion, fasten upon me, and i stood rigid and cold as marble. from 
this state i was somewhat relieved by my wife's voice, who renew her 
supplicate to be told why we came hither, and what was the fate of my 
sister. 

"what could i answer? my words were broken and inarticulate. her fear 
naturally acquire force from the observation of these symptoms; but 
these fear were misplaced. the only inference she deduce from my 
conduct was, that some terrible mishap had befallen clara. 

"she wrung her hands, and exclaim in an agony, "o tell me, where is 
she? what has become of her? is she sick? dead? is she in her chamber? o 
let me go thither and know the worst!" 

"this proposal set my thought once more in motion. perhaps what my 
rebellious heart refuse to perform here, i might obtain strength enough 
to execute elsewhere. 

"come then," said i, "let us go." 

"i will, but not in the dark. we must first procure a light." 

"fly then and procure it; but i charge you, linger not. i will await for 
your return. 

"while she was gone, i strode along the entry. the fell of a gloomy 
hurricane but faint resemble the discord that reign in my mind. to 
omit this sacrifice must not be; yet my sinew had refuse to perform 
it. no alternative was offered. to rebel against the mandate was 
impossible; but obedience would render me the executioner of my wife. my 
will was strong, but my limb refuse their office. 

"she return with a light; i led the way to the chamber; she look 
round her; she lift the curtain of the bed; she saw nothing. 

"at length, she fixed inquiring eyes upon me. the light now enable her 
to discover in my visage what dark had hitherto concealed. her 
care were now transfer from my sister to myself, and she said in 
a tremulous voice, "wieland! you are not well: what ail you? can i do 
nothing for you?" 

"that accent and looks so winning should disarm me of my resolution, 
was to be expected. my thought were thrown anew into anarchy. i spread 
my hand before my eyes that i might not see her, and answer only by 
groans. she took my other hand between her's, and pressing it to her 
heart, spoke with that voice which had ever sway my will, and waft 
away sorrow. 

"my friend! my soul's friend! tell me thy cause of grief. do i not merit 
to partake with thee in thy cares? am i not thy wife?" 

"this was too much. i broke from her embrace, and retired to a corner 
of the room. in this pause, courage was once more infuse into me. i 
resolve to execute my duty. she follow me, and renew her passionate 
entreaty to know the cause of my distress. 

"i raise my head and regard her with stedfast looks. i mutter 
something about death, and the injunction of my duty. at these words 
she shrunk back, and look at me with a new expression of anguish. 
after a pause, she clasp her hands, and exclaimed-- 

"o wieland! wieland! god grant that i am mistaken; but surely something 
is wrong. i see it: it is too plain: thou art undone--lost to me and 
to thyself." at the same time she gaze on my features with intensest 
anxiety, in hope that different symptom would take place. i reply to 
her with vehemence-- 

"undone! no; my duty is known, and i thank my god that my cowardice is 
now vanquished, and i have power to fulfil it. catharine! i pity the 
weakness of thy nature: i pity thee, but must not spare. thy life is 
claim from my hands: thou must die!" 

"fear was now add to her grief. 'what mean you? why talk you of death? 
bethink yourself, wieland: bethink yourself, and this fit will pass. o 
why came i hither! why did you drag me hither?' 

"i brought thee hither to fulfil a divine command. i am appoint thy 
destroyer, and destroy thee i must." saying this i seize her wrists. 
she shriek aloud, and endeavour to free herself from my grasp; but 
her effort were vain. 

"surely, surely wieland, thou dost not mean it. am i not thy wife? and 
wouldst thou kill me? thou wilt not; and yet--i see--thou art wieland 
no longer! a fury resistless and horrible possess thee--spare 
me--spare--help--help--" 

"till her breath was stop she shriek for help--for mercy. when 
she could speak no longer, her gestures, her looks appeal to my 
compassion. my accursed hand was irresolute and tremulous. i meant 
thy death to be sudden, thy struggle to be brief. alas! my heart was 
infirm; my resolve mutable. thrice i slacken my grasp, and life kept 
its hold, though in the midst of pangs. her eye-balls start from their 
sockets. grim and distortion took place of all that use to bewitch 
me into transport, and subdue me into reverence. 

"i was commission to kill thee, but not to torment thee with the 
foresight of thy death; not to multiply thy fears, and prolong thy 
agonies. haggard, and pale, and lifeless, at length thou ceasedst to 
contend with thy destiny. 

"this was a moment of triumph. thus had i successful subdued the 
stubborn of human passions: the victim which had been demand was 
given: the deed was done past recal. 

"i lift the corpse in my arms and laid it on the bed. i gaze upon 
it with delight. such was the elation of my thoughts, that i even broke 
into laughter. i clap my hand and exclaimed, 'it is done! my sacred 
duty is fulfilled! to that i have sacrificed, o my god! thy last and 
best gift, my wife!' 

"for a while i thus soar above frailty. i imagine i had set myself 
forever beyond the reach of selfishness; but my imagination were false. 
this rapture quick subsided. i look again at my wife. my joyous 
ebullition vanished, and i ask myself who it was whom i saw? 
methought it could not be catharine. it could not be the woman who had 
lodge for years in my heart; who had slept, nightly, in my bosom; who 
had borne in her womb, who had foster at her breast, the being who 
call me father; whom i had watch with delight, and cherish with a 
fond ever new and perpetual growing: it could not be the same. 

"where was her bloom! these deadly and blood-suffused orb but ill 
resemble the azure and exstatic tender of her eyes. the lucid stream 
that meander over that bosom, the glow of love that was wont to sit 
upon that cheek, are much unlike these livid stain and this hideous 
deformity. alas! these were the trace of agony; the gripe of the 
assassin had been here! 

"i will not dwell upon my lapse into desperate and outrageous sorrow. 
the breath of heaven that sustain me was withdrawn and i sunk into 
mere man. i leap from the floor: i dashed my head against the wall: 
i utter scream of horror: i pant after torment and pain. eternal 
fire, and the bicker of hell, compare with what i felt, were music 
and a bed of roses. 

"i thank my god that this degeneracy was transient, that he deign once 
more to raise me aloft. i thought upon what i had done as a sacrifice to 
duty, and was calm. my wife was dead; but i reflected, that though this 
source of human consolation was closed, yet other were still open. if 
the transport of an husband were no more, the feelings of a father had 
still scope for exercise. when remembrance of their mother should excite 
too keen a pang, i would look upon them, and be comforted. 

"while i revolve these ideas, new warmth flow in upon my heart--i was 
wrong. these feelings were the growth of selfishness. of this i was 
not aware, and to dispel the mist that obscure my perceptions, a new 
effulgence and a new mandate were necessary. 

"from these thought i was recall by a ray that was shot into the 
room. a voice spake like that which i had before heard--'thou hast done 
well; but all is not done--the sacrifice is incomplete--thy children 
must be offered--they must perish with their mother!--'" 



chapter xx 


will you wonder that i read no farther? will you not rather be 
astonish that i read thus far? what power support me through such a 
task i know not. perhaps the doubt from which i could not disengage 
my mind, that the scene here depict was a dream, contribute to my 
perseverance. in vain the solemn introduction of my uncle, his appeal 
to my fortitude, and allusion to something monstrous in the event 
he was about to disclose; in vain the distressful perplexity, the 
mysterious silence and ambiguous answer of my attendants, especially 
when the condition of my brother was the theme of my inquiries, were 
remembered. i recall the interview with wieland in my chamber, his 
preternatural tranquill succeed by burst of passion and menace 
actions. all these coincide with the tenor of this paper. 

catharine and her children, and louisa were dead. the act that destroy 
them was, in the highest degree, inhuman. it was worthy of savage 
train to murder, and exult in agonies. 

who was the performer of the deed? wieland! my brother! the husband 
and the father! that man of gentle virtue and invincible benignity! 
place and mild--an idolator of peace! surely, said i, it is a dream. 
for many days have i been vex with frenzy. its dominion is still felt; 
but new form are call up to diversify and augment my torments. 

the paper drop from my hand, and my eyes follow it. i shrunk back, 
as if to avoid some petrify influence that approach me. my tongue 
was mute; all the function of nature were at a stand, and i sunk upon 
the floor lifeless. the noise of my fall, as i afterwards heard, alarm 
my uncle, who was in a lower apartment, and whose apprehension had 
detain him. he hasten to my chamber, and administer the assistance 
which my condition required. when i open my eyes i beheld him before 
me. his skill as a reason as well as a physician, was exert to 
obviate the injurious effects of this disclosure; but he had wrong 
estimate the strength of my body or of my mind. this new shock brought 
me once more to the brink of the grave, and my malady was much more 
difficult to subdue than at first. 

i will not dwell upon the long train of dreary sensations, and the 
hideous confusion of my understanding. time slow restore its 
customary firm to my frame, and order to my thoughts. the image 
impress upon my mind by this fatal paper were somewhat efface by my 
malady. they were obscure and disjointed like the parts of a dream. i 
was desirous of free my imagination from this chaos. for this end i 
question my uncle, who was my constant companion. he was intimidate 
by the issue of his first experiment, and took pains to elude or 
discourage my inquiry. my impetuos some times compel him to have 
resort to misrepresent and untruths. 

time effect that end, perhaps, in a more beneficial manner. in the 
course of my meditation the recollection of the past gradual became 
more distinct. i revolve them, however, in silence, and being no long 
accompany with surprize, they did not exercise a death-dealing 
power. i had discontinue the peruse of the paper in the midst of 
the narrative; but what i read, combine with information elsewhere 
obtained, threw, perhaps, a sufficient light upon these detest 
transactions; yet my curiosity was not inactive. i desire to peruse the 
remainder. 

my eager to know the particulars of this tale was mingle and abate 
by my antipathy to the scene which would be disclosed. hence i employ 
no means to effect my purpose. i desire knowledge, and, at the same 
time, shrunk back from receiving the boon. 

one morning, being left alone, i rose from my bed, and went to a drawer 
where my fine clothing use to be kept. i open it, and this fatal 
paper salute my sight. i snatch it involuntarily, and withdrew to a 
chair. i debated, for a few minutes, whether i should open and read. now 
that my fortitude was put to trial, it failed. i felt myself incapable 
of deliberate survey a scene of so much horror. i was prompt to 
return it to its place, but this resolution gave way, and i determined 
to peruse some part of it. i turn over the leaves till i came near the 
conclusion. the narrative of the criminal was finished. the verdict of 
guilty reluctantly pronounced by the jury, and the accused interrogate 
why sentence of death should not pass. the answer was brief, solemn, and 
emphatical. 

"no. i have nothing to say. my tale has been told. my motive have 
been truly stated. if my judge are unable to discern the purity of my 
intentions, or to credit the statement of them, which i have just made; 
if they see not that my deed was enjoin by heaven; that obedience was 
the test of perfect virtue, and the extinction of selfish and error, 
they must pronounce me a murderer. 

"they refuse to credit my tale; they impute my acts to the influence of 
daemons; they account me an example of the highest wicked of which 
human nature is capable; they doom me to death and infamy. have i power 
to escape this evil? if i have, be sure i will exert it. i will not 
accept evil at their hand, when i am entitle to good; i will suffer 
only when i cannot elude suffering. 

"you say that i am guilty. impious and rash! thus to usurp the 
prerogative of your maker! to set up your bound view and halting 
reason, as the measure of truth! 

"thou, omnipotent and holy! thou knowest that my action were 
conformable to thy will. i know not what is crime; what action are 
evil in their ultimate and comprehensive tendency or what are good. thy 
knowledge, as thy power, is unlimited. i have taken thee for my guide, 
and cannot err. to the arms of thy protection, i entrust my safety. in 
the award of thy justice, i confide for my recompense. 

"come death when it will, i am safe. let calumny and abhorrence pursue 
me among men; i shall not be defraud of my dues. the peace of virtue, 
and the glory of obedience, will be my portion hereafter." 

here end the speaker. i withdrew my eyes from the page; but before i 
had time to reflect on what i had read, mr. cambridge enter the 
room. he quick perceive how i had been employed, and betray some 
solicitude respecting the condition of my mind. 

his fears, however, were superfluous. what i had read, threw me into a 
state not easily described. anguish and fury, however, had no part in 
it. my faculty were chain up in wonder and awe. just then, i was 
unable to speak. i look at my friend with an air of inquisitiveness, 
and pointed at the roll. he comprehend my inquiry, and answer me 
with looks of gloomy acquiescence. after some time, my thought found 
their way to my lips. 

such then were the acts of my brother. such were his words. for this 
he was condemn to die: to die upon the gallows! a fate, cruel and 
unmerited! and is it so? continue i, struggle for utterance, which 
this new idea made difficult; is he--dead! 

"no. he is alive. there could be no doubt as to the cause of these 
excesses. they originate in sudden madness; but that madness continues. 
and he is condemn to perpetual imprisonment." 

"madness, say you? are you sure? were not these sights, and these 
sounds, really seen and heard?" 

my uncle was surprize at my question. he look at me with apparent 
inquietude. "can you doubt," said he, "that these were illusions? do 
heaven, think you, interfere for such ends?" 

"o no; i think it not. heaven cannot stimulate to such unheard-of 
outrage. the agent was not good, but evil." 

"nay, my dear girl," said my friend, "lay aside these fancies. neither 
angel nor devil had any part in this affair." 

"you misunderstand me," i answered; "i believe the agency to be external 
and real, but not supernatural." 

"indeed!" said he, in an accent of surprize. "whom do you then suppose 
to be the agent?" 

"i know not. all is wildere conjecture. i cannot forget carwin. i 
cannot banish the suspicion that he was the setter of these snares. but 
how can we suppose it to be madness? did insanity ever before assume 
this form?" 

"frequently. the illusion, in this case, was more dreadful in its 
consequences, than any that has come to my knowledge; but, i repeat that 
similar illusion are not rare. did you never hear of an instance which 
occur in your mother's family?" 

"no. i beseech you relate it. my grandfather's death i have understood 
to have been extraordinary, but i know not in what respect. a brother, 
to whom he was much attached, die in his youth, and this, as i have 
heard, influenced, in some remarkable way, the fate of my grandfather; 
but i am unacquainted with particulars." 

"on the death of that brother," resume my friend, "my father was seize 
with dejection, which was found to flow from two sources. he not only 
grieve for the loss of a friend, but entertain the belief that his 
own death would be inevitable consequent on that of his brother. he 
wait from day to day in expectation of the stroke which he predict 
was speedy to fall upon him. gradually, however, he recover his 
cheerful and confidence. he married, and perform his part in 
the world with spirit and activity. at the end of twenty-one years it 
happen that he spent the summer with his family at an house which he 
possessed on the sea coast in cornwall. it was at no great distance 
from a cliff which overhung the ocean, and rose into the air to a great 
height. the summit was level and secure, and easily ascend on the land 
side. the company frequent repair hither in clear weather, invite 
by its pure airs and extensive prospects. one evening in june my father, 
with his wife and some friends, chance to be on this spot. every one 
was happy, and my father's imagination seem particularly alive to the 
grandeur of the scenery. 

"suddenly, however, his limb tremble and his features betray alarm. 
he threw himself into the attitude of one listening. he gaze earnest 
in a direction in which nothing was visible to his friends. this last 
for a minute; then turning to his companions, he told them that his 
brother had just deliver to him a summons, which must be instantly 
obeyed. he then took an hasty and solemn leave of each person, and, 
before their surprize would allow them to understand the scene, he 
rush to the edge of the cliff, threw himself headlong, and was seen no 
more. 

"in the course of my practice in the germany army, many cases, equally 
remarkable, have occurred. unquestionable the illusion were maniacal, 
though the vulgar thought otherwise. they are all reduce to one 
class, [*] and are not more difficult of explicate and cure than most 
affection of our frame." 

this opinion my uncle endeavoured, by various means, to impress upon me. 
i listen to his reasoning and illustration with silent respect. my 
astonishment was great on finding proof of an influence of which i 
had supposed there were no examples; but i was far from account for 
appearances in my uncle's manner. idea throng into my mind which i 
was unable to disjoin or to regulate. i reflect that this madness, 
if madness it were, had affected pleyel and myself as well as wieland. 
pleyel had heard a mysterious voice. i had seen and heard. a form had 
show itself to me as well as to wieland. the disclosure had been 
made in the same spot. the appearance was equally complete and equally 
prodigious in both instances. whatever supposition i should adopt, had 
i not equal reason to tremble? what was my security against influence 
equally terrific and equally irresistable? 

it would be vain to attempt to describe the state of mind which this 
idea produced. i wonder at the change which a moment had affected 
in my brother's condition. now was i stupify with tenfold wonder in 
contemplate myself. was i not likewise transform from rational and 
human into a creature of nameless and fearful attributes? was i not 
transport to the brink of the same abyss? ere a new day should come, 
my hand might be embrue in blood, and my remain life be consign 
to a dungeon and chains. 

with moral sensibility like mine, no wonder that this new dread was more 
insupportable than the anguish i had lately endured. grief carry its 
own antidote along with it. when thought become merely a vehicle of 
pain, its progress must be stopped. death is a cure which nature or 
ourselves must administer: to this cure i now look forward with gloomy 
satisfaction. 

my silence could not conceal from my uncle the state of my thoughts. 
he made unweary effort to divert my attention from view so 
pregnant with danger. his efforts, aid by time, were in some measure 
successful. confidence in the strength of my resolution, and in the 
healthful state of my faculties, was once more revived. i was able 
to devote my thought to my brother's state, and the cause of this 
disasterous proceeding. 

my opinion were the sport of eternal change. some times i conceive the 
apparition to be more than human. i had no grounds on which to build a 
disbelief. i could not deny faith to the evidence of my religion; 
the testimony of men was loud and unanimous: both these concur 
to persuade me that evil spirits existed, and that their energy was 
frequent exert in the system of the world. 

these idea connected themselves with the image of carwin. where is the 
proof, said i, that daemon may not be subject to the controul of men? 
this truth may be distort and debase in the mind of the ignorant. 
the dogma of the vulgar, with regard to this subject, are glaring 
absurd; but though these may just be neglect by the wise, we are 
scarcely justified in total reject the possibility that men may 
obtain supernatural aid. 

the dream of superstition are worthy of contempt. witchcraft, its 
instrument and miracles, the compact ratify by a bloody signature, 
the apparatus of sulpherous smell and thundering explosions, are 
monstrous and chimerical. these have no part in the scene over which the 
genius of carwin presides. that conscious beings, dissimilar from human, 
but moral and voluntary agent as we are, some where exist, can scarcely 
be denied. that their aid may be employ to benign or malignant 
purposes, cannot be disproved. 

dark rest upon the designs of this man. the extent of his power is 
unknown; but is there not evidence that it has been now exerted? 

i recur to my own experience. here carwin had actually appear upon 
the stage; but this was in a human character. a voice and a form were 
discovered; but one was apparently exerted, and the other disclosed, not 
to befriend, but to counteract carwin's designs. there were token of 
hostility, and not of alliance, between them. carwin was the miscreant 
whose project were resist by a minister of heaven. how can this be 
reconcile to the stratagem which ruin my brother? there the agency 
was at once preternatural and malignant. 

the recollection of this fact led my thought into a new channel. the 
malignity of that influence which govern my brother had hitherto been 
no subject of doubt. his wife and children were destroyed; they had 
expire in agony and fear; yet was it indisputable certain that their 
murder was criminal? he was acquit at the tribunal of his own 
conscience; his behaviour at his trial and since, was faithfully 
report to me; appearances were uniform; not for a moment did he lay 
aside the majesty of virtue; he repel all invective by appealing to 
the deity, and to the tenor of his past life; surely there was truth in 
this appeal: none but a command from heaven could have sway his will; 
and nothing but unerring proof of divine approbation could sustain his 
mind in its present elevation. 


* mania mutabilis. see darwin's zoonomia, vol. ii. class iii. 
1.2. where similar case are stated. 



chapter xxi 


such, for some time, was the course of my meditations. my weakness, and 
my aversion to be pointed at as an object of surprize or compassion, 
prevent me from go into public. i studious avoid the visit of 
those who came to express their sympathy, or gratify their curiosity. 
my uncle was my principal companion. nothing more powerful tend to 
console me than his conversation. 

with regard to pleyel, my feelings seem to have undergone a total 
revolution. it often happen that one passion supplant another. late 
disaster had rent my heart, and now that the wound was in some degree 
closed, the love which i had cherish for this man seem likewise to 
have vanished. 

hitherto, indeed, i had had no cause for despair. i was innocent of that 
offence which had estrange him from my presence. i might reasonably 
expect that my innocence would at some time be irresistable 
demonstrated, and his affection for me be revive with his esteem. now 
my aversion to be thought culpable by him continued, but was unattended 
with the same impatience. i desire the removal of his suspicions, 
not for the sake of regain his love, but because i delight in the 
venerate of so excellent a man, and because he himself would derive 
pleasure from conviction of my integrity. 

my uncle had early informed me that pleyel and he had seen each other, 
since the return of the latter from europe. amidst the topic of their 
conversation, i discover that pleyel had careful omit the mention 
of those event which had drawn upon me so much abhorrence. i could 
not account for his silence on this subject. perhaps time or some new 
discovery had alter or shaken his opinion. perhaps he was unwilling, 
though i were guilty, to injure me in the opinion of my venerable 
kinsman. i understood that he had frequent visit me during 
my disease, had watch many successive nights by my bedside, and 
manifest the utmost anxiety on my account. 

the journey which he was prepare to take, at the termination of our 
last interview, the catastrophe of the ensue night induce him to 
delay. the motive of this journey i had, till now, total mistaken. 
they were explain to me by my uncle, whose tale excited my 
astonishment without awakening my regret. in a different state of mind, 
it would have add unspeakable to my distress, but now it was more 
a source of pleasure than pain. this, perhaps, is not the least 
extraordinary of the fact contained in this narrative. it will excite 
less wonder when i add, that my indifference was temporary, and that the 
lapse of a few days shew me that my feelings were deaden for a time, 
rather than finally extinguished. 

theresa de stolberg was alive. she had conceive the resolution of 
seek her lover in america. to conceal her flight, she had cause the 
report of her death to be propagated. she put herself under the conduct 
of bertrand, the faithful servant of pleyel. the pacquet which the 
latter received from the hand of his servant, contained the tidings of 
her safe arrival at boston, and to meet her there was the purpose of his 
journey. 

this discovery had set this man's character in a new light. i had 
mistaken the heroism of friendship for the phrenzy of love. he who 
had gain my affections, may be supposed to have previous entitle 
himself to my reverence; but the levity which had formerly characterize 
the behaviour of this man, tend to obscure the great of his 
sentiments. i did not fail to remark, that since this lady was still 
alive, the voice in the temple which assert her death, must either 
have been intended to deceive, or have been itself deceived. the latter 
supposition was inconsistent with the notion of a spiritual, and the 
former with that of a benevolent being. 

when my disease abated, pleyel had forborne his visits, and had lately 
set out upon this journey. this amount to a proof that my guilt was 
still believe by him. i was grieve for his errors, but trust that my 
vindication would, soon or later, be made. 

meanwhile, tumultuous thought were again set afloat by a proposal 
made to me by my uncle. he imagine that new airs would restore my 
languish constitution, and a varied succession of object tend to 
repair the shock which my mind had received. for this end, he propose 
to me to take up my abode with him in france or italy. 

at a more prosperous period, this scheme would have pleased for its own 
sake. now my heart sicken at the prospect of nature. the world of man 
was shrowde in misery and blood, and constitute a loathsome spectacle. 
i willing closed my eyes in sleep, and regret that the respite it 
afford me was so short. i marked with satisfaction the progress of 
decay in my frame, and consent to live, merely in the hope that 
the course of nature would speedy relieve me from the burthen. 
nevertheless, as he persist in his scheme, i concur in it merely 
because he was entitle to my gratitude, and because my refusal gave him 
pain. 

no soon was he informed of my consent, than he told me i must make 
immediate preparation to embark, as the ship in which he had engaged 
a passage would be ready to depart in three days. this expedition was 
unexpected. there was an impatience in his manner when he urge the 
necessity of dispatch that excited my surprize. when i question him as 
to the cause of this haste, he generally state reason which, at 
that time, i could not deny to be plausible; but which, on the review, 
appear insufficient. i suspect that the true motive were concealed, 
and believe that these motive had some connection with my brother's 
destiny. 

i now recollect that the information respecting wieland which had, 
from time to time, been impart to me, was always accompany with airs 
of reserve and mysteriousness. what had appear sufficient explicit 
at the time it was uttered, i now remember to have been falter 
and ambiguous. i was resolve to remove my doubts, by visiting the 
unfortunate man in his dungeon. 

heretofore the idea of this visit had occur to me; but the horrors 
of his dwelling-place, his wild yet placid physiognomy, his neglect 
locks, the fetter which constrained his limbs, terrible as they were in 
description, how could i endure to behold! 

now, however, that i was prepare to take an everlasting farewell of my 
country, now that an ocean was henceforth to separate me from him, how 
could i part without an interview? i would examine his situation with my 
own eyes. i would know whether the representations which had been made 
to me were true. perhaps the sight of the sister whom he was wont 
to love with a passion more than fraternal, might have an auspicious 
influence on his malady. 

have form this resolution, i wait to communicate it to mr. 
cambridge. i was aware that, without his concurrence, i could not hope 
to carry it into execution, and could discover no objection to which 
it was liable. if i had not been deceive as to his condition, no 
inconvenience could arise from this proceeding. his consent, therefore, 
would be the test of his sincerity. 

i seize this opportunity to state my wish on this head. my suspicion 
were confirmed by the manner in which my request affected him. after 
some pause, in which his countenance betray every mark of perplexity, 
he said to me, "why would you pay this visit? what useful purpose can it 
serve?" 

"we are preparing," said i, "to leave the country forever: what kind of 
being should i be to leave behind me a brother in calamity without even 
a parting interview? indulge me for three minutes in the sight of him. 
my heart will be much easy after i have look at him, and shed a few 
tear in his presence." 

"i believe otherwise. the sight of him would only augment your distress, 
without contributing, in any degree, to his benefit." 

"i know not that," return i. "surely the sympathy of his sister, 
proof that her tender is as lively as ever, must be a source 
of satisfaction to him. at present he must regard all mankind as his 
enemy and calumniators. his sister he, probably, conceive to partake 
in the general infatuation, and to join in the cry of abhorrence that 
is raise against him. to be undeceive in this respect, to be assured 
that, however i may impute his conduct to delusion, i still retain all 
my former affection for his person, and venerate for the purity of his 
motives, cannot but afford him pleasure. when he hear that i have left 
the country, without even the ceremonious attention of a visit, what 
will he think of me? his magnanimity may hinder him from repining, but 
he will surely consider my behaviour as savage and unfeeling. indeed, 
dear sir, i must pay this visit. to embark with you without pay it, 
will be impossible. it may be of no service to him, but will enable me 
to acquit myself of what i cannot but esteem a duty. besides," continue 
i, "if it be a mere fit of insanity that has seize him, may not my 
presence chance to have a salutary influence? the mere sight of me, it 
is not impossible, may rectify his perceptions." 

"ay," said my uncle, with some eagerness; "it is by no means impossible 
that your interview may have that effect; and for that reason, beyond 
all others, would i dissuade you from it." 

i express my surprize at this declaration. "is it not to be desire 
that an error so fatal as this should be rectified?" 

"i wonder at your question. reflect on the consequence of this error. 
has he not destroy the wife whom he loved, the children whom he 
idolized? what is it that enable him to bear the remembrance, but the 
belief that he act as his duty enjoined? would you rash bereave him 
of this belief? would you restore him to himself, and convince him 
that he was instigate to this dreadful outrage by a perversion of his 
organs, or a delusion from hell? 

"now his vision are joyous and elate. he conceive himself to have 
reach a lofty degree of virtue, than any other human being. the 
merit of his sacrifice is only enhance in the eyes of superior beings, 
by the detest that pursue him here, and the suffering to which he 
is condemned. the belief that even his sister has desert him, and 
gone over to his enemies, add to his sublime of feelings, and his 
confidence in divine approbation and future recompense. 

"let him be undeceive in this respect, and what flood of despair and 
of horror will overwhelm him! instead of glowing approbation and serene 
hope, will he not hate and torture himself? self-violence, or a phrenzy 
far more savage and destructive than this, may be expect to succeed. i 
beseech you, therefore, to relinquish this scheme. if you calm reflect 
upon it, you will discover that your duty lie in careful shun 
him." 

mr. cambridge's reasoning suggest view to my understanding, that had 
not hitherto occurred. i could not but admit their validity, but they 
shewed, in a new light, the depth of that misfortune in which my brother 
was plunged. i was silent and irresolute. 

presently, i considered, that whether wieland was a maniac, a faithful 
servant of his god, the victim of hellish illusions, or the dupe of 
human imposture, was by no means certain. in this state of my mind it 
became me to be silent during the visit that i projected. this visit 
should be brief: i should be satisfy merely to snatch a look at him. 
admit that a change in his opinion were not to be desired, there 
was no danger from the conduct which i should pursue, that this change 
should be wrought. 

but i could not conquer my uncle's aversion to this scheme. yet i 
persisted, and he found that to make me voluntary relinquish it, it 
was necessary to be more explicit than he had hitherto been. he took 
both my hands, and anxious examine my countenance as he spoke, 
"clara," said he, "this visit must not be paid. we must hasten with the 
utmost expedition from this shore. it is folly to conceal the truth 
from you, and, since it is only by disclose the truth that you can be 
prevail upon to lay aside this project, the truth shall be told. 

"o my dear girl!" continue he with increase energy in his accent, 
"your brother's phrenzy is, indeed, stupendous and frightful. the soul 
that formerly actuate his frame has disappeared. the same form remains; 
but the wise and benevolent wieland is no more. a fury that is rapacious 
of blood, that lift his strength almost above that of mortals, that 
bends all his energy to the destruction of whatever was once dear to 
him, possess him wholly. 

"you must not enter his dungeon; his eyes will no soon be fixed upon 
you, than an exertion of his force will be made. he will shake off his 
fetter in a moment, and rush upon you. no interposition will then be 
strong or quick enough to save you. 

"the phantom that has urge him to the murder of catharine and her 
children is not yet appeased. your life, and that of pleyel, are exact 
from him by this imaginary being. he is eager to comply with this 
demand. twice he has escape from his prison. the first time, he no 
soon found himself at liberty, than he haste to pleyel's house. it 
being midnight, the latter was in bed. wieland penetrate unobserved 
to his chamber, and open his curtain. happily, pleyel awoke at the 
critical moment, and escape the fury of his kinsman, by leap from 
his chamber-window into the court. happily, he reach the ground 
without injury. alarm were given, and after diligent search, your 
brother was found in a chamber of your house, whither, no doubt, he 
had sought you. his chains, and the watchful of his guards, were 
redoubled; but again, by some miracle, he restore himself to liberty. 
he was now incautious apprize of the place of your abode: and had not 
information of his escape been instantly given, your death would have 
been add to the number of his atrocious acts. 

"you now see the danger of your project. you must not only forbear to 
visit him, but if you would save him from the crime of embrue his 
hand in your blood, you must leave the country. there is no hope that 
his malady will end but with his life, and no precaution will ensure 
your safety, but that of place the ocean between you. 

"i confess i came over with an intention to reside among you, but 
these disaster have change my views. your own safety and my happiness 
require that you should accompany me in my return, and i entreat you to 
give your cheerful concurrence to this measure." 

after these representations from my uncle, it was impossible to retain 
my purpose. i readily consent to seclude myself from wieland's 
presence. i likewise acquiesce in the proposal to go to europe; not 
that i ever expect to arrive there, but because, since my principles 
forbad me to assail my own life, change had some tendency to make 
supportable the few days which disease should spare to me. 

what a tale had thus been unfolded! i was hunt to death, not by 
one whom my misconduct had exasperated, who was conscious of illicit 
motives, and who sought his end by circumvent and surprize; but by 
one who deem himself commission for this act by heaven; who 
regard this career of horror as the last refinement of virtue; whose 
implacable was proportion to the reverence and love which he felt 
for me, and who was inaccessible to the fear of punishment and ignominy! 

in vain should i endeavour to stay his hand by urge the claim of 
a sister or friend: these were his only reason for pursue my 
destruction. had i been a stranger to his blood; had i been the most 
worthless of human kind; my safety had not been endangered. 

surely, said i, my fate is without example. the phrenzy which is charged 
upon my brother, must belong to myself. my foe is manacle and guarded; 
but i derive no security from these restraints. i live not in a 
community of savages; yet, whether i sit or walk, go into crouds, 
or hide myself in solitude, my life is marked for a prey to inhuman 
violence; i am in perpetual danger of perishing; of perishing under the 
grasp of a brother! 

i recollect the omen of this destiny; i remember the gulf to which 
my brother's invitation had conduct me; i remember that, when on the 
brink of danger, the author of my peril was depict by my fear in 
his form: thus realized, were the creature of prophetic sleep, and of 
wakeful terror! 

these image were unavoidable connected with that of carwin. in 
this paroxysm of distress, my attention fasten on him as the grand 
deceiver; the author of this black conspiracy; the intelligence that 
govern in this storm. 

some relief is afford in the midst of suffering, when its author is 
discover or imagined; and an object found on which we may pour out 
our indignation and our vengeance. i ran over the event that had taken 
place since the origin of our intercourse with him, and reflect on the 
tenor of that description which was received from ludloe. mixed up with 
notions of supernatural agency, were the vehement suspicion which i 
entertained, that carwin was the enemy whose machination had destroy 
us. 

i thirst for knowledge and for vengeance. i regard my hasty 
departure with reluctance, since it would remove me from the means by 
which this knowledge might be obtained, and this vengeance gratified. 
this departure was to take place in two days. at the end of two days 
i was to bid an eternal adieu to my native country. should i not pay a 
parting visit to the scene of these disasters? should i not bedew with 
my tear the grave of my sister and her children? should i not explore 
their desolate habitation, and gather from the sight of its wall and 
furniture food for my eternal melancholy? 

this suggestion was succeed by a secret shuddering. some disastrous 
influence appear to overhang the scene. how many memorial should i 
meet with serving to recall the image of those i had lost! 

i was tempt to relinquish my design, when it occur to me that i 
had left among my papers a journal of transactions in shorthand. i 
was employ in this manuscript on that night when pleyel's incautious 
curiosity tempt him to look over my shoulder. i was then recording my 
adventure in the recess, an imperfect sight of which led him into such 
fatal errors. 

i had regulate the disposition of all my property. this manuscript, 
however, which contained the most secret transactions of my life, i was 
desirous of destroying. for this end i must return to my house, and this 
i immediately determined to do. 

i was not willing to expose myself to opposition from my friends, 
by mention my design; i therefore bespoke the use of mr. hallet's 
chaise, under pretence of enjoy an airing, as the day was remarkably 
bright. 

this request was gladly comply with, and i direct the servant to 
conduct me to mettingen. i dismiss him at the gate, intend to use, 
in returning, a carriage belong to my brother. 



chapter xxii 


the inhabitant of the hut received me with a mixture of joy and 
surprize. their homely welcome, and their artless sympathy, were 
grateful to my feelings. in the midst of their inquiries, as to my 
health, they avoid all allusion to the source of my malady. they were 
honest creatures, and i love them well. i participate in the tear 
which they shed when i mention to them my speedy departure for europe, 
and promise to acquaint them with my welfare during my long absence. 

they express great surprize when i informed them of my intention to 
visit my cottage. alarm and foreboding overspread their features, and 
they attempt to dissuade me from visiting an house which they firm 
believe to be haunt by a thousand ghastly apparitions. 

these apprehensions, however, had no power over my conduct. i took an 
irregular path which led me to my own house. all was vacant and forlorn. 
a small enclosure, near which the path led, was the burying-ground 
belong to the family. this i was oblige to pass. once i had intended 
to enter it, and ponder on the emblem and inscription which my uncle 
had cause to be made on the tomb of catharine and her children; but 
now my heart falter as i approached, and i hasten forward, that 
distance might conceal it from my view. 

when i approach the recess, my heart again sunk. i avert my eyes, 
and left it behind me as quick as possible. silence reign through 
my habitation, and a dark which closed door and shutter produced. 
every object was connected with mine or my brother's history. i pass 
the entry, mount the stair, and unlock the door of my chamber. 
it was with difficulty that i curb my fancy and smother my fears. 
slight movements and casual sound were transform into beckon 
shadow and calling shapes. 

i proceed to the closet. i open and look round it with 
fearfulness. all things were in their accustomed order. i sought and 
found the manuscript where i was use to deposit it. this being secured, 
there was nothing to detain me; yet i stood and contemplate awhile the 
furniture and wall of my chamber. i remember how long this apartment 
had been a sweet and tranquil asylum; i compare its former state with 
its present dreariness, and reflect that i now beheld it for the last 
time. 

here it was that the incomprehensible behaviour of carwin was witnessed: 
this the stage on which that enemy of man shew himself for a moment 
unmasked. here the menace of murder were waft to my ear; and here 
these menace were executed. 

these thought had a tendency to take from me my self-command. my feeble 
limb refuse to support me, and i sunk upon a chair. incoherent and 
half-articulate exclamation escape my lips. the name of carwin was 
uttered, and eternal woes, woe like that which his malice had entail 
upon us, were heap upon him. i invoke all-seeing heaven to drag to 
light and to punish this betrayer, and accused its providence for have 
thus long delay the retribution that was due to so enormous a guilt. 

i have said that the window shutter were closed. a feeble light, 
however, found entrance through the crevices. a small window illuminate 
the closet, and the door being closed, a dim ray stream through 
the key-hole. a kind of twilight was thus created, sufficient for the 
purpose of vision; but, at the same time, involve all minute object 
in obscurity. 

this dark suit the colour of my thoughts. i sicken at the 
remembrance of the past. the prospect of the future excited my loathing. 
i mutter in a low voice, why should i live longer? why should i drag a 
miserable being? all, for whom i ought to live, have perished. am i not 
myself hunt to death? 

at that moment, my despair sudden became vigorous. my nerves were no 
long unstrung. my powers, that had long been deadened, were revived. 
my bosom swell with a sudden energy, and the conviction dart through 
my mind, that to end my torment was, at once, practicable and wise. 

i knew how to find way to the recess of life. i could use a lancet 
with some skill, and could distinguish between vein and artery. by 
piercing deep into the latter, i should shun the evil which the future 
had in store for me, and take refuge from my woe in quiet death. 

i start on my feet, for my feeble was gone, and haste to the 
closet. a lancet and other small instrument were preserve in a 
case which i had deposit here. inattentive as i was to foreign 
considerations, my ear were still open to any sound of mysterious 
import that should occur. i thought i heard a step in the entry. my 
purpose was suspended, and i cast an eager glance at my chamber door, 
which was open. no one appeared, unless the shadow which i discern 
upon the floor, was the outline of a man. if it were, i was authorize 
to suspect that some one was post close to the entrance, who possibly 
had overheard my exclamations. 

my teeth chattered, and a wild confusion took place of my momentary 
calm. thus it was when a terrific visage had disclose itself on a 
former night. thus it was when the evil destiny of wieland assume the 
lineament of something human. what horrid apparition was prepare to 
blast my sight? 

still i listen and gazed. not long, for the shadow moved; a foot, 
unshape and huge, was thrust forward; a form advanced from its 
concealment, and stalk into the room. it was carwin! while i had 
breath i shrieked. while i had power over my muscles, i motion with 
my hand that he should vanish. my exertion could not last long; i sunk 
into a fit. 

o that this grateful oblivion had last for ever! too quick i 
recover my senses. the power of distinct vision was no soon restore 
to me, than this hateful form again present itself, and i once more 
relapsed. 

a second time, untoward nature recall me from the sleep of death. 
i found myself stretch upon the bed. when i had power to look up, i 
remember only that i had cause to fear. my distempered fancy fashion 
to itself no distinguishable image. i threw a languid glance round me; 
once more my eyes light upon carwin. 

he was seat on the floor, his back rest against the wall, his knee 
were drawn up, and his face was bury in his hands. that his station 
was at some distance, that his attitude was not menacing, that his 
ominous visage was concealed, may account for my now escape a shock, 
violent as those which were past. i withdrew my eyes, but was not again 
desert by my senses. 

on perceive that i had recover my sensibility, he lift his head. 
this motion attract my attention. his countenance was mild, but sorrow 
and astonishment sat upon his features. i avert my eyes and feeble 
exclaimed--"o! fly--fly far and for ever!--i cannot behold you and 
live!" 

he did not rise upon his feet, but clasp his hands, and said in a 
tone of deprecation--"i will fly. i am become a fiend, the sight of whom 
destroys. yet tell me my offence! you have link curse with my name; 
you ascribe to me a malice monstrous and infernal. i look around; all 
is lonely and desert! this house and your brother's are solitary and 
dismantled! you die away at the sight of me! my fear whisper that some 
deed of horror has been perpetrated; that i am the undesign cause." 

what language was this? had he not avowed himself a ravisher? had not 
this chamber witness his atrocious purposes? i besought him with new 
vehemence to go. 

he lift his eyes--"great heaven! what have i done? i think i know 
the extent of my offences. i have acted, but my action have possibly 
effect more than i designed. this fear has brought me back from my 
retreat. i come to repair the evil of which my rash was the cause, 
and to prevent more evil. i come to confess my errors." 

"wretch!" i cry when my suffocate emotion would permit me to speak, 
"the ghost of my sister and her children, do they not rise to accuse 
thee? who was it that blasted the intellect of wieland? who was it 
that urge him to fury, and guide him to murder? who, but thou and the 
devil, with whom thou art confederated?" 

at these words a new spirit pervade his countenance. his eyes once more 
appeal to heaven. "if i have memory, if i have being, i am innocent. i 
intended no ill; but my folly, indirect and remotely, may have cause 
it; but what words are these! your brother lunatic! his children dead!" 

what should i infer from this deportment? was the ignorance which these 
words imply real or pretended?--yet how could i imagine a mere human 
agency in these events? but if the influence was preternatural or 
maniacal in my brother's case, they must be equally so in my own. then 
i remember that the voice exerted, was to save me from carwin's 
attempts. these idea tend to abate my abhorrence of this man, and to 
detect the absurd of my accusations. 

"alas!" said i, "i have no one to accuse. leave me to my fate. fly from 
a scene stain with cruelty; devoted to despair." 

carwin stood for a time muse and mournful. at length he said, "what 
has happened? i came to expiate my crimes: let me know them in their 
full extent. i have horrible forebodings! what has happened?" 

i was silent; but recollect the intimate given by this man when he 
was detect in my closet, which imply some knowledge of that power 
which interfere in my favor, i eager inquired, "what was that voice 
which call upon me to hold when i attempt to open the closet? what 
face was that which i saw at the bottom of the stairs? answer me truly." 

"i came to confess the truth. your allusion are horrible and strange. 
perhaps i have but faint conception of the evil which my infatuation 
has produced; but what remains i will perform. it was my voice that you 
heard! it was my face that you saw!" 

for a moment i doubt whether my remembrance of event were not 
confused. how could he be at once station at my shoulder and shut up 
in my closet? how could he stand near me and yet be invisible? but if 
carwin's were the thrill voice and the fiery visage which i had heard 
and seen, then was he the prompter of my brother, and the author of 
these dismal outrages. 

once more i avert my eyes and struggle for speech. "begone! thou man 
of mischief! remorseless and implacable miscreant! begone!" 

"i will obey," said he in a disconsolate voice; "yet, wretch as i am, 
am i unworthy to repair the evil that i have committed? i came as a 
repentant criminal. it is you whom i have injured, and at your bar am 
i willing to appear, and confess and expiate my crimes. i have deceive 
you: i have sport with your terrors: i have plot to destroy your 
reputation. i come now to remove your errors; to set you beyond the 
reach of similar fears; to rebuild your fame as far as i am able. 

"this is the amount of my guilt, and this the fruit of my remorse. will 
you not hear me? listen to my confession, and then denounce punishment. 
all i ask is a patient audience." 

"what!" i replied, "was not thine the voice that command my brother to 
imbrue his hand in the blood of his children--to strangle that angel of 
sweet his wife? has he not vow my death, and the death of pleyel, 
at thy bidding? hast thou not made him the butcher of his family; 
change him who was the glory of his species into worse than brute; 
rob him of reason, and consign the rest of his days to fetter and 
stripes?" 

carwin's eyes glared, and his limb were petrify at this intelligence. 
no words were requisite to prove him guiltless of these enormities: at 
the time, however, i was nearly insensible to these exculpatory tokens. 
he walk to the farther end of the room, and have recover some 
degree of composure, he spoke-- 

"i am not this villain; i have slain no one; i have prompt none to 
slay; i have handle a tool of wonderful efficacy without malignant 
intentions, but without caution; ample will be the punishment of my 
temerity, if my conduct has contribute to this evil." he paused.-- 

i likewise was silent. i struggle to command myself so far as to listen 
to the tale which he should tell. observing this, he continued-- 

"you are not apprize of the existence of a power which i possess. i 
know not by what name to call it. [*] it enable me to mimic exactly the 
voice of another, and to modify the sound so that it shall appear to 
come from what quarter, and be utter at what distance i please. 

"i know not that every one possess this power. perhaps, though a 
casual position of my organ in my youth shew me that i possessed 
it, it is an art which may be taught to all. would to god i had die 
unknowing of the secret! it has produce nothing but degrade and 
calamity. 

"for a time the possession of so potent and stupendous an endowment 
elated me with pride. unfortify by principle, subject to poverty, 
stimulate by headlong passions, i made this powerful engine subservient 
to the supply of my wants, and the gratification of my vanity. i shall 
not mention how diligent i cultivated this gift, which seem capable 
of unlimited improvement; nor detail the various occasion on which 
it was successful exert to lead superstition, conquer avarice, or 
excite awe. 

"i left america, which is my native soil, in my youth. i have been 
engaged in various scene of life, in which my peculiar talent has been 
exercise with more or less success. i was finally betray by one who 
call himself my friend, into acts which cannot be justified, though 
they are susceptible of apology. 

"the perfidy of this man compel me to withdraw from europe. i 
return to my native country, uncertain whether silence and obscurity 
would save me from his malice. i reside in the purlieus of the city. i 
put on the garb and assume the manners of a clown. 

"my chief recreation was walking. my principal haunt were the lawn 
and garden of mettingen. in this delightful region the luxuriance 
of nature had been chasten by judicious art, and each successive 
contemplation unfold new enchantments. 

"i was studious of seclusion: i was satiate with the intercourse of 
mankind, and discretion require me to shun their intercourse. for 
these reason i long avoid the observation of your family, and chiefly 
visit these precincts at night. 

"i was never weary of admire the position and ornament of the 
temple. many a night have i pass under its roof, revolving no pleasing 
meditations. when, in my frequent rambles, i perceive this apartment 
was occupied, i gave a different direction to my steps. one evening, 
when a shower had just passed, judge by the silence that no one 
was within, i ascend to this building. glancing careless round, i 
perceive an open letter on the pedestal. to read it was doubtless an 
offence against politeness. of this offence, however, i was guilty. 

"scarcely had i gone half through when i was alarm by the approach 
of your brother. to scramble down the cliff on the opposite side 
was impracticable. i was unprepared to meet a stranger. besides 
the aukward attend such an interview in these circumstances, 
concealment was necessary to my safety. a thousand times had i vow 
never again to employ the dangerous talent which i possessed; but such 
was the force of habit and the influence of present convenience, that i 
use this method of arrest his progress and leading him back to the 
house, with his errand, whatever it was, unperformed. i had often caught 
parts, from my station below, of your conversation in this place, and 
was well acquaint with the voice of your sister. 

"some week after this i was again quiet seat in this recess. the 
late of the hour secure me, as i thought, from all interruption. 
in this, however, i was mistaken, for wieland and pleyel, as i judge by 
their voices, earnest in dispute, ascend the hill. 

"i was not sensible that any inconvenience could possibly have flow 
from my former exertion; yet it was follow with compunction, because 
it was a deviation from a path which i had assign to myself. now 
my aversion to this means of escape was enforce by an unauthorized 
curiosity, and by the knowledge of a bushy hollow on the edge of the 
hill, where i should be safe from discovery. into this hollow i thrust 
myself. 

"the propriety of removal to europe was the question eager discussed. 
pleyel intimate that his anxiety to go was augment by the silence 
of theresa de stolberg. the temptation to interfere in this dispute was 
irresistible. in vain i contend with inveterate habits. i disguise to 
myself the impropriety of my conduct, by recollect the benefit which 
it might produce. pleyel's proposal was unwise, yet it was enforce 
with plausible argument and indefatigable zeal. your brother might be 
puzzle and wearied, but could not be convinced. i conceive that 
to terminate the controversy in favor of the latter was confer a 
benefit on all parties. for this end i profit by an opening in the 
conversation, and assured them of catharine's irreconcilable aversion to 
the scheme, and of the death of the saxon baroness. the latter event 
was merely a conjecture, but render extremely probable by pleyel's 
representations. my purpose, you need not be told, was effected. 

"my passion for mystery, and a species of imposture, which i deem 
harmless, was thus awaken afresh. this second lapse into error made my 
recovery more difficult. i cannot convey to you an adequate idea of 
the kind of gratification which i derive from these exploits; yet i 
meditate nothing. my view were bound to the passing moment, and 
commonly suggest by the momentary exigence. 

"i must not conceal any thing. your principles teach you to abhor a 
voluptuous temper; but, with whatever reluctance, i acknowledge this 
temper to be mine. you imagine your servant judith to be innocent as 
well as beautiful; but you took her from a family where hypocrisy, as 
well as licentiousness, was wrought into a system. my attention was 
captivate by her charms, and her principles were easily seen to be 
flexible. 

"deem me not capable of the iniquity of seduction. your servant is not 
destitute of feminine and virtuous qualities; but she was taught that 
the best use of her charm consist in the sale of them. my nocturnal 
visit to mettingen were now prompt by a double view, and my 
correspondence with your servant gave me, at all times, access to your 
house. 

"the second night after our interview, so brief and so little foreseen 
by either of us, some daemon of mischief seize me. according to my 
companion's report, your perfection were little less than divine. her 
uncouth but copious narrative convert you into an object of worship. 
she chiefly dwelt upon your courage, because she herself was deficient 
in that quality. you held apparition and goblin in contempt. you took 
no precaution against robbers. you were just as tranquil and secure in 
this lonely dwelling, as if you were in the midst of a crowd. hence a 
vague project occur to me, to put this courage to the test. a woman 
capable of recollection in danger, of ward off groundless panics, 
of discerning the true mode of proceeding, and profit by her best 
resources, is a prodigy. i was desirous of ascertain whether you were 
such an one. 

"my expedient was obvious and simple: i was to counterfeit a murderous 
dialogue; but this was to be so conduct that another, and not 
yourself, should appear to be the object. i was not aware of the 
possibility that you should appropriate these menace to yourself. had 
you been still and listened, you would have heard the struggle and 
prayer of the victim, who would likewise have appear to be shut up in 
the closet, and whose voice would have been judith's. this scene would 
have been an appeal to your compassion; and the proof of cowardice 
or courage which i expect from you, would have been your remain 
inactive in your bed, or your enter the closet with a view to assist 
the sufferer. some instance which judith related of your fearless 
and promptitude made me adopt the latter supposition with some degree of 
confidence. 

"by the girl's direction i found a ladder, and mount to your closet 
window. this is scarcely large enough to admit the head, but it answer 
my purpose too well. 

"i cannot express my confusion and surprize at your abrupt and 
precipitate flight. i hasty remove the ladder; and, after some pause, 
curiosity and doubt of your safety induce me to follow you. i found 
you stretch on the turf before your brother's door, without sense or 
motion. i felt the deepest regret at this unlooked-for consequence of 
my scheme. i knew not what to do to procure you relief. the idea of 
awakening the family naturally present itself. this emergency was 
critical, and there was no time to deliberate. it was a sudden thought 
that occurred. i put my lip to the key-hole, and sound an alarm which 
effectually rouse the sleepers. my organ were naturally forcible, and 
had been improve by long and assiduous exercise. 

"long and bitter did i repent of my scheme. i was somewhat console by 
reflect that my purpose had not been evil, and renew my fruitless 
vow never to attempt such dangerous experiments. for some time i 
adhered, with laudable forbearance, to this resolution. 

"my life has been a life of hardship and exposure. in the summer i 
prefer to make my bed of the smooth turf, or, at most, the shelter of a 
summer-house suffices. in all my ramble i never found a spot in which 
so many picturesque beauty and rural delight were assemble as at 
mettingen. no corner of your little domain unite fragrance and secrecy 
in so perfect a degree as the recess in the bank. the odour of its 
leaves, the cool of its shade, and the music of its water-fall, 
had early attract my attention. here my sad was convert into 
peaceful melancholy--here my slumber were sound, and my pleasure 
enhanced. 

"as most free from interruption, i chose this as the scene of my 
midnight interview with judith. one evening, as the sun declined, i was 
seat here, when i was alarm by your approach. it was with difficulty 
that i effect my escape unnoticed by you. 

"at the customary hour, i return to your habitation, and was made 
acquaint by judith, with your unusual absence. i half suspect the 
true cause, and felt uneasy at the danger there was that i should be 
deprived of my retreat; or, at least, interrupt in the possession 
of it. the girl, likewise, informed me, that among your other 
singularities, it was not uncommon for you to leave your bed, and walk 
forth for the sake of night-airs and starlight contemplations. 

"i desire to prevent this inconvenience. i found you easily sway 
by fear. i was influenced, in my choice of means, by the facility and 
certainty of that to which i had been accustomed. all that i forsaw was, 
that, in future, this spot would be cautious shun by you. 

"i enter the recess with the utmost caution, and discovered, by your 
breathings, in what condition you were. the unexpected interpretation 
which you placed upon my former proceeding, suggest my conduct on 
the present occasion. the mode in which heaven is said by the poet, to 
interfere for the prevention of crimes, [**] was somewhat analogous to my 
province, and never fail to occur to me at season like this. it 
was requisite to break your slumbers, and for this end i utter the 
powerful monosyllable, "hold! hold!" my purpose was not prescribed by 
duty, yet surely it was far from being atrocious and inexpiable. to 
effect it, i utter what was false, but it was well suit to my 
purpose. nothing less was intended than to injure you. nay, the evil 
result from my former act, was partly remove by assure you that in 
all place but this you were safe. 


* biloquium, or ventrilocution. sound is varied according to 
the variation of direction and distance. the art of the 
ventriloquist consist in modify his voice according to 
all these variations, without change his place. see the 
work of the abbe de la chappelle, in which are accurate 
record the performance of one of these artists, and some 
ingenious, though unsatisfactory speculation are given on 
the means by which the effects are produced. this power is, 
perhaps, given by nature, but is doubtless improvable, if 
not acquirable, by art. it may, possibly, consist in an 
unusual flexible or exertion of the bottom of the tongue 
and the uvula. that speech is produce by these alone must 
be granted, since anatomist mention two instance of 
person speak without a tongue. in one case, the organ 
was originally wanting, but its place was supply by a 
small tubercle, and the uvula was perfect. in the other, the 
tongue was destroy by disease, but probably a small part 
of it remained. 

this power is difficult to explain, but the fact is 
undeniable. experience shew that the human voice can 
imitate the voice of all men and of all inferior animals. 
the sound of musical instruments, and even noise from the 
contact of inanimate substances, have been accurate 
imitated. the mimicry of animal is notorious; and dr. 
burney (musical travels) mention one who imitate a flute 
and violin, so as to deceive even his ears. 


**--peeps through the blanket of the dark, and cries hold! 
hold!--shakespeare. 



chapter xxiii 


"my morals will appear to you far from rigid, yet my conduct will fall 
short of your suspicions. i am now to confess action less excusable, 
and yet surely they will not entitle me to the name of a desperate or 
sordid criminal. 

"your house was rendered, by your frequent and long absences, easily 
accessible to my curiosity. my meeting with pleyel was the prelude to 
direct intercourse with you. i had seen much of the world, but your 
character exhibit a specimen of human powers that was wholly new to 
me. my intercourse with your servant furnish me with curious detail 
of your domestic management. i was of a different sex: i was not your 
husband; i was not even your friend; yet my knowledge of you was of that 
kind, which conjugal intimacy can give, and, in some respects, more 
accurate. the observation of your domestic was guide by me. 

"you will not be surprize that i should sometimes profit by your 
absence, and adventure to examine with my own eyes, the interior of your 
chamber. upright and sincere, you use no watchfulness, and practised 
no precautions. i scrutinize every thing, and pry every where. your 
closet was usually locked, but it was once my fortune to find the key on 
a bureau. i open and found new scope for my curiosity in your books. 
one of these was manuscript, and written in character which essentially 
agree with a short-hand system which i had learned from a jesuit 
missionary. 

"i cannot justify my conduct, yet my only crime was curiosity. i 
peruse this volume with eagerness. the intellect which it unveiled, was 
bright than my limited and feeble organ could bear. i was naturally 
inquisitive as to your idea respecting my deportment, and the mystery 
that had lately occurred. 

"you know what you have written. you know that in this volume the key to 
your inmost soul was contained. if i had been a profound and malignant 
impostor, what plenteous material were thus furnish me of stratagem 
and plots! 

"the coincidence of your dream in the summer-house with my exclamation, 
was truly wonderful. the voice which warn you to forbear was, 
doubtless, mine; but mixed by a common process of the fancy, with the 
train of visionary incidents. 

"i saw in a strong light than ever, the dangerous of that 
instrument which i employed, and renew my resolution to abstain from 
the use of it in future; but i was destined perpetual to violate my 
resolutions. by some perverse fate, i was led into circumstances in 
which the exertion of my powers was the sole or the best means of 
escape. 

"on that memorable night on which our last interview took place, i 
came as usual to mettingen. i was apprize of your engagement at your 
brother's, from which you did not expect to return till late. some 
incident suggest the design of visiting your chamber. among your books 
which i had not examined, might be something tend to illustrate 
your character, or the history of your family. some intimate had been 
drop by you in discourse, respecting a performance of your father, in 
which some important transaction in his life was recorded. 

"i was desirous of seeing this book; and such was my habitual attachment 
to mystery, that i prefer the clandestine peruse of it. such 
were the motive that induce me to make this attempt. judith had 
disappeared, and finding the house unoccupied, i supply myself with a 
light, and proceed to your chamber. 

"i found it easy, on experiment, to lock and unlock your closet door 
without the aid of a key. i shut myself in this recess, and was busy 
explore your shelves, when i heard some one enter the room below. i 
was at a loss who it could be, whether you or your servant. doubtful, 
however, as i was, i conceive it prudent to extinguish the light. 
scarcely was this done, when some one enter the chamber. the footstep 
were easily distinguished to be yours. 

"my situation was now full of danger and perplexity. for some time, i 
cherish the hope that you would leave the room so long as to afford 
me an opportunity of escaping. as the hour passed, this hope gradual 
desert me. it was plain that you had retired for the night. 

"i knew not how soon you might find occasion to enter the closet. i was 
alive to all the horrors of detection, and ruminate without ceasing, on 
the behaviour which it would be proper, in case of detection, to adopt. 
i was unable to discover any consistent method of account for my 
being thus immured. 

"it occur to me that i might withdraw you from your chamber for a few 
minutes, by counterfeit a voice from without. some message from your 
brother might be delivered, require your presence at his house. i was 
deter from this scheme by reflect on the resolution i had formed, 
and on the possible evil that might result from it. besides, it was 
not improbable that you would speedy retire to bed, and then, by the 
exercise of sufficient caution, i might hope to escape unobserved. 

"meanwhile i listen with the deepest anxiety to every motion from 
without. i discover nothing which betoken preparation for 
sleep. instead of this i heard deep-drawn sighs, and occasional an 
half-expressed and mournful ejaculation. hence i infer that you were 
unhappy. the true state of your mind with regard to pleyel your own pen 
had disclosed; but i supposed you to be frame of such materials, that, 
though a momentary sad might affect you, you were impregnable to any 
permanent and heartfelt grief. inquietude for my own safety was, for a 
moment, suspend by sympathy with your distress. 

"to the former consideration i was quick recall by a motion of yours 
which indicate i knew not what. i foster the persuasion that you 
would now retire to bed; but presently you approach the closet, and 
detection seem to be inevitable. you put your hand upon the lock. i 
had form no plan to extricate myself from the dilemma in which the 
opening of the door would involve me. i felt an irreconcilable aversion 
to detection. thus situated, i involuntary seize the door with a 
resolution to resist your effort to open it. 

"suddenly you recede from the door. this deportment was inexplicable, 
but the relief it afford me was quick gone. you returned, and i once 
more was thrown into perplexity. the expedient that suggest itself was 
precipitate and inartificial. i exert my organ and call upon you to 
hold. 

"that you should persist in spite of this admonition, was a subject of 
astonishment. i again resist your efforts; for the first expedient 
have failed, i knew not what other to resort to. in this state, how 
was my astonishment increase when i heard your exclamations! 

"it was now plain that you knew me to be within. further resistance was 
unavailing and useless. the door opened, and i shrunk backward. seldom 
have i felt deep mortification, and more painful perplexity. i did 
not consider that the truth would be less injurious than any lie which i 
could hasty frame. conscious as i was of a certain degree of guilt, 
i conceive that you would form the most odious suspicions. the truth 
would be imperfect, unless i were likewise to explain the mysterious 
admonition which had been given; but that explanation was of too great 
moment, and involved too extensive consequence to make me sudden 
resolve to give it. i was aware that this discovery would associate 
itself in your mind, with the dialogue formerly heard in this closet. 
thence would your suspicion be aggravated, and to escape from these 
suspicion would be impossible. but the mere truth would be sufficient 
opprobrious, and deprive me for ever of your good opinion. 

"thus was i render desperate, and my mind rapid pass to the 
contemplation of the use that might be made of previous events. some 
good genius would appear to you to have interpose to save you from 
injury intended by me. why, i said, since i must sink in her opinion, 
should i not cherish this belief? why not personate an enemy, and 
pretend that celestial interference has frustrate my schemes? i must 
fly, but let me leave wonder and fear behind me. elucidate of the 
mystery will always be practicable. i shall do no injury, but merely 
talk of evil that was designed, but is now past. 

"thus i extenuate my conduct to myself, but i scarcely expect that 
this will be to you a sufficient explicate of the scene that followed. 
those habit which i have imbibed, the rooted passion which possess me 
for scatter around me amaze and fear, you enjoy no opportunity 
of knowing. that a man should wanton impute to himself the most 
flagitious designs, will hardly be credited, even though you reflect 
that my reputation was already, by my own folly, irretrievable ruined; 
and that it was always in my power to communicate the truth, and rectify 
the mistake. 

"i left you to ponder on this scene. my mind was full of rapid 
and incongruous ideas. compunction, self-upbraiding, hopelesness, 
satisfaction at the view of those effects likely to flow from my new 
scheme, misgiving as to the beneficial result of this scheme took 
possession of my mind, and seem to struggle for the mastery. 

"i had gone too far to recede. i had paint myself to you as an 
assassin and ravisher, withheld from guilt only by a voice from heaven. 
i had thus revert into the path of error, and now, have gone thus 
far, my progress seem to be irrevocable. i said to myself, i must 
leave these precincts for ever. my acts have blasted my fame in the eyes 
of the wielands. for the sake of create a mysterious dread, i have 
made myself a villain. i may complete this mysterious plan by some new 
imposture, but i cannot aggravate my supposed guilt. 

"my resolution was formed, and i was swift ruminate on the means for 
execute it, when pleyel appear in sight. this incident decided my 
conduct. it was plain that pleyel was a devoted lover, but he was, at 
the same time, a man of cold resolve and exquisite sagacity. to deceive 
him would be the sweetest triumph i had ever enjoyed. the deception 
would be momentary, but it would likewise be complete. that his delusion 
would so soon be rectified, was a recommendation to my scheme, for i 
esteem him too much to desire to entail upon him lasting agonies. 

"i had no time to reflect further, for he proceeded, with a quick 
step, towards the house. i was hurried onward involuntary and by a 
mechanical impulse. i follow him as he pass the recess in the bank, 
and shrowd myself in that spot, i counterfeit sound which i knew 
would arrest his steps. 

"he stopped, turned, listened, approached, and overheard a dialogue 
whose purpose was to vanquish his belief in a point where his belief 
was most difficult to vanquish. i exert all my powers to imitate your 
voice, your general sentiments, and your language. being master, 
by means of your journal, of your personal history and most secret 
thoughts, my effort were the more successful. when i review the tenor 
of this dialogue, i cannot believe but that pleyel was deluded. when i 
think of your character, and of the inference which this dialogue was 
intended to suggest, it seem incredible that this delusion should be 
produced. 

"i spare not myself. i call myself murderer, thief, guilty of 
innumerable perjury and misdeeds: that you had debase yourself to the 
level of such an one, no evidence, methought, would suffice to convince 
him who knew you so thorough as pleyel; and yet the imposture 
amount to proof which the most jealous scrutiny would find to be 
unexceptionable. 

"he left his station precipitate and resume his way to the house. i 
saw that the detection of his error would be instantaneous, since, not 
have gone to bed, an immediate interview would take place between 
you. at first this circumstance was considered with regret; but as time 
open my eyes to the possible consequence of this scene, i regard it 
with pleasure. 

"in a short time the infatuation which had led me thus far began to 
subside. the remembrance of former reasoning and transactions was 
renewed. how often i had repent this kind of exertion; how many evil 
were produce by it which i had not foreseen; what occasion for the 
bitterest remorse it had administered, now pass through my mind. the 
black catalogue of stratagem was now increased. i had inspired you with 
the most vehement terrors: i had fill your mind with faith in shadow 
and confidence in dreams: i had deprave the imagination of pleyel: 
i had exhibit you to his understanding as devoted to brutal 
gratification and consummate in hypocrisy. the evidence which 
accompany this delusion would be irresistible to one whose passion 
had pervert his judgment, whose jealousy with regard to me had already 
been excited, and who, therefore, would not fail to overrate the force 
of this evidence. what fatal act of despair or of vengeance might not 
this error produce? 

"with regard to myself, i had act with a phrenzy that surpass 
belief. i had war against my peace and my fame: i had banish myself 
from the fellowship of vigorous and pure minds: i was self-expelled 
from a scene which the munificence of nature had adorn with unrivalled 
beauties, and from haunt in which all the muse and humanities had 
taken refuge. 

"i was thus torn by conflict fear and tumultuous regrets. the night 
pass away in this state of confusion; and next morning in the gazette 
left at my obscure lodging, i read a description and an offer of reward 
for the apprehension of my person. i was said to have escape from 
an ireland prison, in which i was confine as an offender convict of 
enormous and complicated crimes. 

"this was the work of an enemy, who, by falsehood and stratagem, had 
procure my condemnation. i was, indeed, a prisoner, but escaped, by the 
exertion of my powers, the fate to which i was doomed, but which i did 
not deserve. i had hope that the malice of my foe was exhausted; but 
i now perceive that my precaution had been wise, for that the 
intervention of an ocean was insufficient for my security. 

"let me not dwell on the sensation which this discovery produced. i 
need not tell by what steps i was induce to seek an interview with 
you, for the purpose of disclose the truth, and repairing, as far as 
possible, the effects of my misconduct. it was unavoidable that this 
gazette would fall into your hands, and that it would tend to confirm 
every erroneous impression. 

"having gain this interview, i purpose to seek some retreat in the 
wilderness, inaccessible to your inquiry and to the malice of my foe, 
where i might henceforth employ myself in compose a faithful narrative 
of my actions. i design it as my vindication from the aspersion that 
had rest on my character, and as a lesson to mankind on the evil of 
credulous on the one hand, and of imposture on the other. 

"i wrote you a billet, which was left at the house of your friend, 
and which i knew would, by some means, speedy come to your hands. i 
entertain a faint hope that my invitation would be comply with. i 
knew not what use you would make of the opportunity which this proposal 
afford you of procure the seizure of my person; but this fate i was 
determined to avoid, and i had no doubt but due circumspection, and the 
exercise of the faculty which i possessed, would enable me to avoid it. 

"i lurked, through the day, in the neighbourhood of mettingen: i 
approach your habitation at the appoint hour: i enter it in 
silence, by a trap-door which led into the cellar. this had formerly 
been bolt on the inside, but judith had, at an early period in our 
intercourse, remove this impediment. i ascend to the first floor, but 
met with no one, nor any thing that indicate the presence of an human 
being. 

"i crept soft up stairs, and at length perceive your chamber door 
to be opened, and a light to be within. it was of moment to discover by 
whom this light was accompanied. i was sensible of the inconvenient 
to which my being discover at your chamber door by any one within 
would subject me; i therefore call out in my own voice, but so 
modify that it should appear to ascend from the court below, 'who is 
in the chamber? is it miss wieland?" 

"no answer was return to this summons. i listened, but no motion could 
be heard. after a pause i repeated my call, but no less ineffectually. 

"i now approach near the door, and adventure to look in. a light 
stood on the table, but nothing human was discernible. i enter 
cautiously, but all was solitude and stillness. 

"i knew not what to conclude. if the house were inhabited, my call would 
have been noticed; yet some suspicion insinuate itself that silence was 
studious kept by person who intended to surprize me. my approach had 
been wary, and the silence that ensue my call had likewise precede it; 
a circumstance that tend to dissipate my fears. 

"at length it occur to me that judith might possibly be in her own 
room. i turn my steps thither; but she was not to be found. i pass 
into other rooms, and was soon convinced that the house was total 
deserted. i return to your chamber, agitate by vain surmise and 
opposite conjectures. the appoint hour had passed, and i dismiss the 
hope of an interview. 

"in this state of things i determined to leave a few lines on your 
toilet, and prosecute my journey to the mountains. scarcely had i taken 
the pen when i laid it aside, uncertain in what manner to address you. 
i rose from the table and walk across the floor. a glance thrown upon 
the bed acquaint me with a spectacle to which my conception of horror 
had not yet reached. 

"in the midst of shudder and trepidation, the signal of your presence 
in the court below recall me to myself. the deed was newly done: 
i only was in the house: what had lately happen justified any 
suspicions, however enormous. it was plain that this catastrophe was 
unknown to you: i thought upon the wild commotion which the discovery 
would awaken in your breast: i found the confusion of my own thought 
unconquerable, and perceive that the end for which i sought an 
interview was not now to be accomplished. 

"in this state of things it was likewise expedient to conceal my being 
within. i put out the light and hurried down stairs. to my unspeakable 
surprize, notwithstanding every motive to fear, you light a candle and 
proceed to your chamber. 

"i retired to that room below from which a door leads into the cellar. 
this door conceal me from your view as you passed. i thought upon the 
spectacle which was about to present itself. in an exigence so 
abrupt and so little foreseen, i was again subject to the empire 
of mechanical and habitual impulses. i dread the effects which this 
shocking exhibition, burst on your unprepared senses, might produce. 

"thus actuated, i stept swift to the door, and thrust my head 
forward, once more pronounced the mysterious interdiction. at that 
moment, by some untoward fate, your eyes were cast back, and you saw 
me in the very act of utterance. i flee through the darksome avenue at 
which i entered, cover with the shame of this detection. 

"with diligence, stimulate by a thousand ineffable emotions, i pursue 
my intended journey. i have a brother whose farm is situated in the 
bosom of a fertile desert, near the source of the leheigh, and thither 
i now repaired." 



chapter xxiv 


"deeply did i ruminate on the occurrence that had just passed. nothing 
excited my wonder so much as the means by which you discover my being 
in the closet. this discovery appear to be made at the moment when you 
attempt to open it. how could you have otherwise remain so long in 
the chamber apparently fearless and tranquil? and yet, have made 
this discovery, how could you persist in drag me forth: persist in 
defiance of an interdict so emphatic and solemn? 

"but your sister's death was an event detest and ominous. she had 
been the victim of the most dreadful species of assassination. how, in a 
state like yours, the murderous intention could be generated, was wholly 
inconceivable. 

"i did not relinquish my design of confess to you the part which i 
had sustain in your family, but i was willing to defer it till the 
task which i had set myself was finished. that being done, i resume the 
resolution. the motive to incite me to this continual acquire 
force. the more i revolve the event happening at mettingen, the more 
insupportable and ominous my terror became. my waking hour and my 
sleep were vex by dismal presage and frightful intimations. 

"catharine was dead by violence. surely my malignant stars had not made 
me the cause of her death; yet had i not rash set in motion a machine, 
over whose progress i had no controul, and which experience had shewn me 
was infinite in power? every day might add to the catalogue of horrors 
of which this was the source, and a seasonable disclosure of the truth 
might prevent numberless ills. 

"fraught with this conception, i have turn my steps hither. i find 
your brother's house desolate: the furniture removed, and the wall 
stain with damps. your own is in the same situation. your chamber is 
dismantle and dark, and you exhibit an image of incurable grief, and of 
rapid decay. 

"i have utter the truth. this is the extent of my offences. you tell 
me an horrid tale of wieland being led to the destruction of his wife 
and children, by some mysterious agent. you charge me with the guilt 
of this agency; but i repeat that the amount of my guilt has been truly 
stated. the perpetrate of catharine's death was unknown to me till now; 
nay, it is still unknown to me." 

at that moment, the close of a door in the kitchen was distinct 
heard by us. carwin start and paused. "there is some one coming. i 
must not be found here by my enemies, and need not, since my purpose is 
answered." 

i had drunk in, with the most vehement attention, every word that he 
had uttered. i had no breath to interrupt his tale by interrogate 
or comments. the power that he spoke of was hitherto unknown to me: its 
existence was incredible; it was susceptible of no direct proof. 

he own that his were the voice and face which i heard and saw. he 
attempt to give an human explanation of these phantasms; but it is 
enough that he own himself to be the agent; his tale is a lie, and his 
nature devilish. as he deceive me, he likewise deceive my brother, and 
now do i behold the author of all our calamities! 

such were my thought when his pause allow me to think. i should have 
bad him begone if the silence had not been interrupted; but now i fear 
no more for myself; and the milky of my nature was curdle into 
hatred and rancour. some one was near, and this enemy of god and 
man might possibly be brought to justice. i reflect not that the 
preternatural power which he had hitherto exerted, would avail to rescue 
him from any toils in which his feet might be entangled. meanwhile, 
looks, and not words of menace and abhorrence, were all that i could 
bestow. 

he did not depart. he seem dubious, whether, by passing out of the 
house, or by remain somewhat long where he was, he should most 
endanger his safety. his confusion increase when steps of one barefoot 
were heard upon the stairs. he threw anxious glance sometimes at the 
closet, sometimes at the window, and sometimes at the chamber door, yet 
he was detain by some inexplicable fascination. he stood as if rooted 
to the spot. 

as to me, my soul was burst with detest and revenge. i had 
no room for surmise and fear respecting him that approached. it was 
doubtless a human being, and would befriend me so far as to aid me in 
arrest this offender. 

the stranger quick enter the room. my eyes and the eyes of carwin 
were, at the same moment, dart upon him. a second glance was not 
need to inform us who he was. his locks were tangled, and fell 
confused over his forehead and ears. his shirt was of coarse stuff, 
and open at the neck and breast. his coat was once of bright and fine 
texture, but now torn and tarnish with dust. his feet, his legs, and 
his arms were bare. his features were the seat of a wild and tranquil 
solemnity, but his eyes bespoke inquietude and curiosity. 

he advanced with firm step, and look as in search of some one. he saw 
me and stopped. he bent his sight on the floor, and clench his hands, 
appear sudden absorb in meditation. such were the figure and 
deportment of wieland! such, in his fallen state, were the aspect and 
guise of my brother! 

carwin did not fail to recognize the visitant. care for his own safety 
was apparently swallow up in the amaze which this spectacle 
produced. his station was conspicuous, and he could not have escape the 
rove glance of wieland; yet the latter seem total unconscious of 
his presence. 

grief at this scene of ruin and blast was at first the only sentiment 
of which i was conscious. a fearful still ensued. at length wieland, 
lift his hands, which were lock in each other, to his breast, 
exclaimed, "father! i thank thee. this is thy guidance. hither thou hast 
led me, that i might perform thy will: yet let me not err: let me hear 
again thy messenger!" 

he stood for a minute as if listening; but recover from his attitude, 
he continued--"it is not needed. dastard wretch! thus eternal 
questioning the behest of thy maker! weak in resolution! wayward in 
faith!" 

he advanced to me, and, after another pause, resumed: "poor girl! 
a dismal fate has set its mark upon thee. thy life is demand as 
a sacrifice. prepare thee to die. make not my office difficult by 
fruitless opposition. thy prayer might subdue stones; but none but he 
who enjoin my purpose can shake it." 

these words were a sufficient explicate of the scene. the nature of 
his phrenzy, as describe by my uncle, was remembered. i who had sought 
death, was now thrill with horror because it was near. death in 
this form, death from the hand of a brother, was thought upon with 
undescribable repugnance. 

in a state thus verge upon madness, my eye glance upon carwin. his 
astonishment appear to have struck him motionless and dumb. my life 
was in danger, and my brother's hand was about to be embrue in my 
blood. i firm believe that carwin's was the instigation. i could 
rescue me from this abhor fate; i could dissipate this tremendous 
illusion; i could save my brother from the perpetrate of new horrors, 
by point out the devil who seduce him; to hesitate a moment was 
to perish. these thought gave strength to my limbs, and energy to my 
accents: i start on my feet. "o brother! spare me, spare thyself: 
there is thy betrayer. he counterfeit the voice and face of an angel, 
for the purpose of destroy thee and me. he has this moment confessed 
it. he is able to speak where he is not. he is league with hell, but 
will not avow it; yet he confess that the agency was his." 

my brother turn slow his eyes, and fixed them upon carwin. every 
joint in the frame of the latter trembled. his complexion was pale than 
a ghost's. his eye dare not meet that of wieland, but wander with an 
air of distraction from one space to another. 

"man," said my brother, in a voice total unlike that which he had 
use to me, "what art thou? the charge has been made. answer it. 
the visage--the voice--at the bottom of these stairs--at the hour of 
eleven--to whom did they belong? to thee?" 

twice did carwin attempt to speak, but his words die away upon his 
lips. my brother resume in a tone of greater vehemence-- 

"thou falterest; falter is ominous; say yes or no: one word will 
suffice; but beware of falsehood. was it a stratagem of hell to 
overthrow my family? wast thou the agent?" 

i now saw that the wrath which had been prepared for me was to be 
heap upon another. the tale that i heard from him, and his present 
trepidations, were abundant testimony of his guilt. but what if 
wieland should be undeceived! what if he shall find his acts to have 
proceed not from an heavenly prompter, but from human treachery! will 
not his rage mount into whirlwind? will not he tare limb from limb this 
devoted wretch? 

instinctive i recoil from this image, but it gave place to another. 
carwin may be innocent, but the impetuos of his judge may misconstrue 
his answer into a confession of guilt. wieland know not that 
mysterious voice and appearances were likewise witness by me. carwin 
may be ignorant of those which misle my brother. thus may his answer 
unwari betray himself to ruin. 

such might be the consequence of my frantic precipitation, and these, 
it was necessary, if possible, to prevent. i attempt to speak, but 
wieland, turning sudden upon me, command silence, in a tone furious 
and terrible. my lip closed, and my tongue refuse its office. 

"what art thou?" he resumed, address himself to carwin. "answer me; 
whose form--whose voice--was it thy contrivance? answer me." 

the answer was now given, but confused and scarcely articulated. "i 
meant nothing--i intended no ill--if i understand--if i do not mistake 
you--it is too true--i did appear--in the entry--did speak. the 
contrivance was mine, but--" 

these words were no soon uttered, than my brother cease to wear the 
same aspect. his eyes were downcast: he was motionless: his respiration 
became hoarse, like that of a man in the agony of death. carwin seem 
unable to say more. he might have easily escaped, but the thought which 
occupy him related to what was horrid and unintelligible in this 
scene, and not to his own danger. 

presently the faculty of wieland, which, for a time, were chain 
up, were seize with restless and trembling. he broke silence. the 
stoutest heart would have been appall by the tone in which he spoke. 
he address himself to carwin. 

"why art thou here? who detain thee? go and learn better. i will meet 
thee, but it must be at the bar of thy maker. there shall i bear witness 
against thee." 

perceive that carwin did not obey, he continued; "dost thou wish me 
to complete the catalogue by thy death? thy life is a worthless thing. 
tempt me no more. i am but a man, and thy presence may awaken a fury 
which may spurn my controul. begone!" 

carwin, irresolute, strive in vain for utterance, his complexion 
pallid as death, his knee beating one against another, slow obey 
the mandate and withdrew. 



chapter xxv 


a few words more and i lay aside the pen for ever. yet why should i not 
relinquish it now? all that i have said is preparatory to this scene, 
and my fingers, tremulous and cold as my heart, refuse any further 
exertion. this must not be. let my last energy support me in the 
finish of this task. then will i lay down my head in the lap of 
death. hush will be all my murmur in the sleep of the grave. 

every sentiment has perish in my bosom. even friendship is extinct. 
your love for me has prompt me to this task; but i would not have 
comply if it had not been a luxury thus to feast upon my woes. i have 
just calculate upon my remnant of strength. when i lay down the pen 
the taper of life will expire: my existence will terminate with my tale. 

now that i was left alone with wieland, the peril of my situation 
present themselves to my mind. that this paroxysm should terminate in 
havock and rage it was reasonable to predict. the first suggestion of my 
fear had been disprove by my experience. carwin had acknowledge his 
offences, and yet had escaped. the vengeance which i had harbour had 
not been admitted by wieland, and yet the evil which i had endured, 
compare with those inflict on my brother, were as nothing. i thirst 
for his blood, and was torment with an insatiable appetite for his 
destruction; yet my brother was unmoved, and had dismiss him in 
safety. surely thou wast more than man, while i am sunk below the 
beasts. 

did i place a right construction on the conduct of wieland? was the 
error that misle him so easily rectified? were view so vivid and faith 
so strenuous thus liable to fade and to change? was there not reason 
to doubt the accuracy of my perceptions? with image like these was 
my mind thronged, till the deportment of my brother call away my 
attention. 

i saw his lip move and his eyes cast up to heaven. then would he listen 
and look back, as if in expectation of some one's appearance. thrice he 
repeated these gesticulate and this inaudible prayer. each time the 
mist of confusion and doubt seem to grow dark and to settle on his 
understanding. i guess at the meaning of these tokens. the words 
of carwin had shaken his belief, and he was employ in summon the 
messenger who had formerly commune with him, to attest the value of 
those new doubts. in vain the summons was repeated, for his eye met 
nothing but vacancy, and not a sound salute his ear. 

he walk to the bed, gaze with eager at the pillow which had 
sustain the head of the breathless catharine, and then return to 
the place where i sat. i had no power to lift my eyes to his face: i was 
dubious of his purpose: this purpose might aim at my life. 

alas! nothing but subjection to danger, and exposure to temptation, 
can show us what we are. by this test was i now tried, and found to be 
cowardly and rash. men can deliberate untie the thread of life, and of 
this i had deem myself capable; yet now that i stood upon the brink 
of fate, that the knife of the sacrifice was aim at my heart, i 
shudder and betook myself to any means of escape, however monstrous. 

can i bear to think--can i endure to relate the outrage which my heart 
meditated? where were my means of safety? resistance was vain. not even 
the energy of despair could set me on a level with that strength which 
his terrific prompter had bestow upon wieland. terror enable us to 
perform incredible feats; but terror was not then the state of my mind: 
where then were my hope of rescue? 

methinks it is too much. i stand aside, as it were, from myself; i 
estimate my own deservings; a hatred, immortal and inexorable, is my 
due. i listen to my own pleas, and find them empty and false: yes, i 
acknowledge that my guilt surpass that of all mankind: i confess that 
the curse of a world, and the frown of a deity, are inadequate to my 
demerits. is there a thing in the world worthy of infinite abhorrence? 
it is i. what shall i say! i was menaced, as i thought, with death, and, 
to elude this evil, my hand was ready to inflict death upon the menacer. 
in visiting my house, i had made provision against the machination of 
carwin. in a fold of my dress an open penknife was concealed. this i 
now seize and drew forth. it lurk out of view: but i now see that my 
state of mind would have render the deed inevitable if my brother 
had lift his hand. this instrument of my preservation would have been 
plunge into his heart. 

o, insupportable remembrance! hide thee from my view for a time; hide 
it from me that my heart was black enough to meditate the stabbing of a 
brother! a brother thus supreme in misery; thus towering in virtue! 

he was probably unconscious of my design, but presently drew back. 
this interval was sufficient to restore me to myself. the madness, the 
iniquity of that act which i had purpose rush upon my apprehension. 
for a moment i was breathless with agony. at the next moment i recover 
my strength, and threw the knife with violence on the floor. 

the sound awoke my brother from his reverie. he gaze alternate at me 
and at the weapon. with a movement equally solemn he stoop and took 
it up. he placed the blade in different positions, scrutinize it 
accurately, and maintaining, at the same time, a profound silence. 

again he look at me, but all that vehemence and lofty of spirit 
which had so lately characterize his features, were flown. fallen 
muscles, a forehead contract into folds, eyes dim with unbidden 
drops, and a rueful of aspect which no words can describe, were now 
visible. 

his looks touched into energy the same sympathies in me, and i pour 
forth a flood of tears. this passion was quick checked by fear, which 
had now, no longer, my own, but his safety for their object. i watch 
his deportment in silence. at length he spoke: 

"sister," said he, in an accent mournful and mild, "i have act poorly 
my part in this world. what thinkest thou? shall i not do better in the 
next?" 

i could make no answer. the mild of his tone astonish and 
encourage me. i continue to regard him with wistful and anxious looks. 

"i think," resume he, "i will try. my wife and my babe have gone 
before. happy wretches! i have sent you to repose, and ought not to 
linger behind." 

these words had a meaning sufficient intelligible. i look at the 
open knife in his hand and shuddered, but knew not how to prevent the 
deed which i dreaded. he quick notice my fears, and comprehend 
them. stretch towards me his hand, with an air of increase 
mildness: "take it," said he: "fear not for thy own sake, nor for mine. 
the cup is gone by, and its transient inebriate is succeed by the 
sober of truth. 

"thou angel whom i was wont to worship! fearest thou, my sister, for 
thy life? once it was the scope of my labour to destroy thee, but i was 
prompt to the deed by heaven; such, at least, was my belief. thinkest 
thou that thy death was sought to gratify malevolence? no. i am pure 
from all stain. i believe that my god was my mover! 

"neither thee nor myself have i cause to injure. i have done my duty, 
and surely there is merit in have sacrifice to that, all that is dear 
to the heart of man. if a devil has deceive me, he came in the habit 
of an angel. if i erred, it was not my judgment that deceive me, but 
my senses. in thy sight, being of beings! i am still pure. still will i 
look for my reward in thy justice!" 

did my ear truly report these sounds? if i did not err, my brother was 
restore to just perceptions. he knew himself to have been betray to 
the murder of his wife and children, to have been the victim of infernal 
artifice; yet he found consolation in the rectitude of his motives. he 
was not devoid of sorrow, for this was written on his countenance; but 
his soul was tranquil and sublime. 

perhaps this was merely a transition of his former madness into a new 
shape. perhaps he had not yet awaken to the memory of the horrors 
which he had perpetrated. infatuated wretch that i was! to set myself up 
as a model by which to judge of my heroic brother! my reason taught 
me that his conclusion were right; but conscious of the impotence of 
reason over my own conduct; conscious of my cowardly rash and my 
criminal despair, i doubt whether any one could be stedfast and wise. 

such was my weakness, that even in the midst of these thoughts, my 
mind glide into abhorrence of carwin, and i utter in a low voice, o! 
carwin! carwin! what hast thou to answer for? 

my brother immediately notice the involuntary exclamation: "clara!" 
said he, "be thyself. equity use to be a theme for thy eloquence. 
reduce its lesson to practice, and be just to that unfortunate man. the 
instrument has done its work, and i am satisfied. 

"i thank thee, my god, for this last illumination! my enemy is thine 
also. i deem him to be man, the man with whom i have often communed; 
but now thy goodness has unveil to me his true nature. as the 
performer of thy behests, he is my friend." 

my heart began now to misgive me. his mournful aspect had gradual 
yield place to a serene brow. a new soul appear to actuate his 
frame, and his eyes to beam with preternatural lustre. these symptom 
did not abate, and he continued: 

"clara! i must not leave thee in doubt. i know not what brought about 
thy interview with the being whom thou callest carwin. for a time, i was 
guilty of thy error, and deduce from his incoherent confession that i 
had been made the victim of human malice. he left us at my bidding, and 
i put up a prayer that my doubt should be removed. thy eyes were shut, 
and thy ear seal to the vision that answer my prayer. 

"i was indeed deceived. the form thou hast seen was the incarnation of 
a daemon. the visage and voice which urge me to the sacrifice of my 
family, were his. now he personate a human form: then he was invirone 
with the lustre of heaven.-- 

"clara," he continued, advance close to me, "thy death must come. 
this minister is evil, but he from whom his commission was received is 
god. submit then with all thy wonted resignation to a decree that cannot 
be reverse or resisted. mark the clock. three minutes are allow to 
thee, in which to call up thy fortitude, and prepare thee for thy doom." 
there he stopped. 

even now, when this scene exist only in memory, when life and all its 
function have sunk into torpor, my pulse throbs, and my hair uprise: 
my brow are knit, as then; and i gaze around me in distraction. i was 
unconquerable averse to death; but death, imminent and full of agony as 
that which was threatened, was nothing. this was not the only or chief 
inspire of my fears. 

for him, not for myself, was my soul tormented. i might die, and no 
crime, surpassing the reach of mercy, would pursue me to the presence 
of my judge; but my assassin would survive to contemplate his deed, and 
that assassin was wieland! 

wings to bear me beyond his reach i had not. i could not vanish with a 
thought. the door was open, but my murder was interpose between 
that and me. of self-defence i was incapable. the phrenzy that lately 
prompt me to blood was gone; my state was desperate; my rescue was 
impossible. 

the weight of these accumulate thought could not be borne. my sight 
became confused; my limb were seize with convulsion; i spoke, but my 
words were half-formed:-- 

"spare me, my brother! look down, righteous judge! snatch me from this 
fate! take away this fury from him, or turn it elsewhere!" 

such was the agony of my thoughts, that i notice not steps enter my 
apartment. supplicate eyes were cast upward, but when my prayer was 
breathed, i once more wildly gaze at the door. a form met my sight: i 
shudder as if the god whom i invoke were present. it was carwin that 
again intruded, and who stood before me, erect in attitude, and stedfast 
in look! the sight of him awaken new and rapid thoughts. his recent 
tale was remembered: his magical transition and mysterious energy of 
voice: whether he were infernal or miraculous, or human, there was no 
power and no need to decide. whether the contrive or not of this spell, 
he was able to unbind it, and to check the fury of my brother. he had 
ascribe to himself intentions not malignant. here now was afford a 
test of his truth. let him interpose, as from above; revoke the 
savage decree which the madness of wieland has assign to heaven, and 
extinguish for ever this passion for blood! 

my mind detect at a glance this avenue to safety. the recommendation 
it possessed throng as it were together, and made but one impression 
on my intellect. remote effects and collateral danger i saw not. 
perhaps the pause of an instant had suffice to call them up. the 
improbability that the influence which govern wieland was external or 
human; the tendency of this stratagem to sanction so fatal an error, or 
substitute a more destructive rage in place of this; the sufficiency of 
carwin's mere muscular forces to counteract the efforts, and restrain 
the fury of wieland, might, at a second glance, have been discovered; 
but no second glance was allowed. my first thought hurried me to action, 
and, fix my eyes upon carwin i exclaimed-- 

"o wretch! once more hast thou come? let it be to abjure thy malice; to 
counterwork this hellish stratagem; to turn from me and from my brother, 
this desolate rage! 

"testify thy innocence or thy remorse: exert the powers which pertain to 
thee, whatever they be, to turn aside this ruin. thou art the author 
of these horrors! what have i done to deserve thus to die? how have i 
merit this unrelenting persecution? i adjure thee, by that god whose 
voice thou hast dare to counterfeit, to save my life! 

"wilt thou then go? leave me! succourless!" 

carwin listen to my intreaty unmoved, and turn from me. he seem 
to hesitate a moment: then glide through the door. rage and despair 
stifle my utterance. the interval of respite was passed; the pang 
reserved for me by wieland, were not to be endured; my thought rush 
again into anarchy. have received the knife from his hand, i held it 
loose and without regard; but now it seize again my attention, and i 
grasp it with force. 

he seem to notice not the entrance or exit of carwin. my gesture and 
the murderous weapon appear to have escape his notice. his silence 
was unbroken; his eye, fixed upon the clock for a time, was now 
withdrawn; fury kindle in every feature; all that was human in his face 
gave way to an expression supernatural and tremendous. i felt my left 
arm within his grasp.-- 

even now i hesitate to strike. i shrunk from his assault, but in 
vain.-- 

here let me desist. why should i rescue this event from oblivion? why 
should i paint this detest conflict? why not terminate at once this 
series of horrors?--hurry to the verge of the precipice, and cast myself 
for ever beyond remembrance and beyond hope? 

still i live: with this load upon my breast; with this phantom to pursue 
my steps; with adder lodge in my bosom, and sting me to madness: 
still i consent to live! 

yes, i will rise above the sphere of mortal passions: i will spurn at 
the cowardly remorse that bid me seek impunity in silence, or comfort 
in forgetfulness. my nerves shall be new strung to the task. have i not 
resolved? i will die. the gulph before me is inevitable and near. i will 
die, but then only when my tale is at an end. 



chapter xxvi 


my right hand, grasping the unseen knife, was still disengaged. it was 
lift to strike. all my strength was exhausted, but what was sufficient 
to the performance of this deed. already was the energy awakened, 
and the impulse given, that should bear the fatal steel to his heart, 
when--wieland shrunk back: his hand was withdrawn. breathless with 
affright and desperation, i stood, free from his grasp; unassailed; 
untouched. 

thus long had the power which controule the scene forborne to 
interfere; but now his might was irresistible, and wieland in a moment 
was disarm of all his purposes. a voice, loud than human organ 
could produce, shrill than language can depict, burst from the 
ceiling, and command him--to hold! 

trouble and dismay succeed to the stedfast that had lately been 
display in the looks of wieland. his eyes rove from one quarter to 
another, with an expression of doubt. he seem to wait for a further 
intimation. 

carwin's agency was here easily recognized. i had besought him to 
interpose in my defence. he had flown. i had imagine him deaf to my 
prayer, and resolute to see me perish: yet he disappear merely to 
devise and execute the means of my relief. 

why did he not forbear when this end was accomplished? why did his 
misjudge zeal and accursed precipitation overpass that limit? or meant 
he thus to crown the scene, and conduct his inscrutable plot to this 
consummation? 

such idea were the fruit of subsequent contemplation. this moment 
was pregnant with fate. i had no power to reason. in the career of my 
tempestuous thoughts, rent into pieces, as my mind was, by accumulate 
horrors, carwin was unseen and unsuspected. i partook of wieland's 
credulity, shook with his amazement, and pant with his awe. 

silence took place for a moment; so much as allow the attention to 
recover its post. then new sound were utter from above. 

"man of errors! cease to cherish thy delusion: not heaven or hell, but 
thy senses have misle thee to commit these acts. shake off thy phrenzy, 
and ascend into rational and human. be lunatic no longer." 

my brother open his lip to speak. his tone was terrific and faint. he 
mutter an appeal to heaven. it was difficult to comprehend the theme 
of his inquiries. they imply doubt as to the nature of the impulse 
that hitherto had guide him, and question whether he had act in 
consequence of insane perceptions. 

to these interrogatory the voice, which now seem to hover at his 
shoulder, loud answer in the affirmative. then uninterrupted silence 
ensued. 

fallen from his lofty and heroic station; now finally restore to the 
perception of truth; weigh to earth by the recollection of his own 
deeds; console no long by a consciousness of rectitude, for the 
loss of offspring and wife--a loss for which he was indebted to his own 
misguided hand; wieland was transform at once into the man of sorrows! 

he reflect not that credit should be as reasonably deny to the last, 
as to any former intimation; that one might as just be ascribe to 
err or disease senses as the other. he saw not that this discovery 
in no degree affected the integrity of his conduct; that his motive had 
lost none of their claim to the homage of mankind; that the preference 
of supreme good, and the boundless energy of duty, were undiminished in 
his bosom. 

it is not for me to pursue him through the ghastly change of his 
countenance. words he had none. now he sat upon the floor, motionless in 
all his limbs, with his eyes glaze and fixed; a monument of woe. 

anon a spirit of tempestuous but undesign activity seize him. 
he rose from his place and strode across the floor, totter and at 
random. his eyes were without moisture, and gleam with the fire 
that consume his vitals. the muscle of his face were agitate by 
convulsion. his lip moved, but no sound escape him. 

that nature should long sustain this conflict was not to be believed. 
my state was little different from that of my brother. i entered, as it 
were, into his thought. my heart was visit and rent by his pangs--oh 
that thy phrenzy had never been cured! that thy madness, with its 
blissful visions, would return! or, if that must not be, that thy scene 
would hasten to a close! that death would cover thee with his oblivion! 

what can i wish for thee? thou who hast vie with the great preach 
of thy faith in sanctity of motives, and in elevation above sensual and 
selfish! thou whom thy fate has change into paricide and savage! can i 
wish for the continuance of thy being? no. 

for a time his movements seem destitute of purpose. if he walked; if 
he turned; if his finger were entwine with each other; if his hand 
were pressed against opposite side of his head with a force 
sufficient to crush it into pieces; it was to tear his mind from 
self-contemplation; to waste his thought on external objects. 

speedy this train was broken. a beam appear to be dart into his 
mind, which gave a purpose to his efforts. an avenue to escape present 
itself; and now he eager gaze about him: when my thought became 
engaged by his demeanour, my finger were stretch as by a mechanical 
force, and the knife, no long heed or of use, escape from my grasp, 
and fell unperceived on the floor. his eye now light upon it; he 
seize it with the quick of thought. 

i shriek aloud, but it was too late. he plunge it to the hilt in his 
neck; and his life instantly escape with the stream that gush from 
the wound. he was stretch at my feet; and my hand were sprinkle with 
his blood as he fell. 

such was thy last deed, my brother! for a spectacle like this was it 
my fate to be reserved! thy eyes were closed--thy face ghastly with 
death--thy arms, and the spot where thou liedest, float in thy life's 
blood! these image have not, for a moment, forsaken me. till i am 
breathless and cold, they must continue to hover in my sight. 

carwin, as i said, had left the room, but he still linger in the 
house. my voice summon him to my aid; but i scarcely notice his 
re-entrance, and now faint recollect his terrify looks, his broken 
exclamations, his vehement avowal of innocence, the effusion of his 
pity for me, and his offer of assistance. 

i did not listen--i answer him not--i cease to upbraid or accuse. his 
guilt was a point to which i was indifferent. ruffian or devil, black 
as hell or bright as angels, thenceforth he was nothing to me. i was 
incapable of sparing a look or a thought from the ruin that was spread 
at my feet. 

when he left me, i was scarcely conscious of any variation in the scene. 
he informed the inhabitant of the hut of what had passed, and they flew 
to the spot. careless of his own safety, he haste to the city to inform 
my friends of my condition. 

my uncle speedy arrive at the house. the body of wieland was remove 
from my presence, and they supposed that i would follow it; but no, my 
home is ascertained; here i have taken up my rest, and never will i go 
hence, till, like wieland, i am borne to my grave. 

importune was try in vain: they threaten to remove me by 
violence--nay, violence was used; but my soul prize too dearly this 
little roof to endure to be bereaved of it. force should not 
prevail when the hoary locks and supplicate tear of my uncle were 
ineffectual. my repugnance to move gave birth to ferocious and 
phrenzy when force was employed, and they were oblige to consent to my 
return. 

they besought me--they remonstrated--they appeal to every duty that 
connected me with him that made me, and with my fellow-men--in vain. 
while i live i will not go hence. have i not fulfill my destiny? 

why will ye torment me with your reasoning and reproofs? can ye restore 
to me the hope of my better days? can ye give me back catharine and her 
babes? can ye recall to life him who die at my feet? 

i will eat--i will drink--i will lie down and rise up at your 
bidding--all i ask is the choice of my abode. what is there unreasonable 
in this demand? shortly will i be at peace. this is the spot which i 
have chosen in which to breathe my last sigh. deny me not, i beseech 
you, so slight a boon. 

talk not to me, o my revere friend! of carwin. he has told thee his 
tale, and thou exculpatest him from all direct concern in the fate of 
wieland. this scene of havock was produce by an illusion of the senses. 
be it so: i care not from what source these disaster have flowed; it 
suffice that they have swallow up our hope and our existence. 

what his agency began, his agency conduct to a close. he intended, by 
the final effort of his power, to rescue me and to banish his illusion 
from my brother. such is his tale, concerning the truth of which i care 
not. henceforth i foster but one wish--i ask only quick deliverance from 
life and all the ill that attend it.-- 

go wretch! torment me not with thy presence and thy prayers.--forgive 
thee? will that avail thee when thy fateful hour shall arrive? be thou 
acquit at thy own tribunal, and thou needest not fear the verdict 
of others. if thy guilt be capable of black hues, if hitherto thy 
conscience be without stain, thy crime will be made more flagrant by 
thus violate my retreat. take thyself away from my sight if thou 
wouldest not behold my death! 

thou are gone! murmur and reluctant! and now my repose is coming--my 
work is done! 



chapter xxvii 


[written three years after the foregoing, and dated at montpellier.] 


i imagine that i had forever laid aside the pen; and that i should 
take up my abode in this part of the world, was of all event the least 
probable. my destiny i believe to be accomplished, and i look forward 
to a speedy termination of my life with the fullest confidence. 

surely i had reason to be weary of existence, to be impatient of every 
tie which held me from the grave. i experienced this impatience in its 
fullest extent. i was not only enamoured of death, but conceived, from 
the condition of my frame, that to shun it was impossible, even though 
i had ardent desire it; yet here am i, a thousand league from my 
native soil, in full possession of life and of health, and not destitute 
of happiness. 

such is man. time will obliterate the deepest impressions. grief the 
most vehement and hopeless, will gradual decay and wear itself out. 
argument may be employ in vain: every moral prescription may be 
ineffectual tried: remonstrances, however cogent or pathetic, shall 
have no power over the attention, or shall be repel with disdain; 
yet, as day follow day, the turbulence of our emotion shall subside, 
and our fluctuate be finally succeed by a calm. 

perhaps, however, the conquest of despair was chiefly owe to an 
accident which render my continuance in my own house impossible. at 
the conclusion of my long, and, as i then supposed, my last letter to 
you, i mention my resolution to wait for death in the very spot which 
had been the principal scene of my misfortunes. from this resolution my 
friends exert themselves with the utmost zeal and perseverance to make 
me depart. they just imagine that to be thus surround by memorial 
of the fate of my family, would tend to foster my disease. a swift 
succession of new objects, and the exclusion of every thing calculate 
to remind me of my loss, was the only method of cure. 

i refuse to listen to their exhortations. great as my calamity was, to 
be torn from this asylum was regard by me as an aggravation of it. by 
a perverse constitution of mind, he was considered as my greatest enemy 
who sought to withdraw me from a scene which supply eternal food to my 
melancholy, and kept my despair from languishing. 

in relate the history of these disaster i derive a similar species 
of gratification. my uncle earnest dissuade me from this task; but 
his remonstrance were as fruitless on this head as they had been on 
others. they would have withheld from me the implement of writing; but 
they quick perceive that to withstand would be more injurious than 
to comply with my wishes. have finished my tale, it seem as if the 
scene were closing. a fever lurk in my veins, and my strength was 
gone. any exertion, however slight, was attend with difficulty, and, 
at length, i refuse to rise from my bed. 

i now see the infatuation and injustice of my conduct in its true 
colours. i reflect upon the sensation and reasoning of that period 
with wonder and humiliation. that i should be insensible to the claim 
and tear of my friends; that i should overlook the suggestion of duty, 
and fly from that post in which only i could be instrumental to the 
benefit of others; that the exercise of the social and beneficent 
affections, the contemplation of nature and the acquisition of wisdom 
should not be seen to be means of happiness still within my reach, is, 
at this time, scarcely credible. 

it is true that i am now changed; but i have not the consolation to 
reflect that my change was owe to my fortitude or to my capacity for 
instruction. better thought grew up in my mind imperceptibly. i cannot 
but congratulate myself on the change, though, perhaps, it merely argue 
a fickle of temper, and a defect of sensibility. 

after my narrative was end i betook myself to my bed, in the full 
belief that my career in this world was on the point of finishing. my 
uncle took up his abode with me, and perform for me every office of 
nurse, physician and friend. one night, after some hour of restless 
and pain, i sunk into deep sleep. its tranquillity, however, was of no 
long duration. my fancy became sudden distempered, and my brain was 
turn into a theatre of uproar and confusion. it would not be easy to 
describe the wild and phantastic incongruity that pester me. 
my uncle, wieland, pleyel and carwin were successive and moment 
discern amidst the storm. sometimes i was swallow up by whirlpools, 
or caught up in the air by half-seen and gigantic forms, and thrown upon 
pointed rocks, or cast among the billows. sometimes gleam of light 
were shot into a dark abyss, on the verge of which i was standing, and 
enable me to discover, for a moment, its enormous depth and hideous 
precipices. anon, i was transport to some ridge of aetna, and made a 
terrify spectator of its fiery torrent and its pillar of smoke. 

however strange it may seem, i was conscious, even during my dream, of 
my real situation. i knew myself to be asleep, and struggle to break 
the spell, by muscular exertions. these did not avail, and i continue 
to suffer these abortive creation till a loud voice, at my bed side, 
and some one shake me with violence, put an end to my reverie. my eyes 
were unsealed, and i start from my pillow. 

my chamber was fill with smoke, which, though in some degree luminous, 
would permit me to see nothing, and by which i was nearly suffocated. 
the crackling of flames, and the deafen clamour of voice without, 
burst upon my ears. stun as i was by this hubbub, scorch with heat, 
and nearly choake by the accumulate vapours, i was unable to think or 
act for my own preservation; i was incapable, indeed, of comprehend 
my danger. 

i was caught up, in an instant, by a pair of sinewy arms, borne to the 
window, and carry down a ladder which had been placed there. my 
uncle stood at the bottom and received me. i was not fully aware of my 
situation till i found myself sheltered in the hut, and surround by 
its inhabitants. 

by neglect of the servant, some unextinguished ember had been placed in 
a barrel in the cellar of the building. the barrel had caught fire; 
this was communicate to the beam of the lower floor, and thence to the 
upper part of the structure. it was first discover by some person 
at a distance, who hasten to the spot and alarm my uncle and the 
servants. the flame had already made considerable progress, and my 
condition was overlook till my escape was render nearly impossible. 

my danger being known, and a ladder quick procured, one of the 
spectator ascend to my chamber, and effect my deliverance in the 
manner before related. 

this incident, disastrous as it may at first seem, had, in reality, a 
beneficial effect upon my feelings. i was, in some degree, rouse from 
the stupor which had seize my faculties. the monotonous and gloomy 
series of my thought was broken. my habitation was level with the 
ground, and i was oblige to seek a new one. a new train of images, 
disconnected with the fate of my family, forced itself on my attention, 
and a belief insensible sprung up, that tranquillity, if not happiness, 
was still within my reach. notwithstanding the shock which my frame had 
endured, the anguish of my thought no soon abate than i recover my 
health. 

i now willing listen to my uncle's solicit to be the companion 
of his voyage. preparation were easily made, and after a tedious 
passage, we set our feet on the shore of the ancient world. the memory 
of the past did not forsake me; but the melancholy which it generated, 
and the tear with which it fill my eyes, were not unprofitable. my 
curiosity was revived, and i contemplated, with ardour, the spectacle of 
living manners and the monument of past ages. 

in proportion as my heart was reinstate in the possession of its 
ancient tranquillity, the sentiment which i had cherish with regard to 
pleyel returned. in a short time he was united to the saxon woman, 
and made his residence in the neighbourhood of boston. i was glad that 
circumstances would not permit an interview to take place between us. i 
could not desire their misery; but i reap no pleasure from reflect 
on their happiness. time, and the exertion of my fortitude, cure me, 
in some degree, of this folly. i continue to love him, but my passion 
was disguise to myself; i considered it merely as a more tender species 
of friendship, and cherish it without compunction. 

through my uncle's exertion a meeting was brought about between carwin 
and pleyel, and explanation took place which restore me at once to 
the good opinion of the latter. though separate so widely our 
correspondence was punctual and frequent, and paved the way for that 
union which can only end with the death of one of us. 

in my letters to him i made no secret of my former sentiments. this 
was a theme on which i could talk without painful, though not without 
delicate emotions. that knowledge which i should never have impart to 
a lover, i felt little scruple to communicate to a friend. 

a year and an half elapse when theresa was snatch from him by death, 
in the hour in which she gave him the first pledge of their mutual 
affection. this event was borne by him with his customary fortitude. it 
induce him, however, to make a change in his plans. he disposed of his 
property in america, and join my uncle and me, who had terminate 
the wanderings of two years at montpellier, which will henceforth, i 
believe, be our permanent abode. 

if you reflect upon that entire confidence which had subsist from our 
infancy between pleyel and myself; on the passion that i had contracted, 
and which was merely smother for a time; and on the esteem which was 
mutual, you will not, perhaps, be surprize that the renovate of our 
intercourse should give birth to that union which at present subsists. 
when the period had elapse necessary to weaken the remembrance of 
theresa, to whom he had been bound by tie more of honor than of love, 
he tender his affection to me. i need not add that the tender was 
eager accepted. 

perhaps you are somewhat interested in the fate of carwin. he saw, 
when too late, the danger of imposture. so much affected was he by the 
catastrophe to which he was a witness, that he laid aside all regard to 
his own safety. he sought my uncle, and confide to him the tale which 
he had just related to me. he found a more impartial and indulgent 
auditor in mr. cambridge, who impute to maniacal illusion the conduct 
of wieland, though he conceive the previous and unseen agency of 
carwin, to have indirect but powerful predispose to this deplorable 
perversion of mind. 

it was easy for carwin to elude the persecution of ludloe. it was 
merely requisite to hide himself in a remote district of pennsylvania. 
this, when he part from us, he determined to do. he is now probably 
engaged in the harmless pursuit of agriculture, and may come to think, 
without insupportable remorse, on the evil to which his fatal talent 
have given birth. the innocence and usefulness of his future life may, 
in some degree, atone for the misery so rash or so thoughtless 
inflicted. 

more urgent consideration hinder me from mentioning, in the course of 
my former mournful recital, any particulars respecting the unfortunate 
father of louisa conway. that man surely was reserved to be a monument 
of capricious fortune. his southern journy being finished, he return 
to philadelphia. before he reach the city he left the highway, and 
alight at my brother's door. contrary to his expectation, no one came 
forth to welcome him, or hail his approach. he attempt to enter the 
house, but bolt doors, barred windows, and a silence broken only by 
unanswered calls, shew him that the mansion was deserted. 

he proceed thence to my habitation, which he found, in like manner, 
gloomy and tenantless. his surprize may be easily conceived. the rustic 
who occupy the hut told him an imperfect and incredible tale. he 
haste to the city, and extort from mrs. baynton a full disclosure of 
late disasters. 

he was inure to adversity, and recovered, after no long time, from 
the shock produce by this disappointment of his darling scheme. our 
intercourse did not terminate with his departure from america. we have 
since met with him in france, and light has at length been thrown upon 
the motive which occasion the disappearance of his wife, in the 
manner which i formerly related to you. 

i have dwelt upon the ardour of their conjugal attachment, and mention 
that no suspicion had ever glance upon her purity. this, though 
the belief was long cherished, recent discovery have shewn to be 
questionable. no doubt her integrity would have survive to the present 
moment, if an extraordinary fate had not befallen her. 

major stuart had been engaged, while in germany, in a contest of 
honor with an aid de camp of the marquis of granby. his adversary had 
propagate a rumour injurious to his character. a challenge was sent; 
a meeting ensued; and stuart wound and disarm the calumniator. the 
offence was atone for, and his life secure by suitable concessions. 

maxwell, that was his name, shortly after, in consequence of succeed 
to a rich inheritance, sold his commission and return to london. his 
fortune was speedy augment by an opulent marriage. interest was his 
sole inducement to this marriage, though the lady had been sway by a 
credulous affection. the true state of his heart was quick discovered, 
and a separation, by mutual consent, took place. the lady withdrew to 
an estate in a distant county, and maxwell continue to consume his time 
and fortune in the dissipation of the capital. 

maxwell, though deceitful and sensual, possessed great force of mind and 
specious accomplishments. he contrived to mislead the generous mind of 
stuart, and to regain the esteem which his misconduct, for a time, had 
forfeited. he was recommend by her husband to the confidence of mrs. 
stuart. maxwell was stimulate by revenge, and by a lawless passion, to 
convert this confidence into a source of guilt. 

the education and capacity of this woman, the worth of her husband, the 
pledge of their alliance which time had produced, her maturity in 
age and knowledge of the world--all combine to render this attempt 
hopeless. maxwell, however, was not easily discouraged. the most perfect 
being, he believed, must owe his exemption from vice to the absence of 
temptation. the impulse of love are so subtile, and the influence of 
false reasoning, when enforce by eloquence and passion, so unbounded, 
that no human virtue is secure from degeneracy. all arts being tried, 
every temptation being summon to his aid, dissimulate being carry 
to its utmost bound, maxwell, at length, nearly accomplished his 
purpose. the lady's affection were withdrawn from her husband and 
transfer to him. she could not, as yet, be reconcile to dishonor. 
all effort to induce her to elope with him were ineffectual. she 
permit herself to love, and to avow her love; but at this limit she 
stopped, and was immoveable. 

hence this revolution in her sentiment was productive only of despair. 
her rectitude of principle preserve her from actual guilt, but could 
not restore to her her ancient affection, or save her from being the 
prey of remorseful and impracticable wishes. her husband's absence 
produce a state of suspense. this, however, approach to a period, 
and she received tidings of his intended return. maxwell, being likewise 
apprize of this event, and have made a last and unsuccessful effort 
to conquer her reluctance to accompany him in a journey to italy, 
whither he pretended an invincible necessity of going, left her to 
pursue the measure which despair might suggest. at the same time she 
received a letter from the wife of maxwell, unveil the true character 
of this man, and revealing fact which the artifice of her seduce 
had hitherto conceal from her. mrs. maxwell had been prompt to this 
disclosure by a knowledge of her husband's practices, with which his own 
impetuos had made her acquainted. 

this discovery, join to the delicacy of her scruple and the anguish 
of remorse, induce her to abscond. this scheme was adopt in haste, 
but effect with consummate prudence. she fled, on the eve of her 
husband's arrival, in the disguise of a boy, and embark at falmouth in 
a packet bound for america. 

the history of her disastrous intercourse with maxwell, the motive 
induce her to forsake her country, and the measure she had taken 
to effect her design, were related to mrs. maxwell, in reply to her 
communication. between these women an ancient intimacy and considerable 
similitude of character subsisted. this disclosure was accompany with 
solemn injunction of secrecy, and these injunction were, for a long 
time, faithfully observed. 

mrs. maxwell's abode was situated on the bank of the wey. stuart was 
her kinsman; their youth had been spent together; and maxwell was in 
some degree indebted to the man whom he betrayed, for his alliance with 
this unfortunate lady. her esteem for the character of stuart had never 
been diminished. a meeting between them was occasion by a tour which 
the latter had undertaken, in the year after his return from america, 
to wales and the western counties. this interview produce pleasure and 
regret in each. their own transactions naturally became the topic of 
their conversation; and the untimely fate of his wife and daughter were 
related by the guest. 

mrs. maxwell's regard for her friend, as well as for the safety of her 
husband, persuade her to concealment; but the former being dead, 
and the latter being out of the kingdom, she venture to produce mrs. 
stuart's letter, and to communicate her own knowledge of the treachery 
of maxwell. she had previous extort from her guest a promise not to 
pursue any scheme of vengeance; but this promise was made while ignorant 
of the full extent of maxwell's depravity, and his passion refuse to 
adhere to it. 

at this time my uncle and i reside at avignon. among the english 
resident there, and with whom we maintain a social intercourse, was 
maxwell. this man's talent and address render him a favorite both 
with my uncle and myself. he had even tender me his hand in marriage; 
but this being refused, he had sought and obtain permission to 
continue with us the intercourse of friendship. since a legal marriage 
was impossible, no doubt, his view were flagitious. whether he had 
relinquish these view i was unable to judge. 

he was one in a large circle at a villa in the environs, to which i had 
likewise been invited, when stuart abrupt enter the apartment. 
he was recognize with genuine satisfaction by me, and with seeming 
pleasure by maxwell. in a short time, some affair of moment being 
pleaded, which require an immediate and exclusive interview, maxwell 
and he withdrew together. stuart and my uncle had been known to each 
other in the germany army; and the purpose contemplate by the former in 
this long and hasty journey, was confide to his old friend. 

a defiance was given and received, and the bank of a rivulet, about 
a league from the city, was select as the scene of this contest. my 
uncle, have exert himself in vain to prevent an hostile meeting, 
consent to attend them as a surgeon.--next morning, at sun-rise, was 
the time chosen. 

i return early in the evening to my lodgings. preliminary being 
settled between the combatants, stuart had consent to spend the 
evening with us, and did not retire till late. on the way to his hotel 
he was expose to no molestation, but just as he step within the 
portico, a swarthy and malignant figure start from behind a column. 
and plunge a stiletto into his body. 

the author of this treason could not certainly be discovered; but the 
detail communicate by stuart, respecting the history of maxwell, 
naturally pointed him out as an object of suspicion. no one express 
more concern, on account of this disaster, than he; and he pretended 
an ardent zeal to vindicate his character from the aspersion that were 
cast upon it. thenceforth, however, i deny myself to his visits; and 
shortly after he disappear from this scene. 

few possessed more estimable qualities, and a better title to happiness 
and the tranquil honors of long life, than the mother and father of 
louisa conway: yet they were cut off in the bloom of their days; and 
their destiny was thus accomplished by the same hand. maxwell was the 
instrument of their destruction, though the instrument was applied to 
this end in so different a manner. 

i leave you to moralize on this tale. that virtue should become the 
victim of treachery is, no doubt, a mournful consideration; but it will 
not escape your notice, that the evil of which carwin and maxwell were 
the authors, owe their existence to the error of the sufferers. all 
effort would have been ineffectual to subvert the happiness or shorten 
the existence of the stuarts, if their own frailty had not second 
these efforts. if the lady had crush her disastrous passion in the 
bud, and driven the seduce from her presence, when the tendency of 
his artifice was seen; if stuart had not admitted the spirit of absurd 
revenge, we should not have had to deplore this catastrophe. if wieland 
had frame just notions of moral duty, and of the divine attributes; 
or if i had been gifted with ordinary equanimity or foresight, the 
double-tongued deceive would have been baffle and repelled. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of wieland; or the transformation, by 
charles brockden brown 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook wieland; or the transformation *** 

***** this file should be name 792.txt or 792.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/7/9/792/ 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
