the project gutenberg ebook of edgar huntley, by charles brockden brown 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 

title: edgar huntley 

author: charles brockden brown 

posting date: february 11, 2015 [ebook #8223] 
release date: june, 2005 
first posted: july 3, 2003 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook edgar huntley *** 




produce by online distribute proofread team 









edgar hunt 

or, memoirs of a sleep-walker 

by 

charles brockden brown 







to the public: 

the flatter reception that has been given, by the public, to arthur 
mervyn, has prompt the writer to solicit a continuance of the same 
favour, and to offer to the world a new performance. 

america has open new view to the naturalist and politician, but has 
seldom furnish theme to the moral painter. that new spring of action 
and new motive to curiosity should operate,--that the field of 
investigation, open to us by our own country, should differ 
essentially from those which exist in europe,--may be readily conceived. 
the source of amusement to the fancy and instruction to the heart, that 
are peculiar to ourselves, are equally numerous and inexhaustible. it is 
the purpose of this work to profit by some of these sources; to exhibit 
a series of adventures, grow out of the condition of our country, and 
connected with one of the most common and most wonderful disease or 
affection of the human frame. 

one merit the writer may at least claim:--that of calling forth the 
passion and engaging the sympathy of the reader by means hitherto 
unemployed by preceding authors. puerile superstition and exploded 
manners, gothic castle and chimeras, are the material usually employ 
for this end. the incident of indian hostility, and the peril of the 
western wilderness, are far more suitable; and for a native of america 
to overlook these would admit of no apology. these, therefore, are, in 
part, the ingredient of this tale, and these he has been ambitious of 
depict in vivid and faithful colours. the success of his effort must 
be estimate by the liberal and candid reader. 

c. b. b. 





chapter i. 


i sit down, my friend, to comply with thy request. at length do the 
impetuos of my fears, the transport of my wonder, permit me to 
recollect my promise and perform it. at length am i somewhat deliver 
from suspense and from tremors. at length the drama is brought to an 
imperfect close, and the series of event that absorb my faculties, 
that hurried away my attention, has terminate in repose. 

till now, to hold a steadfast pen was impossible; to disengage my senses 
from the scene that was passing or approaching; to forbear to grasp at 
futurity; to suffer so much thought to wander from the purpose which 
engross my fear and my hopes, could not be. 

yet am i sure that even now my perturbation are sufficient still 
for an employment like this? that the incident i am go to relate can 
be recall and arrange without indistinct and confusion? that 
emotion will not be reawakene by my narrative, incompatible with order 
and coherence? yet when i shall be better qualified for this task i know 
not. time may take away these headlong energies, and give me back my 
ancient sobriety; but this change will only be effect by weaken my 
remembrance of these events. in proportion as i gain power over words, 
shall i lose dominion over sentiments. in proportion as my tale is 
deliberate and slow, the incident and motive which it is design to 
exhibit will be imperfect revive and obscure portrayed. 

oh, why art thou away at a time like this. wert thou present, the office 
to which my pen is so inadequate would easily be execute by my tongue. 
accent can scarcely be too rapid; or that which words should fail to 
convey, my looks and gesture would suffice to communicate. but i know 
thy coming is impossible. to leave this spot is equally beyond my power. 
to keep thee in ignorance of what has happen would just offend thee. 
there is no method of inform thee except by letter, and this method 
must i, therefore, adopt. 

how short is the period that has elapse since thou and i parted, and 
yet how full of tumult and dismay has been my soul during that period! 
what light has burst upon my ignorance of myself and of mankind! how 
sudden and enormous the transition from uncertainty to knowledge! 

but let me recall my thoughts; let me struggle for so much composure as 
will permit my pen to trace intelligible characters. let me place in 
order the incident that are to compose my tale. i need not call on thee 
to listen. the fate of waldegrave was as fertile of torment to thee as 
to me. his bloody and mysterious catastrophe equally awaken thy grief, 
thy revenge, and thy curiosity. thou wilt catch from my story every 
horror and every sympathy which it paints. thou wilt shudder with my 
foreboding and dissolve with my tears. as the sister of my friend, and 
as one who honours me with her affection, thou wilt share in all my 
task and all my dangers. 

you need not be remind with what reluctance i left you. to reach this 
place by evening was impossible, unless i had set out early in the 
morning; but your society was too precious not to be enjoy to the last 
moment. it was indispensable to be here on tuesday, but my duty require 
no more than that i should arrive by sunrise on that day. to travel 
during the night was productive of no formidable inconvenience. the air 
was likely to be frosty and sharp, but these would not incommode one who 
walk with speed. a nocturnal journey in district so romantic and wild 
as these, through which lay my road, was more congenial to my temper 
than a noonday ramble. 

by nightfall i was within ten mile of my uncle's house. as the dark 
increased, and i advanced on my way, my sensation sunk into melancholy. 
the scene and the time remind me of the friend whom i had lost. i 
recall his features, and accents, and gestures, and muse with 
unutterable feelings on the circumstances of his death. 

my recollection once more plunge me into anguish and perplexity. once 
more i asked, who was his assassin? by what motive could he be impel 
to a deed like this? waldegrave was pure from all offence. his piety was 
rapturous. his benevolence was a stranger to remiss or torpor. all 
who came within the sphere of his influence experienced and acknowledge 
his benign activity. his friends were few, because his habit were timid 
and reserved; but the existence of an enemy was impossible. 

i recall the incident of our last interview, my importune that he 
should postpone his ill-omened journey till the morning, his 
inexplicable obstinacy, his resolution to set out on foot during a dark 
and tempestuous night, and the horrible disaster that befell him. 

the first intimate i received of this misfortune, the insanity of 
vengeance and grief into which i was hurried, my fruitless search for 
the author of this guilt, my midnight wanderings and reverie beneath 
the shade of that fatal elm, were revive and reacted. i heard the 
discharge of the pistol, i witness the alarm of inglefield, i heard 
his call to his servants, and saw them issue forth with lights and 
hasten to the spot whence the sound had seem to proceed. i beheld my 
friend, stretch upon the earth, ghastly with a mortal wound, alone, 
with no trace of the slay visible, no token by which his place of 
refuge might be sought, the motive of his enmity or his instrument of 
mischief might be detected. 

i hung over the die youth, whose insensibility forbade him to 
recognise his friend, or unfold the cause of his destruction. i 
accompany his remains to the grave; i tend the sacred spot where he 
lay; i once more exercise my penetration and my zeal in pursuit of his 
assassin. once more my meditation and exertion were doom to be 
disappointed. 

i need not remind thee of what is past. time and reason seem to have 
dissolve the spell which made me deaf to the dictate of duty and 
discretion. remembrance had cease to agonize, to urge me to headlong 
acts and foster sanguinary purposes. the gloom was half dispersed, and a 
radiance had succeed sweet than my former joys. 

now, by some unseen concurrence of reflections, my thought revert 
into some degree of bitterness. methought that to ascertain the hand who 
kill my friend was not impossible, and to punish the crime was just. 
that to forbear inquiry or withhold punishment was to violate my duty to 
my god and to mankind. the impulse was gradual awaken that bade me 
once more to seek the elm; once more to explore the ground; to 
scrutinize its trunk. what could i expect to find? had it not been a 
hundred times examined? had i not extend my search to the neighbouring 
grove and precipices? had i not pore upon the brooks, and pry into 
the pit and hollows, that were adjacent to the scene of blood? 

lately i had view this conduct with shame and regret; but in the 
present state of my mind it assume the appearance of conformity with 
prudence, and i felt myself irresistible prompt to repeat my search. 
some time had elapse since my departure from this district,--time 
enough for momentous change to occur. expedient that formerly were 
useless might now lead instantaneous to the end which i sought. the 
tree which had formerly been shun by the criminal might, in the 
absence of the avenge of blood, be incautious approached. thoughtless 
or fearless of my return, it was possible that he might, at this moment, 
be detect hover near the scene of his offences. 

nothing can be plead in extenuation of this relapse into folly. my 
return, after an absence of some duration, into the scene of these 
transactions and sufferings, the time of night, the glimmer of the 
stars, the obscurity in which external object were wrapped, and which, 
consequently, did not draw my attention from the image of fancy, may in 
some degree account for the revival of those sentiment and resolution 
which immediately succeed the death of waldegrave, and which, during 
my visit to you, had been suspended. 

you know the situation of the elm, in the midst of a private road, on 
the verge of norwalk, near the habitation of inglefield, but three mile 
from my uncle's house. it was now my intention to visit it. the road in 
which i was travel led a different way. it was requisite to leave 
it, therefore, and make a circuit through meadow and over steeps. my 
journey would, by these means, be considerably prolonged; but on that 
head i was indifferent, or rather, considering how far the night had 
already advanced, it was desirable not to reach home till the dawn. 

i proceed in this new direction with speed. time, however, was allow 
for my impetuos to subside, and for sober thought to take place. 
still i persist in this path. to linger a few moments in this shade, 
to ponder on object connected with event so momentous to my happiness, 
promise me a mournful satisfaction. i was familiar with the way, though 
trackless and intricate, and i climb the steeps, crept through the 
brambles, leap the rivulet and fence with undeviate aim, till at 
length i reach the craggy and obscure path which led to inglefield's 
house. 

in a short time, i descry through the dusk the widespread branch of 
the elm. this tree, however faint seen, cannot be mistaken for 
another. the remarkable bulk and shape of its trunk, its position in the 
midst of the way, its branch spread into an ample circumference, 
made it conspicuous from afar. my pulse throb as i approach it. 

my eyes were eager bent to discover the trunk and the area beneath the 
shade. these, as i approached, gradual became visible. the trunk was 
not the only thing which appear in view. somewhat else, which made 
itself distinguishable by its motions, was likewise noted. i falter 
and stopped. 

to a casual observer this appearance would have been unnoticed. to me, 
it could not but possess a powerful significance. all my surmise and 
suspicion instantly returned. this apparition was human, it was 
connected with the fate of waldegrave, it led to a disclosure of the 
author of that fate. what was i to do? to approach unwari would alarm 
the person. instant flight would set him beyond discovery and reach. 

i walk soft to the roadside. the ground was cover with rocky 
masses, scattered among shrub-oaks and dwarf-cedars, emblem of its 
sterile and uncultivated state. among these it was possible to elude 
observation and yet approach near enough to gain an accurate view of 
this being. 

at this time, the atmosphere was somewhat illuminate by the moon, 
which, though it had already set, was yet so near the horizon as to 
benefit me by its light. the shape of a man, tall and robust, was now 
distinguished. repeated and close scrutiny enable me to perceive that 
he was employ in digging the earth. something like flannel was wrap 
round his waist and cover his lower limbs. the rest of his frame was 
naked. i did not recognise in him any one whom i knew. 

a figure, robust and strange, and half naked, to be thus employed, at 
this hour and place, was calculate to rouse up my whole soul. his 
occupation was mysterious and obscure. was it a grave that he was 
digging? was his purpose to explore or to hide? was it proper to watch 
him at a distance, unobserved and in silence, or to rush upon him and 
extort from him, by violence or menaces, an explanation of the scene? 

before my resolution was formed, he cease to dig. he cast aside his 
spade and sat down in the pit that he had dug. he seem wrap in 
meditation; but the pause was short, and succeed by sobs, at first low 
and at wide intervals, but presently loud and more vehement. sorely 
charged was indeed that heart whence flow these token of sorrow. 
never did i witness a scene of such mighty anguish, such heart-bursting 
grief. 

what should i think? i was suspend in astonishment. every sentiment, 
at length, yield to my sympathy. every new accent of the mourner 
struck upon my heart with additional force, and tear found their way 
spontaneous to my eyes. i left the spot where i stood, and advanced 
within the verge of the shade. my caution had forsaken me, and, instead 
of one whom it was duty to persecute, i beheld, in this man, nothing but 
an object of compassion. 

my pace was checked by his sudden cease to lament. he snatch the 
spade, and, rising on his feet, began to cover up the pit with the 
utmost diligence. he seem aware of my presence, and desirous of hiding 
something from my inspection. i was prompt to advance near and hold 
his hand, but my uncertainty as to his character and views, the 
abrupt with which i had been usher into this scene, made me still 
hesitate; but, though i hesitate to advance, there was nothing to 
hinder me from calling. 

"what, ho!" said i. "who is there? what are you doing?" 

he stopped: the spade fell from his hand; he look up and bent forward 
his face towards the spot where i stood. an interview and explanation 
were now, methought, unavoidable. i muster up my courage to confront 
and interrogate this being. 

he continue for a minute in his gaze and listen attitude. where i 
stood i could not fail of being seen, and yet he act as if he saw 
nothing. again he betook himself to his spade, and proceed with new 
diligence to fill up the pit. this demeanour confounded and bewilder 
me. i had no power but to stand and silent gaze upon his motions. 

the pit being filled, he once more sat upon the ground, and resigned 
himself to weeping and sigh with more vehemence than before. in a short 
time the fit seem to have passed. he rose, seize the spade, and 
advanced to the spot where i stood. 

again i made preparation as for an interview which could not but take 
place. he pass me, however, without appear to notice my existence. 
he came so near as almost to brush my arm, yet turn not his head to 
either side. my near view of him made his brawny arms and lofty 
stature more conspicuous; but his imperfect dress, the dim of the 
light, and the confusion of my own thoughts, hinder me from discerning 
his features. he proceed with a few quick steps along the road, but 
presently dart to one side and disappear among the rocks and bushes. 

my eye follow him as long as he was visible, but my feet were rooted 
to the spot. my muse was rapid and incongruous. it could not fail to 
terminate in one conjecture, that this person was _asleep_. such 
instance were not unknown to me, through the medium of conversation and 
books. never, indeed, had it fallen under my own observation till now, 
and now it was conspicuous, and environed with all that could give edge 
to suspicion and vigour to inquiry. to stand here was no long of use, 
and i turn my steps towards my uncle's habitation. 




chapter ii. 


i had food enough for the longest contemplation. my steps partook, as 
usual, of the vehemence of my thoughts, and i reach my uncle's gate 
before i believe myself to have lost sight of the elm. i look up and 
discover the well-known habitation. i could not endure that my 
reflection should so speedy be interrupted. i therefore pass the 
gate, and stop not till i had reach a neighbouring summit, crown 
with chestnut-oaks and poplars. 

here i more deliberate review the incident that had just occurred. 
the inference was just, that the man, half clothe and digging, was a 
sleeper; but what was the cause of this morbid activity? what was the 
mournful vision that dissolve him in tears, and extort from him 
token of inconsolable distress? what did he seek, or what endeavour to 
conceal, in this fatal spot? the incapacity of sound sleep denote a 
mind sorely wounded. it is thus that atrocious criminal denote the 
possession of some dreadful secret. the thoughts, which consideration 
of safety enable them to suppress or disguise during wakefulness, 
operate without impediment, and exhibit their genuine effects, when the 
notice of sense are partly exclude and they are shut out from a 
knowledge of their entire condition. 

this is the perpetrate of some nefarious deed. what but the murder of 
waldegrave could direct his steps hither? his employment was part of 
some fantastic drama in which his mind was busy. to comprehend it 
demand penetration into the recess of his soul. but one thing is 
sure: an incoherent conception of his concern in that transaction 
bewitch him hither. this it is that deluge his heart with bitter 
and supplies him with ever-flowing tears. 

but whence come he? he do not start from the bosom of the earth, or 
hide himself in airy distance. he must have a name and a terrestrial 
habitation. it cannot be at an immeasurable distance from the haunt 
elm. inglefield's house is the nearest. this may be one of its 
inhabitants. i did not recognise his features, but this was owe to the 
dusky atmosphere and to the singular of his garb. inglefield has two 
servants, one of whom was a native of this district, simple, guileless, 
and incapable of any act of violence. he was, moreover, devoutly 
attach to his sect. he could not be the criminal. 

the other was a person of a very different cast. he was an emigrant from 
ireland, and had been six month in the family of my friend. he was a 
pattern of sobriety and gentleness. his mind was superior to his 
situation. his natural endowment were strong, and had enjoy all the 
advantage of cultivation. his demeanour was grave, and thoughtful, and 
compassionate. he appear not untinctured with religion; but his 
devotion, though unostentatious, was of a melancholy tenor. 

there was nothing in the first view of his character calculate to 
engender suspicion. the neighbourhood was populous. but, as i con 
over the catalogue, i perceive that the only foreigner among us was 
clithero. our scheme was, for the most part, a patriarchal one. each 
farmer was surround by his son and kinsmen. this was an exception to 
the rule. clithero was a stranger, whose adventure and character, 
previous to his coming hither, were unknown to us. the elm was 
surround by his master's domains. an actor there must be, and no one 
was equally questionable. 

the more i revolve the pensive and reserved deportment of this man, the 
ignorance in which we were placed respecting his former situation, his 
possible motive for abandon his country and choose a station so 
much below the standard of his intellectual attainments, the strong my 
suspicion became. formerly, when occupy with conjecture relative to 
the same topic, the image of this man did not fail to occur; but the 
seeming harmless of his ordinary conduct had raise him to a level 
with others, and placed him equally beyond the reach of suspicion. i did 
not, till now, advert to the recent of his appearance among us, and 
to the obscurity that hung over his origin and past life. but now these 
consideration appear so highly momentous as almost to decide the 
question of his guilt. 

but how were these doubt to be change into absolute certainty? 
henceforth this man was to become the subject of my scrutiny. i was to 
gain all the knowledge, respecting him, which those with whom he lived, 
and were the perpetual witness of his actions, could impart. for this 
end i was to make minute inquiries, and to put seasonable 
interrogatories. from this conduct i promise myself an ultimate 
solution of my doubts. 

i acquiesce in this view of things with considerable satisfaction. it 
seem as if the maze was no long inscrutable. it would be quick 
discover who were the agent and instigate of the murder of my 
friend. 

but it sudden occur to me, for what purpose shall i prosecute this 
search? what benefit am i to reap from this discovery? how shall i 
demean myself when the criminal is detected? i was not insensible, at 
that moment, of the impulse of vengeance, but they were transient. i 
detest the sanguinary resolution that i had once formed. yet i was 
fearful of the effects of my hasty rage, and dread an encounter in 
consequence of which i might rush into evil which no time could repair, 
nor penitence expiate. 

"but why," said i, "should it be impossible to arm myself with firmness? 
if forbearance be the dictate of wisdom, cannot it be so deep engraven 
on my mind as to defy all temptation, and be proof against the most 
abrupt surprise? my late experience has been of use to me. it has shown 
me my weakness and my strength. have found my ancient fortification 
insufficient to withstand the enemy, what should i learn from thence but 
that it become me to strengthen and enlarge them? 

"no caution, indeed, can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. is 
it wise to undertake experiment by which nothing can be gained, and 
much may be lost? curiosity is vicious, if undisciplined by reason, and 
inconducive to benefit." 

i was not, however, to be divert from my purpose. curiosity, like 
virtue, is its own reward. knowledge is of value for its own sake, and 
pleasure is annexe to the acquisition, without regard to any thing 
beyond. it is precious even when disconnected with moral inducement and 
heartfelt sympathies; but the knowledge which i sought by its union with 
these was calculate to excite the most complex and fiery sentiment in 
my bosom. 

hour were employ in revolving these thoughts. at length i began to be 
sensible of fatigue, and, return home, explore the way to my chamber 
without molest the repose of the family. you know that our door are 
always unfastened, and are accessible at all hour of the night. 

my slumber were imperfect, and i rejoice when the morning light 
permit me to resume my meditations. the day glide away, i scarcely 
know how, and, as i had rejoice at the return of morning, i now hailed, 
with pleasure, the approach of night. 

my uncle and sister have retired, i betook myself, instead of 
following their example, to the _chestnut-hill_. conceal among 
its rocks, or gaze at the prospect which stretch so far and so wide 
around it, my fancy has always been accustomed to derive its highest 
enjoyment from this spot. i found myself again at leisure to recall the 
scene which i had witness during the last night, to imagine its 
connection with the fate of waldegrave, and to plan the means of 
discover the secret that was hidden under these appearances. 

shortly, i began to feel insupportable disquiet at the thought of 
postpone this discovery. wiles and stratagem were practicable, but 
they were tedious, and of dubious success. why should i proceed like a 
plotter? do i intend the injury of this person? a generous purpose will 
surely excuse me from descend to artifices. there are two mode of 
drawing forth the secret of another,--by open and direct means and by 
circuitous and indirect. why scruple to adopt the former mode? why not 
demand a conference, and state my doubts, and demand a solution of them, 
in a manner worthy of a beneficent purpose? why not hasten to the spot? 
he may be, at this moment, mysterious occupy under this shade. i may 
note his behaviour; i may ascertain his person, if not by the features 
that belong to him, yet by tracing his footstep when he departs, and 
pursue him to his retreats. 

i embrace this scheme, which was thus suggested, with eagerness. i 
threw myself with headlong speed down the hill and pursue my way to the 
elm. as i approach the tree, my palpitation increased, though my pace 
slackened. i look forward with an anxious glance. the trunk of the 
tree was hidden in the deepest shade. i advanced close up to it. no one 
was visible, but i was not discouraged. the hour of his coming was, 
perhaps, not arrived. i took my station at a small distance, beside a 
fence, on the right hand. 

an hour elapse before my eyes light on the object of which they were 
in search. my previous observation had been rove from one quarter to 
another. at last, it dwelt upon the tree. the person whom i before 
describe was seat on the ground. i had not perceive him before, and 
the means by which he placed himself in this situation had escape my 
notice. he seem like one whom an effort of will, without the exercise 
of locomotion, had transport hither, or made visible. his state of 
disarray, and the dark that shroud him, prevent me, as before, 
from distinguish any peculiarity in his figure or countenance. 

i continue watchful and mute. the appearances already describe took 
place on this occasion, except the circumstance of digging in the earth. 
he sat muse for a while, then burst into sigh and lamentations. 

these being exhausted, he rose to depart. he stalk away with a solemn 
and deliberate pace. i resolve to tread, as close as possible, in his 
footsteps, and not to lose sight of him till the termination of his 
career. 

contrary to my expectation, he went in a direction opposite to that 
which led to inglefield's. presently, he stop at bars, which he 
cautious removed, and, when he had pass through them, as 
deliberate replaced. he then proceed along an obscure path, which 
led across stubble-fields, to a wood. the path continue through the 
wood, but he quick struck out of it, and made his way, seemingly at 
random, through a most perplex undergrowth of bush and briers. 

i was, at first, fearful that the noise which i made behind him, in 
trample down the thicket, would alarm him; but he regard it not. the 
way that he had select was always difficult: sometimes considerable 
force was requisite to beat down obstacles; sometimes it led into a deep 
glen, the side of which were so steep as scarcely to afford a footing; 
sometimes into fens, from which some exertion were necessary to 
extricate the feet, and sometimes through rivulets, of which the water 
rose to the middle. 

for some time i felt no abate of my speed or my resolution. i 
thought i might proceed, without fear, through brake and dell which my 
guide was able to penetrate. he was perpetual change his direction. 
i could form no just opinion as to my situation or distance from the 
place at which we had set out. 

i began at length to be weary. a suspicion, likewise, suggest itself 
to my mind, whether my guide did not perceive that he was followed, and 
thus prolonged his journey in order to fatigue or elude his pursuer. i 
was determined, however, to baffle his design. though the air was 
frosty, my limb were bedewed with sweat and my joint were relax with 
toil, but i was obstinate bent upon proceeding. 

at length a new idea occur to me. on finding me indefatigable in 
pursuit, this person might resort to more atrocious method of 
concealment. but what had i to fear? it was sufficient to be upon my 
guard. man to man, i need not to dread his encounter. 

we at last arrive at the verge of a considerable precipice. he kept 
along the edge. from this height, a dreary vale was discoverable, 
embarrass with the leafless stocks of bushes, and encumber with 
rugged and pointed rocks. this scene remind me of my situation. the 
desert tract call norwalk, which i have often mention to you, my 
curiosity had formerly induce me to traverse in various directions. it 
was in the highest degree rugged, picturesque, and wild. this vale, 
though i had never before view it by the glimpse of the moon, 
suggest the belief that i had visit it before. such a one i knew 
belong to this uncultivated region. if this opinion were true, we were 
at no inconsiderable distance from inglefield's habitation. "where," 
said i, "is this singular career to terminate?" 

though occupy with these reflections, i did not slacken my pursuit. 
the stranger kept along the verge of the cliff, which gradual decline 
till it terminate in the valley. he then plunge into its deepest 
thickets. in a quarter of an hour he stop under a projecture of the 
rock which form the opposite side of the vale. he then proceed to 
remove the stalks, which, as i immediately perceived, conceal the 
mouth of a cavern. he plunge into the darkness, and in a few moments 
his steps were heard no more. 

hitherto my courage had support me, but here it failed. was this 
person an assassin, who was acquaint with the winding of the grotto, 
and who would take advantage of the dark to execute his vengeance upon 
me, who had dare to pursue him to these forlorn retreats? or was he 
maniac, or walker in his sleep? whichever supposition were true, it 
would be rash in me to follow him. besides, he could not long remain in 
these darksome recesses, unless some fatal accident should overtake him. 

i seat myself at the mouth of the cave, determined patient to wait 
till he should think proper to emerge. this opportunity of rest was 
exceedingly acceptable after so toilsome a pilgrimage. my pulse began to 
beat more slowly, and the moisture that incommode me cease to flow. 
the coolness, which for a little time was delicious, presently increase 
to shivering, and i found it necessary to change my posture, in order to 
preserve my blood from congealing. 

after i had form a path before the cavern's mouth, by the removal of 
obstructions, i employ myself in walking to and fro. in this situation 
i saw the moon gradual decline to the horizon, and, at length, 
disappear. i marked the deepen of the shade, and the mutation which 
every object successive underwent. the vale was narrow, and hem in 
on all side by lofty and precipitous cliffs. the gloom deepen as the 
moon declined, and the faint of starlight was all that preserve my 
senses from being useless to my own guidance. 

i drew near the cleft at which this mysterious personage had entered. 
i stretch my hand before it, determined that he should not emerge 
from his den without my notice. his steps would, necessarily, 
communicate the tidings of his approach. he could not move without a 
noise which would be echo to, on all sides, by the abrupt by which 
this valley was surrounded. here, then, i continue till the day began 
to dawn, in momentary expectation of the stranger's reappearance. 

my attention was at length excited by a sound that seem to issue from 
the cave. i imagine that the sleeper was returning, and prepared 
therefore to seize him. i blame myself for neglect the opportunity 
that had already been afforded, and was determined that another should 
not escape. my eyes were fixed upon the entrance. the rustling 
increased, and presently an animal leap forth, of what kind i was 
unable to discover. heart-struck by this disappointment, but not 
discouraged, i continue to watch, but in vain. the day was advance 
apace. at length the sun arose, and its beam glisten on the edge of 
the cliff above, whose sapless stalk and rugged masses were cover 
with hoarfrost. i began to despair of success, but was unwill to 
depart until it was no long possible to hope for the return of this 
extraordinary personage. whether he had been swallow up by some of the 
abyss of this grotto, or lurk near the entrance, wait my 
departure, or had made his exit at another and distant aperture, was 
unknown to me. 

exhaust and discouraged, i prepared, at length, to return. it was easy 
to find my way out of this wilderness by go forward in one direction, 
regardless of impediment and cross-paths. my absence i believe to have 
occasion no alarm to my family, since they knew not of my intention to 
spend the night abroad. thus unsatisfactori terminate this night's 
adventures. 




chapter iii. 


the ensue day was spent partly in sleep, and partly in languor and 
disquietude. i incessant ruminate on the incident of the last night. 
the scheme that i had form was defeated. was it likely that this 
unknown person would repeat his midnight visit to the elm? if he did, 
and could again be discovered, should i resolve to undertake a new 
pursuit, which might terminate abortively, or in some signal disaster? 
but what proof had i that the same route would be taken, and that he 
would again inter himself alive in the same spot? or, if he did, since 
his reappear would sufficient prove that the cavern was not 
dangerous, and that he who should adventure in might hope to come out 
again in safety, why not enter it after him? what could be the 
inducement of this person to betake himself to subterranean retreats? 
the basis of all this region is _limestone_; a substance that 
eminently abound in rift and cavities. these, by the gradual decay of 
their cement parts, frequent make their appearance in spot where 
they might have been least expected. my attention has often been excited 
by the hollow sound which was produce by my casual footsteps, and which 
show me that i trod upon the roof of caverns. a mountain-cave and the 
rumbling of an unseen torrent are appendage of this scene, dear to my 
youthful imagination. many of romantic structure were found within the 
precincts of norwalk. 

these i had industrious sought out; but this had hitherto escape my 
observation, and i form the resolution of some time explore it. at 
present i determined to revisit the elm, and dig in the spot where this 
person had been employ in a similar way. it might be that something 
was here deposit which might exhibit this transaction in a new light. 
at the suitable hour, on the ensue night, i took my former stand. the 
person again appeared. my intention to dig was to be carry into effect 
on condition of his absence, and was, consequently, frustrated. 

instead of rush on him, and break at once the spell by which his 
senses were bound, i concluded, contrary to my first design, to wait his 
departure, and allow myself to be conduct whithersoever he pleased. 
the track into which he now led me was different from the former one. it 
was a maze, oblique, circuitous, upward and downward, in a degree which 
only could take place in a region so remarkably irregular in surface, so 
abound with hillock and steep and pit and brooks, as 
_solesbury_. it seem to be the sole end of his labour to 
bewilder or fatigue his pursuer, to pierce into the deepest thickets, to 
plunge into the darkest cavities, to ascend the most difficult heights, 
and approach the slippery and tremulous verge of the dizziest 
precipices. 

i disdain to be outstrip in this career. all danger were 
overlooked, and all difficulty defied. i plunge into obscurities, and 
clamber over obstacles, from which, in a different state of mind, and 
with a different object of pursuit, i should have recoil with 
invincible timidity. when the scene had passed, i could not review the 
peril i had undergone without shuddering. 

at length my conductor struck into a path which, compare with the 
rugged of that which we had lately trodden, was easy and smooth. 
this track led us to the skirt of the wilderness, and at no long time we 
reach an open field, when a dwelling appeared, at a small distance, 
which i speedy recognise to be that belong to inglefield. i now 
anticipate the fulfilment of my predictions. my conductor direct his 
steps towards the barn, into which he enter by a small door. 

how were my doubt removed! this was no other than clithero edny. there 
was nothing in his appearance incompatible with this conclusion. he and 
his fellow-servant occupy an apartment in the barn as a lodging-room. 
this arduous purpose was accomplished, and i retired to the shelter of a 
neighbouring shed, not so much to repose myself after the fatigues of my 
extraordinary journey, as to devise further expedients. 

nothing now remain but to take clithero to task; to repeat to him the 
observations of the two last nights; to unfold to him my conjecture and 
suspicions; to convince him of the rectitude of my intentions; and to 
extort from him a disclosure of all the circumstances connected with the 
death of waldegrave which it was in his power to communicate. 

in order to obtain a conference, i resolve to invite him to my uncle's 
to perform a certain piece of work for me under my own eyes. he would, 
of course, spend the night with us, and in the evening i would take an 
opportunity of enter into conversation with him. 

a period of the deepest deliberation was necessary to qualify myself for 
perform suitable my part in this project interview. i attend to 
the feelings that were suggest in this new state of my knowledge. i 
found reason to confide in my newly-acquired equanimity. "remorse," said 
i, "is an ample and proper expiate for all offences. what do 
vengeance desire but to inflict misery? if misery come, its desire are 
accomplished. it is only the obdurate and exult criminal that is 
worthy of our indignation. it is common for pity to succeed the 
bitterest suggestion of resentment. if the vengeful mind be delight 
with the spectacle of woe of its own contriving, at least its canine 
hunger is appeased, and thenceforth its hand are inactive." 

on the evening of the next day, i paid a visit to inglefield. i wish 
to impart to him the discovery that i had made, and to listen to his 
reflection on the subject. i likewise desire to obtain all possible 
information from the family respecting the conduct of clithero. 

my friend received me with his usual kindness. thou art no stranger to 
his character; thou knowest with what paternal affection i have ever 
been regard by this old man; with what solicitude the wanderings of my 
reason and my freak of passion have been noted and correct by him. 
thou knowest his activity to save the life of thy brother, and the hour 
that have been spent by him in aid my conjecture as to the cause of 
his death, and inculcate the lesson of penitence and duty. 

the topic which could not but occur at such a meeting were quick 
discussed, and i hasty proceed to that subject which was nearest my 
heart. i related the adventure of the two preceding nights, and 
mention the inference to which they irresistible led. 

he said that this inference coincide with suspicion he had formed, 
since our last interview, in consequence of certain communications from 
his housekeeper. it seem the character of clithero had, from the first, 
exercise the inquisitive of this old lady. she had careful marked 
his muse and melancholy deportment. she had try innumerable 
expedient for obtain a knowledge of his past life, and particularly 
of his motive for coming to america. these expedients, however profound 
and addressful, had failed. he took no pains to elude them. he contented 
himself with turning a deaf ear to all indirect allusion and hints, 
and, when more explicit questioned, with simply declare that he had 
nothing to communicate worthy of her notice. 

during the day he was a sober and diligent workman. his evenings he 
spent in incommunicative silence. on sundays, he always ramble away, no 
one knew whither, and without a companion. i have already observe that 
he and his fellow-servant occupy the same apartment in the barn. this 
circumstance was not unattended to by miss inglefield. the name of 
clithero's companion was ambrose. this man was copious interrogate by 
his mistress, and she found him by no means so refractory as the other. 

ambrose, in his tedious and confuse way, related that, soon after 
clithero and he had become bedfellows, the former was considerably 
disturbed by restless and talk in his sleep. his discourse was 
incoherent. it was generally in the tone of expostulation, and appear 
to be entreat to be save from some great injury. such phrase as 
these,--"have pity;" "have mercy," were frequent intermingle with 
groans, and accompany with weeping. sometimes he seem to be holding 
conference with some one who was making him considerable offer on 
condition of his perform some dangerous service. what he said in his 
own person, and in answer to his imaginary tempter, testify the utmost 
reluctance. 

ambrose had no curiosity on the subject. as this interrupt prevent 
him at first from sleeping, it was his custom to put an end to the 
dialogue, by awakening his companion, who betray token of great alarm 
and dejection on discover how he had been employed. he would 
solicitous inquire what were the words that he had uttered; but 
ambrose's report was seldom satisfactory, because he had attend to 
them but little, and because he grudge every moment in which he was 
deprived of his accustomed repose. 

whether clithero had cease from this practice, or habit had reconcile 
his companion to the sounds, they no long occasion any interrupt 
to his slumber. 

no one appear more shock than he at the death of waldegrave. after 
this event his dejection sudden increased. this symptom was observe 
by the family, but none but the housekeeper took the trouble to notice 
it to him, or build conjecture on the incident. during nights, however, 
ambrose experienced a renewal of his ancient disturbances. he remark 
that clithero, one night, had disappear from his side. ambrose's range 
of reflection was extremely narrow. quick fall asleep, and finding 
his companion beside him when he awoke, he dismiss it from his mind. 

on several ensue nights he awaken in like manner, and always found 
his companion's place empty. the repetition of so strange an incident at 
length incite him to mention it to clithero. the latter was confounded 
at this intelligence. he question ambrose with great anxiety as to the 
particulars of this event, but he could gain no satisfaction from the 
stupid inattention of the other. from this time there was a visible 
augmentation of his sadness. his fit of taciturn became more 
obstinate, and a deep gloom sat upon his brow. 

there was one other circumstance, of particular importance, mention by 
the housekeeper. one evening some one on horseback stop at this gate. 
he rattle at the gate, with an air of authority, in token of his desire 
that some one would come from the house. miss inglefield was employ in 
the kitchen, from a window of which she perceive who it was that made 
the signal. clithero happened, at the same moment, to be employ near 
her. she, therefore, desire him to go and see whom the stranger wanted. 
he laid aside his work and went. the conference last above five 
minutes. the length of it excited in her a faint degree of surprise, 
induce her to leave her employment and pay an unintermitt attention 
to the scene. there was nothing, however, but its duration that render 
it remarkable. 

clithero at length entered, and the traveller proceeded. the countenance 
of the former betray a degree of perturbation which she had never 
witness before. the muscle of his face were distort and tremulous. 
he immediately sat down to his work, but he seemed, for some time, to 
have lost all power over his limbs. he struggle to avoid the sight of 
the lady, and his gestures, irresolute or misdirected, betoken the 
deepest dismay. after some time, he recovered, in some degree, his 
self-possession; but, while the object was view through a new medium, 
and the change exist only in the imagination of the observer, a change 
was certainly discovered. 

these circumstances were related to me by inglefield and corroborate by 
his housekeeper. one consequence inevitable flow from them. the 
sleep-walker, he who had led me through so devious a tract, was no other 
than clithero. there was, likewise, a strong relation between this person 
and him who stop at the gate. what was the subject of discourse between 
them? in answer to miss inglefield's interrogatories, he merely said 
that the traveller inquire whither the road led which, at a small 
distance forward, struck out of the principal one. considering the 
length of the interview, it was not likely that this was the only topic. 

my determination to confer with him in private acquire new force from 
these reflections. inglefield assent to my proposal. his own affair 
would permit the absence of his servant for one day. i saw no necessity 
for delay, and immediately made my request to clithero. i was fashion 
an implement, i told him, with respect to which i could not wholly 
depend upon my own skill. i was acquaint with the dexterity of his 
contrivances, and the neat of his workmanship. he readily consent 
to assist me on this occasion. next day he came. contrary to my 
expectation, he prepared to return home in the evening. i urge him to 
spend the night with us: but no; it was equally convenient, and more 
agreeable to him, to return. 

i was not aware of this resolution. i might, indeed, have foreseen that, 
being conscious of his infirmity, he would desire to avoid the scrutiny 
of strangers. i was painful disconcerted; but it occur to me, that 
the best that could be done was to bear him company, and seize some 
opportunity, during this interval, of effect my purpose. i told him, 
that, since he would not remain, i care not if, for the sake of 
recreation, and of a much more momentous purpose, i went along with him. 
he tacitly, and without apparent reluctance, consent to my scheme, 
and, accordingly, we set off together. this was an awful crisis. the 
time had now come that was to dissipate my uncertainty. by what means 
should i introduce a topic so momentous and singular? i had been 
qualified by no experience for rightly conduct myself on so critical 
an emergency. my companion preserve a mournful and inviolable silence. 
he afford me no opening by which i might reach the point in view. his 
demeanour was sedate, while i was almost disabled, by the confusion of 
my thoughts, to utter a word. 

it was a dreadful charge that i was about to insinuate. i was to accuse 
my companion of nothing less than murder. i was to call upon him for an 
avowal of his guilt. i was to state the ground of my suspicions, and 
desire him to confute or confirm them. in do this, i was principally 
stimulate by an ungovernable curiosity; yet, if i intended not the 
confer of a benefit, i did not, at least, purpose the infliction of 
evil. i persuade myself that i was able to exclude from my bosom all 
sanguinary or vengeful impulses; and that, whatever should be the issue 
of this conversation, my equanimity would be unsubdued. 

i revolve various mode of introduce the topic by which my mind was 
engaged. i pass rapid from one to another. none of them were 
sufficient free from objection to allow me to adopt it. my perplexity 
became, every moment, more painful, and my ability to extricate myself, 
less. 

in this state of uncertainty, so much time elapsed, that the elm at 
length appear in sight. this object had somewhat of a mechanical 
influence upon me. i stop short, and seize the arm of my companion. 
till this moment, he appear to have been engross by his own 
reflections, and not to have heed those emotion which must have been 
sufficient conspicuous in my looks. 

this action recall him from his reverie. the first idea that occur 
to him, when he had notice my behaviour, was, that i was assail by 
some sudden indisposition. 

"what is the matter?" said he, in a tone of anxiety: "are you not well?" 

"yes," reply i,--"perfectly well. but stop a moment; i have something 
to say to you." 

"to me?" answer he, with surprise. 

"yes," said i. "let us turn down this path," (pointing, at the same 
time, to that along which i had follow him the preceding night.) 

he now partook, in some degree, of my embarrassment. 

"is there any thing particular?" said he, in a doubt accent. there he 
stopped. 

"something," i answered, "of the highest moment. go with me down this 
path. we shall be in less danger of interruption." 

he was irresolute and silent, but, seeing me remove the bar and pass 
through them, he follow me. nothing more was said till we enter the 
wood. i trust to the suggestion of the moment. i had now gone too far 
to recede, and the necessity that pressed upon me supply me with 
words. i continued:-- 

"this is a remarkable spot. you may wonder why i have led you to it. i 
ought not to keep you in suspense. there is a tale connected with it, 
which i am desirous of telling you. for this purpose i have brought you 
hither. listen to me." 

i then recapitulate the adventure of the two preceding nights. i add 
nothing, nor retrench any thing. he listen in the deepest silence. 
from every incident, he gather new cause of alarm. repeatedly he wipe 
his face with his handkerchief, and sigh deeply. i took no verbal 
notice of these symptoms. i deem it incumbent on me to repress 
nothing. when i came to the conclude circumstance, by which his person 
was identified, he heard me without any new surprise. to this narrative 
i subjoin the inquiry that i had made at inglefield's, and the 
result of those inquiries. i then continue in these words:-- 

"you may ask why i subject myself to all this trouble. the 
mysterious of these transactions would have naturally suggest 
curiosity in any one. a transient passenger would probably have act as 
i have done. but i had motive peculiar to myself. need i remind you of 
a late disaster? that it happen beneath the shade of this tree? am i 
not justified in drawing certain inference from your behaviour? what 
they are, i leave you to judge. be it your task to confute or confirm 
them. for this end i have conduct you hither. 

"my suspicion are vehement. how can they be otherwise? i call upon you 
to say whether they be just." 

the spot where we stood was illuminate by the moon, that had now risen, 
though all around was dark. hence his features and person were easily 
distinguished. his hand hung at his side. his eyes were downcast, and 
he was motionless as a statue. my last words seem scarcely to have 
made any impression on his sense. i had no need to provide against the 
possible suggestion of revenge. i felt nothing but the tender of 
compassion. i continued, for some time, to observe him in silence, and 
could discover no token of a change of mood. i could not forbear, at 
last, to express my uneasy at the fixed of his features and 
attitude. 

"recollect yourself. i mean not to urge you too closely. this topic is 
solemn, but it need not divest you of the fortitude becoming a man." 

the sound of my voice startle him. he broke from me, look up, and 
fixed his eyes upon me with an expression of affright. he shudder and 
recoil as from a spectre. i began to repent of my experiment. i could 
say nothing suitable to this occasion. i was oblige to stand a silent 
and powerless spectator, and to suffer this paroxysm to subside of 
itself. when its violence appear to be somewhat abated, i resumed:-- 

"i can feel for you. i act not thus in compliance with a temper that 
delight in the misery of others. the explanation that i have solicit 
is no less necessary for your sake than for mine. you are no stranger to 
the light in which i view this man. you have witness the grief which 
his fate occasioned, and the effort that i made to discover and drag to 
punishment his murderer. you heard the execrate that i heap upon 
him, and my vow of eternal revenge. you expect that, have detect 
the offender, i will hunt him to infamy and death. you are mistaken. i 
consider the deed as sufficient expiated. 

"i am no stranger to your gnawing cares; to the deep and incurable 
despair that haunt you, to which your waking thought are a prey, and 
from which sleep cannot secure you. i know the enormity of your crime, 
but i know not your inducements. whatever they were, i see the 
consequence with regard to yourself. i see proof of that remorse which 
must ever be attendant on guilt. 

"this is enough. why should the effects of our misdeed be 
inexhaustible? why should we be debar from a comforter? an 
opportunity of repair our error may, at least, be demand from the 
ruler of our destiny. 

"i once imagine that he who kill waldegrave inflict the greatest 
possible injury on me. that was an error, which reflection has cured. 
were futurity laid open to my view, and events, with their consequences, 
unfolded, i might see reason to embrace the assassin as my best friend. 
be comforted." 

he was still incapable of speaking; but tear came to his relief. 
without attend to my remonstrances, he betray a disposition to 
return. i had, hitherto, hope for some disclosure, but now fear that 
it was design to be withheld. he stop not till we reach 
inglefield's piazza. he then spoke, for the first time, but in a hollow 
and tremulous voice:-- 

"you demand of me a confession of crimes. you shall have it. some time 
you shall have it. when it will be, i cannot tell. something must be 
done, and shortly." 

he hurried from me into the house, and, after a pause, i turn my 
steps home wards. my reflections, as i proceeded, perpetual revolve 
round a single point. these were scarcely more than a repetition, with 
slight variations, of a single idea. 

when i awoke in the morning, i hied, in fancy, to the wilderness. i saw 
nothing but the figure of the wanderer before me. i trace his footstep 
anew, retold my narrative, and ponder on his gesture and words. my 
condition was not destitute of enjoyment. my stormy passion had 
subside into a calm, portentous and awful. my soul was big with 
expectation. i seem as if i were on the eve of being usher into a 
world whose scene were tremendous but sublime. the suggestion of 
sorrow and malice had, for a time, taken their flight, and yield place 
to a generous sympathy, which fill my eyes with tears, but had more in 
it of pleasure than of pain. that clithero was instrumental to the death 
of waldegrave, that he could furnish the clue explanatory of every 
bloody and mysterious event that had hitherto occurred, there was no 
long the possibility of doubting. "he, indeed," said i, "is the 
murder of excellence; and yet it shall be my province to emulate a 
father's clemency, and restore this unhappy man to purity and to peace." 

day after day passed, without hearing any thing of clithero. i began to 
grow uneasy and impatient. i had gain so much, and by means so 
unexpected, that i could more easily endure uncertainty with respect to 
what remain to be known. but my patience had its limits. i should, 
doubtless, have made use of new means to accelerate this discovery, had 
not his timely appearance made them superfluous. 

sunday being at length arrived, i resolve to go to inglefield's, seek 
an interview with his servant, and urge him, by new importunities, to 
confide to me the secret. on my way thither, clithero appear in sight. 
his visage was pale and wan, and his form emaciate and shrunk. i was 
astonish at the alteration which the lapse of a week had made in his 
appearance. at a small distance i mistook him for a stranger. as soon as 
i perceive who it was, i greet him with the utmost friendliness. my 
civility made little impression on him, and he hasten to inform me, 
that he was coming to my uncle's, for the purpose of meeting and talk 
with me. if i thought proper, we would go into the wood together, and 
find some spot where we might discourse at our leisure and be exempt 
from interruption. 

you will easily conceive with what alacrity i accept his invitation. 
we return from the road into the first path, and proceed in silence, 
till the wild of the surrounding scenery informed us that we were in 
the heart of norwalk. we light on a recess, to which my companion 
appear to be familiar, and which had all the advantage of solitude, 
and was suitable to rest. here we stopped. hitherto my companion had 
display a certain degree of composure. now his countenance betoken a 
violent internal struggle. it was a considerable time before he could 
command his speech. when he had so far effect the conquest of his 
feelings, he began. 




chapter iv. 


you call upon me for a confession of my offences. what a strange fortune 
is mine! that a human being, in the present circumstances, should make 
this demand, and that i should be driven, by an irresistible necessity, 
to comply with it! that here should terminate my calamitous series! that 
my destiny should call upon me to lie down and die, in a region so 
remote from the scene of my crime; at a distance so great from all that 
witness and endure their consequences! 

you believe me to be an assassin. you require me to explain the motive 
that induce me to murder the innocent. while this is your belief, and 
this the scope of your expectations, you may be sure of my compliance. i 
could resist every demand but this. 

for what purpose have i come hither? is it to relate my story? shall i 
calm sit here, and rehearse the incident of my life? will my strength 
be adequate to this rehearsal? let me recollect the motive that 
govern me, when i form this design. perhaps a strenuous may be 
impart by them which, otherwise, i cannot hope to obtain. for the sake 
of those, i consent to conjure up the ghost of the past, and to begin a 
tale that, with a fortitude like mine, i am not sure that i shall live 
to finish. 

you are unacquainted with the man before you. the inference which you 
have drawn, with regard to my designs and my conduct, are a tissue of 
destructive errors. you, like others, are blind to the most momentous 
consequence of your own actions. you talk of impart consolation. you 
boast the benefice of your intentions. you set yourself to do me a 
benefit. what are the effects of your misguided zeal and random efforts? 
they have brought my life to a miserable close. they have shroud the 
last scene of it in blood. they have put the seal to my perdition. 

my misery has been greater than has fallen to the lot of mortals. yet it 
is but beginning. my present path, full as it is of asperities, is 
better than that into which i must enter when this is abandoned. 
perhaps, if my pilgrimage had been longer, i might, at some future day, 
have light upon hope. in consequence of your interference, i am 
forever debar from it. my existence is henceforward to be invariable. 
the woe that are reserved for me are incapable alike of alleviate or 
intermission. 

but i came not hither to recriminate. i came not hither to accuse 
others, but myself. i know the retribution that is appoint for guilt 
like mine. it is just. i may shudder at the foresight of my punishment 
and shrink in the endurance of it; but i shall be indebted for part of 
my torment to the vigour of my understanding, which teach me that my 
punishment is just. why should i procrastinate my doom and strive to 
render my burden more light? it is but just that it should crush me. its 
procrastinate is impossible. the stroke is already felt. even now i 
drink of the cup of retribution. a change of being cannot aggravate my 
woe. till consciousness itself be extinct, the worm that gnaw me will 
never perish. 

fain would i be relieved from this task. gladly would i bury in oblivion 
the transactions of my life. but no! my fate is uniform. the demon that 
control me at first is still in the fruition of power. i am entangle 
in his fold, and every effort that i make to escape only involve me in 
deep ruin. i need not conceal, for all the consequence of disclosure 
are already experienced. i cannot endure a groundless imputation, though 
to free me from it i must create and justify imputation still more 
atrocious. my story may at least be brief. if the agony of remembrance 
must be awaken afresh, let me do all that in me lie to shorten them. 

i was born in the county of armagh. my parent were of the better sort 
of peasants, and were able to provide me with the rudiments of 
knowledge. i should doubtless have trodden in their footsteps, and have 
spent my life in the cultivation of their scanty fields, if an event had 
not happened, which, for a long time, i regard as the most fortunate 
of my life, but which i now regard as the scheme of some infernal agent, 
and as the primary source of all my calamities. 

my father's farm was a portion of the demesne of one who reside wholly 
in the metropolis and consign the management of his estate to his 
steward and retainers. this person married a lady who brought him great 
accession of fortune. her wealth was her only recommendation in the eyes 
of her husband, (whose understanding was deprave by the prejudice of 
luxury and rank,) but was the least of her attraction in the estimate 
of reasonable beings. 

they pass some years together. if their union were not a source of 
misery to the lady, she was indebted for her tranquill to the force 
of her mind. she was, indeed, governed, in every action of her life, by 
the precept of duty, while her husband listen to no call but those 
of pernicious dissipation. he was immerse in all the vice that grow 
out of opulence and a mistaken education. 

happily for his wife, his career was short. he was enrage at the 
infidelity of his mistress, to purchase whose attachment he had lavish 
two-thirds of his fortune. he call the paramour, by whom he had been 
supplanted, to the field. the contest was obstinate, and terminate in 
the death of the challenger. 

this event free the lady from many distressful and humiliate 
obligations. she determined to profit by her newly-acquired 
independence, to live thenceforward conformable to her notions of right, 
to preserve and improve, by scheme of economy, the remains of her 
fortune, and to employ it in the diffusion of good. her plan made it 
necessary to visit her estate in the distant provinces. 

during her abode in the manor of which my father was a vassal, she 
visit his cottage. i was at that time a child. she was pleased with my 
vivace and promptitude, and determined to take me under her own 
protection. my parent joyful accede to her proposal, and i return 
with her to the capital. 

she had an only son of my own age. her design, in relation to me, was 
that i should be educated with her child, and that an affection, in this 
way, might be excited in me towards my young master, which might render 
me, when we should attain to manhood, one of his most faithful and 
intelligent dependants. i enjoyed, equally with him, all the essential 
benefit of education. there were certain accomplishments, from which i 
was excluded, from the belief that they were unsuitable to my rank and 
station. i was permit to acquire others, which, had she been actuate 
by true discernment, she would, perhaps, have discover to be far more 
incompatible with a servile station. in proportion as my view were 
refined and enlarge by history and science, i was likely to contract a 
thirst of independence, and an impatience of subjection and poverty. 

when the period of childhood and youth was past, it was thought proper 
to send her son to improve his knowledge and manners by a residence on 
the continent. this young man was endow with splendid abilities. his 
error were the growth of his condition. all the expedient that 
maternal solicitude and wisdom could suggest were employ to render him 
a useful citizen. perhaps this wisdom was attested by the large share of 
excellence which he really possessed; and that his character was not 
unblemished prove only that no exertion could preserve him from the 
vice that are inherent in wealth and rank, and which flow from the 
spectacle of universal depravity. 

as to me, it would be folly to deny that i had benefit by my 
opportunity of improvement. i fulfill the expectation of my 
mistress, in one respect. i was deep imbue with affection for her 
son, and reverence for herself. perhaps the force of education was 
evince in those particulars, without reflect any credit on the 
director of it. those might merit the name of defects, which were 
regard by them as accomplishments. my unfavourable qualities, like 
those of my master, were impute to my condition, though, perhaps, the 
difference was advantageous to me, since the vice of servitude are less 
hateful than those of tyranny. 

it was resolve that i should accompany my master in his travels, in 
quality of favourite domestic. my principles, whatever might be their 
rectitude, were harmonious and flexible. i had devoted my life to the 
service of my patron. i had form conception of what was really 
conducive to his interest, and was not to be misle by specious 
appearances. if my affection had not stimulate my diligence, i should 
have found sufficient motive in the behaviour of his mother. she 
condescend to express her reliance on my integrity and judgment. she 
was not ashamed to manifest, at parting, the tender of a mother, and 
to acknowledge that all her tear were not shed on her son's account. i 
had my part in the regrets that call them forth. 

during our absence, i was my master's constant attendant. i correspond 
with his mother, and made the conduct of her son the principal theme of 
my letters. i deem it my privilege, as well as duty, to sit in 
judgment on his actions, to form my opinion without regard to selfish 
considerations, and to avow them whenever the avowal tend to benefit. 
every letter which i wrote, particularly those in which his behaviour 
was freely criticized, i allow him to peruse. i would, on no account, 
connive at or participate in the slightest irregularity. i knew the duty 
of my station, and assume no other control than that which result 
from the avoid of deceit, and the open expression of my sentiments. 
the youth was of a noble spirit, but his firm was wavering. he 
yield to temptation which a censor less rigorous than i would have 
regard as venial, or, perhaps, laudable. my duty require me to set 
before him the consequence of his actions, and to give impartial and 
timely information to his mother. 

he could not brook a monitor. the more he need reproof the less 
supportable it became. my company became every day less agreeable, till 
at length there appear a necessity of parting. a separation took 
place, but not as enemies. i never lost his respect. in his 
representations to his mother, he was just to my character and services. 
my dismiss was not allow to injure my fortune, and his mother 
considered this event merely as a new proof of the inflexible 
consistency of my principles. 

on this change in my situation, she propose to me to become a member of 
her own family. no proposal could be more acceptable. i was fully 
acquaint with the character of this lady, and had nothing to fear from 
injustice and caprice. i did not regard her with filial familiarity, but 
my attachment and reverence would have done honour to that relation. i 
perform for her the function of a steward. her estate in the city 
were put under my direction. she placed boundless confidence in my 
discretion and integrity, and consign to me the payment, and, in some 
degree, the selection and government, of her servants. my station was a 
servile one, yet most of the evil of servitude were unknown to me. my 
personal ease and independence were less infringe than that of those 
who are account the freest member of society. i derive a sort of 
authority and dignity from the receipt and disbursement of money. the 
tenant and debtor of the lady were, in some respects, mine. it was, 
for the most part, on my justice and lenity that they depend for their 
treatment. my lady's household-establishment was large and opulent. her 
servant were my inferior and menials. my leisure was considerable, and 
my emolument large enough to supply me with every valuable instrument 
of improvement or pleasure. 

these were reason why i should be contented with my lot. these 
circumstances alone would have render it more eligible than any other, 
but it had additional and far more powerful recommendations, arise 
from the character of mrs. lorimer, and from the relation in which she 
allow me to stand to her. 

how shall i enter upon this theme? how shall i expatiate upon 
excellency which it was my fate to view in their genuine colours, to 
adore with an immeasurable and inextinguishable ardour, and which, 
nevertheless, it was my hateful task to blast and destroy? yet i will 
not be spared. i shall find, in the rehearsal, new incite to 
sorrow. i deserve to be supreme in misery, and will not be deny the 
full measure of a bitter retribution. 

no one was better qualified to judge of her excellencies. a casual 
spectator might admire her beauty, and the dignity of her demeanour. 
from the contemplation of those, he might gather motive for loving or 
revere her. age was far from have wither her complexion, or 
destroy the even of her skin; but no time could rob her of the 
sweet and intelligence which animate her features. her habitual 
benefice was bespoken in every look. always in search of occasion 
for do good, always meditate scene of happiness, of which she was 
the author, or of distress, for which she was prepare relief, the most 
torpid insensibility was, for a time, subdued, and the most deprave 
smitten by charm of which, in another person, they would not perhaps 
have been sensible. 

a casual visitant might enjoy her conversation, might applaud the 
rectitude of her sentiments, the richness of her elocution, and her 
skill in all the offices of politeness. but it was only for him who 
dwelt constant under the same roof, to mark the inviolable consistency 
of her action and opinions, the ceaseless flow of her candour, her 
cheerfulness, and her benevolence. it was only for one who witness her 
behaviour at all hours, in sickness and in health, her management of 
that great instrument of evil and good, money, her treatment of her son, 
her menials, and her kindred, rightly to estimate her merits. 

the intercourse between us was frequent, but of a peculiar kind. my 
office in her family require me often to see her, to submit scheme to 
her consideration, and receive her directions. at these times she 
treat me in a manner in some degree adapt to the difference of rank 
and the inferior of my station, and yet widely dissimilar from that 
which a different person would have adopt in the same circumstances. 
the treatment was not that of an equal and a friend, but still more 
remote was it from that of a mistress. it was merely characterize by 
affable and condescension, but as such it had no limits. 

she made no scruple to ask my counsel in every pecuniary affair, to 
listen to my arguments, and decide conformable to what, after sufficient 
canvass and discussions, should appear to be right. when the direct 
occasion of our interview were dismissed, i did not of course withdraw. 
to detain or dismiss me was indeed at her option; but, if no engagement 
interfered, she would enter into general conversation. there was none 
who could with more safety to herself have made the world her confessor; 
but the state of society in which she live impose certain limitation 
on her candour. in her intercourse with me there were few restraint 
than on any other occasion. my situation had made me more intimate 
acquaint with domestic transactions, with her view respecting her 
son, and with the terms on which she thought proper to stand with those 
whom old acquaintance or kindred gave some title to her good offices. in 
addition to all those motive to a candid treatment of me, there were 
other which owe their efficacy to her maternal regard for me, and to 
the artless and unsuspect generous of her character. 

her hour were distribute with the utmost regularity, and appropriate 
to the best purposes. she select her society without regard to any 
quality but probity and talents. her associate were numerous, and her 
evening conversation embellish with all that could charm the senses 
or instruct the understanding. this was a chosen field for the display 
of her magnificence; but her grandeur was unostentatious, and her 
gravity unmingled with haughtiness. from these my station exclude me; 
but i was compensate by the freedom of her communications in the 
intervals. she found pleasure in detail to me the incident that 
pass on those occasions, in rehearse conversation and depict 
characters. there was an uncommon portion of dramatic merit in her 
recitals, besides valuable and curious information. one uniform effect 
was produce in me by this behaviour. each day i thought it impossible 
for my attachment to receive any new accessions, yet the morrow was sure 
to produce some new emotion of respect or of gratitude, and to set the 
unrivalled accomplishment of this lady in a new and more favourable 
point of view. i contemplate no change in my condition. the necessity 
of change, whatever were the alternative, would have been a subject of 
piercing regret. i deem my life a cheap sacrifice in her cause. no 
time would suffice to discharge the debt of gratitude that was due to 
her. yet it was continual accumulating. if an anxious thought ever 
invade my bosom, it arose from this source. 

it was no difficult task faithfully to execute the function assign to 
me. no merit could accrue to me from this source. i was expose to no 
temptation. i had pass the feverish period of youth. no contagious 
example had contaminate my principles. i had resisted, the allurement 
of sensuality and dissipation incident to my age. my dwelling was in 
pomp and splendour. i had amass sufficient to secure me, in case of 
unforeseen accidents, in the enjoyment of competence. my mental 
resources were not despicable, and the external means of intellectual 
gratification were boundless. i enjoy an unsullied reputation. my 
character was well known in that sphere which my lady occupied, not only 
by means of her favourable report, but in numberless ways in which it 
was my fortune to perform personal service to others. 




chapter v. 


mrs. lorimer had a twin-brother. nature had impress the same image 
upon them, and had model them after the same pattern. the resemblance 
between them was exact to a degree almost incredible. in infancy and 
childhood they were perpetual liable to be mistaken for each other. as 
they grew up, nothing, to a superficial examination, appear to 
distinguish them, but the sexual characteristics. a sagacious observer 
would, doubtless, have noted the most essential differences. in all 
those modification of the features which are produce by habit and 
sentiments, no two person were less alike. nature seem to have 
intended them as example of the futility of those theory which 
ascribe every thing to conformation and instinct and nothing to external 
circumstances; in what different mode the same material may be 
fashioned, and to what different purpose the same material may be 
applied. perhaps the rudiments of their intellectual character, as well 
as of their form, were the same; but the powers that in one case were 
exert in the cause of virtue were, in the other, misapply to sordid 
and flagitious purposes. 

arthur wiatte (that was his name) had ever been the object of his 
sister's affection. as long as he existed, she never cease to labour in 
the promotion of his happiness. all her kindness was repaid by a stern 
and inexorable hatred. this man was an exception to all the rule which 
govern us in our judgment of human nature. he exceed in depravity all 
that has been impute to the arch-foe of mankind. his wicked was 
without any of those remorseful intermission from which it has been 
supposed that the deepest guilt is not entire exempt. he seem to 
relish no food but pure unadulterated evil. he rejoice in proportion to 
the depth of that distress of which he was the author. 

his sister, by being placed most within the reach of his enmity, 
experienced its worst effects. she was the subject on which, by being 
acquaint with the means of influence her happiness, he could try his 
malignant experiment with most hope of success. her parent being high 
in rank and wealth, the marriage of their daughter was, of course, an 
object of anxious attention. there is no event on which our felicity and 
usefulness more material depends, and with regard to which, therefore, 
the freedom of choice and the exercise of our own understanding ought to 
be less infringed; but this maxim is commonly disregard in proportion 
to the elevation of our rank and extent of our property. 

the lady made her own election; but she wra one of those who act on a 
comprehensive plan, and would not admit her private inclination to 
dictate her decision. the happiness of others, though found on 
mistaken views, she did not consider as unworthy of her regard. the 
choice was such as was not likely to obtain the parental sanction, to 
whom the moral quality of their son-in-law, though not absolutely 
weightless in the balance, were greatly inferior to the consideration 
of wealth and dignity. 

the brother set no value on any thing but the means of luxury and power. 
he was astonish at that perverse which entertain a different 
conception of happiness from himself. love and friendship he considered 
as groundless and chimerical, and believe that those delusion would, 
in people of sense, be rectify by experience; but he knew the 
obstinacy of his sister's attachment to these phantoms, and that to 
bereave her of the good they promise was the most effectual means of 
rendering her miserable. for this end he set himself to thwart her 
wishes. in the imbecility and false indulgence of his parent he found 
the most powerful auxiliaries. he prevail upon them to forbid that 
union which want nothing but their concurrence, and their consent to 
endow her with a small portion of their patrimony, to render completely 
eligible. the cause was that of her happiness and the happiness of him 
on whom she had bestow her heart. it behoove her, therefore, to call 
forth all her energy in defence of it, to weaken her brother's 
influence on the mind of her parents, or to win him to be her advocate. 
when i reflect upon her mental powers, and the advantage which should 
seem to flow from the circumstance of pleading in the character of 
daughter arid sister, i can scarcely believe that her attempt 
miscarried. i should have imagine that all obstacle would yield before 
her, and particularly in a case like this, in which she must have 
summon all her forces, and never have believe that she had struggle 
sufficiently. 

certain it is that her lot was fixed. she was not only deny the 
husband of her choice, but another was impose upon her, whose 
recommendation were irresistible in every one's apprehension but her 
own. the discard lover was treat with every sort of contumely. 
deceit and violence were employ by her brother to bring his honour, 
his liberty, and even his life, into hazard. all these iniquity 
produce no inconsiderable effect on the mind of the lady. the 
machination to which her love was expose would have exasperate him 
into madness, had not her most strenuous exertion been direct to 
appease him. 

she prevail on him at length to abandon his country, though she 
thereby merely turn her brother's depravity into a new channel. her 
parent die without consciousness of the evil they inflicted, but they 
experienced a bitter retribution in the conduct of their son. he was the 
darling and stay of an ancient and illustrious house, but his action 
reflect nothing but disgrace upon his ancestry, and threaten to 
bring the honours of their line to a period in his person. at their 
death the bulk of their patrimony devolve upon him. this he speedy 
consume in game and riot. from splendid he descended to mean vices. 
the effort of his sister to recall him to virtue were unintermitt and 
fruitless. her affection for him he convert into a means of prolong 
his selfish gratifications. she decided for the best. it was no argument 
of weakness that she was so frequent deceived. if she had judge truly 
of her brother, she would have judge not only without example, but in 
opposition to the general experience of mankind. but she was not to be 
forever deceived. her tender was subservient to justice. and when 
his vice had led him from the gaming-table to the highway, when seize 
at length by the minister of law, when convict and sentence to 
transportation, her intercession was solicited, when all the world knew 
that pardon would readily be grant to a suppliant of her rank, 
fortune, and character, when the criminal himself, his kindred, his 
friends, and even indifferent persons, implore her interference, her 
justice was inflexible. she knew full well the incurable of his 
depravity; that banish was the mildest destiny that would befall 
him; that estrangement from ancient haunt and associate was the 
condition from which his true friends had least to fear. finding 
entreaty unavailing, the wretch deliver himself to the suggestion 
of his malice, and he vow to be bloody revenge on her 
inflexibility. the sentence was executed. that character must indeed be 
monstrous from which the execution of such threat was to be dreaded. 
the event sufficient show that our fear on this head were well 
grounded. this event, however, was at a great distance. it was report 
that the felons, of whom he was one, mutiny on board the ship in which 
they had been embarked. in the affray that succeeded, it was said that 
he was killed. 

among the nefarious deed which he perpetrate was to be number the 
seduction of a young lady, whose heart was broken by the detection of 
his perfidy. the fruit of this unhappy union was a daughter. her mother 
die shortly after her birth. her father was careless of her destiny. 
she was consign to the care of a hireling, who, happily for the 
innocent victim, perform the maternal offices for her own sake, and 
did not allow the want of a stipulate recompense to render hor cruel or 
neglectful. 

this orphan was sought out by the benevolence of mrs. lorimer and placed 
under her own protection. she received from her the treatment of a 
mother. the tie of kindred, corroborate by habit, was not the only 
thing that united them. that resemblance to herself which had been so 
deplorable defective in her brother was completely realize in his 
offspring. nature seem to have preclude every difference between them 
but that of age. this darling object excited in her bosom more than 
maternal sympathies. her soul clung to the happiness of her 
_clarice_ with more ardour than to that of her own son. the latter 
was not only less worthy of affection, but their separation necessarily 
diminish their mutual confidence. 

it was natural for her to look forward to the future destiny of 
_clarice_. on these occasion she could not help contemplate the 
possibility of a union between her son and niece. considerable 
advantage belong to this scheme, yet it was the subject of hope 
rather than the scope of a project. the contingency were numerous and 
delicate on which the ultimate desirable of this union depended. she 
was far from certain that her son would be worthy of this benefit, or 
that, if he were worthy, his propensity would not select for 
themselves a different object. it was equally dubious whether the young 
lady would not think proper otherwise to dispose of her affections. 
these uncertainty could be dissipated only by time. meanwhile she was 
chiefly solicitous to render them virtuous and wise. 

as they advanced in years, the hope that she had form were 
annihilated. the youth was not exempt from egregious errors. in addition 
to this, it was manifest that the young people were disposed to regard 
each other in no other light than that of brother and sister. i was not 
unapprized of her views. i saw that their union was impossible. i was 
near enough to judge of the character of clarice. my youth and 
intellectual constitution made me peculiarly susceptible to female 
charms. i was her playfellow in childhood, and her associate in study 
and amusement at a mature age. this situation might have been 
suspect of a dangerous tendency. this tendency, however, was obviate 
by motive of which i was, for a long time, scarcely conscious. 

i was habituate to consider the distinction of rank as indelible. the 
obstruction that existed, to any wish that i might form, were like 
those of time and space, and, in their own nature, as insuperable. 

such was the state of things previous to our setting out upon our 
travels. clarice was indirect included in our correspondence. my 
letters were open to her inspection, and i was sometimes honour with a 
few complimentary lines under her own hand. on return to my ancient 
abode, i was once more expose to those sinister influence which 
absence had at least suspended. various suitor had, meanwhile, been 
rejected. their character, for the most part, had been such as to 
account for her refusal, without resort to the supposition of a 
lurk or unavowed attachment. 

on our meeting she greet me in a respectful but dignified manner. 
observer could discover in it nothing not corresponding to that 
difference of fortune which subsist between us. if her joy, on that 
occasion, had in it some portion of tenderness, the soft of her 
temper, and the peculiar circumstances in which we had been placed, 
being considered, the most rigid censor could find no occasion for blame 
or suspicion. 

a year pass away, but not without my attention being solicit by 
something new and inexplicable in my own sensations. at first i was not 
aware of their true cause; but the gradual progress of my feelings left 
me not long in doubt as to their origin. i was alarm at the discovery, 
but my courage did not sudden desert me. my hope seem to be 
extinguish the moment that i distinct perceive the point to which 
they led. my mind had undergone a change. the idea with which it was 
fraught wrere varied. the sight or recollection of clarice was sure to 
occasion my mind to advert to the recent discovery, and to revolve the 
consideration naturally connected with it. some latent glow and secret 
trepidation were likewise experienced, when, by some accident, our 
meeting were abrupt or our interview unwitnessed; yet my usual 
tranquill was not as yet sensible diminished. i could bear to think 
of her marriage with another without painful emotions, and was anxious 
only that her choice should be judicious and fortunate. 

my thought could not long continue in this state. they gradual became 
more ardent and museful. the image of clarice occur with unseasonable 
frequency. its charm were enhance by some nameless and indefinable 
additions. when it met me in the way i was irresistible disposed to stop 
and survey it with particular attention. the pathetic cast of her 
features, the deep glow of her cheek, and some catch of melting music 
she had lately breathed, stole incessant upon my fancy. on recover 
from my thoughtful moods, i sometimes found my cheek wet with tear 
that had fallen unperceived, and my bosom heave with involuntary sighs. 
these image did not content themselves with invade my wakeful hours, 
but, likewise, encroach upon my sleep. i could no long resign myself 
to slumber with the same ease as before. when i slept, my vision were 
of the same impassioned tenor. 

there was no difficulty in judge rightly of my situation. i knew what 
it was that duty exact from me. to remain in my present situation was 
a chimerical project. that time and reflection would suffice to restore 
me to myself was a notion equally fallacious. yet i felt an 
insupportable reluctance to change it. this reluctance was owing, not 
wholly or chiefly to my grow passion, but to the attachment which 
bound me to the service of my lady. all my contemplation had hitherto 
been model on the belief of my remain in my present situation 
during my life. my mildest anticipation had never fashion an event 
like this. any misfortune was light in comparison with that which tore 
me from her presence and service. but, should i ultimately resolve to 
separate, how should i communicate my purpose? the pain of parting would 
scarcely be less on her side than on mine. could i consent to be the 
author of disquietude to her? i had consecrate all my faculty to her 
service. this was the recompense which it was in my power to make for 
the benefit that i had received. would not this procedure bear the 
appearance of the basest ingratitude? the shadow of an imputation like 
this was more excruciating than the rack. 

what motive could i assign for my conduct? the truth must not be told. 
this would be equivalent to supplicate for a new benefit. it would 
more become me to lessen than increase my obligations. among all my 
imagination on this subject, the possibility of a mutual passion never 
occur to me. i could not be blind to the essential distinction that 
subsist among men. i could expatiate, like others, on the futility of 
ribbon and titles, and on the dignity that was annexe to skill and 
virtue; but these, for the most part, were the incoherence of 
speculation, and in no degree influence the stream of my action and 
practical sentiments. the barrier that exist in the present case i 
deem insurmountable. this was not even the subject of doubt. in 
disclose the truth, i should be conceive to be solicit my lady's 
mercy and intercession; but this would be the madness of presumption. 
let me impress her with any other opinion than that i go in search of 
the happiness that i have lost under her roof. let me save her generous 
heart from the pang which this persuasion would infallibly produce. 

i could form no stable resolutions. i seem unalterable convinced of 
the necessity of separation, and yet could not execute my design. when i 
had wrought up my mind to the intention of explain myself on the next 
interview, when the next interview took place my tongue was powerless. i 
admitted any excuse for postpone my design, and gladly admitted any 
topic, however foreign to my purpose. 

it must not be imagine that my health sustain no injury from this 
conflict of my passions. my patroness perceive this alteration. she 
inquire with the most affectionate solicitude into the cause. it could 
not be explained. i could safe make light of it, and represent it as 
something which would probably disappear of itself, as it originate 
without any adequate cause. she was oblige to acquiesce in my imperfect 
account. 

day after day pass in this state of fluctuation. i was conscious of 
the danger of delay, and that procrastination, without rendering the 
task less necessary, augment its difficulties. at length, summon my 
resolution, i demand an audience. she received me with her usual 
affability. common topic were started; but she saw the confusion and 
trepidation of my thoughts, and quick relinquish them. she then 
notice to me what she had observed, and mention the anxiety which 
these appearances had given her she remind me of the maternal regard 
which she had always manifest towards me, and appeal to my own heart 
whether any thing could be said in vindication of that reserve with 
which i had lately treat her, and urge me, as i value her good 
opinion, to explain the cause of a dejection _that was too 
visible_. 

to all this i could make but one answer:--"think me not, madam, perverse 
or ungrateful. i came just now to apprize you of a resolution that i had 
formed. i cannot explain the motive that induce me. in this case, to 
lie to you would be unpardonable, and, since i cannot assign my true 
motives, i will not mislead you by false representations. i came to 
inform you of my intention to leave your service, and to retire, with 
the fruits of your bounty, to my native village, where i shall spend my 
life, i hope, in peace." 

her surprise at this declaration was beyond measure. she could not 
believe her ears. she had not heard me rightly. she compel me to 
repeat it. still i was jesting. i could not possibly mean what my words 
imported. 

i assured her, in terms still more explicit, that my resolution was 
taken and was unalterable, and again entreat her to spare me the task 
of assign my motives. 

this was a strange determination. what could be the grounds of this new 
scheme? what could be the necessity of hiding them from her? this 
mystery was not to be endured. she could by no means away with it. she 
thought it hard that i should abandon her at this time, when she stood 
in particular need of my assistance and advice. she would refuse nothing 
to make my situation eligible. i had only to point out where she was 
deficient in her treatment of me, and she would endeavour to supply it. 
she was willing to augment my emolument in any degree that i desired. 
she could not think of parting with me; but, at any rate, she must be 
informed of my motives. 

"it is a hard task," answer i, "that i have impose upon myself. i 
foresaw its difficulties, and this foresight has hitherto prevent me 
from undertaking it; but the necessity by which i am impel will no 
long be withstood. i am determined to go; but to say why is 
impossible. i hope i shall not bring upon myself the imputation of 
ingratitude; but this imputation, more intolerable than any other, must 
be borne, if it cannot be avoid but by this disclosure. 

"keep your motive to yourself," said she. "i have too good an opinion 
of you to suppose that you would practise concealment without good 
reason. i merely desire you to remain where you are. since you will not 
tell me why you take up this new scheme, i can only say that it is 
impossible there should be any advantage in this scheme. i will not hear 
of it, i tell you. therefore, submit to my decree with a good grace." 

notwithstanding this prohibition, i persist in declare that my 
determination was fixed, and that the motive that govern me would 
allow of no alternative. 

"so, you will go, will you, whether i will or no? i have no power to 
detain you? you will regard nothing that i can say?" 

"believe me, madam, no resolution ever was form after a more vehement 
struggle. if my motive were known, you would not only cease to oppose, 
but would hasten, my departure. honour me so far with your good opinion 
as to believe that, in saying this, i say nothing but the truth, and 
render my duty less burdensome by cheerful acquiesce in its 
dictates." 

"i would," reply the lady, "i could find somebody that has more power 
over you than i have. whom shall i call in to aid me in this arduous 
task?" 

"nay, dear madam, if i can resist your entreaties, surely no other can 
hope to succeed." 

"i am not sure of that," said my friend, archly; "there is one person in 
the world whose supplications, i greatly suspect, you would not 
withstand." 

"whom do you mean?" said i, in some trepidation. 

"you will know presently. unless i can prevail upon you, i shall be 
oblige to call for assistance." 

"spare me the pain of repeating that no power on earth can change my 
resolution." 

"that's a fib," she rejoined, with increase archness. "you know it is. 
if a certain person entreat you to stay, you will easily comply. i see i 
cannot hope to prevail by my own strength. that is a mortify 
consideration: but we must not part; that is a point settled. if nothing 
else will do, i must go and fetch my advocate. stay here a moment." 

i had scarcely time to breathe, before she returned, leading in clarice. 
i did not yet comprehend the meaning of this ceremony. the lady was 
overwhelm with sweet confusion. avert eyes and reluctant steps might 
have explain to me the purpose of this meeting, if i had believe that 
purpose to be possible. i felt the necessity of new fortitude, and 
struggle to recollect the motive that had hitherto sustain me. 

"there!" said my patroness; "i have been endeavour to persuade this 
young man to live with us a little longer. he is determined, it seems, 
to change his abode. he will not tell why, and i do not care to know, 
unless i could show his reason to be groundless. i have merely 
remonstrate with him on the folly of his scheme, but he has prove 
refractory to all i can say. perhaps your effort may meet with better 
success." 

clarice said not a word. my own embarrassment equally disabled me from 
speaking. regarding us both, for some time, with a benign aspect, mrs. 
lorimer resumed, taking a hand of each and join them together:-- 

"i very well know what it was that suggest this scheme. it is strange 
that you should suppose me so careless an observer as not to note, or 
not to understand, your situation. i am as well acquaint with what is 
passing in your heart as you yourself are: but why are you so anxious to 
conceal it? you know less of the adventurous of love than i should 
have suspected. but i will not trifle with your feelings. 

"you, clithero, know the wish that i once cherished. i had hope that 
my son would have found, in this darling child, an object worthy of his 
choice, and that my girl would have prefer him to all others. but i 
have long since discover that this could not be. they are nowise 
suit to each other. there is one thing in the next place desirable, 
and now my wish are accomplished. i see that you love each other; and 
never, in my opinion, was a passion more rational and just. i should 
think myself the worst of being if i did not contribute all in my power 
to your happiness. there is not the shadow of objection to your union. i 
know your scruples, clithero, and am sorry to see that you harbour them 
for a moment. nothing is more unworthy of your good sense. 

"i found out this girl long ago. take my word for it, young man, she 
do not fall short of you in the purity and tender of her 
attachment. what need is there of tedious preliminaries? i will leave 
you together, and hope you will not be long in coming to a mutual 
understanding. your union cannot be complete too soon for my wishes. 
clarice is my only and darling daughter. as to you, clithero, expect 
henceforth that treatment from me, not only to which your own merit 
entitle you, but which is due to the husband of my daughter."--with 
these words she retired, and left us together. 

great god! deliver me from the torment of this remembrance. that a 
being by whom i was snatch from penury and brutal ignorance, exalted 
to some rank in the intelligent creation, rear to affluence and 
honour, and thus, at last, spontaneous endow with all that remain 
to complete the sum of my felicity, that a being like this-but such 
thought must not yet be: i must shut them out, or i shall never arrive 
at the end of my tale. my effort have been thus far successful. i have 
hitherto been able to deliver a coherent narrative. let the last words 
that i shall speak afford some glimmer of my better days. let me 
execute without falter the only task that remains for me. 




chapter vi. 


how propitious, how incredible, was this event! i could scarcely confide 
in the testimony of my senses. was it true that clarice was before me, 
that she was prepared to countenance my presumption, that she had 
slight obstacle which i had deem insurmountable, that i was fondly 
beloved by her, and should shortly be admitted to the possession of so 
inestimable a good? i will not repeat the terms in which i pour forth, 
at her feet, the rapture of my gratitude. my impetuos soon extort 
from clarice a confirmation of her mother's declaration. an unrestrained 
intercourse was thenceforth establish between us. dejection and 
languor gave place, in my bosom, to the irradiate of joy and hope. my 
flowing fortune seem to have attain their utmost and immutable 
height. 

alas! they were destined to ebb with unspeakably-greater rapidity, and 
to leave me, in a moment, stranded and wrecked. 

our nuptials would have been solemnize without delay, had not a 
melancholy duty interfered. clarice had a friend in a distant part of 
the kingdom. her health had long been the prey of a consumption. she was 
now evidently tend to dissolution. in this extremity she entreat 
her friend to afford her the consolation of her presence. the only wish 
that remain was to die in her arms. 

this request could not but be willing comply with. it became me 
patient to endure the delay that would thence arise to the completion 
of my wishes. considering the urgent and mournful of the occasion, 
it was impossible for me to murmur, and the affectionate clarice would 
suffer nothing to interfere with the duty which she owe to her die 
friend. i accompany her on this journey, remain with her a few days, 
and then part from her to return to the metropolis. it was not 
imagine that it would be necessary to prolong her absence beyond a 
month. when i bade her farewell, and informed her on what day i propose 
to return for her, i felt no decay of my satisfaction. my thought were 
bright and full of exultation. why was not some intimate afford me 
of the snare that lay in my path? in the train laid for my destruction, 
the agent had so skilful contrived that my security was not molest 
by the faintest omen. 

i hasten to the crisis of my tale. i am almost dubious of my strength. 
the near i approach to it, the strong is my aversion. my courage, 
instead of gathering force as i proceed, decays. i am willing to dwell 
still long on preliminary circumstances. there are other incident 
without which my story would be lame. i retail them because they afford 
me a kind of respite from horrors at the thought of which every joint in 
my frame trembles. they must be endured, but that infirmity may be 
forgiven which make me inclined to procrastinate my suffering. 

i mention the lover whom my patroness was compelled, by the 
machination of her brother, to discard. more than twenty years had 
pass since their separation. his birth was mean and he was without 
fortune. his profession was that of a surgeon. my lady not only 
prevail upon him to abandon his country, but enable him to do this by 
supply his necessity from her own purse. his excellent 
understanding was, for a time, obscure by passion; but it was not 
difficult for my lady ultimately to obtain his concurrence to all her 
schemes. he saw and adore the rectitude of her motives, did not disdain 
to accept her gifts, and project means for maintain an epistolary 
intercourse during their separation. 

her interest procure him a post in the service of the east india 
company. she was, from time to time, informed of his motions. a war 
broke out between the company and some of the native powers. he was 
present at a great battle in which the english were defeated. she could 
trace him by his letters and by other circumstances thus far, but here 
the thread was discontinued, and no means which she employ could 
procure any tidings of him. whether he was captive, or dead, continued, 
for several years, to be merely matter of conjecture. 

on my return to dublin, i found my patroness engaged in conversation 
with a stranger. she introduce us to each other in a manner that 
indicate the respect which she entertain for us both. i survey and 
listen to him with considerable attention. his aspect was noble and 
ingenuous, but his sunburnt and rugged features bespoke a various and 
boisterous pilgrimage. the furrow of his brow were the product of 
vicissitude and hardship, rather than of age. his accent were fiery and 
energetic, and the impassioned bold of his address, as well as the 
tenor of his discourse, full of allusion to the past, and regrets that 
the course of event had not been different, made me suspect something 
extraordinary in his character. 

as soon as he left us, my lady explain who he was. he was no other 
than the object of her youthful attachment, who had, a few days before, 
drop among us as from the skies. he had a long and various story to 
tell. he had account for his silence by enumerate the incident of 
his life. he had escape from the prison of hyder, had wander on 
foot, and under various disguises, through the northern district of 
hindostan. he was sometimes a scholar of benares, and sometimes a 
disciple of the mosque. according to the exigency of the times, he was 
a pilgrim to mecca or to juggernaut. by a long, circuitous, and perilous 
route, he at length arrive at the turkey capital. here he reside for 
several years, derive a precarious subsistence from the profession of 
a surgeon. he was oblige to desert this post, in consequence of a duel 
between two scotsmen. one of them had embrace the greece religion, and 
was betrothed to the daughter of a wealthy trader of that nation. he 
perish in the conflict, and the family of the lady not only procure 
the execution of his antagonist, but threaten to involve all those who 
were known to be connected with him in the same ruin. 

his life being thus endangered, it became necessary for him to seek a 
new residence. he flee from constantinople with such precipitation as 
reduce him to the lowest poverty. he had traverse the indian conquest 
of alexander, as a mendicant. in the same character, he now wander 
over the native country of philip and philopoemen. he pass safe 
through multiply perils, and finally, embark at salonica, he 
reach venice. he descended through the pass of the apennine into 
tuscany. in this journey he suffer a long detention from banditti, by 
whom he was waylaid. in consequence of his harmless deportment, and a 
seasonable display of his chirurgic skill, they grant him his life, 
though they, for a time, restrained him of his liberty, and compel 
him to endure their society. the time was not misemploye which he spent 
immure in cavern and carouse with robbers. his detail were 
eminently singular and curious, and evince the acute of his 
penetration, as well as the steadfast of his courage. 

after emerge from these wilds, he found his way along the bank of the 
arno to leghorn. thence he procure a passage to america, whence he had 
just returned, with many addition to his experience, but none to his 
fortune. 

this was a remarkable event. it did not at first appear how far its 
consequence would extend. the lady was, at present, disengaged and 
independent. though the passion which cloud her early prosperity was 
extinct, time had not diminish the worth of her friend, and they were 
far from have reach that age when love become chimerical and 
marriage folly. a confidential intercourse was immediately establish 
between them. the bounty of mrs. lorimer soon divest her friend of all 
fear of poverty. "at any rate," said she, "he shall wander no farther, 
but shall be comfortable situated for the rest of his life." all his 
scruple were vanquish by the reasonable of her remonstrance and 
the vehemence of her solicitations. 

a cordial intimacy grew between me and the newly-arrived. our interview 
were frequent, and our communications without reserve. he detailed to me 
the result of his experience, and expatiate without end on the history 
of his action and opinions. he related the adventure of his youth, and 
dwelt upon all the circumstances of his attachment to my patroness. on 
this subject i had heard only general details. i continual found 
cause, in the course of his narrative, to revere the illustrious 
quality of my lady, and to weep at the calamity to which the 
infernal malice of her brother had subject her. 

the tale of that man's misdeeds, amplify and dramatize by the 
indignant eloquence of this historian, oppress me with astonishment. 
if a poet had drawn such a portrait, i should have been prone to suspect 
the sound of his judgment. till now i had imagine that no character 
was uniform and unmixed, and my theory of the passion did not enable me 
to account for a propensity gratify merely by evil, and delight in 
shriek and agony for their own sake. 

it was natural to suggest to my friend, when expatiate on this theme, 
an inquiry as to how far subsequent event had obliterate the 
impression that were then made, and as to the plausible of reviving, 
at this more auspicious period, his claim on the heart of his friend. 
when he thought proper to notice these hints, he gave me to understand 
that time had made no essential alteration in his sentiment in this 
respect; that he still foster a hope, to which every day add new 
vigour; that, whatever was the ultimate event, he trust in his 
fortitude to sustain it, if adverse, and in his wisdom to extract from 
it the most valuable consequences, if it should prove prosperous. 

the progress of things was not unfavourable to his hopes. she treat 
his insinuation and profession with levity; but her argument seem 
to be urge with no other view than to afford an opportunity of 
confutation; and, since there was no abate of familiarity and 
kindness, there was room to hope that the affair would terminate 
agreeably to his wishes. 




chapter vii. 


clarice, meanwhile, was absent. her friend seemed, at the end of a 
month, to be little less distant from the grave than at first. my 
impatience would not allow me to wait till her death. i visit her, but 
was once more oblige to return alone. i arrive late in the city, and, 
being greatly fatigued, i retired almost immediately to my chamber. 

on hearing of my arrival, sarsefield hasten to see me. he came to my 
bedside, and such, in his opinion, was the importance of the tidings 
which he had to communicate, that he did not scruple to rouse me from a 
deep sleep---- 


at this period of his narrative, clithero stopped. his complexion varied 
from one degree of pale to another. his brain appear to suffer 
some severe constriction. he desire to be excused, for a few minutes, 
from proceeding. in a short time he was relieved from this paroxysm, and 
resume his tale with an accent tremulous at first, but acquire 
stability and force as he went on:-- 


on waking, as i have said, i found my friend seat at my bedside. his 
countenance exhibit various token of alarm. as soon as i perceive 
who it was, i started, exclaiming, "what is the matter?" 

he sighed. "pardon," said he, "this unseasonable intrusion. a light 
matter would not have occasion it. i have waited, for two days past, 
in an agony of impatience, for your return. happily you are, at last, 
come. i stand in the utmost need of your counsel and aid." 

"heaven defend!" cry i. "this is a terrible prelude. you may, of 
course, rely upon my assistance and advice. what is it that you have to 
propose?" 

"tuesday evening," he answered, "i spent here. it was late before i 
return to my lodgings. i was in the act of lift my hand to the 
bell, when my eye was caught by a person standing close to the wall, at 
the distance of ten paces. his attitude was that of one employ in 
watch my motions. his face was turn towards me, and happened, at 
that moment, to be fully illuminate by the ray of a globe-lamp that 
hung over the door. i instantly recognise his features. i was 
petrified. i had no power to execute my design, or even to move, but 
stood, for some seconds, gaze upon him. he was, in no degree, 
disconcert by the eager of my scrutiny. he seem perfectly 
indifferent to the consequence of being known. at length he slow 
turn his eyes to another quarter, but without change his posture, or 
the stern of his looks. i cannot describe to you the shock which 
this encounter produce in me. at last i went into the house, and have 
ever since been excessive uneasy." 

"i do not see any ground for uneasiness." 

"you do not then suspect who this person is?" 

"no." 

"it is arthur wiatte." 

"good heaven! it is impossible. what! my lady's brother?" 

"the same." 

"it cannot be. were we not assured of his death? that he perish in a 
mutiny on board the vessel in which he was embark for transportation?" 

"such was rumour, which is easily mistaken. my eyes cannot be deceive 
in this case. i should as easily fail to recognise his sister, when i 
first met her, as him. this is the man; whether once dead or not, he is 
at present alive, and in this city." 

"but has any thing since happen to confirm you in this opinion?" 

"yes, there has. as soon as i had recover from my first surprise, i 
began to reflect upon the measure proper to be taken. this was the 
identical arthur wiatte. you know his character. no time was likely to 
change the principles of such a man, but his appearance sufficient 
betray the incurable of his habits. the same sullen and atrocious 
passion were written in his visage. you recollect the vengeance which 
wiatte denounce against his sister. there is every thing to dread from 
his malignity. how to obviate the danger, i know not. i thought, 
however, of one expedient. it might serve a present purpose, and 
something better might suggest itself on your return. 

"i came hither early the next day. old gowan, the porter, is well 
acquaint with wiatte's story. i mention to him that i had reason to 
think that he had returned. i charged him to have a watchful eye upon 
every one that knock at the gate, and that, if this person should 
come, by no means to admit him. the old man promise faithfully to abide 
by my directions. his terrors, indeed, were greater than mine, and he 
knew the importance of excluding wiatte from these walls." 

"did you not inform my lady of this?" 

"no. in what way could i tell it to her? what end could it answer? why 
should i make her miserable? but i have not done. yesterday morning 
gowan took me aside, and informed me that wiatte had made his 
appearance, the day before, at the gate. he knew him, he said, in a 
moment. he demand to see the lady, but the old man told him she was 
engaged, and could not be seen. he assume peremptory and haughty airs, 
and assert that his business was of such importance as not to endure a 
moment's delay. gowan persist in his first refusal. he retired with 
great reluctance, but said he should return to-morrow, when he should 
insist upon admission to the presence of the lady. i have inquired, and 
find that he has not repeated his visit. what is to be done?" 

i was equally at a loss with my friend. this incident was so 
unlooked-for. what might not be dread from the monstrous depravity of 
wiatte? his menace of vengeance against his sister still rung in my ears. 
some means of elude them were indispensable. could law be resort to? 
against an evil like this, no legal provision had been made. nine years 
had elapse since his transportation. seven years was the period of his 
exile. in returning, therefore, he had committed no crime. his person 
could not be lawful molested. we were justified merely in repel an 
attack. but suppose we should appeal to law: could this be done without 
the knowledge and concurrence of the lady? she would never permit it. 
her heart was incapable of fear from this quarter. she would spurn at 
the mention of precaution against the hatred of her brother. her 
inquietude would merely be awaken on his own account. 

i was overwhelm with perplexity. perhaps if he were sought out, and 
some judgment form of the kind of danger to be dread from him, by a 
knowledge of his situation and views, some expedient might be thence 
suggested. 

but how should his haunt be discovered? this was easy. he had intimate 
the design of apply again for admission to his sister. let a person 
be station near at hand, who, being furnish with an adequate 
description of his person and dress, shall mark him when he comes, and 
follow him when he retires, and shall forthwith impart to us the 
information on that head which he shall be able to collect. 

my friend concur in this scheme. no better could, for the present, be 
suggested. here end our conference. 

i was thus supply with a new subject of reflection. it was calculate 
to fill my mind with dreary forebodings. the future was no long a 
scene of security and pleasure. it would be hard for those to partake of 
our fear who did not partake of our experience. the existence of wiatte 
was the canker that had blasted the felicity of my patroness. in his 
reappear on the stage there was something portentous. it seem to 
include in it consequence of the utmost moment, without my being able 
to discover what these consequence were. 

that sarsefield should be so quick follow by his arch-foe; that they 
start anew into existence, without any previous intimation, in a 
manner wholly unexpected, and at the same period,--it seem as if there 
lurked, under those appearances, a tremendous significance, which human 
sagacity could not uncover. my heart sunk within me when i reflect 
that this was the father of my clarice. he by whose cruelty her mother 
was torn from the enjoyment of untarnished honour, and consign to 
infamy and an untimely grave. he by whom herself was abandoned in the 
helpless of infancy, and left to be the prey of obdurate avarice, 
and the victim of wretch who traffic in virgin innocence. who had done 
all that in him lay to devote her youth to guilt and misery. what were 
the limit of his power? how may he exert the parental prerogatives? 

to sleep, while these image were haunting me, was impossible. i pass 
the night in continual motion. i strode, without ceasing, across the 
floor of my apartment. my mind was wrought to a higher pitch than i had 
ever before experienced. the occasion, accurate considered, was far 
from justify the ominous inquietude which i then felt. how, then, 
should i account for them? 

sarsefield probably enjoy his usual slumber. his repose might not be 
perfectly serene, but when he ruminate on impending or possible 
calamity his tongue did not cleave to his mouth, his throat was not 
parch with unquenchable thirst, he was not incessant stimulate to 
employ his superfluous fertility of thought in motion. if i tremble for 
the safety of her whom i loved, and whose safety was endanger by being 
the daughter of this miscreant, had he not equal reason to fear for her 
whom he also loved, and who, as the sister of this ruffian, was 
encompass by the most alarm perils? yet he probably was calm while 
i was harass by anxieties. 

alas! the difference was easily explained. such was the beginning of a 
series ordain to hurry me to swift destruction. such were the primary 
token of the presence of that power by whose accursed machination i 
was destined to fall. you are startle at this declaration. it is one to 
which you have been little accustomed. perhaps you regard it merely as 
an effusion of frenzy. i know what i am saying. i do not build upon 
conjecture and surmises. i care not, indeed, for your doubts. your 
conclusion may be fashion at your pleasure. would to heaven that my 
belief were groundless, and that i had no reason to believe my 
intellect to have been pervert by diabolical instigations! 

i could procure no sleep that night. after sarsefield's departure i did 
not even lie down. it seem to me that i could not obtain the benefit 
of repose otherwise than by place my lady beyond the possibility of 
danger. 

i met sarsefield the next day. in pursuance of the scheme which had been 
adopt by us on the preceding evening, a person was select and 
commission to watch the appearance of wiatte. the day pass as usual 
with respect to the lady. in the evening she was surround by a few 
friends. into this number i was now admitted. sarsefield and myself made 
a part of this company. various topic were discuss with ease and 
sprightliness. her society were compose of both sexes, and seem to 
have monopolize all the ingenuity and wit that exist in the 
metropolis. 

after a slight repast the company dispersed. this separation took place 
early than usual, on account of a slight indisposition in mrs. 
_lorimer_. sarsefield and i went out together. we took that 
opportunity of examine our agent, and, receiving no satisfaction from 
him, we dismiss him for that night, enjoin him to hold himself in 
readiness for repeating the experiment to-morrow. my friend direct his 
steps homeward, and i proceed to execute a commission with which i had 
charged myself. 

a few days before, a large sum had been deposit in the hand of a 
banker, for the use of my lady. it was the amount of a debt which had 
lately been recovered. it was lodge here for the purpose of being paid 
on demand of her or her agents. it was my present business to receive 
this money. i had defer the performance of this engagement to this 
late hour, on account of certain preliminary which were necessary to 
be adjusted. 

have received this money, i prepared to return home. the inquietude 
which had been occasion by sarsefield's intelligence had not 
incapacitate me from perform my usual daily occupations. it was a 
theme to which, at every interval of leisure from business or discourse, 
i did not fail to return. at those times i employ myself in examine 
the subject on all sides; in supposing particular emergencies, and 
delineate the conduct that was proper to be observe on each. my daily 
thought were, by no means, so fear-inspiring as the meditation of the 
night had been. 

as soon as i left the banker's door, my meditation fell into this 
channel. i again review the recent occurrences, and imagine the 
consequence likely to flow from them. my deduction were not, on this 
occasion, peculiarly distressful. the return of dark had add 
nothing to my apprehensions. i regard wiatte merely as one against 
whose malice it was wise to employ the most vigilant precautions. in 
revolving these precaution nothing occur that was new. the danger 
appear without unusual aggravations, and the expedient that offer 
themselves to my choice were view with a temper not more sanguine or 
despondent than before. 

in this state of mind i began and continue my walk. the distance was 
considerable between my own habitation and that which i had left. my way 
lay chiefly through populous and well-frequented streets. in one part of 
the way, however, it was at the option of the passenger either to keep 
along the large streets, or considerably to shorten the journey by 
turning into a dark, crooked, and narrow lane. being familiar with every 
part of this metropolis, and deem it advisable to take the shortest 
and obscurest road, i turn into the alley. i proceed without 
interrupt to the next turning. one night-officer, distinguished by 
his usual ensigns, was the only person who pass me. i had gone three 
steps beyond when i perceive a man by my side. i had scarcely time to 
notice this circumstance, when a hoarse voice exclaimed, "damn ye, 
villain, ye're a dead man!" 

at the same moment a pistol flash at my ear, and a report followed. 
this, however, produce no other effect than, for a short space, to 
overpower my senses. i stagger back, but did not fall. 

the ball, as i afterwards discovered, had graze my forehead, but 
without making any dangerous impression. the assassin, perceive that 
his pistol had been ineffectual, muttered, in an enrage tone, "this 
shall do your business!" at the same time, he drew a knife forth from 
his bosom. 

i was able to distinguish this action by the ray of a distant lamp, 
which glisten on the blade. all this pass in an instant. the attack 
was so abrupt that my thought could not be sudden recall from the 
confusion into which they were thrown. my exertion were mechanical. my 
will might be said to be passive, and it was only by retrospect and a 
contemplation of consequence that i became fully informed of the nature 
of the scene. 

if my assailant had disappear as soon as he had discharge the pistol, 
my state of extreme surprise might have slow given place to resolution 
and activity. as it was, my sense was no soon struck by the reflection 
from the blade, than my hand, as if by spontaneous energy, was thrust 
into my pocket. i drew forth a pistol. 

he lift up his weapon to strike, but it drop from his powerless 
fingers. he fell, and his groan informed me that i had manage my arms 
with more skill than my adversary. the noise of this encounter soon 
attract spectators. lights were brought, and my antagonist discover 
bleeding at my feet. i explained, as brief as i was able, the scene 
which they witnessed. the prostrate person was raise by two men, and 
carry into a public house nigh at hand. 

i had not lost my presence of mind. i at once perceive the propriety of 
administer assistance to the wound man. i despatched, therefore, 
one of the bystander for a surgeon of considerable eminence, who live 
at a small distance, and to whom i was well known. the man was carry 
into an inner apartment and laid upon the floor. it was not till now 
that i had a suitable opportunity of ascertain who it was with whom i 
had been engaged. i now look upon his face. the pale of death 
could not conceal his well-known features. it was wiatte himself who was 
breathing his last groan at my feet! 

the surgeon, whom i had summoned, attended; but immediately perceive 
the condition of his patient to be hopeless. in a quarter of an hour he 
expired. during this interval, he was insensible to all around him. i 
was known to the surgeon, the landlord, and some of the witnesses. the 
case need little explanation. the accident reflect no guilt upon me. 
the landlord was charged with the care of the corpse till the morning, 
and i was allow to return home, without further impediment. 




chapter viii. 


till now my mind had been sway by the urgent of this occasion. 
these reflection were excluded, which rush tumultuous upon me the 
moment i was at leisure to receive them. without foresight of a previous 
moment, an entire change had been wrought in my condition. 

i had been oppress with a sense of the danger that flow from the 
existence of this man. by what means the peril could be annihilated, and 
we be placed in security from his attempts, no effort of mind could 
suggest. to devise these means, and employ them with success, demanded, 
as i conceived, the most powerful sagacity and the firmest courage. now 
the danger was no more. the intelligence in which plan of mischief 
might be generate was extinguish or flown. lifeless were the hand 
ready to execute the dictate of that intelligence. the contrive of 
enormous evil was, in one moment, bereft of the power and the will to 
injure. our past tranquill had been owe to the belief of his death. 
fear and dismay had resume their dominion when the mistake was 
discovered. but now we might regain possession of our wonted confidence. 
i had beheld with my own eyes the lifeless corpse of our implacable 
adversary. thus, in a moment, had terminate his long and flagitious 
career. his restless indignation, his malignant projects, that had so 
long occupy the stage and been so fertile of calamity, were now at an 
end! 

in the course of my meditations, the idea of the death of this man had 
occurred, and it bore the appearance of a desirable event. yet it was 
little qualified to tranquillize my fears. in the long catalogue of 
contingencies, this, indeed, was to be found; but it was as little 
likely to happen as any other. it could not happen without a series of 
anterior event paving the way for it. if his death came from us, it 
must be the theme of design. it must spring from laborious circumvent 
and deep-laid stratagems. 

no. he was dead. i had kill him. what had i done? i had meditate 
nothing. i was impel by an unconscious necessity. had the assailant 
been my father, the consequence would have been the same. my 
understanding had been neutral. could it be? in a space so short, was it 
possible that so tremendous a deed had been executed? was i not deceive 
by some portentous vision? i had witness the convulsion and last 
agony of wiatte. he was no more, and i was his destroyer! 

such was the state of my mind for some time after this dreadful event. 
previous to it i was calm, considerate, and self-collected. i marked 
the way that i was going. passing object were observed. if i advert 
to the series of my own reflections, my attention was not seize and 
fasten by them. i could disengage myself at pleasure, and could pass, 
without difficulty, from attention to the world within, to the 
contemplation of that without. 

now my liberty, in this respect, was at an end. i was fettered, 
confounded, smitten with excess of thought, and laid prostrate with 
wonder! i no long attend to my steps. when i emerge from my stupor, 
i found that i had trodden back the way which i had lately come, and had 
arrive within sight of the banker's door. i checked myself, and once 
more turn my steps homeward. 

this seem to be a hint for enter into new reflections. "the deed," 
said i, "is irretrievable. i have kill the brother of my patroness, 
the father of my love." 

this suggestion was new. it instantly involved me in terror and 
perplexity. how shall i communicate the tidings? what effect will they 
produce? my lady's sagacity is obscure by the benevolence of her 
temper. her brother was sordid wicked,--a hoary ruffian, to whom the 
language of pity was as unintelligible as the gabble of monkeys. his 
heart was fortify against compunction, by the atrocious habit of 
forty years; he live only to interrupt her peace, to confute the 
promise of virtue, and convert to rancour and reproach the fair dame of 
fidelity. 

he was her brother still. as a human being, his depravity was never 
beyond the health-restoring power of repentance. his heart, so long as 
it beat, was accessible to remorse. the singular of his birth had 
made her regard this being as more intimate her brother, than would 
have happen in different circumstances. it was her obstinate 
persuasion that their fates were blended. the rumour of his death she 
had never credited. it was a topic of congratulate to her friends, but 
of mourning and distress to her. that he would one day reappear upon the 
stage, and assume the dignity of virtue, was a source of consolation 
with which she would never consent to part. 

her character was now known. when the doom of exile was pronounced upon 
him, she deem it incumbent on her to vindicate herself from aspersion 
found on misconception of her motive in refuse her interference. 
the manuscript, though unpublished, was widely circulated. none could 
resist her simple and touching eloquence, nor rise from the peruse 
without resign his heart to the most impetuous impulse of 
admiration, and enlist himself among the eulogist of her justice and 
her fortitude. this was the only monument, in a written form, of her 
genius. as such it was engraven on my memory. the picture that it 
describe was the perpetual companion of my thoughts. 

alas! it had, perhaps, been well for me if it had been bury in eternal 
oblivion. i read in it the condemnation of my deed, the agony she was 
prepare to suffer, and the indignation that would overflow upon the 
author of so signal a calamity. 

i had rescue my life by the sacrifice of his. whereas i should have 
died. wretched and precipitate coward! what had become of my boast 
gratitude? such was the zeal that i had vow to her. such the service 
which it was the business of my life to perform. i had snatch her 
brother from existence. i had torn from her the hope which she so 
ardent and indefatigable cherished. from a contemptible and dastard 
regard to my own safety i had fail in the moment of trial and when 
call upon by heaven to evince the sincerity of my professions. 

she had treat my profession lightly. my vow of eternal devotion she 
had reject with lofty disinterestedness. she had arraign my 
impatience of obligation as criminal, and condemn every scheme i had 
project for free myself from the burden which her benefice had 
laid upon me. the impassioned and vehement anxiety with which, in former 
days, she had deprecate the vengeance of her lover against wiatte, rung 
in my ears. my senses were shock anew by the dreadful sounds, "touch 
not my brother. wherever you meet with him, of whatever outrage he be 
guilty, suffer him to pass in safety. despise me; abandon me; kill me. 
all this i can bear even from you; but spare, i implore you, my unhappy 
brother. the stroke that deprive him of life will not only have the 
same effect upon me, but will set my portion in everlasting misery." 

to these supplicate i had been deaf. it is true i had not rush upon 
him unarmed, intend no injury nor expect any. of that degree of 
wicked i was, perhaps, incapable. alas! i have immerse myself 
sufficient deep in crimes. i have trample under foot every motive 
dear to the heart of honour. i have shown myself unworthy the society of 
men. 

such were the turbulent suggestion of that moment. my pace slackened. i 
stopped, and was oblige to support myself against a wall. the sickness 
that had seize my heart penetrate every part of my frame. there was 
but one thing wanting to complete my distraction.--"my lady," said i, 
"believed her fate to be blend with that of wiatte. who shall affirm 
that the persuasion is a groundless one? she had live and prospered, 
notwithstanding the general belief that her brother was dead. she would 
not hearken to the rumour. why? because nothing less than indubitable 
evidence would suffice to convince her? because the counter-intimation 
flow from an infallible source? how can the latter supposition be 
confuted? has she not predict the event? 

"the period of terrible fulfilment has arrived. the same blow that 
bereaved _him_ of life has likewise ratify her doom. 

"she has been deceived. it is nothing more, perhaps, than a fond 
imagination. it matter not. who know not the cogency of faith? that 
the pulse of life are at the command of the will? the bearer of these 
tidings will be the messenger of death. a fatal sympathy will seize her. 
she will shrink, and swoon, and perish, at the news! 

"fond and short-sighted wretch! this is the price thou hast given for 
security. in the rash of thy thought, thou saidst, 'nothing is 
wanting but his death to restore us to confidence and safety.' lo! the 
purchase is made. havoc and despair, that were restrained during his 
life, were let loose by his last sigh. now only is destruction made 
sure. thy lady, thy clarice, thy friend, and thyself, are, by this act, 
involved in irretrievable and common ruin!" 

i start from my attitude. i was scarcely conscious of any transition. 
the interval was fraught with stupor, and amazement. it seem as if my 
senses had been hush in sleep, while the powers of locomotion were 
unconscious exert to bear me to my chamber. by whatever means the 
change was effected, there i was. 

i have been able to proceed thus far. i can scarcely believe the 
testimony of my memory that assure me of this. my task is almost 
executed; but whence shall i obtain strength enough to finish it? what i 
have told is light as gossamer, compare with the insupportable and 
crush horrors of that which is to come. heaven, in token of its 
vengeance, will enable me to proceed. it is fitting that my scene should 
thus close. 

my fancy began to be infect with the error of my understanding. the 
mood into which my mind was plunge was incapable of any propitious 
intermission. all within me was tempestuous and dark. my ear were 
accessible to no sound but those of shriek and lamentations. it was 
deepest midnight, and all the noise of a great metropolis were hushed. 
yet i listen as if to catch some strain of the dirge that was begun. 
sable robes, sobs, and a dreary solemnity encompass me on all sides, i 
was haunt to despair by image of death, imaginary clamours, and the 
train of funeral pageantry. i seem to have pass forward to a distant 
era of my life. the effects which were come were already realized. the 
foresight of misery create it, and set me in the midst of that hell 
which i feared. 

from a paroxysm like this the worst might reasonably be dreaded, yet the 
next step to destruction was not sudden taken. i pause on the brink 
of the precipice, as if to survey the depth of that frenzy that invade 
me; was able to ponder on the scene, and deliberate, in a state that 
partook of calm, on the circumstances of my situation. my mind was 
harass by the repetition of one idea. conjecture deepen into 
certainty. i could place the object in no light which did not 
corroborate the persuasion that, in the act committed, i had insured the 
destruction of my lady. at length my mind, somewhat relieved from the 
tempest of my fears, began to trace and analyze the consequence which i 
dreaded. 

the fate of wiatte would inevitable draw along with it that of his 
sister. in what way would this effect be produced? were they link 
together by a sympathy whose influence was independent of sensible 
communication? could she arrive at a knowledge of his miserable and by 
other than verbal means? i had heard of such extraordinary 
copartnership in being and mode of instantaneous intercourse among 
being locally distant. was this a new instance of the subtlety of mind? 
had she already endure his agonies, and like him already cease to 
breathe? 

every hair bristle at this horrible suggestion. but the force of 
sympathy might be chimerical. bury in sleep, or engaged in careless 
meditation, the instrument by which her destiny might be accomplished 
was the steel of an assassin. a series of events, equally beyond the 
reach of foresight with those which had just happened, might introduce, 
with equal abruptness, a similar disaster. what, at that moment, was her 
condition? repose in safety in her chamber, as her family imagined. 
but were they not deceived? was she not a mangle corpse? whatever were 
her situation, it could not be ascertained, except by extraordinary 
means, till the morning. was it wise to defer the scrutiny till then? 
why not instantly investigate the truth? 

these idea pass rapid through my mind. a considerable portion of 
time and amplify of phrase are necessary to exhibit, verbally, 
idea contemplate in a space of incalculable brevity. with the same 
rapid i conceive the resolution of determine the truth of my 
suspicions. all the family, but myself, were at rest. winding passage 
would conduct me, without danger of disturb them, to the hall, from 
which double staircase ascended. one of these led to a saloon above, on 
the east side of which was a door that communicate with a suite of 
rooms occupy by the lady of the mansion. the first was an antechamber, 
in which a female servant usually lay. the second was the lady's own 
bedchamber. this was a sacred recess, with whose situation, relative to 
the other apartments of the building, i was well acquainted, but of 
which i knew nothing from my own examination, have never been admitted 
into it. 

thither i was now resolve to repair. i was not deter by the sanctity 
of the place and hour. i was insensible to all consequence but the 
removal of my doubts. not that my hope were balanced by my fears. that 
the same tragedy had been perform in her chamber and in the street, 
nothing hinder me from believe with as much cogency as if my own 
eyes had witness it, but the reluctance with which we admit a 
detest truth. 

to terminate a state of intolerable suspense, i resolve to proceed 
forthwith to her chamber. i took the light and paced, with no 
interruption, along the galleries. i use no precaution. if i had met a 
servant or robber, i am not sure that i should have notice him. my 
attention was too perfectly engross to allow me to spare any to a 
casual object. i cannot affirm that no one observe me. this, however, 
was probable from the distribution of the dwelling. it consist of a 
central edifice and two wings, one of which was appropriate to 
domestic and the other, at the extremity of which my apartment was 
placed, comprehend a library, and rooms for formal and social and 
literary conferences. these, therefore, were desert at night, and my 
way lay along these. hence it was not likely that my steps would be 
observed. 

i proceed to the hall. the principal parlour was beneath her chamber. 
in the confusion of my thoughts, i mistook one for the other. i 
rectified, as soon as i detected, my mistake. i ascended, with a beating 
heart, the staircase. the door of the antechamber was unfastened. i 
entered, total regardless of disturb the girl who slept within. the 
bed which she occupy was conceal by curtains. whether she were 
there, i did not stop to examine. i cannot recollect that any token 
were given of wakeful or alarm. it was not till i reach the door 
of her own apartment that my heart began to falter. 

it was now that the momentous of the question i was about to decide 
rush with its genuine force upon my apprehension. appall and aghast, 
i had scarcely power to move the bolt. if the imagination of her death 
was not to be supported, how should i bear the spectacle of wound and 
blood? yet this was reserved for me. a few pace would set me in the 
midst of a scene of which i was the abhor contriver. was it right to 
proceed? there were still the remnant of doubt. my foreboding might 
possibly be groundless. all within might be safety and serenity. a 
respite might be gain from the execution of an irrevocable sentence. 
what could i do? was not any thing easy to endure in comparison with the 
agony of suspense? if i could not obviate the evil i must bear it, but 
the torment of suspense were susceptible of remedy. 

i drew back the bolt, and enter with the reluctance of fear, rather 
than the cautious of guilt. i could not lift my eyes from the 
ground. i advanced to the middle of the room. not a sound like that of 
the die salute my-ear. at length, shake off the fetter of 
hopelessness, i look up. 

i saw nothing calculate to confirm my fears. everywhere there reign 
quiet and order. my heart leap with exultation. "can it be," said i, 
"that i have been betray with shadows?--but this is not sufficient." 

within an alcove was the bed that belong to her. if her safety were 
inviolate, it was here that she reposed. what remain to convert 
torment doubt into ravishing certainty? i was insensible to the 
peril of my present situation. if she, indeed, were there, would not my 
intrusion awaken her? she would start and perceive me, at this hour, 
standing at her bedside. how should i account for an intrusion so 
unexampled and audacious? i could not communicate my fears. i could not 
tell her that the blood with which my hand were stain had flow from 
the wound of her brother. 

my mind was inaccessible to such considerations. they did not even 
modify my predominant idea. obstacle like these, had they existed, 
would have been trample under foot. 

leave the lamp, that i bore, on the table, i approach the bed. i 
slow drew aside the curtain, and beheld her tranquil slumbering. i 
listened, but so profound was her sleep, that not even her breathing 
could be overheard. i drop the curtain and retired. 

how blissful and mild were the illuminations of my bosom at this 
discovery! a joy that surpass all utterance succeed the fierce 
of desperation. i stood, for some moments, wrap in delightful 
contemplation. alas! it was a luminous but transient interval. the 
madness to whose black suggestion it bore so strong a contrast began 
now to make sensible approach on my understanding. 

"true," said i, "she lives. her slumber is serene and happy. she is 
blind to her approach destiny. some hour will at least be rescue 
from anguish and death. when she wakes, the phantom that soothe her 
will vanish. the tidings cannot be withheld from her. the murder of 
thy brother cannot hope to enjoy thy smiles. those ravishing accents, 
with which thou hast use to greet me, will be changed. scowl and 
reproaches, the invective of thy anger and the malediction of thy 
justice, will rest upon my head, 

"what is the blessing which i made the theme of my boastful arrogance? 
this interval of being and repose is momentary. she will awake, but only 
to perish at the spectacle of my ingratitude. she will awake only to the 
consciousness of instantly-impending death. when she again sleep she 
will wake no more. i, her son,--i, whom the law of my birth doom to 
poverty and hardship, but whom her unsolicited benefice snatch from 
those evils, and endow with the highest good known to intelligent 
beings, the consolation of science and the blandishments of 
affluence,--to whom the darling of her life, the offspring in whom are 
faithfully preserve the lineament of its angel mother, she has not 
denied! what is the recompense that i have made? how have i discharge 
the measureless debt of gratitude to which she is entitled? thus!-- 

"cannot my guilt be extenuated? is there not a good that i can do thee? 
must i perpetrate unmingled evil? is the province assign me that of an 
infernal emissary, whose effort are concentre in a single purpose, and 
that purpose a malignant one? i am the author of thy calamities. 
whatever misery is reserved for thee, i am the source whence it flows. 
can i not set bounds to the stream? cannot i prevent thee from return 
to a consciousness which, till it cease to exist, will not cease to be 
rent and mangled? 

"yes. it is in my power to screen thee from the coming storm; to 
accelerate thy journey to rest. i will do it." 

the impulse was not to be resisted. i move with the sudden of 
lightning. armed with a pointed implement that lay----it was a dagger. 
as i set down the lamp, i struck the edge. yet i saw it not, or notice 
it not till i need its assistance. by what accident it came hither, to 
what deed of dark it had already been subservient, i had no power to 
inquire. i step to the table and seize it. 

the time which this action require was insufficient to save me. my doom 
was ratify by powers which no human energy can counterwork.--need i 
go further? did you entertain any imagination of so frightful a 
catastrophe? i am overwhelm by turn with dismay and with wonder. i am 
prompt by turn to tear my heart from my breast and deny faith to the 
verdict of my senses. 

was it i that hurried to the deed? no. it was the demon that possessed 
me. my limb were guide to the bloody office by a power foreign and 
superior to mine. i had been defrauded, for a moment, of the empire of 
my muscles. a little moment for that sufficed. if my destruction had 
not been decreed, why was the image of clarice so long excluded? yet why 
do i say long? the fatal resolution was conceived, and i hasten to the 
execution, in a period too brief for more than itself to be view by 
the intellect. 

what then? were my hand imbrue in this precious blood? was it to this 
extremity of horror that my evil genius was determined to urge me? too 
surely this was his purpose; too surely i was qualified to be its 
minister. 

i lift the weapon. its point was aim at the bosom of the sleeper. 
the impulse was given. 

at the instant a piercing shriek was utter behind me, and a 
stretched-out hand, grasping the blade, made it swerve widely from its 
aim. it descended, but without inflict a wound. its force was spent 
upon the bed. 

oh for words to paint that stormy transition! i loose my hold of the 
dagger. i start back, and fixed eyes of frantic curiosity on the 
author of my rescue. he that interpose to arrest my deed, that start 
into being and activity at a moment so pregnant with fate, without 
token of his purpose or his coming being previous imparted, could 
not, methought, be less than divinity. 

the first glance that i dart on this being corroborate my conjecture. 
it was the figure and lineament of mrs. lorimer. negligent habit in 
flowing and brilliant white, with features burst with terror and 
wonder, the likeness of that being who was stretch upon the bed now 
stood before me. 

all that i am able to conceive of angel was comprise in the moral 
constitution of this woman. that her genius had overleap all bounds, 
and interpose to save her, was no audacious imagination. in the state 
in which my mind then was, no other belief than this could occupy the 
first place. 

my tongue was tied. i gaze by turn upon her who stood before me, and 
her who lay upon the bed, and who, awaken by the shriek that had been 
uttered, now open her eyes. she start from her pillow, and, by 
assume a new and more distinct attitude, permit me to recognise 
_clarice herself_! 

three days before, i had left her, beside the bed of a die friend, at 
a solitary mansion in the mountain of donegal. here it had been her 
resolution to remain till her friend should breathe her last. fraught 
with this persuasion, knowing this to be the place and hour of repose of 
my lady, hurried forward by the impetuos of my own conceptions, 
deceive by the faint gleam which penetrate through the curtain and 
imperfectly-irradiated features which bore, at all times, a powerful 
resemblance to those of mrs. lorimer, i had rush to the brink of this 
terrible precipice! 

why did i linger on the verge? why, thus perilous situated, did i not 
throw myself headlong? the steel was yet in my hand. a single blow would 
have pierce my heart, and shut out from my remembrance and foresight 
the past and the future. 

the moment of insanity had gone by, and i was once more myself. instead 
of regarding the act which i had meditate as the dictate of compassion 
or of justice, it only add to the sum of my ingratitude, and gave 
wings to the whirlwind that was sent to bear me to perdition. 

perhaps i was influence by a sentiment which i had not leisure to 
distribute into parts. my understanding was, no doubt, bewilder in the 
maze of consequence which would spring from my act. how should i 
explain my coming hither in this murderous guise, my arm lift to 
destroy the idol of my soul and the darling child of my patroness? in 
what words should i unfold the tale of wiatte, and enumerate the motive 
that terminate in the present scene? what penalty had not my 
infatuation and cruelty deserved? what could i less than turn the 
dagger's point against my own bosom? 

a second time, the blow was thwart and diverted. once more this 
beneficent interpose held my arm from the perpetrate of a new 
iniquity. once more frustrate the instigation of that demon, of whose 
malice a mysterious destiny had consign me to be the sport and the 
prey. 

every new moment add to the sum of my inexpiable guilt. murder was 
succeeded, in an instant, by the more detest enormity of suicide. 
she to whom my ingratitude was flagrant in proportion to the benefit of 
which she was the author, had now add to her former acts that of 
rescue me from the last of mischiefs. 

i threw the weapon on the floor. the zeal which prompt her to seize my 
arm, this action occasion to subside, and to yield place to those 
emotion which this spectacle was calculate to excite. she watch me 
in silence, and with an air of ineffable solicitude. clarice, govern 
by the instinct of modesty, wrap her bosom and face in the 
bedclothes, and testify her horror by vehement but scarcely-articulate 
exclamations. 

i move forward, but my steps were random and tottering. my thought 
were fetter by reverie, and my gesticulate destitute of meaning. my 
tongue falter without speaking, and i felt as if life and death were 
struggle within me for the mastery. 

my will, indeed, was far from being neutral in this contest. to such as 
i, annihilate is the supreme good. to shake off the ill that fasten 
on us by shake off existence, is a lot which the system of nature has 
deny to man. by escape from life, i should be deliver from this 
scene, but should only rush into a world of retribution, and be immerse 
in new agonies. 

i was yet to live. no instrument of my deliverance was within reach. i 
was powerless. to rush from the presence of these women to hide me 
forever from their scrutiny and their upbraiding, to snatch from their 
mind all trace of the existence of clithero, was the scope of 
unutterable longings. 

urge to flight by every motive of which my nature was susceptible, i 
was yet rooted to the spot. had the pause been only to be interrupt by 
me, it would have last forever. 

at length, the lady, clasp her hand and lift them, exclaimed, in 
a tone melting into pity and grief,-- 

"clithero! what is this? how came you hither, and why?" 

i struggle for utterance:--"i came to murder you. your brother has 
perish by my hands. fresh from the commission of this deed, i have 
hasten hither to perpetrate the same crime upon you." 

"my brother!" reply the lady, with new vehemence. "oh, say not so! i 
have just heard of his return, from sarsefield, and that he lives." 

"he is dead," repeated i, with fierceness; "i know it. it was i that 
kill him." 

"dead!" she faint articulated. "and by thee, clithero? oh! cursed 
chance that hinder thee from killing me also! dead! then is the omen 
fulfilled! then am i undone! lost forever!" 

her eyes now wander from me, and her countenance sunk into a wild and 
rueful expression. hope was utterly extinguish in her heart, and life 
forsook her at the same moment. she sunk upon the floor pallid and 
breathless. 

how she came into possession of this knowledge i know not. it is 
possible that sarsefield had repent of concealment, and, in the 
interval that pass between our separation and my encounter with 
wiatte, had returned, and informed her of the reappear of this 
miscreant. 

thus, then, was my fate consummated. i was rescue from destroy her 
by a dagger, only to behold her perish by the tidings which i brought. 
thus was every omen of mischief and misery fulfilled. thus was the 
enmity of wiatte render efficacious, and the instrument of his 
destruction change into the executioner of his revenge. 

such is the tale of my crimes. it is not for me to hope that the curtain 
of oblivion will ever shut out the dismal spectacle. it will haunt me 
forever. the torment that grow out of it can terminate only with the 
thread of my existence, but that, i know full well, will never end. 
death is but a shift of the scene; and the endless progress of 
eternity, which to the good is merely the perfection of felicity, is to 
the wicked an accumulation of woe. the self-destroyer is his own enemy: 
this has ever been my opinion. hitherto it has influence my actions. 
now, though the belief continues, its influence on my conduct is 
annihilated. i am no stranger to the depth of that abyss into which i 
shall plunge. no matter. change is precious for its own sake. 

well, i was still to live. my abode must be somewhere fixed. my conduct 
was henceforth the result of a perverse and rebellious principle. i 
banish myself forever from my native soil. i vow never more to 
behold the face of my clarice, to abandon my friends, my books, all my 
wonted labour and accustomed recreations. 

i was neither ashamed nor afraid. i considered not in what way the 
justice of the country would affect me. it merely made no part of my 
contemplations. i was not embarrass by the choice of expedient for 
trammel up the visible consequence and for elude suspicion. the 
idea of abjure my country and flying forever from the hateful scene 
partook, to my apprehension, of the vast, the boundless, and strange; of 
plunge from the height of fortune to obscurity and indigence, 
correspond with my present state of mind. it was of a piece with the 
tremendous and wonderful event that had just happened. 

these were the image that haunt me, while i stood speechless gaze 
at the ruin before me. i heard a noise from without, or imagine that i 
heard it. my reverie was broken, and my muscular power restored. i 
descended into the street, through door of which i possessed one set of 
keys, and hurried by the shortest way beyond the precincts of the city. 
i had laid no plan. my conception with regard to the future were 
shapeless and confused. successive incident supply me with a clue, 
and suggested, as they rose, the next step to be taken. i threw off the 
garb of affluence, and assume a beggar's attire. that i had money about 
me for the accomplishment of my purpose was wholly accidental. i 
travelled along the coast, and, when i arrive at one town, knew not why 
i should go farther; but my restless was unabated, and change was 
some relief. i it length arrive at belfast. a vessel was prepare for 
america. i embrace eager the opportunity of passing into a new world. 
i arrive at philadelphia. as soon as i landed i wander hither, and 
was content to wear out my few remain days in the service of 
inglefield. 

i have no friends. why should i trust my story to mother? i have no 
solicitude about concealment; but who is there who will derive pleasure 
or benefit from my rehearsal? and why should i expatiate on so hateful a 
scheme? yet now have i consent to this. i have confide in you the 
history of my disasters. i am not fearful of the use that you may be 
disposed to make of it. i shall quick set myself beyond the reach of 
human tribunals. i shall relieve the minister of law from the trouble 
of punishing. the recent event which induce you to summon me to this 
conference have likewise determined me to make this disclosure. 

i was not aware, for some time, of my perturb sleep. no wonder that 
sleep cannot soothe misery like mine; that i am alike infest by 
memory in wakeful and slumber. yet i was anew distress by the 
discovery that my thought found their way to my lips, without my being 
conscious of it, and that my steps wander forth unknowing and 
without the guidance of my will. 

the story you have told is not incredible. the disaster to which you 
allude did not fail to excite my regret. i can still weep over the 
untimely fall of youth and worth. i can no otherwise account for my 
frequent his shade than by the distant resemblance which the death of 
this man bore to that of which i was the perpetrator. this resemblance 
occur to me at first. if he were able to weaken the impression which 
was produce by my crime, this similitude was adapt to revive and 
enforce them. 

the wilderness, and the cave to which you follow me, were familiar to 
my sunday rambles. often have i indulge in audible grief on the cliff 
of that valley. often have i brood over my sorrow in the recess of 
that cavern. this scene is adapt to my temper. its mountainous 
asperity supply me with image of desolate and seclusion, and its 
headlong stream lull me into temporary forgetful of mankind. 

i comprehend you. you suspect me of concern in the death of waldegrave. 
you could not do otherwise. the conduct that you have witness was that 
of a murderer. i will not upbraid you for your suspicions, though i have 
bought exemption from them at a high price. 




chapter ix. 


there end his narrative. he start from the spot where he stood, and, 
without afford me any opportunity of reply or commenting, 
disappear amidst the thickest of the wood. i had no time to exert 
myself for his detention. i could have use no argument for this end, 
to which it is probable he would have listened. the story i had heard 
was too extraordinary, too completely the reverse of all my 
expectations, to allow me to attend to the intimate of self-murder 
which he dropped. 

the secret which i imagine was about to be disclose was as inscrutable 
as ever. not a circumstance, from the moment when clithero's character 
became the subject of my meditations, till the conclusion of his talk, 
but serve to confirm my suspicion. was this error to be impute to 
credulity. would not any one, from similar appearances, have drawn 
similar conclusions? or is there a criterion by which truth can always 
be distinguished? was it owe to my imperfect education that the 
inquietude of this man were not trace to a deed perform at the 
distance of a thousand leagues, to the murder of his patroness and 
friend? 

i had heard a tale which apparently related to scene and person far 
distant: but, though my suspicion have appear to have been misplaced, 
what should hinder but that the death of my friend was, in like manner, 
an act of momentary insanity and originate in a like spirit of mistaken 
benevolence? 

but i did not consider this tale merely in relation to myself. my life 
had been limited and uniform. i had commune with romance and 
historians, but the impression made upon me by this incident was 
unexampled in my experience. my reading had furnish me with no 
instance in any degree parallel to this, and i found that to be a 
distant and second-hand spectator of event was widely different from 
witness them myself and partake in their consequences. my judgment 
was, for a time, sunk into imbecility and confusion. my mind was full of 
the image unavoidable suggest by this tale, but they exist in a 
kind of chaos, and not otherwise than gradual was i able to reduce 
them to distinct particulars, and subject them to a deliberate and 
methodical inspection. 

how was i to consider this act of clithero? what a deplorable 
infatuation! yet it was the necessary result of a series of idea 
mutual link and connected. his conduct was dictate by a motive 
allied to virtue. it was the fruit of an ardent and grateful spirit. 

the death of wiatte could not be censured. the life of clithero was 
unspeakable more valuable than that of his antagonist. it was the 
instinct of self-preservation that sway him. he knew not his adversary 
in time enough to govern himself by that knowledge. had the assailant 
been an unknown ruffian, his death would have been follow by no 
remorse. the spectacle of his die agony would have dwelt upon the 
memory of his assassin like any other mournful sight, in the production 
of which he bore no part. 

it must at least be said that his will was not concerned in this 
transaction. he act in obedience to an impulse which he could not 
control nor resist. shall we impute guilt where there is no design? 
shall a man extract food for self-reproach from an action to which it is 
not enough to say that he was actuate by no culpable intention, but 
that he was sway by no intention whatever? if consequence arise that 
cannot be foreseen, shall we find no refuge in the persuasion of our 
rectitude and of human frailty? shall we deem ourselves criminal because 
we do not enjoy the attribute of deity? because our power and our 
knowledge are confine by impassable boundaries? 

but whence arose the subsequent intention? it was the fruit of a 
dreadful mistake. his intent were noble and compassionate. but this is 
of no avail to free him from the imputation of guilt. no remembrance of 
past benefice can compensate for this crime. the scale loaded with 
the recrimination of his conscience, is immovable by any 
counter-weight. 

but what are the conclusion to be drawn by dispassionate observers? is 
it possible to regard this person with disdain or with enmity? the crime 
originate in those limitation which nature has impose upon human 
faculties. proof of a just intention are all that are requisite to 
exempt us from blame; he is thus, in consequence of a double mistake. 
the light in which he view this event is erroneous. he judge wrong, 
and is therefore miserable. 

how imperfect are the grounds of all our decision was it of no use to 
superintend his childhood, to select his instructor and examples, to 
mark the operation of his principles, to see him emerge into youth, 
to follow him through various scene and try vicissitudes, and mark 
the uniform of his integrity? who would have predict his future 
conduct? who would not have affirm the impossible of an action like 
this? 

how mysterious was the connection between the fate of wiatte and his 
sister! by such circuitous and yet infallible means were the prediction 
of the lady and the vengeance of the brother accomplished! in how many 
case may it be said, as in this, that the prediction was the cause of 
its own fulfilment! that the very act which considerate observers, and 
even himself, for a time, imagine to have utterly preclude the 
execution of wiatte's menaces, should be that inevitable leading to it! 
that the execution should be assign to him who, abound in 
abhorrence, and in the act of self-defence, was the slay of the 
menacer! 

as the obstruct of his designs, wiatte waylaid and assault clithero. 
he perish in the attempt. were his designs frustrated? no. it was thus 
that he secure the gratification of his vengeance. his sister was cut 
off in the bloom of life and prosperity. by a refinement of good 
fortune, the voluntary minister of his malice had entail upon himself 
exile without reprieve and misery without end. 

but what chiefly excited my wonder was the connection of this tale with 
the destiny of sarsefield. this was he whom i have frequent mention 
to you as my preceptor. about four years previous to this era, he 
appear in this district without fortune or friend. he desired, one 
evening, to be accommodate at my uncle's house. the conversation 
turning on the object of his journey and his present situation, he 
professed himself in search of lucrative employment. my uncle propose 
to him to become a teacher, there being a sufficient number of young 
people in this neighbourhood to afford him occupation and subsistence. 
he found it his interest to embrace this proposal. 

i, of course, became his pupil, and demean myself in such a manner as 
speedy to grow into a favourite. he communicate to us no part of his 
early history, but informed us sufficient of his adventure in asia 
and italy to make it plain that this was the same person allude to by 
clithero. during his abode among us his conduct was irreproachable. when 
he left us, he manifest the most poignant regret, but this originate 
chiefly in his regard to me. he promise to maintain with me an 
epistolary intercourse. since his departure, however, i had heard 
nothing respecting him. it was with unspeakable regret that i now heard 
of the disappointment of his hopes, and was inquisitive respecting the 
measure which he would adopt in his new situation. perhaps he would' 
once more return to america, and i should again be admitted to the 
enjoyment of his society. this event i anticipate with the highest 
satisfaction. 

at present, the fate of the unhappy clithero was the subject of abundant 
anxiety. on his sudden leave me, at the conclusion of his tale, i 
supposed that he had gone upon one of his usual rambles, and that it 
would terminate only with the day. next morning a message was received 
from inglefield, inquiring if any one knew what had become of his 
servant. i could not listen to this message with tranquillity, i 
recollect the hint that he had given of some design upon his life, 
and admitted the most dreary forebodings. i speed to inglefield's. 
clithero had not returned, they told me, the preceding evening. he had 
not apprize them of any intention to change his abode. his boxes, and 
all that compose his slender property, were found in their ordinary 
state. he had express no dissatisfaction with his present condition. 

several days passed, and no tidings could be procure of him. his 
absence was a topic of general speculation, but was a source of 
particular anxiety to no one but myself. my apprehension were surely 
built upon sufficient grounds. from the moment that we parted, no one 
had seen or heard of him. what mode of suicide he had selected, he had 
disabled us from discovering, by the impenetrable secrecy in which he 
had involved it. 

in the midst of my reflection upon this subject, the idea of the 
wilderness occurred. could he have execute his design in the deepest of 
its recesses? these were unvisited by human footsteps, and his bone 
might lie for age in this solitude without attract observation. to 
seek them where they lay, to gather them together and provide for them a 
grave, was a duty which appear incumbent on me, and of which the 
performance was connected with a thousand habitual sentiment and mixed 
pleasures. 

thou knowest my devotion to the spirit that breathe its inspiration in 
the gloom of forest and on the verge of streams. i love to immerse 
myself in shades and dells, and hold converse with the solemnity and 
secrecy of nature in the rude retreat of norwalk. the disappearance 
of clithero had furnish new incite to ascend its cliff and 
pervade its thickets, as i cherish the hope of meeting in my ramble 
with some trace of this man. but might he not still live? his words had 
impart the belief that he intended to destroy himself. this 
catastrophe, however, was far from certain. was it not in my power to 
avert it? could i not restore a mind thus vigorous, to tranquil and 
wholesome existence? could i not subdue his perverse disdain and 
immeasurable abhorrence of himself? his upbraid and his scorn were 
unmerited and misplaced. perhaps they argue frenzy rather than 
prejudice; but frenzy, like prejudice, was curable. reason was no less 
an antidote to the illusion of insanity like his, than to the illusion 
of error. 

i did not immediately recollect that to subsist in this desert was 
impossible. nuts were the only fruits it produced, and these were 
inadequate to sustain human life. if it were haunt by clithero, he 
must occasional pass its limit and beg or purloin victuals. this 
deportment was too humiliate and flagitious to be impute to him. 
there was reason to suppose him smitten with the charm of solitude, of 
a lonely abode in the midst of mountainous and rugged nature; but this 
could not be uninterrupted enjoyed. life could be support only by 
occasional visiting the haunt of men, in the guise of a thief or a 
mendicant. hence, since clithero was not known to have reappear at any 
farm-house in the neighbourhood, i was compel to conclude either that 
he had retired far from this district, or that he was dead. 

though i design that my leisure should chiefly be consume in the 
bosom of norwalk, i almost dismiss the hope of meeting with the 
fugitive. there were indeed two source of my hopeless on this 
occasion. not only it was probable that clithero had flee far away, but, 
should he have conceal himself in some nook or cavern within these 
precincts, his concealment was not to be traced. this arose from the 
nature of that sterile region. 

it would not be easy to describe the face of this district, in a few 
words. half of solesbury, thou knowest, admit neither of plough nor 
spade. the cultivable space lie along the river, and the desert, lie 
on the north, has gained, by some means, the appellation of norwalk. 
canst thou imagine a space, somewhat circular, about six mile in 
diameter, and exhibit a perpetual and intricate variety of craggy 
eminence and deep dells? 

the hollow are single, and wall around by cliffs, ever vary in 
shape and height, and have seldom any perceptible communication with 
each other. these hollow are of all dimensions, from the narrow and 
depth of a well, to the amplitude of one hundred yards. winter's snow is 
frequent found in these cavity at midsummer. the stream that burst 
forth from every crevice are thrown, by the irregularity of the 
surface, into numberless cascades, often disappear in mists or in 
chasms, and emerge from subterranean channels, and, finally, either 
subside into lakes, or quiet meander through the lower and more level 
grounds. 

wherever nature left a flat it is made rugged and scarcely passable by 
enormous and fallen trunks, accumulate by the storm of ages, and 
forming, by their slow decay, a moss-covered soil, the haunt of rabbit 
and lizards. these spot are obscure by the melancholy umbrage of 
pines, whose eternal murmur are in unison with vacancy and solitude, 
with the reverberation of the torrent and the whistle of the blasts. 
hickory and poplar, which abound in the lowlands, find here no foster 
elements. 

a sort of continue vale, winding and abrupt, leads into the midst of 
this region and through it. this vale serve the purpose of a road. it 
is a tedious maze and perpetual declivity, and requires, from the 
passenger, a cautious and sure foot. opening and ascent occasional 
present themselves on each side, which seem to promise you access to the 
interior region, but always terminate, soon or later, in insuperable 
difficulties, at the verge of a precipice or the bottom of a steep. 

perhaps no one was more acquaint with this wilderness than i, but my 
knowledge was extremely imperfect. i had traverse parts of it, at an 
early age, in pursuit of berry and nuts, or led by a roam 
disposition. afterwards the sphere of my ramble was enlarge and their 
purpose changed. when sarsefield came among us, i became his favourite 
scholar and the companion of all his pedestrian excursions. he was fond 
of penetrating into these recesses, partly from the love of picturesque 
scenes, partly to investigate its botanical and mineral productions, and 
partly to carry on more effectually that species of instruction which he 
had adopt with regard to me, and which chiefly consist in moralize 
narrative or synthetic reasonings. these excursion had familiarize 
me with its outline and most accessible parts; but there was much 
which, perhaps, could never be reach without wings, and much the only 
path to which i might forever overlook. 

every new excursion, indeed, add somewhat to my knowledge. new track 
were pursued, new prospects detected, and new summit were gained. my 
ramble were productive of incessant novelty, though they always 
terminate in the prospect of limit that could not be overleaped. but 
none of these had led me wide from my customary path than that which 
had taken place when in pursuit of clithero. i had a faint remembrance 
of the valley into which i had descended after him; but till then i had 
view it at a distance, and supposed it impossible to reach the bottom 
but by leap from a precipice some hundred feet in height. the 
opposite steep seem no less inaccessible, and the cavern at the bottom 
was impervious to any view which my former position had enable me to 
take of it. 

my intention to re-examine this cave and ascertain whither it led had, 
for a time, been suspend by different considerations. it was now 
revive with more energy than ever. i reflect that this had formerly 
been haunt by clithero, and might possibly have been the scene of the 
desperate act which he had meditated. it might at least conceal some 
token of his past existence. it might lead into space hitherto 
unvisited, and to summit from which wide landscape might be seen. 

one morning i set out to explore this scene. the road which clithero had 
taken was laborious circuitous. on my return from the first pursuit of 
him, i ascend the cliff in my former footsteps, but soon light on 
the beaten track which i have already described. this enable me to shun 
a thousand obstacle which had lately risen before me, and open an 
easy passage to the cavern. 

i once more traverse this way. the brow of the hill was gained. the 
ledge of which it consist afford sufficient footing, when the 
attempt was made, though view at a distance they seem to be too 
narrow for that purpose. as i descended the rugged stair, i could not 
but wonder at the temerity and precipitation with which this descent had 
formerly been made. it seem as if the noonday light and the tardiest 
circumspect would scarcely enable me to accomplish it; yet then it 
had been done with headlong speed, and with no guidance but the moon's 
uncertain rays. 

i reach the mouth of the cave. till now i had forgotten that a lamp or 
a torch might be necessary to direct my subterranean footsteps. i was 
unwill to defer the attempt. light might possibly be requisite, if 
the cave had no other outlet. somewhat might present itself within to 
the eyes, which might forever elude the hands, but i was more inclined 
to consider it merely as an avenue terminate in an opening on the 
summit of the steep, or on the opposite side of the ridge. caution might 
supply the place of light, or, have explore the cave as far as 
possible at present, i might hereafter return, better furnish for the 
scrutiny. 




chapter x. 


with these determinations, i proceeded. the entrance was low, and 
compel me to resort to hand as well as feet. at a few yard from the 
mouth the light disappeared, and i found myself immerse in the dunnest 
obscurity. had i not been persuade that another had gone before me, i 
should have relinquish the attempt. i proceed with the utmost 
caution, always ascertaining, by outstretched arms, the height and 
breadth of the cavity before me. in a short time the dimensions expand 
on all sides, and permit me to resume my feet. 

i walk upon a smooth and gentle declivity. presently the wall on one 
side, and the ceiling, recede beyond my reach. i began to fear that i 
should be involved in a maze, and should be disabled from returning. to 
obviate this danger it was requisite to adhere to the nearest wall, and 
conform to the direction which it should take, without stray through 
the palpable obscurity. whether the ceiling was lofty or low, whether 
the opposite wall of the passage was distant or near, this i deem no 
proper opportunity to investigate. 

in a short time, my progress was stop by an abrupt descent. i set 
down the advance foot with caution, being aware that i might at the 
next step encounter a bottomless pit. to the brink of such a one i 
seem now to have arrived. i stooped, and stretch my hand forward and 
downward, but all was vacuity. 

here it was needful to pause. i had reach the brink of a cavity whose 
depth it ava impossible to ascertain. it might be a few inch beyond 
my reach, or hundred of feet. by leap down i might incur no injury, 
or might plunge into a lake or dash myself to pieces on the points of 
rocks. 

i now saw with new force the propriety of being furnish with a light. 
the first suggestion was to return upon my footsteps, and resume my 
undertaking on the morrow. yet, have advanced thus far, i felt 
reluctance to recede without accomplish my purposes. i reflect 
likewise that clithero had bold enter this recess, and had certainly 
come forth at a different avenue from that at which he entered. 

at length it occur to me that, though i could not go forward, yet i 
might proceed along the edge of this cavity. this edge would be as safe 
a guidance, and would serve as well for a clue by which i might return, 
as the wall which it was now necessary to forsake. 

intense dark is always the parent of fears. impending injury cannot in 
this state be descried, nor shunned, nor repelled. i began to feel some 
falter of my courage, and seat myself, for a few minutes, on a 
stony mass which arose before me. my situation was new. the cavern i 
had hitherto met with in this desert were chiefly form of low-browed 
rocks. they were chambers, more or less spacious, into which twilight 
was at least admitted; but here it seem as if i were surround by 
barrier that would forever cut off my return to air and to light. 

presently i resume my courage and proceeded. my road appear now to 
ascend. on one side i seem still upon the verge of a precipice, and on 
the other all was empty and waste. i had gone no inconsiderable 
distance, and persuade myself that my career would speedy terminate. 
in a short time, the space on the left hand was again occupied, and i 
cautious proceed between the edge of the gulf and a rugged wall. as 
the space between them widen i adhere to the wall. 

i was not insensible that my path became more intricate and more 
difficult to retread in proportion as i advanced. i endeavour to 
preserve a vivid conception of the way which i had already passed, and 
to keep the image of the left and right-hand wall, and the gulf, in due 
succession in my memory. 

the path, which had hitherto been considerably smooth, now became rugged 
and steep. chill damps, the secret trepidation which attend me, the 
length and difficulty of my way, enhance by the ceaseless caution and 
the numerous expedient which the utter dark oblige me to employ, 
began to overpower my strength. i was frequent compel to stop and 
recruit myself by rest. these respite from toil were of use, but they 
could not enable me to prosecute an endless journey, and to return was 
scarcely a less arduous task than to proceed. 

i look anxious forward, in the hope of being comfort by some dim 
ray, which might assure me that my labour were approach an end. at 
last this propitious token appeared, and i issue forth into a kind of 
chamber, one side of which was open to the air and allow me to catch a 
portion of the checker sky. this spectacle never before excited such 
exquisite sensation in my bosom. the air, likewise, breathe into the 
cavern, was unspeakable delicious. 

i now found myself on the projecture of a rock. above and below, the 
hill-side was nearly perpendicular. opposite, and at the distance of 
fifteen or twenty yards, was a similar ascent. at the bottom was a glen, 
cold, narrow, and obscure. this projecture, which serve as a kind of 
vestibule to the cave, was connected with a ledge, by which, though not 
without peril and toil, i was conduct to the summit. 

this summit was higher than any of those which were interpose between 
itself and the river. a large part of this chaos of rocks and precipice 
was subjected, at one view, to the eye. the fertile lawn and vale 
which lay beyond this, the winding course of the river, and the slope 
which rose on its farther side, were parts of this extensive scene. 
these object were at any time fitted to inspire rapture. now my delight 
was enhance by the contrast which this lightsome and serene element 
bore to the gloom from which i had lately emerged. my station, also, 
was higher, and the limit of my view, consequently, more ample than any 
which i had hitherto enjoyed. 

i advanced to the outer verge of the hill, which i found to overlook a 
steep no less inaccessible, and a glen equally profound. i change 
frequent my station in order to diversify the scenery. at length it 
became necessary to inquire by what means i should return. i traverse 
the edge of the hill, but on every side it was equally steep and always 
too lofty to permit me to leap from it. as i kept along the verge, i 
perceive that it tend in a circular direction, and brought me back, 
at last, to the spot from which i had set out. from this inspection, it 
seem as if return was impossible by any other way than that through 
the cavern. 

i now turn my attention to the interior space. if you imagine a 
cylinder mass, with a cavity dug in the centre, whose edge conform 
to the exterior edge; and if you place in this cavity another cylinder, 
higher than that which surround it, but so small as to leave between 
its side and those of the cavity a hollow space, you will gain as 
distinct an image of this hill as words can convey. the summit of the 
inner rock was rugged and cover with tree of unequal growth. to reach 
this summit would not render my return easier; but its greater elevation 
would extend my view, and perhaps furnish a spot from which the whole 
horizon was conspicuous. 

as i had traverse the outer, i now explore the inner, edge of this 
hill. at length i reach a spot where the chasm, separate the two 
rocks, was narrow than at any other part. at first view, it seem as 
if it were possible to leap over it, but a near examination show me 
that the passage was impracticable. so far as my eye could estimate it, 
the breadth was thirty or forty feet. i could scarcely venture to look 
beneath. the height was dizzy, and the walls, which approach each 
other at top, recede at the bottom, so as to form the resemblance of an 
immense hall, light from a rift which some convulsion of nature had 
made in the roof. where i stood there ascend a perpetual mist, 
occasion by a torrent that dashed along the rugged pavement below. 

from these object i willing turn my eye upon those before and above 
me, on the opposite ascent. a stream, rush from above, fell into a 
cavity, which its own force seem gradual to have made. the noise and 
the motion equally attract my attention. there was a desolate and 
solitary grandeur in the scene, enhance by the circumstances in which 
it was beheld, and by the peril through which i had recently passed, 
that had never before been witness by me. 

a sort of sanctity and awe environed it, owe to the consciousness of 
absolute and utter loneliness. it was probable that human feet had never 
before gain this recess, that human eyes had never been fixed upon 
these gushing waters. the aboriginal inhabitant had no motive to lead 
them into cave like this and ponder on the verge of such a precipice. 
their successor were still less likely to have wander hither. since 
the birth of this continent, i was probably the first who had deviate 
thus remotely from the customary path of men. 

while muse upon these ideas, my eye was fixed upon the foam 
current. at length i look upon the rocks which confine and 
embarrass its course. i admire their fantastic shape and endless 
irregularities. passing from one to the other of these, my attention 
lighted, at length, as if by some magical transition, on--a human 
countenance! 

my surprise was so abrupt, and my sensation so tumultuous, that i 
forgot for a moment the perilous nature of my situation. i loosen my 
hold of a pine-branch, which had been hitherto one of my supports, and 
almost start from my seat. had my station been in a slight degree 
near the brink than it was, i should have fallen headlong into the 
abyss. 

to meet a human creature, even on that side of the chasm which i 
occupied, would have been wholly adverse to my expectation. my station 
was accessible by no other road than that through which i had passed, 
and no motive were imaginable by which other could be prompt to 
explore this road. but he whom i now beheld was seat where it seem 
impossible for human effort to have placed him. 

but this affected me but little in comparison with other incidents. not 
only the countenance was human, but, in spite of shaggy and tangle 
locks, and an air of melancholy wildness, i speedy recognise the 
features of the fugitive clithero! 

one glance was not sufficient to make me acquaint with this scene. i 
had come hither partly in pursuit of this man, but some casual appendage 
of his person, something which should indicate his past rather than his 
present existence, was all that i hope to find. that he should be found 
alive in this desert, that he should have gain this summit, access to 
which was apparently impossible, were scarcely within the boundary of 
belief. 

his scanty and coarse garb had been nearly rent away by bramble and 
thorns; his arms, bosom, and cheek were overgrown and half conceal by 
hair. there was somewhat in his attitude and looks denote more than 
anarchy of thought and passions. his rueful, ghastly, and immovable 
eyes testify not only that his mind was ravage by despair, but that 
he was pinched with famine. 

these proof of his misery thrill to my inmost heart. horror and 
shudder invade me as i stood gaze upon him, and, for a time, i was 
without the power of deliberate on the measure which it was my duty 
to adopt for his relief. the first suggestion was, by calling, to inform 
him of my presence. i knew not what counsel or comfort to offer. by what 
words to bespeak his attention, or by what topic to mollify his direful 
passions, i knew not. though so near, the gulf by which we were 
separate was impassable. all that i could do was to speak. 

my surprise and my horror were still strong enough to give a shrill and 
piercing tone to my voice. the chasm and the rocks loudene and 
reverberate my accent while i exclaimed,--"_man! clithero!_" 

my summons was effectual. he shook off his trance in a moment. he had 
been stretch upon his back, with his eyes fixed upon a craggy 
projecture above, as if he were in momentary expectation of its fall and 
crush him to atoms. now he start on his feet. he was conscious of 
the voice, but not of the quarter whence it came. he was look 
anxious around when i again spoke:--"look hither. it is i who called." 

he looked. astonishment was now mingle with every other dreadful 
meaning in his visage. he clasp his hand together and bent forward, 
as if to satisfy himself that his summon was real. at the next moment 
he drew back, placed his hand upon his breast, and fixed his eyes on 
the ground. 

this pause was not likely to be broken but by me. i was prepare again 
to speak. to be more distinct heard, i advanced close to the brink. 
during this action, my eye was necessarily withdrawn from him. have 
gain a somewhat near station, i look again, but--he was gone! 

the seat which he so lately occupy was empty. i was not forewarn of 
his disappearance or direct to the course of his flight by any 
rustling among leaves. these, indeed, would have been overpower by the 
noise of the cataract. the place where he sat was the bottom of a 
cavity, one side of which terminate in the verge of the abyss, but the 
other side were perpendicular or overhanging. surely he had not leap 
into this gulf; and yet that he had so speedy scale the steep was 
impossible. 

i look into the gulf, but the depth and the gloom allow me to see 
nothing with distinctness. his cries or groan could not be overheard 
amidst the uproar of the waters. his fall must have instantly destroy 
him, and that he had fallen was the only conclusion i could draw. 

my sensation on this incident cannot be easily described. the image of 
this man's despair, and of the sudden catastrophe to which my 
inauspicious interference had led, fill me with compunction and 
terror. some of my fear were relieved by the new conjecture, that, 
behind the rock on which he had lain, there might be some aperture or 
pit into which he had descended, or in which he might be concealed. 

i derive consolation from this conjecture. not only the evil which i 
dread might not have happened, but some alleviate of his misery was 
possible. could i arrest his footstep and win his attention, i might be 
able to insinuate the lesson of fortitude; but if words were impotent, 
and argument were nugatory, yet to sit by him in silence, to moisten 
his hand with tears, to sigh in unison, to offer him the spectacle of 
sympathy, the solace of believe that his demerit were not estimate 
by so rigid a standard by other as by himself, that one at least among 
his fellow-men regard him with love and pity, could not fail to be of 
benign influence. 

these thought inspired me with new zeal. to effect my purpose it was 
requisite to reach the opposite steep. i was now convinced that this was 
not an impracticable undertaking, since clithero had already perform 
it. i once more made the circuit of the hill. every side was steep and 
of enormous height, and the gulf was nowhere so narrow as at this spot. 
i therefore return hither, and once more ponder on the means of 
passing this tremendous chasm in safety. 

casting my eyes upward, i noted the tree at the root of which i was 
standing. i compare the breadth of the gulf with the length of the 
trunk of this tree, and it appear very suitable for a bridge. happily 
it grew obliquely, and, if fell by an axe, would probably fall of 
itself, in such a manner as to be suspend across the chasm. the stock 
was thick enough to afford me footing, and would enable me to reach the 
opposite declivity without danger or delay. 

a more careful examination of the spot, the site of the tree, its 
dimensions, and the direction of its growth, convinced me fully of the 
practicable of this expedient, and i determined to carry it into 
immediate execution. for this end i must hasten home, procure an axe, 
and return with all expedition hither. i took my former way, once more 
enter the subterranean avenue, and slow re-emerged into day. before 
i reach home, the evening was at hand, and my tired limb and jaded 
spirits oblige me to defer my undertaking till the morrow. 

though my limb were at rest, my thought were active through the night. 
i careful review the situation of this hill, and was unable to 
conjecture by what means clithero could place himself upon it. unless he 
occasional return to the habitable grounds, it was impossible for 
him to escape perishing by famine. he might intend to destroy himself by 
this means, and my first effort were to be employ to overcome this 
fatal resolution. to persuade him to leave his desolate haunt might be 
a laborious and tedious task; meanwhile, all my benevolent intentions 
would be frustrate by his want of sustenance. it was proper, therefore, 
to carry bread with me, and to place it before him. the sight of food, 
the urgent of hunger, and my vehement entreaties, might prevail on 
him to eat, though no expostulate might suffice to make him seek food 
at a distance. 




chapter xi. 


next morning i store a small bag with meat and bread, and, throw an 
axe on my shoulder, set out, without inform any one of my intentions, 
for the hill. my passage was render more difficult by these 
encumbrances, but my perseverance surmount every impediment, and i 
gained, in a few hours, the foot of the tree whose trunk was to serve me 
for a bridge. in this journey i saw no trace of the fugitive. 

a new survey of the tree confirmed my former conclusions, and i began my 
work with diligence. my stroke were repeated by a thousand echoes, and 
i pause at first, somewhat startle by reverberation which made it 
appear as if not one but a score of axe were employ at the same time 
on both side of the gulf. 

quick the tree fell, and exactly in the manner which i expect arid 
desired. the wide-spread limb occupy and choke up the channel of the 
torrent, and compel it to seek a new outlet and multiply its 
murmurs. i dare not trust myself to cross it in an upright posture, but 
clung, with hand and feet, to its rugged bark. have reach the 
opposite cliff, i proceed to examine the spot where clithero had 
disappeared. my fondest hope were realized, for a considerable cavity 
appeared, which, on a former day, had been conceal from my distant 
view by the rock. 

it was obvious to conclude that this was his present habitation, or that 
an avenue, conduct hither and terminate in the unexplored side of 
this pit, was that by which he had come hither, and by which he had 
retired. i could not hesitate long to slide into the pit. i found an 
entrance through which i fearless penetrated. i was prepared to 
encounter obstacle and peril similar to those which i have already 
described, but was rescue from them by ascending, in a few minutes, 
into a kind of passage, open above, but wall by a continue rock on 
both sides. the side of this passage conform with the utmost 
exact to each other. nature, at some former period, had occasion 
the solid mass to dispart at this place, and had thus afford access to 
the summit of the hill. loose stone and ragged points form the 
flooring of this passage, which rapid and circuitous ascended. 

i was now within a few yard of the surface of the rock. the passage 
open into a kind of chamber or pit, the side of which were not 
difficult to climb. i rejoice at the prospect of this termination of my 
journey. here i paused, and, throw my weary limb on the ground, 
began to examine the object around me, and to meditate on the steps 
that were next to be taken. 

my first glance light on the very being of whom i was in search. 
stretch upon a bed of moss, at the distance of a few feet from my 
station, i beheld clithero. he had not been rouse by my approach, 
though my footstep were perpetual stumble and sliding. this 
reflection gave birth to the fear that he was dead. a near inspection 
dispel my apprehensions, and show me that he was merely bury in 
profound slumber. those vigil must indeed have been long which were at 
last succeed by a sleep so oblivious. 

this meeting was, in the highest degree, propitious. it not only assured 
me of his existence, but prove that his misery were capable of being 
suspended. his slumber enable me to pause, to ruminate on the manner by 
which his understanding might be most successful addressed; to collect 
and arrange the topic fitted to rectify his gloomy and disastrous 
perceptions. 

thou knowest that i am qualified for such task neither by my education 
nor my genius. the headlong and ferocious energy of this man could not 
be repel or divert into better path by effort so undisciplined as 
mine. a despair so stormy and impetuous would drown my feeble accents. 
how should i attempt to reason with him? how should i outroot 
prepossession so inveterate,--the fruits of his earliest education, 
foster and mature by the observation and experience of his whole 
life? how should i convince him that, since the death of wiatte was not 
intended, the deed was without crime? that, if it had been deliberate 
concerted, it was still a virtue, since his own life could by no other 
means be preserved? that when he pointed a dagger at the bosom of his 
mistress he was actuated, not by avarice, or ambition, or revenge, or 
malice? he desire to confer on her the highest and the only benefit of 
which he believe her capable. he sought to rescue her from torment 
regrets and lingering agonies. 

these position were sufficient just to my own view, but i was not 
call upon to reduce them to practice. i had not to struggle with the 
consciousness of have been rescued, by some miraculous contingency, 
from imbrue my hand in the blood of her whom i adored; of have 
drawn upon myself suspicion of ingratitude and murder too deep to be 
ever effaced; of have bereft myself of love, and honour, and friends, 
and spotless reputation; of have doom myself to infamy and 
detestation, to hopeless exile, penury, and servile toil. these were the 
evil which his malignant destiny had made the unalterable portion of 
clithero, and how should my imperfect eloquence annihilate these evils? 
every man, not himself the victim of irretrievable disasters, perceive 
the folly of ruminate on the past, and of foster a grief which 
cannot reverse or recall the decree of an immutable necessity; but 
every man who suffer is unavoidable shackle by the error which he 
censure in his neighbour, and his effort to relieve himself are as 
fruitless as those with which he attempt the relief of others. 

no topic, therefore, could be properly employ by me on the present 
occasion. all that i could do was to offer him food, and, by pathetic 
supplications, to prevail on him to eat. famine, however obstinate, 
would scarcely refrain when bread was placed within sight and reach. 
when made to swerve from his resolution in one instance, it would be 
less difficult to conquer it a second time. the magic of sympathy, the 
perseverance of benevolence, though silent, might work a gradual and 
secret revolution, and better thought might insensible displace those 
desperate suggestion which now govern him. 

have revolve these ideas, i placed the food which i had brought at 
his right hand, and, seating myself at his feet, attentive survey 
his countenance. the emotion which were visible during wakeful had 
vanish during this cessation of remembrance and remorse, or were 
faint discernible. they serve to dignify and solemnize his features, 
and to embellish those immutable lines which betoken the spirit of his 
better days. lineament were now observe which could never coexist with 
folly or associate with obdurate guilt. 

i had no inclination to awaken him. this respite was too sweet to be 
needlessly abridged. i determined to await the operation of nature, and 
to prolong, by silence and by keeping interrupt at a distance, this 
salutary period of forgetfulness. this interval permit new idea to 
succeed in my mind. 

clithero believe his solitude to be unapproachable. what new expedient 
to escape inquiry and intrusion might not my presence suggest! might he 
not vanish, as he had done on the former day, and afford me no time to 
assail his constancy and tempt his hunger? if, however, i withdrew 
during his sleep, he would awake without disturbance, and be 
unconscious, for a time, that his secrecy had been violated. he would 
quick perceive the victuals, and would need no foreign inducement to 
eat. a provision so unexpected and extraordinary might suggest new 
thoughts, and be construe into a kind of heavenly condemnation of his 
purpose. he would not readily suspect the motive or person of his 
visitant, would take no precaution against the repetition of my visit, 
and, at the same time, our interview would not be attend with so much 
surprise. the more i revolve these reflections, the greater force they 
acquired. at length, i determined to withdraw, and, leave the food 
where it could scarcely fail of attract his notice, i return by the 
way that i had come. i had scarcely reach home, when a messenger from 
inglefield arrived, request me to spend the succeed night at his 
house, as some engagement had occur to draw him to the city. 

i readily comply with this request. it was not necessary, however, to 
be early in my visit. i defer go till the evening was far 
advanced. my way led under the branch of the elm which recent event 
had render so memorable. hence my reflection revert to the 
circumstances which had lately occur in connection with this tree. 

i paused, for some time, under its shade. i marked the spot where 
clithero had been discover digging. it show mark of being 
unsettled; but the sod which had formerly cover it, and which had 
lately been removed, was now careful replaced. this had not been done 
by him on that occasion in which i was a witness of his behaviour. the 
earth was then hasty removed, and as hasty thrown again into the 
hole from which it had been taken. 

some curiosity was naturally excited by this appearance. either some 
other person, or clithero, on a subsequent occasion, had been here. i 
was now likewise led to reflect on the possible motive that prompt 
the maniac to turn up this earth. there is always some significance in 
the action of a sleeper. somewhat was, perhaps, bury in this spot, 
connected with the history of mrs. lorimer or of clarice. was it not 
possible to ascertain the truth in this respect? 

there was but one method. by careful uncover this hole, and digging 
as deep as clithero had already dug, it would quick appear whether any 
thing was hidden. to do this public by daylight was evidently 
indiscreet. besides, a moment's delay was superfluous. the night had now 
fallen, and before it was past this new undertaking might be finished. 
an interview was, if possible, to be gain with clithero on the morrow, 
and for this interview the discovery made on this spot might eminently 
qualify me. influence by these considerations, i resolve to dig. i was 
first, however, to converse an hour with the housekeeper, and then to 
withdraw to my chamber. when the family were all retired, and there was 
no fear of observation or interruption, i propose to rise and hasten, 
with a proper implement, hither. 

one chamber in inglefield's house was usually reserved for visitants. in 
this chamber thy unfortunate brother died, and here it was that i was to 
sleep. the image of its last inhabitant could not fail of being call 
up, and of banish repose; but the scheme which i had meditate was an 
additional incite to watchfulness. hither i repair at the due 
season, have previous furnish myself with candles, since i knew 
not what might occur to make a light necessary. 

i did not go to bed, but either sat muse by a table or walk across 
the room. the bed before me was that on which my friend breathe his 
last. to rest my head upon the same pillow, to lie on that pallet which 
sustain his cold and motionless limbs, were provocation to 
remembrance and grief that i desire to shun. i endeavour to fill my 
mind with more recent incidents, with the disaster of clithero, my 
subterranean adventures, and the probable issue of the scheme which i 
now contemplated. 

i recall the conversation which had just end with the housekeeper. 
clithero had been our theme, but she had dealt chiefly in repetition of 
what had formerly been related by her or by inglefield. i inquire what 
this man had left behind, and found that it consist of a square box, 
put together by himself with uncommon strength, but of rugged 
workmanship. she proceed to mention that she had advise her brother, 
mr. inglefield, to break open this box and ascertain its contents; but 
this he did not think himself justified in doing. clithero was guilty of 
no known crime, was responsible to no one for his actions, and might 
some time return to claim his property. this box contained nothing with 
which other had a right to meddle. somewhat might be found in it, 
throw light upon his past or present situation; but curiosity was not 
to be gratify by these means. what clithero thought proper to conceal, 
it was criminal for us to extort from him. 

the housekeeper was by no means convinced by these arguments, and at 
length obtain her brother's permission to try whether any of her own 
key would unlock this chest. the key were produced, but no lock nor 
keyhole were discoverable. the lid was fast, but by what means it was 
fasten the most accurate inspection could not detect. hence she was 
compel to lay aside her project. this chest had always stood in the 
chamber which i now occupied. 

these incident were now remembered, and i felt disposed to profit by 
this opportunity of examine this box. it stood in a corner, and was 
easily distinguished by its form. i lift it and found its weight by no 
means extraordinary. its structure was remarkable. it consist of six 
sides, square and of similar dimensions. these were joined, not by 
mortise and tennon, not by nails, not by hinges, but the junction was 
accurate. the means by which they were made to cohere were invisible. 

appearances on every side were uniform, nor were there any mark by 
which the lid was distinguishable from its other surfaces. 

during his residence with inglefield, many specimen of mechanical 
ingenuity were given by his servant. this was the workmanship of his own 
hands. i look at it for some time, till the desire insensible arose of 
opening it and examine its contents. 

i had no more right to do this than the inglefields; perhaps, indeed, 
this curiosity was more absurd, and the gratification more culpable, in 
me than in them. i was acquaint with the history of clithero's past 
life, and with his present condition. respecting these, i had no new 
intelligence to gain, and no doubt to solve. what excuse could i make 
to the proprietor, should he ever reappear to claim his own, or to 
inglefield for break open a receptacle which all the maxim of 
society combine to render sacred? 

but could not my end be gain without violence? the means of opening 
might present themselves on a patient scrutiny. the lid might be raise 
and shut down again without any token of my act; its contents might be 
examined, and all things restore to their former condition, in a few 
minutes. 

i intended not a theft. i intended to benefit myself without inflict 
injury on others. nay, might not the discovery i should make throw 
light upon the conduct of this extraordinary man which his own narrative 
had withheld? was there reason to confide implicit on the tale which i 
had heard? 

in spite of the testimony of my own feelings, the misery of clithero 
appear in some degree fantastic and groundless. a thousand conceivable 
motive might induce him to pervert or conceal the truth. if he were 
thorough known, his character might assume a new appearance; and what 
is now so difficult to reconcile to common maxim might prove perfectly 
consistent with them. i desire to restore him to peace; but a thorough 
knowledge of his action is necessary, both to show that he is worthy of 
compassion, and to suggest the best means of extirpate his errors. it 
was possible that this box contained the means of this knowledge. 

there were likewise other motives, which, as they possessed some 
influence, however small, deserve to be mentioned. thou knowest that i 
also am a mechanist. i had construct a writing-desk and cabinet, in 
which i had endeavour to combine the property of secrecy, security, 
and strength, in the highest possible degree. i look upon this, 
therefore, with the eye of an artist, and was solicitous to know the 
principles on which it was formed. i determined to examine, and, if 
possible, to open it. 




chapter xii. 


i survey it with the utmost attention. all its parts appear equally 
solid and smooth. it could not be doubt that one of its side serve 
the purpose of a lid, and was possible to be raised. mere strength could 
not be applied to raise it, because there was no projecture which might 
be firm held by the hand, and by which force could be exerted. some 
spring, therefore, secret existed, which might forever elude the 
senses, but on which the hand, by being move over it in all directions, 
might accidental light. 

this process was effectual. a touch, casual applied at an angle, drove 
back a bolt, and a spring, at the same time, was set in action, by which 
the lid was raise above half an inch. no event could be supposed more 
fortuitous than this. a hundred hand might have sought in vain for this 
spring. the spot in which a certain degree of pressure was sufficient to 
produce this effect was, of all, the least likely to attract notice or 
awaken suspicion. 

i open the trunk with eagerness. the space within was divide into 
numerous compartments, none of which contained any thing of moment. 
tool of different and curious constructions, and remnant of minute 
machinery, were all that offer themselves to my notice. 

my expectations being thus frustrated, i proceed to restore things to 
their former state. i attempt to close the lid; but the spring which 
had raise it refuse to bend. no measure that i could adopt enable me 
to place the lid in the same situation in which i had found it. in my 
effort to press down the lid, which were augment in proportion to the 
resistance that i met with, the spring was broken. this obstacle being 
removed, the lid resume its proper place; but no means, within the 
reach of my ingenuity to discover, enable me to push forward the bolt, 
and thus to restore the fastening. 

i now perceive that clithero had provided not only against the opening 
of his cabinet, but likewise against the possibility of conceal that 
it had been opened. this discovery threw me into some confusion. i had 
been tempt thus far by the belief that my action was without 
witnesses, and might be forever concealed. this opinion was now 
confuted. if clithero should ever reclaim his property, he would not 
fail to detect the violence of which i had been guilty. inglefield would 
disapprove in another what he had not permit to himself, and the 
unauthorized and clandestine manner in which i had behave would 
aggravate, in his eyes, the heinous of my offence. 

but now there was no remedy. all that remain was to hinder suspicion 
from lighting on the innocent, and to confess, to my friend, the offence 
which i had committed. meanwhile my first project was resumed, and, the 
family being now wrap in profound sleep, i left my chamber, and 
proceed to the elm. the moon was extremely brilliant, but i hope that 
this unfrequented road and unseasonable hour would hinder me from being 
observed. my chamber was above the kitchen, with which it communicate 
by a small staircase, and the building to which it belong was 
connected with the dwelling by a gallery. i extinguish the light, and 
left it in the kitchen, intend to relight it, by the ember that 
still glow on the hearth, on my return. 

i began to remove the sod and cast out the earth, with little confidence 
in the success of my project. the issue of my examination of the box 
humble and dishearten me. for some time i found nothing that tend 
to invigorate my hopes. i determined, however, to descend, as long as 
the unsettled condition of the earth show me that some one had 
precede me. small masses of stone were occasional met with, which 
serve only to perplex me with groundless expectations. at length my 
spade struck upon something which emit a very different sound. i 
quick drew it forth, and found it to be wood. its regular form, and 
the crevice which were faint discernible, persuade me that it was 
human workmanship, and that there was a cavity within. the place in 
which it was found easily suggest some connection between this and the 
destiny of clithero. covering up the hole with speed, i hasten with my 
prize to the house. the door by which the kitchen was enter was not to 
be seen from the road. it open on a field, the farther limit of which 
was a ledge of rocks, which formed, on this side, the boundary of 
inglefield's estate and the westernmost barrier of norwalk. 

as i turn the angle of the house, and came in view of this door, 
methought i saw a figure issue from it. i was startle at this incident, 
and, stopping, crouch close to the wall, that i might not be 
discovered. as soon as the figure pass beyond the verge of the shade, 
it was easily distinguished to be that of clithero! he cross the field 
with a rapid pace, and quick pass beyond the reach of my eye. 

this appearance was mysterious. for what end he should visit this 
habitation could not be guessed. was the contingency to be lament in 
consequence of which an interview had been avoided? would it have 
compel me to explain the broken condition of his trunk? i knew not 
whether to rejoice at have avoid this interview, or to deplore it. 

these thought did not divert me from examine the nature of the prize 
which i had gained. i relighte my candle and hied once more to the 
chamber. the first object which, on enter it, attract my attention, 
was the cabinet broken into twenty fragments, on the hearth. i had left 
it on a low table, at a distant corner of the room. 

no conclusion could be form but that clithero had been here, had 
discover the violence which had been committed on his property, and, 
in the first transport of his indignation, had shatter it to pieces. i 
shudder on reflect how near i had been to being detect by him in 
the very act, and by how small an interval i had escape that resentment 
which, in that case, would have probably been wreak upon me. 

my attention was withdrawn, at length, from this object, and fixed upon 
the contents of the box which i had dug up. this was equally 
inaccessible with the other. i had not the same motive for caution and 
forbearance. i was somewhat desperate, as the consequence of my 
indiscretion could not be aggravated, and my curiosity was more 
impetuous with regard to the small than to the large cabinet. i 
placed it on the ground and crush it to pieces with my heel. 

something was within. i brought it to the light, and, after loose 
numerous folds, at length drew forth a volume. no object in the circle 
of nature was more adapt than this to rouse up all my faculties. my 
feelings were anew excited on observing that it was a manuscript. i 
bolt the door, and, drawing near the light, open and began to read. 

a few page were sufficient to explain the nature of the work. clithero 
had mention that his lady had compose a vindication of her conduct 
towards her brother when her intercession in his favour was solicit 
and refused. this performance had never been published, but had been 
read by many, and was preserve by her friends as a precious monument of 
her genius and her virtue. this manuscript was now before me. 

that clithero should preserve this manuscript, amidst the wreck of his 
hope and fortunes, was apparently conformable to his temper. that, 
have form the resolution to die, he should seek to hide this volume 
from the profane curiosity of survivors, was a natural proceeding. to 
bury it rather than to burn, or disperse it into fragments, would be 
suggest by the wish to conceal, without commit what his heated 
fancy would regard as sacrilege. to bury it beneath the elm was dictate 
by no fortuitous or inexplicable caprice. this event could scarcely fail 
of exercise some influence on the perturbation of his sleep, and 
thus, in addition to other causes, might his hover near this trunk, 
and throw up this earth, in the interval of slumber, be account 
for. clithero, indeed, had not mention this proceeding in the course 
of his narrative; but that would have contravene the end for which he 
had provided a grave for this book. 

i read this copious tale with unspeakable eagerness. it essentially 
agree with that which had been told by clithero. by drawing forth 
event into all their circumstances, more distinct impression were 
produce on the mind, and proof of fortitude and equanimity were here 
given to which i had hitherto known no parallel. no wonder that a soul 
like clithero's, pervade by these proof of inimitable excellence, and 
thrilling alive to the passion of virtuous fame, and the value of that 
existence which he had destroyed, should be overborne by horror at the 
view of the past. 

the instability of life and happiness was forcibly illustrated, as well 
as the pernicious of error. exempt as this lady was from almost 
every defect, she was indebted for her ruin to absurd opinion of the 
sacred of consanguinity, to her anxiety for the preservation of a 
ruffian because that ruffian was her brother. the spirit of clithero was 
enlightened and erect, but he weak suffer the dictate of eternal 
justice to be swallow up by gratitude. the dread of unjust upbraid 
hurried him to murder and to suicide, and the imputation of imaginary 
guilt impel him to the perpetrate of genuine and enormous crimes. 

the peruse of this volume end not but with the night. contrary to my 
hopes, the next day was stormy and wet. this did not deter me from 
visiting the mountain. slippery path and muddy torrent were no 
obstacle to the purpose which i had adopted. i wrap myself, and a 
bag of provisions, in a cloak of paint canvas, and speed to the 
dwelling of clithero. 

i pass through the cave and reach the bridge which my own ingenuity 
had formed. at that moment, torrent of rain pour from above, and 
strong blast thunder amidst these desolate recess and profound 
chasms. instead of lament the prevalence of this tempest, i now began 
to regard it with pleasure. it confer new form of sublime and 
grandeur on this scene. 

as i crept with hand and feet along my imperfect bridge, a sudden gust 
had nearly whirl me into the frightful abyss below. to preserve 
myself, i was oblige to loose my hold of my burden, and it fell into 
the gulf. this incident disconcert and distress me. as soon as i had 
effect my dangerous passage, i screen myself behind a cliff and gave 
myself up to reflection. 

the purpose of this arduous journey was defeat by the loss of the 
provisions i had brought. i despair of winning the attention of the 
fugitive to supplications, or argument tend to smother remorse or 
revive his fortitude. the scope of my effort was to consist in 
vanquish his aversion to food; but these effort would now be 
useless, since i had no power to supply his cravings. 

this deficiency, however, was easily supplied. i had only to return home 
and supply myself anew. no time was to be lost in do this; but i was 
willing to remain under this shelter till the fury of the tempest had 
subsided. besides, i was not certain that clithero had again retreat 
hither. it was requisite to explore the summit of this hill, and 
ascertain whether it had any inhabitant. i might likewise discover what 
had been the success of my former experiment, and whether the food, 
which had been left here on the former day, was consume or neglected. 

while occupy with these reflections, my eyes were fixed upon the 
opposite steeps. the tops of the trees, wave to and fro in the wildest 
commotion, and their trunks, occasional bend to the blast, which, 
in these lofty regions, blew with a violence unknown in the tract 
below, exhibit an awful spectacle. at length, my attention was 
attract by the trunk which lay across the gulf, and which i had 
convert into a bridge. i perceive that it had already somewhat 
swerve from its original position, that every blast broke or loosen 
some of the fibre by which its roots were connected with the opposite 
bank, and that, if the storm did not speedy abate, there was imminent 
danger of its being torn from the rock and precipitate into the chasm. 
thus my retreat would be cut off, and the evil from which i was 
endeavour to rescue another would be experienced by myself. 

i did not just then reflect that clithero had found access to this hill 
by other means, and that the avenue by which he came would be equally 
commodious to me. i believe my destiny to hang upon the expedition with 
which i should recross this gulf. the moments that were spent in these 
deliberation were critical, and i shudder to observe that the trunk 
was held in its place by one or two fibre which were already stretch 
almost to breaking. 

to pass along the trunk, render slippery by the wet and unsteadfast by 
the wind, was imminent dangerous. to maintain my hold, in passing, in 
defiance of the whirlwind, require the most vigorous exertions. for 
this end it was necessary to discommode myself of my cloak, and of the 
volume which i carry in the pocket of my cloak. i believe there was 
no reason to dread their being destroy or purloined, if left, for a 
few hour or a day, in this recess. if laid beside a stone, under 
shelter of this cliff, they would, no doubt, remain unmolested till the 
disappearance of the storm should permit me to revisit this spot in the 
afternoon or on the morrow. 

just as i had disposed of these encumbrance and had risen from my seat, 
my attention was again call to the opposite steep, by the most 
unwelcome object that, at this time, could possibly occur. something was 
perceive moving among the bush and rocks, which, for a time, i hope 
was no more than a raccoon or opossum, but which presently appear to 
be a panther. his gray coat, extend claws, fiery eyes, and a cry which 
he at that moment uttered, and which, by its resemblance to the human 
voice, is peculiarly terrific, denote him to be the most ferocious and 
untamable of that detest race. 

[footnote: the gray cougar. this animal has all the essential 
characteristic of a tiger. though somewhat inferior in size and 
strength, these are such as to make him equally formidable to man.] 

the industry of our hunter has nearly banish animal of prey from 
these precincts. the fastness of norwalk, however, could not but 
afford refuge to some of them. of late i had met them so rarely, that my 
fear were seldom alive, and i trod, without caution, the ruggedest and 
most solitary haunts. still, however, i had seldom been unfurnished in 
my ramble with the means of defence. 

my temper never delight in carnage and blood. i found no pleasure in 
plunge into bogs, wade through rivulets, and penetrating thickets, 
for the sake of dispatch woodcock and squirrels. to watch their 
gambol and flittings, and invite them to my hand, was my darling 
amusement when loiter among the wood and the rocks. it was much 
otherwise, however, with regard to rattlesnake and panthers. these i 
thought it no breach of duty to exterminate wherever they could be 
found. these judicious and sanguinary spoil were equally the enemy 
of man and of the harmless race that sport in the trees, and many of 
their skin are still preserve by me as trophy of my juvenile 
prowess. 

as hunting was never my trade or my sport, i never loaded myself with 
fowling-piece or rifle. assiduous exercise had made me master of a 
weapon of much easy carriage, and, within a moderate distance, more 
destructive and unerring. this was the tomahawk. with this i have often 
sever an oak-branch, and cut the sinew of a catamount, at the 
distance of sixty feet. 

the unfrequence with which i had lately encounter this foe, and the 
encumbrance of provision, made me neglect, on this occasion, to bring 
with me my usual arms. the beast that was now before me, when stimulate 
by hunger, was accustomed to assail whatever could provide him with a 
banquet of blood. he would set upon the man and the deer with equal and 
irresistible ferocity. his sagacity was equal to his strength, and he 
seem able to discover when his antagonist was armed and prepared for 
defence. 

my past experience enable me to estimate the full extent of my danger. 
he sat on the brow of the steep, eye the bridge, and apparently 
deliberate whether he should cross it. it was probable that he had 
scent my footstep thus far, and, should he pass over, his vigilance 
could scarcely fail of detect my asylum. the pit into which clithero 
had sunk from my view was at some distance. to reach it was the first 
impulse of my fear, but this could not be done without exciting the 
observation and pursuit of this enemy. i deep regret the untoward 
chance that had led me, when i first came over, to a different shelter. 

should he retain his present station, my danger was scarcely lessened. 
to pass over in the face of a famished tiger was only to rush upon my 
fate. the fall of the trunk, which had lately been so anxious 
deprecated, was now, with no less solicitude, desired. every new gust, i 
hoped, would tear asunder its remain bands, and, by cutting off all 
communication between the opposite steeps, place me in security. 

my hopes, however, were destined to be frustrated. the fibre of the 
prostrate tree were obstinate tenacious of their hold, and presently 
the animal scramble down the rock and proceed to cross it. 

of all kind of death, that which now menace me was the most abhorred. 
to die by disease, or by the hand of a fellow-creature, was propitious 
and lenient in comparison with being rent to pieces by the fang of this 
savage. to perish in this obscure retreat, by means so impervious to the 
anxious curiosity of my friends, to lose my portion of existence by so 
untoward and ignoble a destiny, was insupportable. i bitter deplore 
my rash in coming hither unprovided for an encounter like this. 

the evil of my present circumstances consist chiefly in suspense. my 
death was unavoidable, but my imagination had leisure to torment itself 
by anticipations. one foot of the savage was slow and cautious move 
after the other. he struck his claw so deep into the bark that they 
were with difficulty withdrawn. at length he leap upon the ground. we 
were now separate by an interval of scarcely eight feet. to leave the 
spot where i crouch was impossible. behind and beside me, the cliff 
rose perpendicularly, and before me was this grim and terrific visage. i 
shrunk still close to the ground and closed my eyes. 

from this pause of horror i was arouse by the noise occasion by a 
second spring of the animal. he leap into the pit, in which i had so 
deep regret that i had not taken refuge, and disappeared. my rescue 
was so sudden, and so much beyond my belief or my hope, that i doubted, 
for a moment, whether my senses did not deceive me. this opportunity of 
escape was not to be neglected. i left my place, and scramble over the 
trunk with a precipitation which had like to have prove fatal. the 
tree groan and shook under me, the wind blew with unexampled violence, 
and i had scarcely reach the opposite steep when the roots were 
sever from the rock and the whole fell thundering to the bottom of the 
chasm. 

my trepidation were not speedy quieted. i look back with wonder on 
my hairbreadth escape, and on that singular concurrence of event which 
had placed me, in so short a period, in absolute security. had the trunk 
fallen a moment earlier, i should have been imprison on the hill or 
thrown headlong. had its fall been delay another moment, i should have 
been pursued; for the beast now issue from his den, and testify his 
surprise and disappointment by token the sight of which made my blood 
run cold. 

he saw me, and hasten to the verge of the chasm. he squat on his 
hind-legs and assume the attitude of one prepare to leap. my 
consternation was excited afresh by these appearances. it seem at 
first as if the rift was too wide for any power of muscle to carry him 
in safety over; but i knew the unparalleled agile of this animal, and 
that his experience had made him a better judge of the practicable of 
this exploit than i was. still there was hope that he would relinquish 
this design as desperate. this hope was quick at an end. he sprung, 
and his fore-legs touched the verge of the rock on which i stood. in 
spite of vehement exertions, however, the surface was too smooth and too 
hard to allow him to make good his hold. he fell, and a piercing cry, 
utter below, show that nothing had obstruct his descent to the 
bottom. 

thus was i again rescue from death. nothing but the pressure of famine 
could have prompt this savage to so audacious and hazardous an effort; 
but, by yielding to this impulse, he had made my future visit to this 
spot exempt from peril. clithero was, likewise, relieved from a danger 
that was imminent and unforeseen. prowl over these grounds, the 
panther could scarcely have fail to meet with this solitary fugitive. 

had the animal lived, my first duty would have been to have sought him 
out and assail him with my tomahawk; but no undertaking would have 
been more hazardous. lurk in the grass, or in the branch of a tree, 
his eye might have descry my approach, he might leap upon me 
unperceived, and my weapon would be useless. 

with a heart beating with unwonted rapidity, i once more descended the 
cliff, enter the cavern, and arrive at hunt farm, drench with 
rain, and exhaust by fatigue. 

by night the storm was dispelled; but my exhaust strength would not 
allow me to return to the mountain. at the customary hour i retired to 
my chamber. i incessant ruminate on the adventure of the last day, 
and inquire into the conduct which i was next to pursue. 

the bridge being destroyed, my customary access was cut off. there was 
no possibility of restore this bridge. my strength would not suffice 
to drag a fallen tree from a distance, and there was none whose position 
would abridge or supersede that labour. some other expedient must, 
therefore, be discover to pass this chasm. 

i review the circumstances of my subterranean journey. the cavern was 
imperfect explored. its branch might be numerous. that which i had 
hitherto pursue terminate in an opening at a considerable distance 
from the bottom. other branch might exist, some of which might lead to 
the foot of the precipice, and thence a communication might be found 
with the summit of the interior hill. 

the danger of wandering into dark and untry paths, and the 
commodious of that road which had at first been taken, were 
sufficient reason for have hitherto suspend my examination of the 
different branch of this labyrinth. now my customary road was no 
long practicable, and another was to be careful explored. for this 
end, on my next journey to the mountain, i determined to take with me a 
lamp, and unravel this darksome maze: this project i resolve to execute 
the next day. 

i now recollect what, if it had more seasonable occurred, would have 
taught me caution. some month before this a farmer, living in the 
skirt of norwalk, discover two maraud in his field, whom he 
imagine to be a male and female panther. they had destroy some sheep, 
and had been hunt by the farmer with long and fruitless diligence. 
sheep had likewise been destroy in different quarters; but the owner 
had fixed the imputation of the crime upon dogs, many of whom had atone 
for their supposed offence by their death. he who had mention his 
discovery of panther received little credit from his neighbours; 
because a long time had elapse since these animal were supposed to 
have been exile from this district, and because no other person had 
seen them. the truth of this seem now to be confirmed by the testimony 
of my own senses; but, if the rumour were true, there still exist 
another of these animals, who might harbour in the obscurity of this 
desert, and against whom it was necessary to employ some precaution. 
henceforth i resolve never to traverse the wilderness unfurnished with 
my tomahawk. 

these images, mingle with those which the contemplation of futurity 
suggested, floated, for a time, in my brain, but at length gave place to 
sleep. 




chapter xiii. 


since my return home, my mind had been fully occupy by scheme and 
reflection relative to clithero. the project suggest by thee, and to 
which i had determined to devote my leisure, was forgotten, or 
remember for a moment and at wide intervals. what, however, was nearly 
banish from my waking thoughts, occur in an incongruous and 
half-seen form, to my dreams. during my sleep, the image of waldegrave 
flit before me. methought the sentiment that impel him to visit me 
was not affection or complacency, but inquietude and anger. some service 
or duty remain to be perform by me, which i had culpable neglected: 
to inspirit my zeal, to awaken my remembrance, and incite me to the 
performance of this duty, did this glimmer messenger, this 
half-indignant apparition, come. 

i commonly awake soon enough to mark the youngest dawn of the morning. 
now, in consequence perhaps of my perturb sleep, i open my eyes 
before the stars had lost any of their lustre. this circumstance 
produce some surprise, until the image that lately hover in my fancy 
were recalled, and furnish somewhat like a solution of the problem. 
connected with the image of my dead friend was that of his sister. the 
discourse that took place at our last interview; the scheme of 
transcribing, for thy use, all the letters which, during his short but 
busy life, i received from him; the nature of this correspondence, and 
the opportunity which this employment would afford me of contemplate 
these ample and precious monument of the intellectual existence and 
moral pre-eminence of my friend, occur to my thoughts. 

the resolution to prosecute the task was revived. the obligation of 
benevolence, with regard to clithero, was not discharged. this, neither 
duty nor curiosity would permit to be overlook or delayed; but why 
should my whole attention and activity be devoted to this man? the hour 
which were spent at home and in my chamber could not be more useful 
employ than in making my intended copy. 

in a few hour after sunrise i purpose to resume my way to the 
mountain. could this interval be appropriate to a better purpose than 
in count over my friend's letters, setting them apart from my own, 
and prepare them for that transcription from which i expect so high 
and yet so mournful a gratification? 

this purpose, by no violent union, was blend with the recollection of 
my dream. this recollection infuse some degree of waver and 
dejection into my mind. in transcribe these letters i should violate 
pathetic and solemn injunction frequent repeated by the writer. was 
there some connection between this purpose and the incident of my 
vision? was the latter sent to enforce the interdict which had been 
formerly imposed? 

thou art not fully acquaint with the intellectual history of thy 
brother. some information on that head will be necessary to explain the 
nature of that reluctance which i now feel to comply with thy request, 
and which had formerly so much excited thy surprise. 

waldegrave, like other men early devoted to meditation and books, had 
adopted, at different periods, different system of opinion on topic 
connected with religion and morals. his earliest creed tend to efface 
the impression of his education; to deify necessity and universal 
matter; to destroy the popular distinction between soul and body, and 
to dissolve the supposed connection between the moral condition of man 
anterior and subsequent to death. 

this creed he adopt with all the fulness of conviction, and propagate 
with the utmost zeal. soon after our friendship commenced, fortune 
placed us at a distance from each other, and no intercourse was allow 
but by the pen. our letters, however, were punctual and copious. those 
of waldegrave were too frequent devoted to the defence of his 
favourite tenets. 

thou art acquaint with the revolution that afterwards took place in 
his mind. placed within the sphere of religious influence, and listen 
daily to the reasoning and exhortation of mr. s----, whose benign 
temper and blameless deportment was a visible and constant lesson, he 
insensible resume the faith which he had relinquished, and became the 
vehement opponent of all that he had formerly defended. the chief object 
of his labours, in this new state of his mind, was to counteract the 
effect of his former reasoning on my opinions. 

at this time, other change took place in his situation, in consequence 
of which we were once more permit to reside under the same roof. the 
intercourse now cease to be by letter, and the subtle and laborious 
argument which he had formerly produce against religion, and 
which were contained in a permanent form, were combat in transient 
conversation. he was not only eager to subvert those opinion which he 
had contribute to instil into me, but was anxious that the letters and 
manuscript which had been employ in their support should be 
destroyed. he did not fear wholly or chiefly on my own account. he 
believe that the influence of former reasoning on my faith would be 
sufficient eradicate by the new; but he dread lest these 
manuscript might fall into other hands, and thus produce mischief 
which it would not be in his power to repair. with regard to me, the 
poison had been follow by its antidote; but with respect to others, 
these letters would communicate the poison when the antidote could not 
be administered. 

i would not consent to this sacrifice. i did not entire abjure the 
creed which had, with great copious and eloquence, been defend in 
these letters. besides, mixed up with abstract reasoning were 
numberless passage which elucidate the character and history of my 
friend. these were too precious to be consign to oblivion; and to take 
them out of their present connection and arrangement would be to 
mutilate and deform them. 

his entreaty and remonstrance were earnest and frequent, but always 
ineffectual. he had too much purity of motive to be angry at my 
stubbornness; but his sense of the mischievous tendency of these letters 
was so great, that my intractable cost him many a pang. 

he was now gone, and i had not only determined to preserve these 
monuments, but had consent to copy them for the use of another; for 
the use of one whose present and eternal welfare had been the chief 
object of his care and efforts. thou, like other of thy sex, art 
unaccustomed to metaphysics refinements. thy religion is the growth of 
sensibility and not of argument. thou art not fortify and prepossessed 
against the subtlety with which the being and attribute of the deity 
have been assailed. would it be just to expose thee to pollution and 
depravity from this source? to make thy brother the instrument of thy 
apostasy, the author of thy fall? that brother whose latter days were so 
ardent devoted to cherish the spirit of devotion in thy heart? 

these idea now occur with more force than formerly. i had promised, 
not without reluctance, to give thee the entire copy of his letters; but 
i now recede from this promise. i resolve merely to select for thy 
peruse such as were narrative or descriptive. this could not be done 
with too much expedition. it was still dark, but my sleep was at an end, 
and, by a common apparatus, that lay beside my bed, i could instantly 
produce a light. 

the light was produced, and i proceed to the cabinet where all my 
papers and books are deposited. this was my own contrivance and 
workmanship, undertaken by the advice of sarsefield, who took infinite 
pains to foster that mechanical genius which display itself so early 
and so forcibly in thy friend. the key belong to this was, like the 
cabinet itself, of singular structure. for greater safety, it was 
constant placed in a closet, which was likewise locked. 

the key was found as usual, and the cabinet opened. the letters were 
bound together in a compact form, lodge in a parchment case, and placed 
in a secret drawer. this drawer would not have been detect by common 
eyes, and it open by the motion of a spring, of whose existence none 
but the maker was conscious. this drawer i had open before i went to 
sleep, and the letters were then safe. 

thou canst not imagine my confusion and astonishment, when, on opening 
the drawer, i perceive that the packet was gone. i look with more 
attention, and put my hand within it; but the space was empty. whither 
had it gone, and by whom was it purloined? i was not conscious of have 
taken it away, yet no hand but mine could have done it. on the last 
evening i had doubtless remove it to some other corner, but had 
forgotten it. i task my understanding and my memory. i could not 
conceive the possibility of any motive induce me to alter my 
arrangement in this respect, and was unable to recollect that i had 
made this change. 

what remained? this invaluable relic had disappeared. every thought and 
every effort must be devoted to the single purpose of regain it. as 
yet i did not despair. until i had open and ransack every part of 
the cabinet in vain, i did not admit the belief that i had lost it. even 
then this persuasion was tumultuous and fluctuating. it had vanish to 
my senses, but these senses were abuse and depraved. to have passed, of 
its own accord, through the pore of this wood, was impossible; but, if 
it were gone, thus did it escape. 

i was lost in horror and amazement. i explore every nook a second and a 
third time, but still it elude my eye and my touch. i open my closet 
and cases. i pry everywhere, unfold every article of clothing, 
turn and scrutinize every instrument and tool, but nothing availed. 

my thought were not speedy collected or calmed. i threw myself on the 
bed and resigned myself to musing. that my loss was irretrievable was a 
supposition not to be endured. yet ominous terror haunt me,--a 
whisper intimate that a relic which i value more than life was 
torn forever away by some malignant and inscrutable destiny. the same 
power that had taken it from this receptacle was able to waft it over 
the ocean or the mountains, and condemn me to a fruitless and eternal 
search. 

but what was he that committed the theft? thou only, of the being who 
live, wast acquaint with the existence of these manuscripts. thou art 
many mile distant, and art utterly a stranger to the mode or place of 
their concealment. not only access to the cabinet, but access to the 
room, without my knowledge and permission, was impossible. both were 
lock during this night. not five hour had elapse since the cabinet 
and drawer had been opened, and since the letters had been seen and 
touched, being in their ordinary position. during this interval, the 
thief had entered, and despoil me of my treasure. 

this event, so inexplicable and so dreadful, threw my soul into a kind 
of stupor or distraction, from which i was sudden rouse by a footstep 
soft moving in the entry near my door. i start from my bed, as if i 
had gain a glimpse of the robber. before i could run to the door, some 
one knocked. i did not think upon the propriety of answer the signal, 
but hasten with tremulous finger and throb heart to open the 
door. my uncle, in his night-dress, and apparently just risen from his 
bed, stood before me! 

he marked the eager and perturbation of my looks, and inquire into 
the cause. i did not answer his inquiries. his appearance in my chamber 
and in this guise add to my surprise. my mind was full of the late 
discovery, and instantly conceive some connection between this 
unseasonable visit and my lost manuscript. i interrogate him in my turn 
as to the cause of his coming. 

"why," said he, "i came to ascertain whether it was you or not who 
amuse himself so strange at this time of night. what is the matter 
with you? why are you up so early?" 

i told him that i had been rouse by my dreams, and, finding no 
inclination to court my slumber back again, i had risen, though early 
by some hour than the usual period of my rising. 

"but why did you go up-stairs? you might easily imagine that the sound 
of your steps would alarm those below, who would be puzzle to guess who 
it was that had thought proper to amuse himself in this manner." 

"up-stairs? i have not left my room this night. it is not ten minutes 
since i awoke, and my door has not since been opened." 

"indeed! that is strange. nay, it is impossible! it was your feet surely 
that i heard pace so solemn and indefatigable across the _long 
room_ for near an hour. i could not for my life conjecture, for a 
time, who it was, but finally conclude that it was you. there was 
still, however, some doubt, and i came hither to satisfy myself." 

these tidings were adapt to raise all my emotion to a still higher 
pitch. i question him with eager as to the circumstances he had 
noticed. he said he had been rouse by a sound, whose power of 
disturb him arose, not from its loudness, but from its uncommonness. 
he distinct heard some one pace to and fro with bare feet, in the 
long room: this sound continued, with little intermission, for an hour. 
he then notice a cessation of the walking, and a sound as if some one 
were lift the lid of the large cedar chest that stood in the corner 
of this room. the walking was not resumed, and all was silent. he 
listen for a quarter of an hour, and busy himself in conjecture 
the cause of this disturbance. the most probable conclusion was, that 
the walker was his nephew, and his curiosity had led him to my chamber 
to ascertain the truth. 

this dwelling has three stories. the two lower story are divide into 
numerous apartments. the upper story constitute a single room whose 
side are the four wall of the house, and whose ceiling is the roof. 
this room is unoccupied, except by lumber, and imperfect light by a 
small case at one end. in this room were footstep heard by my 
uncle. 

the staircase leading to it terminate in a passage near my door. i 
snatch the candle, and, desire him to follow me, add that i would 
ascertain the truth in a moment. he followed, but observe that the 
walking had cease long enough for the person to escape. 

i ascend to the room, and look behind and among the tables, and 
chairs, and casks, which were confused scattered through it, but found 
nothing in the shape of man. the cedar chest, spoken of by mr. huntly, 
contained old books, and remnant of map and charts, whose 
worthless unfit them for accomodation elsewhere. the lid was 
without hinge or lock. i examine this repository, but there was 
nothing which attract my attention. 

the way between the kitchen-door and the door of the long room had no 
impediments. both were usually unfastened; but the motive by which any 
stranger to the dwelling, or indeed any one within it, could be prompt 
to choose this place and hour for an employment of this kind, were 
wholly incomprehensible. 

when the family rose, inquiry were made; but no satisfaction was 
obtained. the family consist only of four persons,--my uncle, my two 
sisters, and myself. i mention to them the loss i had sustained, but 
their conjecture were no less unsatisfactory on this than on the former 
incident. 

there was no end to my restless meditations. waldegrave was the only 
being, besides myself, acquaint with the secret of my cabinet. during 
his life these manuscript had been the object of perpetual solicitude; 
to gain possession, to destroy or secrete them, was the strongest of his 
wishes. had he retain his sensibility on the approach of death, no 
doubt he would have renewed, with irresistible solemnity, his 
injunction to destroy them. 

now, however, they had vanished. there were no material of conjecture; 
no probability to be weighed, or suspicion to revolve. human artifice 
or power was unequal to this exploit. means less than preternatural 
would not furnish a conveyance for this treasure. 

it was otherwise with regard to this unseasonable walker. his 
inducement indeed were beyond my power to conceive; but to enter these 
door and ascend these stairs demand not the faculty of any being 
more than human. 

this intrusion, and the pillage of my cabinet, were contemporary events. 
was there no more connection between them than that which result from 
time? was not the purloin of my treasure and the wanderer the same 
person? i could not reconcile the former incident with the attribute of 
man; and yet a secret faith, not to be outroote or suspended, sway 
me, and compel me to imagine that the detection of this visitant 
would unveil the thief. 

these thought were pregnant with dejection and reverie. clithero, 
during the day, was forgotten. on the succeed night, my intentions, 
with regard to this man, returned. i derive some slender consolation 
from reflecting, that time, in its long lapse and ceaseless revolutions, 
might dissipate the gloom that environed me. meanwhile, i struggle to 
dismiss the image connected with my loss and to think only of clithero. 

my impatience was as strong as ever to obtain another interview with 
this man. i long with vehemence for the return of day. i believe that 
every moment add to his sufferings, intellectual and physical, and 
confide in the efficacy of my presence to alleviate or suspend them. 
the provisions i had left would be speedy consumed, and the abstinence 
of three days was sufficient to undermine the vital energies. i 
sometimes hesitate whether i ought not instantly to depart. it was 
night indeed, but the late storm had purify the air, and the radiance 
of a full moon was universal and dazzling. 

from this attempt i was deter by reflect that my own frame need 
the repair of sleep. toil and watchfulness, if prolonged another day, 
would deep injure a constitution by no means distinguished for its 
force. i must, therefore, compel, if it were possible, some hour of 
repose. i prepared to retire to bed, when a new incident occur to 
divert my attention for a time from these designs. 




chapter xiv. 


while sitting alone by the parlour-fire, marking the effects of 
moonlight, i noted one on horseback coming towards the gate. at first 
sight, methought his shape and guise were not wholly new to me; but all 
that i could discern was merely a resemblance to some one whom i had 
before seen. presently he stopped, and, look towards the house, made 
inquiry of a passenger who chance to be near. being apparently 
satisfy with the answer he received, he rode with a quick pace into 
the court and alight at the door. i start from my seat, and, go 
forth, wait with some impatience to hear his purpose explained. 

he accost me with the formality of a stranger, and ask if a young 
man, by name edgar huntly, reside here. being answer in the 
affirmative, and being request to come in, he entered, and seat 
himself, without hesitation, by the fire. some doubt and anxiety were 
visible in his looks. he seem desirous of information upon some topic, 
and yet betray terror lest the answer he might receive should subvert 
some hope or confirm some foreboding. 

meanwhile i scrutinize his features with much solicitude. a near and 
more deliberate view convinced me that the first impression was just; 
but still i was unable to call up his name or the circumstances of our 
former meeting. the pause was at length end by his saying, in a 
falter voice,-- 

"my name is weymouth. i came hither to obtain information on a subject 
in which my happiness is deep concerned." 

at the mention of his name, i started. it was a name too close 
connected with the image of thy brother, not to call up affecting and 
vivid recollections. weymouth, thou knowest, was thy brother's friend. 
it is three years since this man left america, during which time no 
tidings had been heard of him,--at least, by thy brother. he had now 
returned, and was probably unacquainted with the fate of his friend. 

after an anxious pause, he continued:--"since my arrival i have heard of 
an event which has, on many accounts, given me the deepest sorrow. i 
love waldegrave, and know not any person in the world whose life was 
dear to me than his. there were considerations, however, which made it 
more precious to me than the life of one whose merit might be greater. 
with his life, my own existence and property were, i have reason to 
think, inseparable united. 

"on my return to my country, after a long absence, i made immediate 
inquiry after him. i was informed of his untimely death. i had 
questions, of infinite moment to my happiness, to decide with regard to 
the state and disposition of his property. i sought out those of his 
friends who had maintain with him the most frequent and confidential 
intercourse, but they could not afford me any satisfaction. at length, i 
was informed that a young man of your name, and living in this district, 
had enjoy more of his affection and society than any other, had 
regulate the property which he left behind, and was best qualified to 
afford the intelligence which i sought. you, it seems, are this person, 
and of you i must make inquiry to which i conjure you to return 
sincere and explicit answers." 

"that," said i, "i shall find no difficulty in doing. whatever question 
you shall think proper to ask, i will answer with readiness and truth." 

"what kind of property, and to what amount, was your friend possessed of 
at his death?" 

"it was money, and consist of deposit at the bank of north america. 
the amount was little short of eight thousand dollars." 

"on whom has this property devolved?" 

"his sister was his only kindred, and she is now in possession of it." 

"did he leave any will by which he direct the disposition of his 
property?" while thus speaking, weymouth fixed his eyes upon my 
countenance, and seem anxious to pierce into my inmost soul. i was 
somewhat surprise at his questions, but much more at the manner in 
which they were put. i answer him, however, without delay:--"he left 
no will, nor was any paper discover by which we could guess at his 
intentions. no doubt, indeed, had he made a will, his sister would have 
been placed precisely in the same condition in which she now is. he was 
not only bound to her by the strongest tie of kindred, but by affection 
and gratitude." 

weymouth now withdrew his eyes from my face, and sunk into a mournful 
reverie. he sigh often and deeply. this deportment and the strain of 
his inquiry excited much surprise. his interest in the fate of 
waldegrave ought to have made the information he had received a source 
of satisfaction rather than of regret. the property which waldegrave 
left was much greater than his mode of life and his own profession had 
given us reason to expect, but it was no more than sufficient to insure 
to thee an adequate subsistence. it ascertain the happiness of those 
who were dearest to waldegrave, and placed them forever beyond the reach 
of that poverty which had hitherto beset them. i made no attempt to 
interrupt the silence, but prepared to answer any new interrogatory. at 
length, weymouth resumed:-- 

"waldegrave was a fortunate man to amass so considerable a sum in so 
short a time. i remember, when we parted, he was poor. he use to lament 
that his scrupulous integrity preclude him from all the common road to 
wealth. he did not contemn riches, but he set the highest value upon 
competence, and imagine that he was doom forever to poverty. his 
religious duty compel him to seek his livelihood by teaching a school 
of blacks. the labour was disproportion to his feeble constitution, 
and the profit was greatly disproportion to the labour. it scarcely 
supply the necessity of nature, and was reduce sometimes even below 
that standard by his frequent indisposition. i rejoice to find that his 
scruple had somewhat relax their force, and that he had betaken 
himself to some more profitable occupation. pray, what was his new way 
of business?" 

"nay," said i, "his scruple continue as rigid, in this respect, as 
ever. he was teacher of the negro freeschool when he died." 

"indeed! how, then, came he to amass so much money? could he blend any 
more lucrative pursuit with his duty as a schoolmaster?" 

"so it seems." 

"what was his pursuit?" 

"that question, i believe, none of his friends are qualified to answer. 
i thought myself acquaint with the most secret transactions of his 
life, but this had been careful conceal from me. i was not only 
unapprized of any other employment of his time, but had not the 
slightest suspicion of his possess any property besides his clothes 
and books. ransack his papers, with a different view, i light on 
his bank-book, in which was a regular receipt for seven thousand five 
hundred dollars. by what means he acquire this money, and even the 
acquisition of it, till his death put us in possession of his papers, 
was wholly unknown to us." 

"possibly he might have held it in trust for another. in this case some 
memorandum or letters would be found explain this affair." 

"true. this supposition could not fail to occur, in consequence of which 
the most diligent search was made among his papers, but no shred or 
scrap was to be found which countenance our conjecture." 

"you may reasonably be surprised, and perhaps offended," said weymouth, 
"at these inquiries; but it is time to explain my motive for making 
them. three years ago i was, like waldegrave, indigent, and earn my 
bread by daily labour. during seven years' service in a public office, i 
saved, from the expenses of subsistence, a few hundred dollars. i 
determined to strike into a new path, and, with this sum, to lay the 
foundation of better fortune. i turn it into a bulky commodity, 
freight and loaded a small vessel, and went with it to barcelona in 
spain. i was not unsuccessful in my projects, and, change my abode to 
england, france, and germany, according as my interest required, i 
became finally possessed of sufficient for the supply of all my wants. i 
then resolve to return to my native country, and, lay out my money 
in land, to spend the rest of my days in the luxury and quiet of an 
opulent farmer. for this end i invest the greatest part of my property 
in a cargo of wine from madeira. the remainder i turn into a bill of 
exchange for seven thousand five hundred dollars. i had maintain a 
friendly correspondence with waldegrave during my absence. there was no 
one with whom i had live on terms of so much intimacy, and had 
boundless confidence in his integrity. to him therefore i determined to 
transmit this bill, request him to take the money into safe-keeping 
until my return. in this manner i endeavour to provide against the 
accident that might befall my person or my cargo in crossing the ocean. 

"it was my fate to encounter the worst of these disasters. we were 
overtaken by a storm, my vessel was driven ashore on the coast of 
portugal, my cargo was utterly lost, and the greater part of the crew 
and passenger were drowned. i was rescue from the same fate by some 
fishermen. in consequence of the hardship to which i had been exposed, 
have labour for several days at the pumps, and spent the greater 
part of a winter night hanging from the rigging of the ship and 
perpetual beaten by the waves, i contract a severe disease, which 
bereaved me of the use of my limbs. the fishermen who rescue me carry 
me to their huts, and there i remain three week helpless and 
miserable. 

"that part of the coast on which i was thrown was, in the highest 
degree, sterile and rude. its few inhabitant subsist precarious on 
the produce of the ocean. their dwelling were of mud,--low, filthy, 
dark, and comfortless. their fuel was the stalk of shrub sparing 
scattered over a sandy desert. their poverty scarcely allow them salt 
and black bread with their fish, which was obtain in unequal and 
sometimes insufficient quantities, and which they ate with all its 
impurities, and half cooked. 

"my former habits, as well as my present indisposition, require very 
different treatment from what the ignorance and penury of these people 
oblige them to bestow. i lay upon the moist earth, imperfect 
sheltered from the sky, and with neither raiment nor fire to keep me 
warm. my host had little attention or compassion to spare to the wants 
of others. they could not remove me to a more hospitable district; and 
here, without doubt, i should have perished, had not a monk chance to 
visit their hovels. he belong to a convent of st. jago, some league 
farther from the shore, which use to send one of its member annual 
to inspect the religious concern of those outcasts. happily, this was 
the period of their visitations. 

"my abode in spain had made me somewhat conversant with its language. 
the dialect of this monk did not so much differ from castilian but that, 
with the assistance of latin, we were able to converse. the jargon of 
the fishermen was unintelligible, and they had vain endeavour to 
keep up my spirits by inform me of this expect visit. 

"this monk was touched with compassion at my calamity, and speedy 
provided the means of my removal to his convent. here i was charitable 
entertained, and the aid of a physician was procure for me. he was but 
poorly skilled in his profession, and rather confirmed than alleviate 
my disease. the portugal of his trade, especially in remote 
districts, are little more than dealer in talisman and nostrums. for a 
long time i was unable to leave my pallet, and had no prospect before me 
but that of consume my days in the gloom of this cloister. 

"all the member of this convent but he who had been my first 
benefactor, and whose name was chaledro, were bigoted and sordid. their 
chief motive for treat me with kindness was the hope of obtain a 
convert from heresy. they spare no pains to subdue my errors, and were 
willing to prolong my imprisonment, in the hope of finally gain their 
end. had my fate been govern by those, i should have been immure in 
this convent, and compel either to adopt their fanatic creed or to 
put an end to my own life, in order to escape their well-meant 
persecutions. chaledro, however, though no less sincere in his faith and 
urgent in his entreaties, yet finding me invincible, exert his 
influence to obtain my liberty. 

"after many delays, and strenuous exertion of my friend, they consent 
to remove me to oporto. the journey was to be perform in an open cart, 
over a mountainous country, in the heat of summer. the monk 
endeavour to dissuade me from the enterprise, for my own sake, it 
being scarcely possible that one in my feeble state should survive a 
journey like this; but i despair of improve my condition by other 
means. i prefer death to the imprison of a portugal monastery, 
and knew that i could hope for no alleviate of my disease but from the 
skill of scotland or france physicians, whom i expect to meet with in 
that city. i adhere to my purpose with so much vehemence and obstinacy, 
that they finally yield to my wishes. 

"my road lay through the wildest and most rugged districts. it did not 
exceed ninety miles, but seven days were consume on the way. the motion 
of the vehicle rack me with the keenest pangs, and my attendant 
conclude that every stage would be my last. they had been select 
without due regard to their characters. they were knavish and inhuman, 
and omit nothing but actual violence to hasten my death. they 
purposely retarded the journey, and protract to seven what might have 
been readily perform in four days. they neglect to execute the 
orders which they had received respecting my lodging and provisions; and 
from them, as well as from the peasants, who were sure to be informed 
that i was a heretic, i suffer every species of insult and injury. my 
constitution, as well as my frame, possessed a fund of strength of which 
i had no previous conception. in spite of hardship, and exposure, and 
abstinence, i at last arrive at oporto. 

"instead of being carried, agreeably to chaledro's direction, to a 
convent of st. jago, i was left, late in the evening, in the porch of a 
common hospital. my attendants, have laid me on the pavement and 
loaded me with imprecations, left me to obtain admission by my own 
efforts. i pass the livelong night in this spot, and in the morning 
was received into the house in a state which left it uncertain whether i 
was alive or dead. 

"after recover my sensibility, i made various effort to procure a 
visit from some english merchant. this was no easy undertaking for one 
in my deplorable condition. i was too weak to articulate my words 
distinctly, and these words were rendered, by my foreign accent, 
scarcely intelligible. the likelihood of my speedy death made the people 
about me more indifferent to my wants and petitions. 

"i will not dwell upon my repeated disappointments, but content myself 
with mention that i gain the attention of a france gentleman whose 
curiosity brought him to view the hospital. through him i obtain a 
visit from an english merchant, and finally gain the notice of a 
person who formerly reside in america, and of whom i had imperfect 
knowledge. by their kindness i was remove from the hospital to a 
private house. a scotland surgeon was summon to my assistance, and in 
seven month i was restore to my present state of health. 

"at oporto, i embarked, in an america ship, for new york. i was 
destitute of all property, and relied, for the payment of the debt 
which i was oblige to contract, as well as for my future subsistence, 
on my remittance to waldegrave. i hasten to philadelphia, and was soon 
informed that my friend was dead. his death had taken place a long time 
since my remittance to him: hence this disaster was a subject of regret 
chiefly on his own account. i entertain no doubt but that my property 
had been secured, and that either some testamentary directions or some 
papers had been left behind respecting this affair. 

"i sought out those who were formerly our mutual acquaintance. i found 
that they were wholly stranger to his affairs. they could merely relate 
some particulars of his singular death, and point out the lodgings which 
he formerly occupied. hither i forthwith repaired, and discover that 
he live in this house with his sister, disconnected with its other 
inhabitants. they describe his mode of life in terms that show them 
to be very imperfect acquaint with it. it was easy indeed to infer, 
from their aspect and manners, that little sympathy or union could have 
subsist between them and their co-tenants; and this inference was 
confirmed by their insinuations, the growth of prejudice and envy. they 
told me that waldegrave's sister had gone to live in the country, but 
whither, or for how long, she had not condescend to inform them, and 
they did not care to ask. she was a topping dame, whose notions were 
much too high for her station; who was more nice than wise, and yet was 
one who could stoop when it most became her to stand upright. it was no 
business of theirs; but they could not but mention their suspicion that 
she had good reason for leave the city and for conceal the place 
of her retreat. some things were hard to be disguised. they spoke for 
themselves, and the only way to hinder disagreeable discovery was to 
keep out of sight. 

"i was wholly a stranger to waldegrave's sister. i knew merely that he 
had such a relation. there was nothing, therefore, to outbalance this 
unfavourable report, but the apparent malignity and gross of those 
who gave it. it was not, however, her character about which i was 
solicitous, but merely the place where she might be found and the 
suitable inquiry respecting her deceased brother be answered. on this 
head, these people professed utter ignorance, and were either unable or 
unwill to direct me to any person in the city who knew more than 
themselves. after much discourse, they, at length, let fall an 
intimate that, if any one knew her place of retreat, it was probably a 
country-lad, by name huntly, who live near the _forks_ of 
delaware. after waldegrave's death this lad had paid his sister a visit, 
and seem to be admitted on a very confidential footing. she left the 
house, for the last time, in his company, and he, therefore, was most 
likely to know what had become of her. 

"the name of hunt was not total unknown to me. i myself was born and 
brought up in the neighbouring township of chetasco. i had some 
knowledge of your family, and your name use often to be mention by 
waldegrave as that of one who, at a mature age, would prove himself 
useful to his country. i determined, therefore, to apply to you for what 
information you could give. i design to visit my father, who lives in 
chetasco, and relieve him from that disquiet which his ignorance of my 
fate could not fail to have inspired, and both these end could be thus, 
at the same time, accomplished. 

"before i left the city, i thought it proper to apply to the merchant on 
whom my bill had been drawn. if this bill had been present and paid, 
he had doubtless preserve some record of it, and hence a clue might be 
afforded, though every other expedient should fail. my usual ill fortune 
pursue me upon this occasion; for the merchant had lately become 
insolvent, and, to avoid the rage of his creditors, had fled, without 
leave any vestige of this or similar transactions behind him. he had, 
some years since, been an adventurer from holland, and was suspect to 
have return thither." 




chapter xv. 


"i came hither with a heart despond of success. adversity had 
weaken my faith in the promise of the future, and i was prepared to 
receive just such tidings as you have communicated. unacquainted with 
the secret motive of waldegrave and his sister, it is impossible for me 
to weigh the probability of their rectitude. i have only my own 
assertion to produce in support of my claim. all other evidence, all 
voucher and papers, which might attest my veracity or sanction my claim 
in a court of law, are bury in the ocean. the bill was transmit 
just before my departure from madeira, and the letters by which it was 
accompany informed waldegrave of my design to follow it immediately. 
hence he did not, it is probable, acknowledge the receipt of my letters. 
the vessel in which they were sent arrive in due season. i was assured 
that all letters were duly deposit in the post-office, where, at 
present, mine are not to be found. 

"you assure me that nothing has been found among his papers, hint at 
any pecuniary transaction between him and me. some correspondence pass 
between us previous to that event. have no letters, with my signature, 
been found? are you qualified, by your knowledge of his papers, to 
answer me explicitly? is it not possible for some letters to have been 
mislaid?" 

"i am qualified," said i, "to answer your inquiry beyond any other 
person in the world. waldegrave maintain only general intercourse with 
the rest of mankind. with me his correspondence was copious, and his 
confidence, as i imagined, without bounds. his books and papers were 
contained in a single chest at his lodgings, the key of which he had 
about him when he died. these key i carry to his sister, and was 
authorize by her to open and examine the contents of this chest. this 
was done with the utmost care. these papers are now in my possession. 
among them no paper, of the tenor you mention, was found, and no letter 
with your signature. neither mary waldegrave nor i are capable of 
disguise the truth or commit an injustice. the moment she receive 
conviction of your right, she will restore this money to you. the moment 
i imbibe this conviction, i will exert all my influence (and it is not 
small) to induce her to restore it. permit me, however, to question you 
in your turn. who was the merchant on whom your bill was drawn, what was 
the date of it, and when did the bill and its counterpart arrive?" 

"i do not exactly remember the date of the bills. they were made out, 
however, six days before i myself embarked, which happen on the 10th 
of august, 1784. they were sent by three vessels, one of which was bound 
to charleston and the other to new york. the last arrive within two 
days of each other, and about the middle of november in the same year. 
the name of the payer was monteith." 

after a pause of recollection, i answered, "i will not hesitate to 
apprize you of every thing which may throw light upon this transaction, 
and whether favourable or otherwise to your claim. i have told you, 
among my friend's papers your name is not to be found. i must likewise 
repeat that the possession of this money by waldegrave was wholly 
unknown to us till his death. we are likewise unacquainted with any 
means by which he could get possession of so large a sum in his own 
right. he spent no more than his scanty stipend as a teacher, though 
this stipend was insufficient to supply his wants. this bank-receipt is 
dated in december, 1784, a fortnight, perhaps, after the date that you 
have mentioned. you will perceive how much this coincidence, which could 
scarcely have taken place by chance, is favourable to your claim. 

"mary waldegrave resides, at present, at abingdon. she will rejoice, as 
i do, to see one who, as her brother's friend, is entitle to her 
affection. doubt not but that she will listen with impartial and 
candour to all that you can urge in defence of your title to this money. 
her decision will not be precipitate, but it will be generous and just, 
and found on such reason that, even if it be adverse to your wishes, 
you will be compel to approve it?" 

"i can entertain no doubt," he answered, "as to the equity of my claim. 
the coincidence you mention are sufficient to convince me that this sum 
was received upon my bill; but this conviction must necessarily be 
confine to myself. no one but i can be conscious to the truth of my own 
story. the evidence on which i build my faith, in this case, is that of 
my own memory and senses; but this evidence cannot make itself 
conspicuous to you. you have nothing but my bare assertion, in addition 
to some probability flowing from the conduct of waldegrave. what fact 
may exist to corroborate my claim, which you have forgotten, or which 
you may think proper to conceal, i cannot judge. i know not what is 
passing in the secret of your hearts; i am unacquainted with the 
character of this lady and with yours. i have nothing on which to build 
surmise and suspicion of your integrity, and nothing to generate 
unusual confidence. the frailty of your virtue and the strength of your 
temptation i know not. however she decide in this case, and whatever 
opinion i shall form as to the reasonable of her decision, it will 
not become me either to upbraid her, or to nourish discontent and 
repinings. 

"i know that my claim has no legal support; that, if this money be 
resigned to me, it will be the impulse of spontaneous justice, and not 
the coercion of law, to which i am indebted for it. since, therefore, 
the justice of my claim is to be measured not by law, but by simple 
equity, i will candidly acknowledge that, as yet, it is uncertain 
whether i ought to receive, even should miss waldegrave be willing to 
give it. i know my own necessity and schemes, and in what degree this 
money would be subservient to these; but i know not the view and wants 
of others, and cannot estimate the usefulness of this money to them. 
however i decide upon your conduct in withhold or retain it, i 
shall make suitable allowance for my imperfect knowledge of your motive 
and wants, as well as for your unavoidable ignorance of mine. 

"i have related my suffering from shipwreck and poverty, not to bias 
your judgment or engage your pity, but merely because the impulse to 
relate them chance to awake; because my heart is soften by the 
remembrance of waldegrave, who has been my only friend, and by the sight 
of one whom he loved. 

"i told you that my father live in chetasco. he is now aged, and i am 
his only child. i should have rejoice in being able to relieve his gray 
hair from labour to which his failing strength cannot be equal. this 
was one of my inducement in coming to america. another was, to prepare 
the way for a woman whom i married in europe and who is now await 
intelligence from me in london. her poverty is not less than my own, and 
by marry against the wish of her kindred she has bereaved herself 
of all support but that of her husband. whether i shall be able to 
rescue her from indigence, whether i shall alleviate the poverty of my 
father, or increase it by burden his scanty friends by my own 
maintenance as well as his, the future alone can determine. 

"i confess that my stock of patience and hope has never been large, and 
that my misfortune have nearly exhaust it. the flower of my years has 
been consume in struggle with adversity, and my constitution has 
received a shock, from sickness and mistreatment in portugal, which i 
cannot expect long to survive. but i make you sad," he continued. "i 
have said all that i meant to say in this interview. i am impatient to 
see my father, and night has already come. i have some mile yet to ride 
to his cottage, and over a rough road. i will shortly visit you again, 
and talk to you at greater leisure on these and other topics. at present 
i leave you." 

i was unwill to part so abrupt with this guest, and entreat him 
to prolong his visit; but he would not be prevail upon. repeating his 
promise of shortly seeing me again, he mount his horse and 
disappeared. i look after him with affecting and complex emotions. i 
review the incident of this unexpected and extraordinary interview, 
as if it had exist in a dream. an hour had passed, and this stranger 
had alight among us as from the clouds, to draw the veil from those 
obscurity which had bewilder us so long, to make visible a new train 
of disastrous consequence flowing from the untimely death of thy 
brother, and to blast that scheme of happiness on which thou and i had 
so fondly meditated. 

but what wilt thou think of this new-born claim? the story, hadst thou 
observe the features and guise of the relater, would have won thy 
implicit credit. his countenance exhibit deep trace of the 
affliction he had endured, and the fortitude which he had exercised. he 
was sallow and emaciated, but his countenance was full of serious 
and dignity. a sort of rugged of brow, the token of great mental 
exertion and varied experience, argue a premature old age. 

what a mournful tale! is such the lot of those who wander from their 
rustic home in search of fortune? our countrymen are prone to 
enterprise, and are scattered over every sea and every land in pursuit 
of that wealth which will not screen them from disease and infirmity, 
which is miss much often than found, and which, when gained, by no 
means compensate them for the hardship and vicissitudes endure in the 
pursuit. 

but what if the truth of these pretension be admitted? the money must 
be restore to its right owner. i know that, whatever inconvenience may 
follow the deed, thou wilt not hesitate to act justly. affluence and 
dignity, however valuable, may be purchase too dear. honesty will not 
take away its keen from the winter blast, its ignominy and 
unwholesome from servile labour, or strip of its charm the life of 
elegance and leisure; but these, unaccompanied with self-reproach, are 
less deplorable than wealth and honour the possession of which is mar 
by our own disapprobation. 

i know the bitter of this sacrifice. i know the impatience with 
which your poverty has formerly been borne; how much your early 
education is at war with that degrade and obscurity to which your 
youth has been condemned; how earnest your wish pant after a state 
which might exempt you from dependence upon daily labour and on the 
caprice of others, and might secure to you leisure to cultivate and 
indulge your love of knowledge and your social and beneficent 
affections. 

your motive for desire a change of fortune has been greatly enforce 
since we have become known to each other. thou hast honour me with thy 
affection; but that union, on which we rely for happiness, could not 
take place while both of us were poor. my habits, indeed, have made 
labour and rustic obscurity less painful than they would prove to my 
friend, but my present condition is wholly inconsistent with marriage. 
as long as my exertion are insufficient to maintain us both, it would 
be unjustifiable to burden you with new care and duties. of this you 
are more thorough convinced than i am. the love of independence and 
ease, and impatience of drudgery, are woven into your constitution. 
perhaps they are carry to an erroneous extreme, and derogate from that 
uncommon excellence by which your character is, in other respects, 
distinguished; but they cannot be removed. 

this obstacle was unexpected remove by the death of your brother. 
however just to be deplore was this catastrophe, yet, like every 
other event, some of its consequence were good. by give you 
possession of the means of independence and leisure, by enabling us to 
complete a contract which poverty alone had thus long delayed, this 
event has been, at the same time, the most disastrous and propitious 
which could have happened. 

why thy brother should have conceal from us the possession of this 
money,--why, with such copious means of indulgence and leisure, he 
should still pursue his irksome trade, and live in so penurious a 
manner,--has been a topic of endless and unsatisfactory conjecture 
between us. it was not difficult to suppose that this money was held in 
trust for another; but in that case it was unavoidable that some 
document or memorandum, or at least some claimant, would appear. much 
time has since elapsed, and you have thought yourself at length 
justified in appropriate this money to your own use. 

our flatter prospects are now shut in. you must return to your 
original poverty, and once more depend for precarious subsistence on 
your needle. you cannot restore the whole, for unavoidable expenses and 
the change of your mode of living have consume some part of it. for so 
much you must consider yourself as weymouth's debtor. 

repine not, my friend, at this unlooked-for reverse. think upon the 
merit and misfortune of your brother's friend; think upon his age 
father, whom we shall enable him to rescue from poverty; think upon his 
desolate wife, whose merit are, probably, at least equal to your own, 
and whose helpless is likely to be greater. i am not insensible to 
the evil which have return upon us with augment force, after 
having, for a moment, taken their flight. i know the precarious of 
my condition and that of my sisters; that our subsistence hang upon the 
life of an old man. my uncle's death will transfer this property to his 
son, who is a stranger and an enemy to us, and the first act of whose 
authority will unquestionable be to turn us forth from these doors. 
marriage with thee was anticipate with joyous emotions, not merely on 
my own account or on thine, but likewise for the sake of those beloved 
girl to whom that event would enable me to furnish an asylum. 

but wedlock is now more distant than ever. mv heart bleed to think of 
the suffering which my beloved mary is again fated to endure; but 
regrets are only aggravation of calamity. they are pernicious, and it 
is our duty to shake them off. 

i can entertain no doubt as to the equity of weymouth's claim. so many 
coincidence could not have happen by chance. the non-appearance of 
any letters or papers connected with it is indeed a mysterious 
circumstance; but why should waldegrave be studious of preserve these? 
they were useless paper, and might, without impropriety, be cast away or 
made to serve any temporary purpose. perhaps, indeed, they still lurk in 
some unsuspected corner. to wish that time may explain this mystery in a 
different manner, and so as to permit our retention of this money, is, 
perhaps, the dictate of selfishness. the transfer to weymouth will not 
be productive of less benefit to him and to his family, than we should 
derive from the use of it. 

these considerations, however, will be weigh when we meet. meanwhile i 
will return to my narrative. 




chapter xvi. 


here, my friend, thou must permit me to pause. the following incident 
are of a kind to which the most ardent invention has never conceive a 
parallel. fortune, in her most wayward mood, could scarcely be suspect 
of an influence like this. the scene was pregnant with astonishment and 
horror. i cannot, even now, recall it without revive the dismay and 
confusion which i then experienced. 

possibly, the period will arrive when i shall look back without agony on 
the peril i have undergone. that period is still distant. solitude and 
sleep are now no more than the signal to summon up a tribe of ugly 
phantoms. famine, and blindness, and death, and savage enemies, never 
fail to be conjure up by the silence and dark of the night. i 
cannot dissipate them by any effort of reason. sly cowardice require 
the perpetual consolation of light. my heart droop when i mark the 
decline of the sun, and i never sleep but with a candle burning at my 
pillow. if, by any chance, i should awake and find myself immerse in 
darkness, i know not what act of desperation i might be sudden 
impel to commit. 

i have delay this narrative long than my duty to my friend enjoined. 
now that i am able to hold a pen, i will hasten to terminate that 
uncertainty with regard to my fate in which my silence has involved 
thee. i will recall that series of unheard-of and disastrous 
vicissitudes which has constitute the latest portion of my life. 

i am not certain, however, that i shall relate them in an intelligible 
manner. one image runs into another; sensation succeed in so rapid a 
train, that i fear i shall be unable to distribute and express them with 
sufficient perspicuity. as i look back, my heart is sore, and ache 
within my bosom. i am conscious to a kind of complex sentiment of 
distress and forlorn that cannot be perfectly portray by words; 
but i must do as well as i can. in the utmost vigour of my faculties, no 
eloquence that i possess would do justice to the tale. now, in my 
languish and feeble state, i shall furnish thee with little more than 
a glimpse of the truth. with these glimpses, transient and faint as they 
are, thou must be satisfied. 

i have said that i slept. my memory assure me of this; it inform me of 
the previous circumstances of my lay aside my clothes, of place the 
light upon a chair within reach of my pillow, of throw myself upon 
the bed, and of gaze on the ray of the moon reflect on the wall and 
almost obscure by those of the candle. i remember my occasional 
relapse into fit of incoherent fancies, the harbinger of sleep. i 
remember, as it were, the instant when my thought cease to flow and my 
senses were arrest by the leaden wand of forgetfulness. 

my return to sensation and to consciousness took place in no such 
tranquil scene. i emerge from oblivion by degree so slow and so faint, 
that their succession cannot be marked. when enable at length to attend 
to the information which my senses afforded, i was conscious for a time 
of nothing but existence. it was unaccompanied with lassitude or pain, 
but i felt disinclined to stretch my limb or raise my eyelids. my 
thought were wildere and mazy, and, though consciousness was present, 
it was disconnected with the locomotive or voluntary power. 

from this state a transition was speedy effected. i perceive that my 
posture was supine, and that i lay upon my back. i attempt to open my 
eyes. the weight that oppress them was too great for a slight exertion 
to remove. the exertion which i made cost me a pang more acute than any 
which i ever experienced. my eyes, however, were opened; but the 
dark that environed me was as intense as before. 

i attempt to rise, but my limb were cold, and my joint had almost 
lost their flexibility. my effort were repeated, and at length i 
attain a sitting posture. i was now sensible of pain in my shoulder 
and back. i was universally in that state to which the frame is reduce 
by blow of a club, merciless and endless repeated; my temple 
throbbed, and my face was cover with clammy and cold drops: but that 
which threw me into deepest consternation was my inability to see. i 
turn my head to different quarters; i stretch my eyelids, and 
exert every visual energy, but in vain. i was wrap in the murkiest 
and most impenetrable gloom. 

the first effort of reflection was to suggest the belief that i was 
blind: that disease is known to assail us in a moment and without 
previous warning. this, surely, was the misfortune that had now befallen 
me. some ray, however fleeting and uncertain, could not fail to be 
discerned, if the power of vision were not utterly extinguished. in what 
circumstances could i possibly be placed, from which every particle of 
light should, by other means, be excluded? 

this led my thought into a new train. i endeavour to recall the past; 
but the past was too much in contradiction to the present, and my 
intellect was too much shatter by external violence, to allow me 
accurate to review it. 

since my sight avail nothing to the knowledge of my condition, i 
betook myself to other instruments. the element which i breathe was 
stagnant and cold. the spot where i lay was rugged and hard. i was 
neither naked nor clothed: a shirt and trousers compose my dress, and 
the shoe and stockings, which always accompany these, were now 
wanting. what could i infer from this scanty garb, this chill 
atmosphere, this stony bed? 

i had awaken as from sleep. what was my condition when i fell asleep? 
surely it was different from the present. then i inhabit a lightsome 
chamber and was stretch upon a down bed; now i was supine upon a 
rugged surface and immerse in palpable obscurity. then i was in perfect 
health; now my frame was cover with bruise and every joint was rack 
with pain. what dungeon or den had received me, and by whose command was 
i transport hither? 

after various effort i stood upon my feet. at first i totter and 
staggered. i stretch out my hand on all sides, but met only with 
vacuity. i advanced forward. at the third step my foot move something 
which lay upon the ground: i stoop and took it up, and found, on 
examination, that it was an indian tomahawk. this incident afford me 
no hint from which i might conjecture my state. 

proceeding irresolute and slow forward, my hand at length touched a 
wall. this, like the flooring, was of stone, and was rugged and 
impenetrable. i follow this wall. an advance angle occur at a 
short distance, which was follow by similar angles. i continue to 
explore this clue, till the suspicion occur that i was merely go 
round the wall of a vast and irregular apartment. 

the utter dark disabled me from compare directions and distances. 
this discovery, therefore, was not made on a sudden, and was still 
entangle with some doubt. my blood recover some warmth, and my 
muscle some elasticity; but in proportion as my sensibility returned, 
my pains augmented. overpower by my fear and my agonies, i desist 
from my fruitless search, and sat down, support my back against the 
wall. 

my excruciating sensation for a time occupy my attention. these, in 
combination with other causes, gradual produce a species of delirium. 
i existed, as it were, in a wakeful dream. with nothing to correct my 
erroneous perceptions, the image of the past occur in capricious 
combinations and vivid hues. methought i was the victim of some tyrant 
who had thrust me into a dungeon of his fortress, and left me no power 
to determine whether he intended i should perish with famine, or linger 
out a long life in hopeless imprisonment. whether the day was shut out 
by insuperable walls, or the dark that surround me was owe to 
the night and to the small of those cranny through which daylight 
was to be admitted, i conjecture in vain. 

sometimes i imagine myself bury alive. methought i had fallen into 
seeming death, and my friends had consign me to the tomb, from which a 
resurrection was impossible. that, in such a case, my limb would have 
been confine to a coffin, and my coffin to a grave, and that i should 
instantly have been suffocated, did not occur to destroy my supposition. 
neither did this supposition overwhelm me with terror or prompt my 
effort at deliverance. my state was full of tumult and confusion, and 
my attention was incessant divide between my painful sensation and 
my feverish dreams. 

there is no standard by which time can be measured but the succession of 
our thought and the change that take place in the external world. from 
the latter i was total excluded. the former made the lapse of some 
hour appear like the tedious of week and months. at length, a new 
sensation recall my rambling meditations, and gave substance to my 
fears. i now felt the craving of hunger, and perceive that, unless my 
deliverance were speedy effected, i must suffer a tedious and 
lingering death. 

i once more task my understanding and my senses to discover the nature 
of my present situation and the means of escape. i listen to catch 
some sound. i heard an unequal and vary echo, sometimes near and 
sometimes distant, sometimes die away and sometimes swelling into 
loudness. it was unlike any thing i had before heard, but it was evident 
that it arose from wind sweeping through spacious hall and winding 
passages. these token were incompatible with the result of the 
examination i had made. if my hand were true, i was immure between 
wall through which there was no avenue. 

i now exert my voice, and cry as loud as my waste strength would 
admit. its echo were sent back to me in broken and confuse sound and 
from above. this effort was casual, but some part of that uncertainty in 
which i was involved was instantly dispel by it. in passing through 
the cavern on the former day, i have mention the verge of the pit at 
which i arrived. to acquaint me as far as was possible with the 
dimensions of the place, i had hallooe with all my force, knowing that 
sound is reflect according to the distance and relative position of 
the substance from which it is repelled. 

the effect produce by my voice on this occasion resembled, with 
remarkable exactness, the effect which was then produced. was i, then, 
shut up in the same cavern? had i reach the brink of the same 
precipice and been thrown headlong into that vacuity? whence else could 
arise the bruise which i had received, but from my fall? yet all 
remembrance of my journey hither was lost. i had determined to explore 
this cave on the ensue day, but my memory informed me not that this 
intention had been carry into effect. still, it was only possible to 
conclude that i had come hither on my intended expedition, and had been 
thrown by another, or had, by some ill chance, fallen, into the pit. 

this opinion was conformable to what i had already observed. the 
pavement and wall were rugged like those of the footing and side of 
the cave through which i had formerly passed. 

but if this were true, what was the abhor catastrophe to which i was 
now reserved? the side of this pit were inaccessible; human footstep 
would never wander into these recesses. my friends were unapprized of my 
forlorn state. here i should continue till waste by famine. in this 
grave should i linger out a few days in unspeakable agonies, and then 
perish forever. 

the inroad of hunger were already experienced; and this knowledge of 
the desperate of my calamity urge me to frenzy. i had none but 
capricious and unseen fate to condemn. the author of my distress, and 
the means he had taken to decoy me hither, were incomprehensible. surely 
my senses were fetter or deprave by some spell. i was still asleep, 
and this was merely a torment vision; or madness had seize me, and 
the dark that environed and the hunger that afflict me exist 
only in my own distempered imagination. 

the consolation of these doubt could not last long. every hour add to 
the proof that my perception were real. my hunger speedy became 
ferocious. i tore the linen of my shirt between my teeth and swallow 
the fragments. i felt a strong propensity to bite the flesh from my arm. 
my heart overflow with cruelty, and i ponder on the delight i should 
experience in rend some living animal to pieces, and drink its 
blood and grind its quiver fibre between my teeth. 

this agony had already pass beyond the limit of endurance. i saw that 
time, instead of bring respite or relief, would only aggravate my 
wants, and that my only remain hope was to die before i should be 
assault by the last extreme of famine. i now recollect that a 
tomahawk was at hand, and rejoice in the possession of an instrument by 
which i could so effectually terminate my sufferings. 

i took it in my hand, move its edge over my fingers, and reflect on 
the force that was require to make it reach my heart. i investigate 
the spot where it should enter, and strove to fortify myself with 
resolution to repeat the stroke a second or third time, if the first 
should prove insufficient. i was sensible that i might fail to inflict a 
mortal wound, but delight to consider that the blood which would be 
made to flow would finally release me, and that meanwhile my pains would 
be alleviate by swallow this blood. 

you will not wonder that i felt some reluctance to employ so fatal 
though indispensable a remedy. i once more ruminate on the possibility 
of rescue myself by other means. i now reflect that the upper 
termination of the wall could not be at an immeasurable distance from 
the pavement. i had fallen from a height; but if that height had been 
considerable, instead of being merely bruised, should i not have been 
dashed into pieces? 

gleam of hope burst anew upon my soul. was it not possible, i asked, to 
reach the top of this pit? the side were rugged and uneven. would not 
their projecture and abruptnesse serve me as steps by which i might 
ascend in safety? this expedient was to be try without delay. shortly 
my strength would fail, and my doom would be irrevocable sealed. 

i will not enumerate my laborious efforts, my alternate of 
despondent and confidence, the eager and unweary scrutiny with which 
i examine the surface, the attempt which i made, and the failure 
which, for a time, succeed each other. a hundred times, when i had 
ascend some feet from the bottom, i was compel to relinquish my 
undertaking by the _untenable_ smooth of the space which 
remain to be gone over. a hundred times i threw myself, exhaust by 
fatigue and my pains, on the ground. the consciousness was gradual 
restore that, till i had attempt every part of the wall, it was 
absurd to despair, and i again drew my totter limb and ache joint 
to that part of the wall which had not been surveyed. 

at length, as i stretch my hand upward, i found somewhat that seem 
like a recession in the wall. it was possible that this was the top of 
the cavity, and this might be the avenue to liberty. my heart leap 
with joy, and i proceed to climb the wall. no undertaking could be 
conceive more arduous than this. the space between this verge and the 
floor was nearly smooth. the verge was higher from the bottom than my 
head. the only means of ascend that were offer me were by my hands, 
with which i could draw myself upward so as, at length, to maintain my 
hold with my feet. 

my effort were indefatigable, and at length i placed myself on the 
verge. when this was accomplished, my strength was nearly gone. had i 
not found space enough beyond this brink to stretch myself at length, i 
should unavoidable have fallen backward into the pit, and all my pains 
had serve no other end than to deepen my despair and hasten my 
destruction. 

what impediment and peril remain to be encounter i could not 
judge. i was now inclined to forebode the worst. the interval of repose 
which was necessary to be taken, in order to recruit my strength, would 
accelerate the ravages of famine, and leave me without the power to 
proceed. 

in this state, i once more console myself that an instrument of death 
was at hand. i had drawn up with me the tomahawk, being sensible that, 
should this impediment be overcome, other might remain that would prove 
insuperable. before i employ it, however, i cast my eyes wildly and 
languid around. the dark was no less intense than in the pit 
below, and yet two object were distinct seen. 

they resemble a fixed and obscure flame. they were motionless. though 
lustrous themselves, they create no illumination around them. this 
circumstance, add to others, which remind me of similar object 
noted on former occasions, immediately explain the nature of what i 
beheld. these were the eyes of a panther. 

thus had i struggle to obtain a post where a savage was lurk and 
wait only till my effort should place me within reach of his fangs. 
the first impulse was to arm myself against this enemy. the 
desperate of my condition was, for a moment, forgotten. the weapon 
which was so lately lift against my own bosom was now raise to defend 
my life against the assault of another. 

there was no time for deliberation and delay. in a moment he might 
spring from his station and tear me to pieces. my utmost speed might not 
enable me to reach him where he sat, but merely to encounter his 
assault. i did not reflect how far my strength was adequate to save me. 
all the force that remain was muster up and exert in a throw. 

no one know the powers that are latent in his constitution. call 
forth by imminent dangers, our effort frequent exceed our most 
sanguine belief. though totter on the verge of dissolution, and 
apparently unable to crawl from this spot, a force was exert in this 
throw, probably greater than i had ever before exerted. it was 
resistless and unerring. i aim at the middle space between those 
glowing orbs. it penetrate the skull, and the animal fell, struggle 
and shrieking, on the ground. 

my ear quick informed me when his pang were at an end. his cries and 
his convulsion last for a moment and then ceased. the effect of his 
voice, in these subterranean abodes, was unspeakable rueful. 

the abrupt of this incident, and the preternatural exertion of my 
strength, left me in a state of languor and sinking, from which slow 
and with difficulty i recovered. the first suggestion that occur was 
to feed upon the carcass of this animal. my hunger had arrive at that 
pitch where all fastidious and scruple are at an end. i crept to 
the spot. i will not shock you by relate the extreme to which dire 
necessity had driven me. i review this scene with loathing and horror. 
now that it is past i look back upon it as on some hideous dream. the 
whole appear to be some freak of insanity. no alternative was offered, 
and hunger was capable of being appease even by a banquet so 
detestable. 

if this appetite has sometimes subdued the sentiment of nature, and 
compel the mother to feed upon the flesh of her offspring, it will 
not excite amaze that i did not turn from the yet warm blood and 
reek fibre of a brute. 

one evil was now removed, only to give place to another. the first 
sensation of full had scarcely been felt when my stomach was seize 
by pangs, whose acute exceed all that i ever before experienced. i 
bitter lament my inordinate avidity. the excruciation of famine 
were better than the agony which this abhor meal had produced. 

death was now impending with no less proximity and certainty, though in 
a different form. death was a sweet relief for my present miseries, and 
i vehement long for its arrival. i stretch myself on the ground. i 
threw myself into every posture that promise some alleviate of this 
evil. i roll along the pavement of the cavern, wholly inattentive to 
the danger that environed me. that i did not fall into the pit whence i 
had just emerge must be ascribe to some miraculous chance. 

how long my misery endured, it is not possible to tell. i cannot even 
form a plausible conjecture. judge by the lingering train of my 
sensations, i should conjecture that some days elapse in this 
deplorable condition; but nature could riot have so long sustain a 
conflict like this. 

gradual my pains subsided, and i fell into a deep sleep. i was visit 
by dream of a thousand hues. they led me to flowing stream and 
plenteous banquets, which, though placed within my view, some power 
forbade me to approach. from this sleep i recover to the fruition of 
solitude and darkness, but my frame was in a state less feeble than 
before that which i had eaten had produce temporary distress, but on 
the whole had been of use. if this food had not been provided for me i 
should scarcely have avoid death. i had reason, therefore, to 
congratulate myself on the danger that had lately occurred. 

i had act without foresight, and yet no wisdom could have prescribed 
more salutary measures. the panther was slain, not from a view to the 
relief of my hunger, but from the self-preserving and involuntary 
impulse. had i foreknown the pang to which my ravenous and bloody meal 
would give birth, i should have careful abstained; and yet these pang 
were a useful effort of nature to subdue and convert to nourishment the 
matter i had swallowed. 

i was now assail by the torment of thirst. my invention and my 
courage were anew bent to obviate this pressing evil. i reflect that 
there was some recess from this cavern, even from the spot where i now 
stood. before, i was doubtful whether in this direction from this pit 
any avenue could be found; but, since the panther had come hither, there 
was reason to suppose the existence of some such avenue. 

i now likewise attend to a sound, which, from its invariable tenor, 
denote somewhat different from the whistle of a gale. it seem like 
the murmur of a running stream. i now prepared to go forward and 
endeavour to move along in that direction in which this sound apparently 
came. 

on either side, and above my head, there was nothing but vacuity. my 
steps were to be guide by the pavement, which, though unequal and 
rugged, appeared, on the whole, to ascend. my safety require that i 
should employ both hand and feet in explore my way. 

i went on thus for a considerable period. the murmur, instead of 
becoming more distinct, gradual die away. my progress was arrest by 
fatigue, and i began once more to despond. my exertion produce a 
perspiration, which, while it augment my thirst, happily supply me 
with imperfect means of appease it. 

this expedient would, perhaps, have been accidental suggested; but my 
ingenuity was assist by remember the history of certain english 
prisoner in bengal, whom their merciless enemy imprison in a small 
room, and some of whom preserve themselves alive merely by swallow 
the moisture that flow from their bodies. this experiment i now 
perform with no less success. 

this was slender arid transitory consolation. i knew that, wandering at 
random, i might never reach the outlet of this cavern, or might be 
disabled, by hunger and fatigue, from go farther than the outlet. the 
craving which had lately been satiate would speedy return, and my 
negligence had cut me off from the resource which had recently been 
furnished. i thought not till now that a second meal might be 
indispensable. 

to return upon my footstep to the spot where the dead animal lay was a 
heartless project. i might thus be place myself at a hopeless distance 
from liberty. besides, my track could not be retraced. i had frequent 
deviate from a straight direction for the sake of avoid impediments. 
all of which i was sensible was, that i was travel up an irregular 
acclivity. i hope some time to reach the summit, but had no reason for 
adhere to one line of ascent in preference to another. 

to remain where i was was manifest absurd. whether i mount or 
descended, a change of place was most likely to benefit me. i resolve 
to vary my direction, and, instead of ascending, keep along the side of 
what i account a hill. i had gone some hundred feet when the murmur, 
before described, once more salute my ear. 

this sound, being imagine to proceed from a running stream, could not 
but light up joy in the heart of one nearly perishing with thirst. i 
proceed with new courage. the sound approach no nearer, nor became 
more distinct; but, as long as it die not away, i was satisfy to 
listen and to hope. 

i was eager observant if any the least glimmer of light should 
visit this recess. at length, on the right hand, a gleam, infinite 
faint, caught my attention. it was waver and unequal. i direct my 
steps towards it. it became more vivid and permanent. it was of that 
kind, however, which proceed from a fire, kindle with dry sticks, and 
not from the sun. i now heard the crackling of flames. 

this sound made me pause, or, at least, to proceed with circumspection. 
at length the scene opened, and i found myself at the entrance of a 
cave. i quick reach a station, when i saw a fire burning. at first 
no other object was noted, but it was easy to infer that the fire was 
kindle by men, and that they who kindle it could be at no great 
distance. 




chapter xvii. 


thus was i deliver from my prison, and restore to the enjoyment of 
the air and the light. perhaps the chance was almost miraculous that led 
me to this opening. in any other direction, i might have involved myself 
in an inextricable maze and render my destruction sure; but what now 
remain to place me in absolute security? beyond the fire i could see 
nothing; but, since the smoke roll rapid away, it was plain that on 
the opposite side the cavern was open to the air. 

i went forward, but my eyes were fixed upon the fire: presently, in 
consequence of change my station, i perceive several feet, and the 
skirt of blankets. i was somewhat startle at these appearances. the 
leg were naked, and score into uncouth figures. the _moccasins_ 
which lay beside them, and which were adorn in a grotesque manner, in 
addition to other incidents, immediately suggest the suspicion that 
they were indians. no spectacle was more adapt than this to excite 
wonder and alarm. had some mysterious power snatch me from the earth, 
and cast me, in a moment, into the heart of the wilderness? was i still 
in the vicinity of my parental habitation, or was i thousand of mile 
distant? 

were these the permanent inhabitant of this region, or were they 
wanderer and robbers? while in the heart of the mountain, i had 
entertain a vague belief that i was still within the precincts of 
norwalk. this opinion was shaken for a moment by the object which i now 
beheld, but it insensible returned: yet how was this opinion to be 
reconcile to appearances so strange and uncouth, and what measure did a 
due regard to my safety enjoin me to take? 

i now gain a view of four brawny and terrific figures, stretch upon 
the ground. they lay parallel to each other, on their left sides; in 
consequence of which their face were turn from me. between each was 
an interval where lay a musket. their right hand seem placed upon the 
stocks of their guns, as if to seize them on the first moment of alarm. 

the aperture through which these object were seen was at the back of 
the cave, and some feet from the ground. it was merely large enough to 
suffer a human body to pass. it was involved in profound darkness, and 
there was no danger of being suspect or discover as long as i 
maintain silence and kept out of view. 

it was easily imagine that these guest would make but a short sojourn 
in this spot. there was reason to suppose that it was now night, and 
that, after a short repose, they would start up and resume their 
journey. it was my first design to remain shroud in this covert till 
their departure, and i prepared to endure imprison and thirst 
somewhat longer. 

meanwhile my thought were busy in account for this spectacle. i need 
not tell thee that norwalk is the termination of a sterile and narrow 
tract which begin in the indian country. it form a sort of rugged and 
rocky vein, and continue upwards of fifty miles. it is cross in a few 
place by narrow and intricate paths, by which a communication is 
maintain between the farm and settlement on the opposite side of 
the ridge. 

during former indian wars, this rude surface was sometimes traverse by 
the red men, and they made, by means of it, frequent and destructive 
inroad into the heart of the english settlements. during the last war, 
notwithstanding the progress of population, and the multiply peril of 
such an expedition, a band of them had once penetrate into norwalk, and 
linger long enough to pillage and murder some of the neighbouring 
inhabitants. 

i have reason to remember that event. my father's house was placed on 
the verge of this solitude. eight of these assassin assail it at the 
dead of night. my parent and an infant child were murder in their 
beds; the house was pillaged, and then burnt to the ground. happily, 
myself and my two sister were abroad upon a visit. the preceding day 
had been fixed for our return to our father's house; but a storm 
occurred, which made it dangerous to cross the river, and, by obliging 
us to defer our journey, rescue us from captivity or death. 

most men are haunt by some species of terror or antipathy, which they 
are, for the most part, able to trace to some incident which befell them 
in their early years. you will not be surprise that the fate of my 
parents, and the sight of the body of one of this savage band, who, in 
the pursuit that was made after them, was overtaken and killed, should 
produce lasting and terrific image in my fancy. i never look upon or 
call up the image of a savage without shuddering. 

i knew that, at this time, some hostilities had been committed on the 
frontier; that a long course of injury and encroachment had lately 
exasperate the indian tribes; that an implacable and exterminate war 
was generally expected. we imagine ourselves at an inaccessible 
distance from the danger; but i could not but remember that this 
persuasion was formerly as strong as at present, and that an expedition 
which had once succeed might possibly be attempt again. here was 
every token of enmity and bloodshed. each prostrate figure was furnish 
with a rifle musket, and a leathern bag tie round his waist, which 
was, probably, store with powder and ball. 

from these reflections, the sense of my own danger was revive and 
enforced; but i likewise ruminate on the evil which might impend over 
others. i should, no doubt, be safe by remain in this nook; but might 
not some means be pursue to warn other of their danger? should they 
leave this spot without notice of their approach being given to the 
fearless and pacific tenant of the neighbouring district, they might 
commit, in a few hours, the most horrid and irreparable devastation. 

the alarm could only be diffuse in one way. could i not escape, 
unperceived, and without alarm the sleepers, from this cavern? the 
slumber of an indian is broken by the slightest noise; but, if all noise 
be precluded, it is commonly profound. it was possible, i conceived, to 
leave my present post, to descend into the cave, and issue forth without 
the smallest signal. their supine posture assured me that they were 
asleep. sleep usually come at their bidding, and if, perchance, they 
should be wakeful at an unseasonable moment, they always sit upon their 
haunches, and, leaning their elbow on their knees, consume the tedious 
hour in smoking. my peril would be great. accident which i could not 
foresee, and over which i had no command, might occur to awaken some one 
at the moment i was passing the fire. should i pass in safety, i might 
issue forth into a wilderness, of which i had no knowledge, where i 
might wander till i perish with famine, or where my footstep might be 
noted and pursue and overtaken by these implacable foes. these peril 
were enormous and imminent; but i likewise considered that i might be at 
no great distance from the habitation of men, and that my escape might 
rescue them from the most dreadful calamities. i determined to make this 
dangerous experiment without delay. 

i came near to the aperture, and had, consequently, a large view of 
this recess. to my unspeakable dismay, i now caught a glimpse of one 
seat at the fire. his back was turn towards me, so that i could 
distinct survey his gigantic form and fantastic ornaments. 

my project was frustrated. this one was probably commission to watch 
and to awaken his companion when a due portion of sleep had been taken. 
that he would not be unfaithful or remiss in the performance of the part 
assign to him was easily predicted. to pass him without exciting his 
notice (and the entrance could not otherwise be reached) was impossible. 
once more i shrunk back, and revolve with hopeless and anguish the 
necessity to which i was reduced. 

this interval of dreary foreboding did not last long. some motion in him 
that was seat by the fire attract my notice. i looked, and beheld 
him rise from his place and go forth from the cavern. this unexpected 
incident led my thought into a new channel. could not some advantage be 
taken of his absence? could not this opportunity be seize for making my 
escape? he had left his gun and hatchet on the ground. it was likely, 
therefore, that he had not gone far, and would speedy return. might 
not these weapon be seized, and some provision be thus made against the 
danger of meeting him without, or of being pursued? 

before a resolution could be formed, a new sound salute my ear. it was 
a deep groan, succeed by sob that seem struggle for utterance but 
were vehement counteract by the sufferer. this low and bitter 
lamentation apparently proceed from some one within the cave. it could 
not be from one of this swarthy band. it must, then, proceed from a 
captive, whom they had reserved for torment or servitude, and who had 
seize the opportunity afford by the absence of him that watch to 
give vent to his despair. 

i again thrust my head forward, and beheld, lie on the ground, apart 
from the rest, and bound hand and foot, a young girl. her dress was the 
coarse russet garb of the country, and bespoke her to be some farmer's 
daughter. her features denote the last degree of fear and anguish, and 
she move her limb in such a manner as show that the ligature by 
which she was confine produced, by their tightness, the utmost degree 
of pain. 

my wish were now bent not only to preserve myself and to frustrate the 
future attempt of these savages, but likewise to relieve this miserable 
victim. this could only be done by escape from the cavern and 
return with seasonable aid. the sob of the girl were likely to rouse 
the sleepers. my appearance before her would prompt her to testify her 
surprise by some exclamation or shriek. what could hence be predict 
but that the band would start on their feet and level their unerring 
pieces at my head? 

i know not why i was insensible to these dangers. my thirst was render 
by these delay intolerable. it took from me, in some degree, the power 
of deliberation. the murmur which had drawn me hither continue still 
to be heard. some torrent or cascade could not be far distant from the 
entrance of the cavern, and it seem as if one draught of clear water 
was a luxury cheap purchase by death itself. this, in addition to 
consideration more disinterested, and which i have already mentioned, 
impel me forward. 

the girl's cheek rest on the hard rock, and her eyes were dim with 
tears. as they were turn towards me, however, i hope that my 
movements would be notice by her gradual and without abruptness. this 
expectation was fulfilled. i had not advanced many steps before she 
discover me. this moment was critical beyond all other in the course 
of my existence. my life was suspended, as it were, by a spider's 
thread. all rest on the effect which this discovery should make upon 
this feeble victim. 

i was watchful of the first movement of her eye which should indicate a 
consciousness of my presence. i laboured, by gesture and looks, to 
deter her from betray her emotion. my attention was, at the same 
time, fixed upon the sleepers, and an anxious glance was cast towards 
the quarter whence the watchful savage might appear. 

i stoop and seize the musket and hatchet. the space beyond the fire 
was, as i expected, open to the air. i issue forth with tremble 
steps. the sensation inspired by the danger which environed me, add 
to my recent horrors, and the influence of the moon, which had now 
gain the zenith, and whose lustre dazzle my long-benighted senses, 
cannot be adequate described. 

for a minute, i was unable to distinguish objects. this confusion was 
speedy corrected, and i found myself on the verge of a steep. craggy 
eminence arose on all sides. on the left hand was a space that offer 
some footing, and hither i turned. a torrent was below me, and this path 
appear to lead to it. it quick appear in sight, and all foreign 
care were, for a time, suspended. 

this water fell from the upper regions of the hill, upon a flat 
projecture which was continue on either side, and on part of which i 
was now standing. the path was bound on the left by an inaccessible 
wall, and on the right terminated, at the distance of two or three feet 
from the wall, in a precipice. the water was eight or ten pace distant, 
and no impediment seem likely to rise between us. i rush forward 
with speed. 

my progress was quick checked. close to the fall water, seat on 
the edge, his back support by the rock, and his leg hanging over the 
precipice, i now beheld the savage who left the cave before me. the 
noise of the cascade and the improbability of interruption, at least 
from this quarter, had made him inattentive to my motions. 

i paused. along this verge lay the only road by which i could reach the 
water, and by which i could escape. the passage was completely occupy 
by this antagonist. to advance towards him, or to remain where i was, 
would produce the same effect. i should, in either case, be detected. he 
was unarmed; but his outcry would instantly summon his companion to 
his aid. i could not hope to overpower him, and pass him in defiance of 
his opposition. but, if this were effected, pursuit would be instantly 
commenced. i was unacquainted with the way. the way was unquestionable 
difficult. my strength was nearly annihilated; i should be overtaken in 
a moment, or their deficiency in speed would be supply by the accuracy 
of their aim. their bullets, at least, would reach me. 

there was one method of remove this impediment. the piece which i held 
in my hand was cocked. there could be no doubt that it was loaded. a 
precaution of this kind would never be omit by a warrior of this hue. 
at a greater distance than this, i should not fear to reach the mark. 
should i not discharge it, and, at the same moment, rush forward to 
secure the road which my adversary's death would open to me? 

perhaps you will conceive a purpose like this to have argue a 
sanguinary and murderous disposition. let it be remembered, however, 
that i entertain no doubt about the hostile designs of these men. 
this was sufficient indicate by their arms, their guise, and the 
captive who attend them. let the fate of my parent be, likewise, 
remembered. i was not certain but that these very men were the assassin 
of my family, and were those who had reduce me and my sister to the 
condition of orphan and dependants. no words can describe the torment 
of my thirst. relief to these torments, and safety to my life, were 
within view. how could i hesitate? 

yet i did hesitate. my aversion to bloodshed was not to be subdued but 
by the direst necessity. i knew, indeed, that the discharge of a musket 
would only alarm the enemy who remain behind; but i had another and 
a better weapon in my grasp. i could rive the head of my adversary, and 
cast him headlong, without any noise which should be heard, into the 
cavern. 

still i was willing to withdraw, to re-enter the cave, and take shelter 
in the darksome recess from which i had emerged. here i might remain, 
unsuspected, till these detest guest should depart. the hazard 
attend my re-entrance were to be bold encountered, and the torment 
of unsatisfy thirst were to be patient endured, rather than imbrue 
my hand in the blood of my fellowmen. but this expedient would be 
ineffectual if my retreat should be observe by this savage. of that i 
was bound to be incontestable assured. i retreated, therefore, but kept 
my eye fixed at the same time upon the enemy. 

some ill fate decree that i should not retreat unobserved. scarcely had 
i withdrawn three pace when he start from his seat, and, turning 
towards me, walk with a quick pace. the shadow of the rock, and the 
improbability of meeting an enemy here, conceal me for a moment from 
his observation. i stood still. the slightest motion would have 
attract his notice. at present, the narrow space engaged all his 
vigilance. cautious footsteps, and attention to the path, were 
indispensable to his safety. the respite was momentary, and i employ 
it in my own defence. 

how otherwise could i act? the danger that impende aim at nothing 
less than my life. to take the life of another was the only method of 
avert it. the means were in my hand, and they were used. in an 
extremity like this, my muscle would have act almost in defiance of 
my will. 

the stroke was quick as lightning, and the wound mortal and deep. he had 
not time to descry the author of his fate, but, sink on the path, 
expire without a groan. the hatchet bury itself in his breast, and 
roll with him to the bottom of the precipice. 

never before had i taken the life of a human creature. on this head i 
had, indeed, entertain somewhat of religious scruples. these scruple 
did not forbid me to defend myself, but they made me cautious and 
reluctant to decide. though they could not withhold my hand when urge 
by a necessity like this, they were sufficient to make me look back upon 
the deed with remorse and dismay. 

i did not escape all compunction in the present instance, but the tumult 
of my feelings was quick allayed. to quench my thirst was a 
consideration by which all other were supplanted. i approach the 
torrent, and not only drank copiously, but lave my head, neck, and 
arms, in this delicious element. 




chapter xviii. 


never was any delight worthy of comparison with the rapture which i 
then experienced. life, that was rapid ebbing, appear to return upon 
me with redouble violence. my languors, my excruciating heat, vanish 
in a moment, and i felt prepared to undergo the labour of hercules. 
have fully supply the demand of nature in this respect, i return 
to reflection on the circumstances of my situation. the path winding 
round the hill was now free from all impediments. what remain but to 
precipitate my flight? i might speedy place myself beyond all danger. 
i might gain some hospitable shelter, where my fatigues might be 
repair by repose, and my wound be cured. i might likewise impart to 
my protector seasonable information of the enemy who meditate their 
destruction. 

i thought upon the condition of the hapless girl whom i had left in the 
power of the savages. was it impossible to rescue her? might i not 
relieve her from her bonds, and make her the companion of my flight? the 
exploit was perilous, but not impracticable. there was something 
dastard and ignominious in withdraw from the danger, and leave a 
helpless being expose to it. a single minute might suffice to snatch 
her from death or captivity. the parent might deserve that i should 
hazard or even sacrifice my life in the cause of their child. 

after some fluctuation, i determined to return to the cavern and attempt 
the rescue of the girl. the success of this project depend on the 
continuance of their sleep. it was proper to approach with wariness, and 
to heed the smallest token which might bespeak their condition. i crept 
along the path, bend my ear forward to catch any sound that might 
arise. i heard nothing but the half-stifled sob of the girl. 

i enter with the slowest and most anxious circumspection. every thing 
was found in its pristine state. the girl notice my entrance with a 
mixture of terror and joy. my gesture and looks enjoin upon her 
silence. i stoop down, and, taking another hatchet, cut asunder the 
deer-skin thong by which her wrist and ankle were tied. i then made 
sign for her to rise and follow me. she willing comply with my 
directions; but her benumbed joint and lacerate sinew refuse to 
support her. there was no time to be lost; i therefore lift her in my 
arms, and, feeble and totter as i was, proceed with this burden 
along the perilous steep and over a most rugged-path. 

i hope that some exertion would enable her to retrieve the use of her 
limbs. i set her, therefore, on her feet, exhort her to walk as well 
as she was able, and promising her my occasional assistance. the poor 
girl was not deficient in zeal, and presently move along with light and 
quick steps. we speedy reach the bottom of the hill. 

no fancy can conceive a scene more wild and desolate than that which now 
present itself. the soil was nearly cover with sharp fragment of 
stone. between these, sprung bramble and creep vines, whose twigs, 
crossing and intertwine with each other, add to the roughness below, 
made the passage infinite toilsome. scattered over this space were 
single cedar with their ragged spine and wreath of moss, and copse 
of dwarf oaks, which were only new emblem of sterility. 

i was wholly unacquainted with the scene before me. no mark of 
habitation or culture, no trace of the footstep of men, were 
discernible. i scarcely knew in what region of the globe i was placed. i 
had come hither by means so inexplicable as to leave it equally in doubt 
whether i was separate from my paternal abode by a river or an ocean. 

i made inquiry of my companion, but she was unable to talk coherently. 
she answer my question with weeping, and sobs, and entreaty to fly 
from the scene of her distress. i collected from her, at length, that 
her father's house had been attack on the preceding evening, and all 
the family but herself destroyed. since this disaster she had walk 
very fast and a great way, but knew not how far or in what direction. 

in a wilderness like this, my only hope was to light upon obscure paths, 
made by cattle. meanwhile i endeavour to adhere to one line, and to 
burst through the vexatious obstacle which encumber our way. the 
ground was conceal by the bushes, and we were perplexed and fatigue 
by a continual succession of hollow and prominences. at one moment we 
were nearly thrown headlong into a pit. at another we struck our feet 
against the angle of stones. the branch of the oak rebound in our 
face or entangle our legs, and the unseen thorn inflict on us a 
thousand wounds. 

i was obliged, in these arduous circumstances, to support not only 
myself, but my companion. her strength was overpower by her evening 
journey, and the terror of being overtaken incessant harass her. 

sometimes we light upon track which afford us an easy footing and 
inspired us with courage to proceed. these, for a time, terminate at a 
brook or in a bog, and we were once more compel to go forward at 
random. one of these track insensible became more beaten, and, at 
length, exhibit the trace of wheels. to this i adhered, confident 
that it would finally conduct us to a dwelling. 

on either side, the undergrowth of shrub and bramble continue as 
before. sometimes small space were observed, which had lately been 
clear by fire. at length a vacant space, of large dimensions than had 
hitherto occurred, present itself to my view. it was a field of some 
acres, that had, apparently, been upturned by the hoe. at the corner of 
this field was a small house. 

my heart leap with joy at this sight. i hasten towards it, in the 
hope that my uncertainties, and toils, and dangers, were now drawing to 
a close. this dwelling was suit to the poverty and desolate which 
surround it. it consist of a few unhewn log laid upon each other, 
to the height of eight or ten feet, including a quadrangular space of 
similar dimensions, and cover by a thatch. there was no window, light 
being sufficient admitted into the crevice between the logs. these 
had formerly been loose plastered with clay; but air and rain had 
crumble and wash the greater part of this rude cement away. somewhat 
like a chimney, built of half-burnt bricks, was perceive at one corner. 
the door was fasten by a leathern thong, tie to a peg. 

all within was silence and darkness. i knock at the door and called, 
but no one move or answered. the tenant, whoever he was, was absent. 
his leave could not be obtained, and i, therefore, enter without it. 
the autumn had made some progress, and the air was frosty and sharp. my 
mind and muscle had been of late so strenuous occupied, that the cold 
had not been felt. the cessation of exercise, however, quick restore 
my sensibility in this respect, but the unhappy girl complain of being 
half frozen. 

fire, therefore, was the first object of my search. happily, some ember 
were found upon the hearth, together with potato-stalks and dry chips. 
of these, with much difficulty, i kindle a fire, by which some warmth 
was impart to our shiver limbs. the light enable me, as i sat upon 
the ground, to survey the interior of this mansion. three saplings, 
strip of their branch and bound together at their end by twigs, 
form a kind of bedstead, which was raise from the ground by four 
stones. ropes stretch across these, and cover by a blanket, 
constitute the bed. a board, of which one end rest on the bedstead 
and the other was thrust between the log that compose the wall, 
sustain the stale fragment of a rye-loaf, and a cedar bucket kept 
entire by withe instead of hoops. in the bucket was a little water, 
full of droppings from the roof, drown insects, and sand. a basket or 
two neat made, and a hoe, with a stake thrust into it by way of 
handle, made up all the furniture that was visible. 

next to cold, hunger was the most urgent necessity by which we were now 
pressed. this was no time to give ear to scruples. we, therefore, 
unceremonious divide the bread and water between us. i had now 
leisure to bestow some regards upon the future. 

these remnant of fire and food convinced me that this dwelling was 
usually inhabited, and that it had lately been deserted. some engagement 
had probably carry the tenant abroad. his absence might be terminate 
in a few minutes, or might endure through the night. on his return, i 
question not my power to appease any indignation he might feel at the 
liberties which i had taken. i was willing to suppose him one who would 
readily afford us all the information and succour that we needed. 

if he should not return till sunrise, i meant to resume my journey. by 
the comfortable meal we had made, and the repose of a few hours, we 
should be considerably invigorate and refreshed, and the road would 
lead us to some more hospitable tenement. 

my thought were too tumultuous, and my situation too precarious, to 
allow me to sleep. the girl, on the contrary, soon sank into a sweet 
oblivion of all her cares. she laid herself, by my advice, upon the bed, 
and left me to ruminate without interruption. 

i was not wholly free from the apprehension of danger. what influence 
this boisterous and solitary life might have upon the temper of the 
being who inhabit this hut, i could not predict. how soon the indian 
might awake, and what path they would pursue, i was equally unable to 
guess. it was by no means impossible that they might tread upon my 
footsteps, and knock, in a few minutes, at the door of this cottage. it 
behoove me to make all the preparation in my power against untoward 
incidents. 

i had not part with the gun which i had first seize in the cavern, 
nor with the hatchet which i had afterwards use to cut the band of the 
girl. these were at once my trophy and my means of defence, which it 
had been rash and absurd to have relinquished. my present reliance was 
placed upon these. 

i now, for the first time, examine the prize that i had made. other 
consideration had prevent me, till now, from examine the structure 
of the piece; but i could not but observe that it had two barrels, and 
was lighter and small than an ordinary musket. the light of the fire 
now enable me to inspect it with more accuracy. 

scarcely had i fixed my eyes upon the stock, when i perceive mark that 
were familiar to my apprehension. shape, ornaments, and ciphers, were 
evidently the same with those of a piece which i had frequent handled. 
the mark were of a kind which could not be mistaken. this piece was 
mine; and, when i left my uncle's house, it was deposited, as i 
believed, in the closet of my chamber. 

thou wilt easily conceive the inference which this circumstance 
suggested. my hair rose and my teeth chatter with horror. my whole 
frame was petrified, and i pace to and fro, hurried from the chimney to 
the door, and from the door to the chimney, with the misguided fury of a 
maniac. 

i need no proof of my calamity more incontestable than this. my uncle 
and my sister had been murdered; the dwelling had been pillaged, and 
this had been a part of the plunder. defenceless and asleep, they were 
assail by these inexorable enemies, and i, who ought to have been 
their protector and champion, was remove to an immeasurable distance, 
and was disabled, by some accursed chance, from afford them the 
succour which they needed. 

for a time, i doubt whether i had not witness and share this 
catastrophe. i had no memory of the circumstances that precede my 
awake in the pit. had not the cause of my being cast into this abyss 
some connection with the ruin of my family? had i not been drag 
hither by these savage and reduced, by their malice, to that breathless 
and insensible condition? was i born to a malignant destiny never tired 
of persecuting? thus had my parent and their infant offspring perished, 
and thus complete was the fate of all those to whom my affection 
cleaved, and whom the first disaster had spared. 

hitherto the death of the savage, whom i had dispatch with my hatchet, 
had not been remember without some remorse. now my emotion were 
total changed. i was somewhat comfort in thinking that thus much of 
necessary vengeance had been executed. new and more vehement regrets 
were excited by reflect on the forbearance i had practised when so 
much was in my power. all the miscreant had been at my mercy, and a 
bloody retribution might, with safety and ease, have been inflict on 
their prostrate bodies. 

it was now too late. what of consolation or of hope remain to me? to 
return to my ancient dwelling, now pollute with blood, or, perhaps, 
nothing but a smoking ruin, was abhorred. life, connected with the 
remembrance of my misfortunes, was detestable. i was no long anxious 
for flight. no change of the scene but that which terminate all 
consciousness could i endure to think of. 

amidst these gloomy meditation the idea was sudden suggest of 
returning, with the utmost expedition, to the cavern. it was possible 
that the assassin were still asleep. he who was appoint to watch, and 
to make, in due season, the signal for resume their march, was forever 
silent. without this signal it was not unlikely that they would sleep 
till dawn of day. but, if they should be roused, they might be overtaken 
or met, and, by choose a proper station, two victim might at least 
fall. the ultimate event to myself would surely be fatal; but my own 
death was an object of desire rather than of dread. to die thus 
speedily, and after some atone was made for those who had already 
been slain, was sweet. 

the way to the mountain was difficult and tedious, but the ridge was 
distinct seen from the door of the cottage, and i trust that 
auspicious chance would lead me to that part of it where my prey was to 
be found. i snatch up the gun and tomahawk in a transport of 
eagerness. on examine the former, i found that both barrel were 
deep loaded. 

this piece was of extraordinary workmanship. it was the legacy of an 
english officer, who die in bengal, to sarsefield. it was construct 
for the purpose not of sport but of war. the artist had made it a 
congery of tube and springs, by which every purpose of protection and 
offence was effectually served. a dagger's blade was attach to it, 
capable of being fixed at the end, and of answer the destructive 
purpose of a bayonet. on his departure from solesbury, my friend left 
it, as a pledge of his affection, in my possession. hitherto i had 
chiefly employ it in shoot at a mark, in order to improve my sight; 
now was i to profit by the gift in a different way. 

thus armed, i prepared to sally forth on my adventurous expedition. 
sober view might have speedy succeed to the present tempest of my 
passions. i might have gradual discover the romantic and criminal 
temerity of my project, the folly of revenge, and the duty of preserve 
my life for the benefit of mankind. i might have suspect the propriety 
of my conclusion, and have admitted some doubt as to the catastrophe 
which i imagine to have befallen my uncle and sisters. i might, at 
least, have consent to ascertain their condition with my own eyes, and 
for this end have return to the cottage, and have patient wait 
till the morning light should permit me to resume my journey. 

this conduct was preclude by a new incident. before i open the door i 
look through a crevice of the wall, and perceive three human figures 
at the farther end of the field. they approach the house. though 
indistinct seen, something in their port persuade me that these were 
the indian from whom i had lately parted. i was startle but not 
dismayed. my thirst of vengeance was still powerful, and i believe that 
the moment of its gratification was hastening. in a short time they 
would arrive and enter the house. in what manner should they be 
received? 

i studied not my own security. it was the scope of my wish to kill the 
whole number of my foes; but, that being done, i was indifferent to the 
consequences. i desire not to live to relate or to exult in the deed. 

to go forth was perilous and useless. all that remain was to sit upon 
the ground opposite the door, and fire at each as he entered. in the 
hasty survey i had taken of this apartment, one object had been 
overlooked, or imperfect noticed. close to the chimney was an 
aperture, form by a cavity partly in the wall and in the ground. it 
was the entrance of an oven, which resembled, on the outside, a mound of 
earth, and which was fill with dry stalk of potato and other 
rubbish. 

into this it was possible to thrust my body. a sort of screen might be 
form of the brushwood, and more deliberate and effectual execution be 
done upon the enemy. i weigh not the disadvantage of this scheme, but 
precipitate threw myself into this cavity. i discovered, in an 
instant, that it was total unfit for my purpose; but it was too late 
to repair my miscarriage. 

this wall of the hovel was placed near the verge of a sand-bank. the 
oven was erect on the very brink. this bank, being of a loose and 
mutable soil, could not sustain my weight. it sunk, and i sunk along 
with it. the height of the bank was three or four feet, so that, though 
disconcert and embarrassed, i received no injury. i still grasp my 
gun, and resume my feet in a moment. 

what was now to be done? the bank screen me from the view of the 
savages. the thicket was hard by, and, if i were eager to escape, the 
way was obvious and sure. but, though single, though enfeeble by toil, 
by abstinence, and by disease, and though so much exceed in number and 
strength by my foes, i was determined to await and provoke the contest. 

in addition to the desperate impulse of passion, i was sway by 
thought of the danger which beset the sleep girl, and from which my 
flight would leave her without protection. how strange is the destiny 
that govern mankind! the consequence of shroud myself in this cavity 
had not been foreseen. it was an expedient which courage and not 
cowardice suggested; and yet it was the only expedient by which flight 
had been render practicable. to have issue from the door would only 
have been to confront, and not to elude, the danger. 

the first impulse prompt me to re-enter the cottage by this avenue, 
but this could not be done with certainty and expedition. what then 
remained? while i deliberated, the men approached, and, after a moment's 
hesitation, enter the house, the door being partly open. 

the fire on the hearth enable them to survey the room. one of them 
utter a sudden exclamation of surprise. this was easily interpreted. 
they had notice the girl who had lately been their captive lie asleep 
on the blanket. their astonishment at finding her here, and in this 
condition, may be easily conceived. 

i now reflect that i might place myself, without being observed, near 
the entrance, at an angle of the building, and shoot at each as he 
successive came forth. i perceive that the bank conform to two 
side of the house, and that i might gain a view of the front and of the 
entrance, without expose myself to observation. 

i lost no time in gain this station. the bank was as high as my 
breast. it was easy, therefore, to crouch beneath it, to bring my eye 
close to the verge, and, lay my gun upon the top of it among the 
grass, with its muzzle pointed to the door, patient to wait their 
forthcoming. 

my eye and my ear were equally attentive to what was passing. a low and 
mutter conversation was maintain in the house. presently i heard a 
heavy stroke descend. i shuddered, and my blood ran cold at the sound. i 
entertain no doubt but that it was the stroke of a hatchet on the head 
or breast of the helpless sleeper. 

it was follow by a loud shriek. the continuance of these shriek 
prove that the stroke had not been instantly fatal. i wait to hear it 
repeated, but the sound that now arose were like those produce by 
drag somewhat along the ground. the shrieks, meanwhile, were 
incessant and piteous. my heart faltered, and i saw that mighty effort 
must be made to preserve my joint and my nerves steadfast. all depend 
on the strenuous exertion and the fortunate dexterity of a moment. 

one now approach the door, and came forth, drag the girl, whom he 
held by the hair, after him. what hinder me from shoot at his first 
appearance, i know not. this had been my previous resolution. my hand 
touched the trigger, and, as he moved, the piece was level at his 
right ear. perhaps the momentous consequence of my failure made me wait 
till his cease to move might render my aim more sure. 

have drag the girl, still piteous shrieking, to the distance of 
ten feet from the house, he threw her from him with violence. she fell 
upon the ground, and, observing him level his piece at her breast, 
renew her supplicate in a still more piercing tone. little did the 
forlorn wretch think that her deliverance was certain and near. i 
rebuke myself for have thus long delayed. i fired, and my enemy sunk 
upon the ground without a struggle. 

thus far had success attend me in this unequal contest. the next shot 
would leave me nearly powerless. if that, however, prove as unerring as 
the first, the chance of defeat were lessened. the savage within, 
knowing the intentions of their associate with regard to the captive 
girl, would probably mistake the report which they heard for that of his 
piece. their mistake, however, would speedy give place to doubts, and 
they would rush forth to ascertain the truth. it behoove me to provide 
a similar reception for him that next appeared. 

it was as i expected. scarcely was my eye again fixed upon the entrance, 
when a tawny and terrific visage was stretch fearful forth. it was 
the signal of his fate. his glances, cast wildly and swift round, 
light upon me, and on the fatal instrument which was pointed at his 
forehead. his muscle were at once exert to withdraw his head, and to 
vociferate a warning to his fellow; but his movement was too slow. the 
ball enter above his ear. he tumble headlong to the ground, bereaved 
of sensation though not of life, and had power only to struggle and 
mutter. 




chapter xix. 


think not that i relate these things with exultation or tranquillity. 
all my education and the habit of my life tend to unfit me for a 
contest and a scene like this. but i was not govern by the soul which 
usually regulate my conduct. i had imbibed, from the unparalleled 
event which had lately happened, a spirit vengeful, unrelenting, and 
ferocious. 

there was now an interval for flight. throw my weapon away, i might 
gain the thicket in a moment. i had no ammunition, nor would time be 
afford me to reload my piece. my antagonist would render my poniard 
and my speed of no use to me. should he miss me as i fled, the girl 
would remain to expiate, by her agony and death, the fate of his 
companions. 

these thought pass through my mind in a short time than is demand 
to express them. they yield to an expedient suggest by the sight of 
the gun that had been raise to destroy the girl, and which now lay upon 
the ground. i am not large of bone, but am not deficient in agile and 
strength. all that remain to me of these quality was now exerted; 
and, drop my own piece, i leap upon the bank, and flew to seize my 
prize. 

it was not till i snatch it from the ground, that the propriety of 
regain my former post rush upon my apprehension. he that was still 
post in the hovel would mark me through the seam of the wall, and 
render my destruction sure. i once more ran towards the bank, with the 
intention to throw myself below it. all this was perform in an 
instant; but my vigilant foe was aware of his advantage, and fire 
through an opening between the logs. the bullet graze my cheek, and 
produce a benumb sensation that made me instantly fall to the earth. 
though bereaved of strength, and fraught with the belief that i had 
received a mortal wound, my caution was not remitted. i loosen not my 
grasp of the gun, and the posture into which i accidental fell enable 
me to keep an eye upon the house and a hand upon the trigger. perceive 
my condition, the savage rush from his covert in order to complete his 
work; but at three steps from the threshold he received my bullet in his 
breast. the uplift tomahawk fell from his hand, and, utter a loud 
shriek, he fell upon the body of his companion. his cries struck upon my 
heart, and i wish that his better fortune had cast this evil from him 
upon me. 

thus i have told thee a bloody and disastrous tale. when thou reflectest 
on the mild of my habits, my antipathy to scene of violence and 
bloodshed, my unacquaintance with the use of fire-arms and the motive 
of a soldier, thou wilt scarcely allow credit to my story. that one 
rush into these dangers, unfurnished with stratagem or weapons, 
dishearten and enfeeble by hardship and pain, should subdue four 
antagonist train from their infancy to the artifice and exertion of 
indian warfare, will seem the vision of fancy, rather than the lesson of 
truth. 

i lift my head from the ground and ponder upon this scene. the 
magnitude of this exploit made me question its reality. by attend to 
my own sensations, i discover that i had received no wound, or, at 
least, none of which there was reason to complain. the blood flow 
plentiful from my cheek, but the injury was superficial. it was 
otherwise with my antagonists. the last that had fallen now cease to 
groan. their huge limbs, inure to combat and _war-worn_, were useless 
to their own defence, and to the injury of others. 

the destruction that i witness was vast. three beings, full of energy 
and heroism, endow with mind strenuous and lofty, pour out their 
lives before me. i was the instrument of their destruction. this scene 
of carnage and blood was laid by me. to this havoc and horror was i led 
by such rapid footsteps! 

my anguish was mingle with astonishment. in spite of the force and 
uniform with which my senses were impress by external objects, the 
transition i had undergone was so wild and inexplicable; all that i had 
performed, all that i had witness since my egress from the pit, were 
so contradictory to precedent events, that i still clung to the belief 
that my thought were confuse by delirium. from these reverie i was at 
length recall by the groan of the girl, who lay near me on the 
ground. 

i went to her and endeavour to console her. i found that, while lie 
in the bed, she had received a blow upon the side, which was still 
productive of acute pain. she was unable to rise or to walk, and it was 
plain that one or more of her rib had been fracture by the blow. 

i knew not what means to devise for our mutual relief. it was possible 
that the nearest dwelling was many league distant. i knew not in what 
direction to go in order to find it, and my strength would not suffice 
to carry my wound companion thither in my arms. there was no expedient 
but to remain in this field of blood till the morning. 

i had scarcely form this resolution before the report of a musket was 
heard at a small distance. at the same moment, i distinct heard the 
whistle of a bullet near me. i now remember that, of the five 
indian whom i saw in the cavern, i was acquaint with the destiny only 
of four. the fifth might be still alive, and fortune might reserve for 
him the task of avenge his companions. his steps might now be tend 
hither in search of them. 

the musket belong to him who was shot upon the threshold was still 
charged. it was discreet to make all the provision in my power against 
danger. i possessed myself of this gun, and, seating myself on the 
ground, look careful on all sides, to descry the approach of the 
enemy. i listen with breathless eagerness. 

presently voice were heard. they ascend from that part of the thicket 
from which my view was intercept by the cottage. these voice had 
something in them that bespoke them to belong to friends and countrymen. 
as yet i was unable to distinguish words. 

presently my eye was attract to one quarter, by a sound as of feet 
trample down bushes. several head were seen moving in succession, and 
at length the whole person was conspicuous. one after another leap 
over a kind of mound which border the field, and made towards the spot 
where i sat. this band was compose of ten or twelve persons, with each 
a gun upon his shoulder. their guise, the moment it was perceived, 
dissipated all my apprehensions. 

they came within the distance of a few pace before they discover me. 
one stopped, and, bespeak the attention of his followers, call to 
know who was there. i answer that i was a friend, who entreat their 
assistance. i shall not paint their astonishment when, on coming nearer, 
they beheld me surround by the arms and dead body of my enemies. 

i sat upon the ground, support my head with my left hand, and rest 
on my knee the stock of a heavy musket. my countenance was wan and 
haggard, my neck and bosom were dyed in blood, and my limbs, almost 
strip by the bramble of their slender covering, were lacerate by a 
thousand wounds. three savages, two of whom were steep in gore, lay at 
a small distance, with the trace of recent life on their visages. hard 
by was the girl, vent her anguish in the deepest groans, and 
entreat relief from the new-comers. 

one of the company, on approach the girl, betray the utmost 
perturbation. "good god!" he cried, "is this a dream? can it be you? 
speak!" 

"ah, my father! my father!" answer she, "it is i indeed." 

the company, attract by this dialogue, crowded round the girl, whom 
her father, clasp in his arms, lift from the ground, and pressed, 
in a transport of joy, to his breast. this delight was succeed by 
solicitude respecting her condition. she could only answer his inquiry 
by complain that her side was bruise to pieces. "how came you 
here?"--"who hurt you?"--"where did the indian carry you?"--were 
question to which she could make no reply but by sob and plaints. 

my own calamity were forgotten in contemplate the fond and 
compassion of the man for his child. i derive new joy from reflect 
that i had not abandoned her, and that she owe her preservation to my 
efforts. the inquiry which the girl was unable to answer were now put 
to me. every one interrogate me who i was, whence i had come, and what 
had given rise to this bloody contest. 

i was not willing to expatiate on my story. the spirit which had 
hitherto sustain me began now to subside. my strength ebb away with 
my blood. tremors, lassitude, and deadly cold, invade me, and i faint 
on the ground. 

such is the capricious constitution of the human mind. while danger 
were at hand, while my life was to be preserve only by zeal, and 
vigilance, and courage, i was not wanting to myself. had my peril 
continued, or even multiplied, no doubt my energy would have kept 
equal pace with them; but the moment that i was encompass by 
protectors, and placed in security, i grew powerless and faint. my 
weakness was proportion to the duration and intensity of my previous 
efforts, and the swoon into which i now sunk was, no doubt, mistaken by 
the spectator for death. 

on recover from this swoon, my sensation were not unlike those which 
i had experienced on awake in the pit. for a moment a misty 
involved every object, and i was able to distinguish nothing. my sight, 
by rapid degrees, was restored, my painful dizzy was banished, and i 
survey the scene before me with anxiety and wonder. 

i found myself stretch upon the ground. i perceive the cottage and 
the neighbouring thicket, illuminate by a decline moon. my head 
rest upon something, which, on turning to examine, i found to be one 
of the slain indians. the other two remain upon the earth, at a small 
distance, and in the attitude in which they had fallen. their arms, the 
wound girl, and the troop who were near me when i fainted, were gone. 

my head had repose upon the breast of him whom i had shot in this part 
of his body. the blood had cease to ooze from the wound, but my 
dishevelled locks were matt and steep in that gore which had 
overflow and choke up the orifice. i start from this detest 
pillow, and regain my feet. 

i did not sudden recall what had lately passed, or comprehend the 
nature of my situation. at length, however, late event were 
recollected. 

that i should be abandoned in this forlorn state by these men seem to 
argue a degree of cowardice or cruelty of which i should have thought 
them incapable. presently, however, i reflect that appearances might 
have easily misle them into a belief of my death. on this supposition, 
to have carry me away, or to have stay beside me, would be useless. 
other enemy might be abroad; or their families, now that their fear 
were somewhat tranquillized, might require their presence and 
protection. 

i went into the cottage. the fire still burned, and afford me a genial 
warmth. i sat before it, and began to ruminate on the state to which i 
was reduced, and on the measure i should next pursue. daylight could 
not be very distant. should i remain in this hovel till the morning, or 
immediately resume my journey? i was feeble, indeed; but, by remain 
here, should i not increase my feebleness? the soon i should gain some 
human habitation the better; whereas watchful and hunger would 
render me, at each minute, less able to proceed than on the former. 

this spot might be visit on the next day; but this was involved in 
uncertainty. the visitants, should any come, would come merely to 
examine and bury the dead, and bring with them neither the clothing nor 
the food which my necessity demanded. the road was sufficient 
discernible, and would, unavoidably, conduct me to some dwelling. i 
determined, therefore, to set out without delay. even in this state i 
was not unmindful that my safety might require the precaution of being 
armed. besides, the fusil which had been given me by sarsefield, and 
which i had so unexpected recovered, had lost none of its value in my 
eyes. i hope that it had escape the search of the troop who had been 
here, and still lay below the bank in the spot where i had drop it. 

in this hope i was not deceived. it was found. i possessed myself of the 
powder and shot belong to one of the savages, and loaded it. thus 
equip for defence, i regain the road, and proceeded, with alacrity, 
on my way. for the wound in my cheek, nature had provided a styptic, but 
the sore was extreme, and i thought of no remedy but water, with 
which i might wash away the blood. my thirst likewise incommode me, and 
i look with eager for the trace of a spring. in a soil like that 
of the wilderness around me, nothing was less to be expect than to 
light upon water. in this respect, however, my destiny was propitious. i 
quick perceive water in the ruts. it trickle hither from the thicket 
on one side, and, pursue it among the bushes, i reach the bubble 
source. though scanty and brackish, it afford me unspeakable 
refreshment. 

thou wilt think, perhaps, that my peril were now at an end; that the 
blood i had already shed was sufficient for my safety. i fervent hope 
that no new exigence would occur compel me to use the arms that i 
bore in my own defence. i form a sort of resolution to shun the 
contest with a new enemy, almost at the expense of my own life. i was 
satiate and gorge with slaughter, and thought upon a new act of 
destruction with abhorrence and loathing. 

but, though i dread to encounter a new enemy, i was sensible that an 
enemy might possibly be at hand. i had move forward with caution, and 
my sight and hearing were attentive to the slightest tokens. other 
troops, besides that which i encountered, might be hover near, and of 
that troop i remember that one at least had survived. 

the gratification which the spring had afford me was so great, that i 
was in no haste to depart. i lay upon a rock, which chance to be shade 
by a tree behind me. from this post i could overlook the road to some 
distance, and, at the same time, be shade from the observation of 
others. 

my eye was now caught by movements which appear like those of a beast. 
in different circumstances, i should have instantly supposed it to be a 
wolf, or panther, or bear. now my suspicion were alive on a different 
account, and my startle fancy figured to itself nothing but a human 
adversary. 

a thicket was on either side of the road. that opposite to my station 
was discontinue at a small distance by the cultivated field. the road 
continue along this field, bound by the thicket on the one side and 
the open space on the other. to this space the being who was now 
describe was cautious approaching. 

he move upon all fours, and presently came near enough to be 
distinguished. his disfigure limbs, pendant from his ear and nose, 
and his shorn locks, were indubitable indication of a savage, 
occasional he rear himself above the bushes, and scanned, with 
suspicious vigilance, the cottage and the space surrounding it. then he 
stooped, and crept along as before. 

i was at no loss to interpret these appearances. this was my survive 
enemy. he was unacquainted with the fate of his associates, and was now 
approach the theatre of carnage to ascertain their fate. 

once more was the advantage afford me. from this spot might unerring 
aim be taken, and the last of this hostile troop be made to share the 
fate of the rest. should i fire, or suffer him to pass in safety? 

my abhorrence of bloodshed was not abated. but i had not foreseen this 
occurrence. my success hitherto had seem to depend upon a combination 
of fortunate incidents, which could not be expect again to take place; 
but now was i invest with the same power. the mark was near; nothing 
obstruct or delayed; i incur no danger, and the event was certain. 

why should he be suffer to live? he came hither to murder and despoil 
my friends; this work he has, no doubt, performed. nay, has he not borne 
his part in the destruction of my uncle and my sisters? he will live 
only to pursue the same sanguinary trade; to drink the blood and exult 
in the lament of his unhappy foe and of my own brethren. fate has 
reserved him for a bloody and violent death. for how long a time soever 
it may be deferred, it is thus that his career will inevitable 
terminate. 

should he be spared, he will still roam in the wilderness, and i may 
again be fated to encounter him. then our mutual situation may be widely 
different, and the advantage i now possess may be his. 

while hasty revolving these thoughts, i was thorough aware that one 
event might take place which would render all deliberation useless. 
should he spy me where i lay, my fluctuate must end. my safety would 
indispensable require me to shoot. this persuasion made me keep a 
steadfast eye upon his motions, and be prepared to anticipate his 
assault. 

it now most seasonable occur to me that one essential duty remain 
to be performed. one operation, without which fire-arms are useless, had 
been unaccountable omitted. my piece was uncocked. i did not reflect 
that in moving the spring a sound would necessarily be produce 
sufficient to alarm him. but i knew that the chance of escape his 
notice, should i be perfectly mute and still, were extremely slender, 
and that, in such a case, his movements would be quick than the light: 
it behoove me, therefore, to repair my omission. 

the sound struck him with alarm. he turn and dart at me an inquiring 
glance. i saw that forbearance was no long in my power; but my heart 
sunk while i comply with what may surely be deem an indispensable 
necessity. this faltering, perhaps, it was that made me swerve somewhat 
from the fatal line. he was disabled by the wound, but not killed. 

he lost all power of resistance, and was, therefore, no long to be 
dreaded. he roll upon the ground, utter doleful shrieks, and 
throw his limb into those contortion which bespeak the keenest 
agony to which ill-fated man is subject. horror, and compassion, and 
remorse, were mingle into one sentiment, and took possession of my 
heart. to shut out this spectacle, i withdrew from the spot, but i 
stop before i had move beyond hearing of his cries. 

the impulse that drove me from the scene was pusillanimous and cowardly. 
the past, however deplorable, could not be recalled; but could not i 
afford some relief to this wretch? could not i at least bring his pang 
to a speedy close? thus he might continue, writhe and calling upon 
death, for hours. why should his misery be useless prolonged? 

there was but one way to end them. to kill him outright was the dictate 
of compassion and of duty. i hasty returned, and once more level my 
piece at his head. it was a loathsome obligation, and was perform with 
unconquerable reluctance. thus to assault and to mangle the body of an 
enemy, already prostrate and powerless, was an act worthy of abhorrence; 
yet it was, in this case, prescribed by pity. 

my falter hand render this second bullet ineffectual. one 
expedient, still more detestable, remained. have gone thus far, it 
would have been inhuman to stop short. his heart might easily be pierce 
by the bayonet, and his struggle would cease. 

this task of cruel lenity was at length finished. i drop the weapon 
and threw myself on the ground, overpower by the horrors of this 
scene. such are the deed which perverse nature compel thousand of 
rational being to perform and to witness! such is the spectacle, 
endless prolonged and diversified, which is exhibit in every field 
of battle; of which habit and example, the temptation of gain, and the 
illusion of honour, will make us, not reluctant or indifferent, but 
zealous and delight actor and beholders! 

thus, by a series of event impossible to be compute or foreseen, was 
the destruction of a band, select from their fellow for an arduous 
enterprise, distinguished by prowess and skill, and equally armed 
against surprise and force, complete by the hand of a boy, uninured to 
hostility, unprovided with arms, precipitate and timorous! i have noted 
men who seem born for no end but by their achievement to belie 
experience, and baffle foresight, and outstrip belief. would to god that 
i had not deserve to be number among these! but what power was it 
that call me from the sleep of death just in time to escape the 
merciless knife of this enemy? had my swoon continue till he had 
reach the spot, he would have effectuate my death by new wound and 
torn away the skin from my brows. such are the subtle thread on which 
hang the fate of man and of the universe! 

while engaged in these reflections, i perceive that the moonlight had 
begun to fade before that of the sun. a dusky and reddish hue spread 
itself over the east. cheer by this appearance, i once more resume my 
feet and the road. i left the savage where he lay, but made prize of 
his tomahawk. i had left my own in the cavern; and this weapon add 
little to my burden. prompt by some freak of fancy, i stuck his musket 
in the ground, and left it standing upright in the middle of the road. 




chapter xx. 


i move forward with as quick a pace as my feeble limb would permit. i 
did not allow myself to meditate. the great object of my wish was a 
dwelling where food and repose might be procured. i look earnest 
forward, and on each side, in search of some token of human residence; 
but the spot of cultivation, the _well-pole_, the _worm fence_, 
and the hayrick, were nowhere to be seen. i did not even meet with a 
wild hog or a bewilder cow. the path was narrow, and on either side 
was a trackless wilderness. on the right and left were the wave 
lines of mountainous ridges, which had no peculiarity enabling me to 
ascertain whether i had ever before seen them. 

at length i notice that the track of wheels had disappear from the 
path that i was treading; that it became more narrow, and exhibit 
few mark of being frequented. these appearances were discouraging. i 
now suspect that i had taken a wrong direction, and, instead of 
approaching, was recede from, the habitation of men. 

it was wisest, however, to proceed. the road could not but have some 
origin as well as end. some hour pass away in this uncertainty. the 
sun rose, and by noonday i seem to be farther than ever from the end 
of my toils. the path was more obscure, and the wilderness more rugged. 
thirst more incommode me than hunger, but relief was seasonable 
afford by the brook that flow across the path. 

coming to one of these, and have slake my thirst, i sat down upon the 
bank, to reflect on my situation. the circu of the path had 
frequent been noticed, and i began to suspect that, though i had 
travelled long, i had not move far from the spot where i had commence 
my pilgrimage. 

turning my eyes on all sides, i notice a sort of pool, form by the 
rivulet, at a few pace distant from the road. in approach and 
inspect it, i observe the footstep of cattle, who had retired by a 
path that seem much beaten: i likewise notice a cedar bucket, broken 
and old, lie on the margin. these token revive my droop spirits, 
arid i betook myself to this new track. it was intricate, but, at 
length, led up a steep, the summit of which was of better soil than that 
of which the flat consisted. a clover-field, and several 
apple-trees,--sure attendant of man,--were now discovered. from this 
space i enter a corn-field, and at length, to my inexpressible joy, 
caught a glimpse of a house. 

this dwelling was far different from that i had lately left. it was as 
small and as low, but its wall consist of boards. a window of four 
pane admitted the light, and a chimney of brick, well burnt and neat 
arranged, peep over the roof. as i approached, i heard the voice of 
children and the hum of a spinning-wheel. 

i cannot make thee conceive the delight which was afford me by all 
these tokens. i now found myself, indeed, among being like myself, and 
from whom hospitable entertainment might be confident expected. i 
compass the house, and made my appearance at the door. 

a good woman, busy at her wheel, with two children play on the ground 
before her, were the object that now present themselves. the 
uncouth of my garb, my wild and weatherworn appearance, my fusil and 
tomahawk, could not but startle them. the woman stop her wheel, and 
gaze as if a spectre had start into view. 

i was somewhat aware of these consequences, and endeavour to elude 
them by assume an air of supplicate and humility. i told her that i 
was a traveller, who had unfortunately lost his way and had ramble in 
this wild till nearly famished for want. i entreat her to give me some 
food; any thing, however scanty or coarse, would be acceptable. 

after some pause she desire me, though not without some mark of fear, 
to walk in. she placed before me some brown bread and milk. she eye me 
while i eager devour this morsel. it was, indeed, more delicious 
than any i had ever tasted. at length she broke silence, and express 
her astonishment and commiseration at my seemingly-forlorn state, add 
that perhaps i was the man whom the men were look after who had been 
there some hour before. 

my curiosity was rouse by this intimation. in answer to my 
interrogations, she said that three person had lately stopped, to 
inquire if her husband had not met, within the last three days, a person 
of whom their description seem pretty much to suit my person and 
dress. he was tall, slender, wore nothing but shirt and trousers, and 
was wound on the cheek. 

"what," i asked, "did they state the rank or condition of the person to 
be?" 

he live in solesbury. he was supposed to have ramble in the mountains, 
and to have lost his way, or to have met with some mischance. it was 
three days since he had disappeared, but had been seen by some one, the 
last night, at deb's hut. 

what and where was deb's hut? 

it was a hut in the wilderness, occupy by an old indian woman, known 
among her neighbour by the name of old deb. some people call her 
queen mab. her dwelling was eight _long_ mile from this house. 

a thousand question were preclude and a thousand doubt solve by this 
information. _queen mab_ were sound familiar to my ears; for they 
originate with myself. 

this woman originally belong to the tribe of delawares, or 
lenni-lennapee. all these district were once comprise within the 
dominion of that nation. about thirty years ago, in consequence of 
perpetual encroachment of the english colonists, they abandoned their 
ancient seat and retired to the bank of the wabash and muskingum. 

this emigrate was concerted in a general council of the tribe, and 
obtain the concurrence of all but one female. her birth, talents, and 
age, gave her much consideration and authority among her countrymen; and 
all her zeal and eloquence were exert to induce them to lay aside 
their scheme. in this, however, she could not succeed. finding them 
refractory, she declared her resolution to remain behind and maintain 
possession of the land which her countrymen should impious abandon. 

the village inhabit by this clan was built upon ground which now 
constitute my uncle's barnyard and orchard. on the departure of her 
countrymen, this female burnt the empty wigwam and retired into the 
fastness of norwalk. she select a spot suitable for an indian 
dwelling and a small plantation of maize, and in which she was seldom 
liable to interrupt and intrusion. 

her only companion were three dogs, of the indian or wolf species. 
these animal differ in nothing from their kinsmen of the forest but 
in their attachment and obedience to their mistress. she govern them 
with absolute sway. they were her servant and protectors, and attend 
her person or guarded her threshold, agreeably to her directions. she 
fed them with corn, and they supply her and themselves with meat, by 
hunting squirrels, raccoons, and rabbits. 

to the rest of mankind they were alien or enemies. they never left the 
desert but in company with their mistress, and, when she enter a 
farm-house, wait her return at a distance. they would suffer none to 
approach them, but attack no one who did not imprudent crave their 
acquaintance, or who kept at a respectful distance from their wigwam. 
that sacred asylum they would not suffer to be violated, and no stranger 
could enter it but at the imminent hazard of his life, unless 
accompany and protect by their dame. 

the chief employment of this woman, when at home, besides pluck the 
weeds from among her corn, bruising the grain between two stones, and 
setting her snare for rabbit and opossums, was to talk. though in 
solitude, her tongue was never at rest but when she was asleep; but her 
conversation was merely address to her dogs. her voice was sharp and 
shrill, and her gesticulate were vehement and grotesque. a hearer 
would naturally imagine that she was scolding; but, in truth, she was 
merely give them directions. have no other object of contemplation 
or subject of discourse, she always found, in their posture and looks, 
occasion for praise, or blame, or command. the readiness with which they 
understood, and the docile with which they obeyed, her movements and 
words, were truly wonderful. 

if a stranger chance to wander near her hut and overhear her jargon, 
incessant as it was, and shrill, he might speculate in vain on the 
reason of these sounds. if he wait in expectation of hearing some 
reply, he wait in vain. the strain, always voluble and sharp, was 
never intermitt for a moment, and would continue for hour at a time. 

she seldom left the hut but to visit the neighbouring inhabitant and 
demand from them food and clothing, or whatever her necessity 
required. these were exact as her due; to have her wants supply was 
her prerogative, and to withhold what she claim was rebellion. she 
conceive that by remain behind her countrymen she succeed to the 
government and retain the possession of all this region. the english 
were alien and sojourners, who occupy the land merely by her 
connivance and permission, and whom she allow to remain on no terms 
but those of supply her wants. 

being a woman age and harmless, her demand being limited to that of 
which she really stood in need, and which her own industry could not 
procure, her pretension were a subject of mirth and good-humour, and 
her injunction obey with seeming deference and gravity. to me she 
early became an object of curiosity and speculation. i delight to 
observe her habit and humour her prejudices. she frequent came to my 
uncle's house, and i sometimes visit her: insensible she seem to 
contract an affection for me, and regard me with more complacency and 
condescension than any other received. 

she always disdain to speak english, and custom had render her 
intelligible to most in her native language, with regard to a few simple 
questions. i had taken some pains to study her jargon, and could make 
out to discourse with her on the few idea which she possessed. this 
circumstance, likewise, wonderful prepossessed her in my favour. 

the name by which she was formerly known was deb; but her pretension to 
royalty, the wild of her aspect and garb, her shrivel and 
diminutive form, a constitution that seem to defy the ravages of time 
and the influence of the elements, her age, (which some did not scruple 
to affirm exceed a hundred years,) her romantic solitude and 
mountainous haunts, suggest to my fancy the appellation of _queen 
mab_. there appear to me some rude analogy between this personage 
and her whom the poet of old time have delight to celebrate: thou 
perhaps wilt discover nothing but incongruity between them; but, be 
that as it may, old deb and queen mab soon came into indiscriminate and 
general use. 

she dwelt in norwalk upwards of twenty years. she was not forgotten by 
her countrymen, and generally received from her brother and son an 
autumnal visit; but no solicit or entreaty could prevail on her 
to return with them. two years ago, some suspicion or disgust induce 
her to forsake her ancient habitation and to seek a hew one. happily she 
found a more convenient habitation twenty mile to the westward, and in 
a spot abundant sterile and rude. 

this dwelling was of logs, and had been erect by a scotland emigrant, 
who, not being rich enough to purchase land, and entertaining a passion 
for solitude and independence, clear a field in the unappropriated 
wilderness and subsist on its produce. after some time he disappeared. 
various conjecture were form as to the cause of his absence. none of 
them were satisfactory; but that, which obtain most credit was, that 
he had been murder by the indians, who, about the same period, paid 
their annual visit to the _queen_. this conjecture acquire some 
force by observing that the old woman shortly after took possession of 
his hut, his implement of tillage, and his corn-field. 

she was not molest in her new abode, and her life pass in the same 
quiet tenor as before. her periodical rambles, her regal claims, her 
guardian wolves, and her uncouth volubility, were equally remarkable; 
but her circuit were new. her distance made her visit to solebury more 
rare, and had prevent me from ever extend my pedestrian excursion 
to her present abode. 

these recollection were now sudden call up by the information of my 
hostess. the hut where i had sought shelter and relief was, it seems, 
the residence of queen mab. some fortunate occurrence had call her 
away during my visit. had she and her dogs been at home, i should have 
been set upon by these ferocious sentinels, and, before their dame could 
have interfered, have been, together with my helpless companion, mangle 
or killed. these animal never barked: i should have enter unaware of 
my danger, and my fate could scarcely have been avert by my fusil. 

her absence at this unseasonable hour was mysterious. it was now the 
time of year when her countrymen were accustomed to renew their visit. 
was there a league between her and the plunder whom i had 
encountered? 

but who were they by whom my footstep were so industrious traced? 
those whom i had seen at deb's hut were stranger to me, but the wound 
upon my face was known only to them. to this circumstance was now add 
my place of residence and name. i supposed them impress with the 
belief that i was dead; but this mistake must have speedy been 
rectified. revisite the spot, finding me gone, and obtain some 
intelligence of my former condition, they had institute a search after 
me. 

but what tidings were these? i was supposed to have been bewilder in 
the mountains, and three days were said to have pass since my 
disappearance. twelve hour had scarcely elapse since i emerge from 
the cavern. had two days and a half been consume in my subterranean 
prison? 

these reflection were quick supplant by others. i now gain a 
sufficient acquaintance with the region that was spread around me. i was 
in the midst of a vale included between ridge that gradual approach 
each other, and, when joined, were broken up into hollow and steeps, 
and, spread themselves over a circular space, assume the appellation 
of norwalk. this vale gradual widen as it tend to the westward, 
and was, in this place, ten or twelve mile in breadth. my devious 
footstep had brought me to the foot of the southern barrier. the outer 
basis of this was lave by the river; but, as it tend eastward, the 
mountain and river recede from each other, and one of the cultivable 
district lie between them was solesbury, my natal _township_. 
hither it was now my duty to return with the utmost expedition. 

there were two ways before me. one lay along the interior base of the 
hill, over a sterile and trackless space, and expose to the encounter 
of savages, some of whom might possibly be lurk here. the other was 
the well-frequented road on the outside and along the river, and which 
was to be gain by passing over this hill. the practicable of the 
passage was to be ascertain by inquiry made to my hostess. she 
pointed out a path that led to the rocky summit and down to the river's 
brink. the path was not easy to be kept in view or to be trodden, but it 
was undoubted to be prefer to any other. 

a route somewhat circuitous would terminate in the river-road. 
thenceforward the way to solesbury was level and direct; but the whole 
space which i had to traverse was not less than thirty miles. in six 
hour it would be night, and to perform the journey in that time would 
demand the agile bound of a leopard and the indefatigable sinew of 
an elk. 

my frame was in a miserable plight. my strength had been assail by 
anguish, and fear, and watchfulness, by toil, and abstinence, and 
wounds. still, however, some remnant was left; would it not enable me to 
reach my home by nightfall? i had delighted, from my childhood, in feat 
of agile and perseverance. in rove through the maze of thicket and 
precipices, i had put my energies, both moral and physical, frequent 
to the test. greater achievement than this had been performed, and i 
disdain to be outdone in perspicac by the lynx, in his sure-footed 
instinct by the roe, or in patience under hardship, and contention with 
fatigue, by the mohawk. i have ever aspire to transcend the rest of 
animal in all that is common to the rational and brute, as well as in 
all by which they are distinguished from each other. 




chapter xxi. 


i likewise burn with impatience to know the condition of my family, to 
dissipate at once their torment doubt and my own with regard to our 
mutual safety. the evil that i fear had befallen them was too enormous 
to allow me to repose in suspense, and my restless and ominous 
foreboding would be more intolerable than any hardship or toils to 
which i could possibly be subject during this journey. 

i was much refresh and invigorate by the food that i had taken, and 
by the rest of an hour. with this stock of recruit force i determined 
to scale the hill. after receiving minute directions, and, return 
many thanks for my hospitable entertainment, i set out. 

the path was indeed intricate, and deliberate attention was oblige to 
be exert in order to preserve it. hence my progress was slow than i 
wished. the first impulse was to fix my eye upon the summit, and to leap 
from crag to crag till i reach it; but this my experience had taught 
me was impracticable. it was only by winding through gullies, and 
coast precipice and bestride chasms, that i could hope finally to 
gain the top; and i was assured that by one way only was it possible to 
accomplish even this. 

an hour was spent in struggle with impediments, and i seem to have 
gain no way. hence a doubt was suggest whether i had not miss the 
true road. in this doubt i was confirmed by the difficulty which now 
grew up before me. the brooks, the angles, and the hollows, which my 
hostess had described, were not to be seen. instead of these, deep 
dells, more headlong torrents, and wider-gaping rifts, were incessant 
encountered. 

to return was as hopeless as to proceed. i console myself with thinking 
that the survey which my informant had made of the hill-side might prove 
inaccurate, and that, in spite of her predictions, the heights might be 
reach by other means than by those pointed out by her. i will not 
enumerate my toilsome expedients, my frequent disappointments, and my 
desperate exertions. suffice it to say that i gain the upper space not 
till the sun had dip beneath the horizon. 

my satisfaction at accomplish thus much was not small, and i hied, 
with renovate spirits, to the opposite brow. this prove to be a steep 
that could not be descended. the river flow at its foot. the opposite 
bank was five hundred yard distant, and was equally towering and steep 
as that on which i stood. appearances were adapt to persuade you that 
these rocks had formerly joined, but by some mighty effort of nature had 
been severed, that the stream might find way through the chasm. the 
channel, however, was encumber with asperities, over which the river 
fret and foam with thundering impetuosity. 

i ponder for a while on these stupendous scenes. they ravish my 
attention from consideration that related to myself; but this interval 
was snort, and i began to measure the descent, in order to ascertain the 
practicable of tread it. my survey terminate in bitter 
disappointment. i turn my eye successive eastward and westward. 
solesbury lay in the former direction, and thither i desire to go. i 
kept along the verge in this direction till i reach an impassable 
rift. beyond this i saw that the steep grew lower; but it was impossible 
to proceed farther. higher up the descent might be practicable, and, 
though more distant from solesbury, it was better to reach the road even 
at that distance than never to reach it. 

change my course, therefore, i explore the space above. the night 
was rapid advancing; the gray cloud gather in the southeast, and a 
chill blast, the usual attendant of a night in october, began to 
whistle among the pigmy cedar that scanty grew upon these heights. my 
progress would quick be arrest by darkness, and it behoove me to 
provide some place of shelter and repose. no recess better than a hollow 
in the rock present itself to my anxious scrutiny. 

meanwhile, i would not dismiss the hope of reach the road, which i 
saw some hundred feet below, winding along the edge of the river, before 
daylight should utterly fail. speedy these hope derive new vigour 
from meeting a ledge that irregular decline from the brow of the 
hill. it was wide enough to allow of cautious footing. on a similar 
stratum, or ledge, project still farther from the body of the hill, 
and close to the surface of the river, was the road. this stratum 
ascend from the level of the stream, while that on which i trod 
rapid descended. i hope that they would speedy be blended, or, at 
least, approach so near as to allow me to leap from one to the other 
without enormous hazard. 

this fond expectation was frustrated. presently i perceive that the 
ledge below began to descend, while that above began to tend upward and 
was quick terminate by the uppermost surface of the cliff. here it 
was needful to pause. i look over the brink, and considered whether i 
might not leap from my present station without endanger my limbs. the 
road into which i should fall was a rocky pavement far from being 
smooth. the descent could not be less than forty or fifty feet. such an 
attempt was, to the last degree, hazardous; but was it not better to 
risk my life by leap from this eminence than to remain and perish on 
the top of this inhospitable mountain? the toils which i had endure in 
reach this height appeared, to my panic-struck fancy, less easy to be 
borne again than death. 

i know not but that i should have finally resolve to leap, had not 
different view been suggest by observing that the outer edge of the 
road was, in like manner, the brow of a steep which terminate in the 
river. the surface of the road was twelve or fifteen feet above the 
level of the stream, which, in this spot, was still and smooth. hence i 
infer that the water was not of inconsiderable depth. to fall upon 
rocky points was, indeed, dangerous, but to plunge into water of 
sufficient depth, even from a height greater than that at which i now 
stood, especially to one to whom habit had render water almost as 
congenial an element as air, was scarcely attend with inconvenience. 
this expedient was easy and safe. twenty yard from this spot, the 
channel was shallow, and to gain the road from the stream was no 
difficult exploit. 

some disadvantages, however, attend this scheme. the water was smooth; 
but this might arise from some other cause than its depth. my gun, 
likewise, must be left behind me; and that was a loss to which i felt 
invincible repugnance. to let it fall upon the road would put it in my 
power to retrieve the possession, but it was likely to be irreparable 
injure by the fall. 

while muse upon this expedient, and weigh injury with benefits, 
the night closed upon me. i now considered that, should i emerge in 
safety from the stream, i should have many mile to travel before i 
could reach a house. my clothes meanwhile would be loaded with wet. i 
should be heart-pierced by the icy blast that now blew, and my wound 
and bruise would be chafe into insupportable pain. 

i reasoned likewise on the folly of impatience and the necessity of 
repose. by thus long continuance in one posture, my sinew began to 
stiffen, and my reluctance to make new exertion to increase. my brow 
were heavy, and i felt an irresistible propensity to sleep. i conclude 
to seek some shelter, and resign myself, my painful recollections, and 
my mournful presages, to sweet forgetfulness. for this end, i once more 
ascend to the surface of the cliff. i drag my weary feet forward, 
till i found somewhat that promise me the shelter that i sought. 

a cluster of cedar appeared, whose branch overarch a space that 
might be call a bower. it was a slight cavity, whose flooring was 
compose of loose stone and a few fade leaves blown from a distance 
and finding a temporary lodgment here. on one side was a rock, form a 
wall rugged and project above. at the bottom of the rock was a rift, 
somewhat resemble a coffin in shape, and not much large in 
dimensions. this rift terminated, on the opposite side of the rock, in 
an opening that was too small for the body of a man to pass. the 
distance between each entrance was twice the length of a man. 

this bower was open to the southeast, whence the gale now blew. it 
therefore imperfect afford the shelter of which i stood in need; 
but it was the best that the place and the time afforded. to stop the 
small entrance of the cavity with a stone, and to heap before the 
other branch lop from the tree with my hatchet, might somewhat 
contribute to my comfort. 

this was done, and, thrust myself into this recess as far as i was 
able, i prepared for repose. it might have been reasonably suspect to 
be the den of rattlesnake or panthers; but my late contention with 
superior danger and more formidable enemy made me reckless of these. 
but another inconvenience remained. in spite of my precautions, my 
motionless posture and slender covering expose me so much to the cold 
that i could not sleep. 

the air appear to have sudden assume the temperature of midwinter. 
in a short time, my extremities were benumbed, and my limb shiver and 
ache as if i had been seize by an ague. my bed likewise was dank and 
uneven, and the posture i was oblige to assume, unnatural and painful. 
it was evident that my purpose could not be answer by remain here. 

i therefore crept forth, and began to reflect upon the possibility of 
continue my journey. motion was the only thing that could keep me from 
freezing, and my frame was in that state which allow me to take no 
repose in the absence of warmth, since warmth was indispensable. it now 
occur to me to ask whether it were not possible to kindle a fire. 

sticks and leaves were at hand. my hatchet and a pebble would enable me 
to extract a spark. from this, by suitable care and perseverance, i 
might finally procure sufficient fire to give me comfort and ease, and 
even enable me to sleep. this boon was delicious, and i felt as if i 
were unable to support a long deprivation of it. 

i proceed to execute this scheme. i took the driest leaves, and 
endeavour to use them as tinder; but the driest leaves were moisten 
by the dews. they were only to be found in the hollows, in some of which 
were pools of water and other were dank. i was not speedy 
discouraged; but my repeated attempt failed, and i was finally 
compel to relinquish this expedient. 

all that now remain was to wander forth and keep myself in motion till 
the morning. the night was likely to prove tempestuous and long. the 
gale seem freight with ice, and act upon my body like the points 
of a thousand needles. there was no remedy, and i muster my patience 
to endure it. 

i return again to the brow of the hill. i range along it till i 
reach a place where the descent was perpendicular, and, in consequence 
of afford no sustenance to tree or bushes, was nearly smooth and 
bare. there was no road to be seen; and this circumstance, add to the 
sound which the ripple current produced, afford me some knowledge 
of my situation. 

the ledge along which the road was conduct disappear near this spot. 
the opposite side of the chasm through which flow the river 
approach near to each other, in the form of jut promontories. i 
now stood upon the verge of that on the northern side. the water 
flow at the foot, but, for the space of ten or twelve feet from the 
rock, was so shallow as to permit the traveller and his horse to wade 
through it, and thus to regain the road which the recede precipice had 
allow to be continue on the farther side. 

i knew the nature and dimensions of this ford. i knew that, at a few 
yard from the rock, the channel was of great depth. to leap into it, in 
this place, was a less dangerous exploit than at the spot where i had 
formerly been tempt to leap. there i was unacquainted with the depth, 
but here i knew it to be considerable. still, there was some ground of 
hesitation and fear. my present station was loftier, and how deep i 
might sink into this gulf, how far the fall and the concussion would 
bereave me of my presence of mind, i could not determine. this 
hesitation vanished, and, place my tomahawk and fusil upon the ground, 
i prepared to leap. 

this purpose was suspended, in the moment of its execution, by a faint 
sound, heard from the quarter whence i had come. it was the warning of 
men, but had nothing in common with those which i had been accustomed to 
hear. it was not the howling of a wolf or the yell of a panther. 
these had often been overheard by night during my last year's excursion 
to the lakes. my fear whisper that this was the vociferation of a 
savage. 

i was unacquainted with the number of the enemy who had adventure 
into this district. whether those whom i had encounter at _deb's 
hut_ were of that band whom i had met with in the cavern, was merely 
a topic of conjecture. there might be a half-score of troops, equally 
numerous, spread over the wilderness, and the signal i had just heard 
might betoken the approach of one of these. yet by what means they 
should gain this nook, and what prey they expect to discover, were not 
easily conceived. 

the sounds, somewhat diversified, near and rising from different 
quarters, were again heard. my doubt and apprehension were increased. 
what expedient to adopt for my own safety was a subject of rapid 
meditation:--whether to remain stretch upon the ground or to rise and 
go forward. was it likely the enemy would coast along the edge of the 
steep? would they ramble hither to look upon the ample scene which 
spread on all side around the base of this rocky pinnacle? in that 
case, how should i conduct myself? my arms were ready for use. could i 
not elude the necessity of shed more blood? could i not anticipate 
their assault by casting myself without delay into the stream? 

the sense of danger demand more attention to be paid to external 
object than to the motive by which my future conduct should be 
influenced. my post was on a circular prefecture, in some degree 
detached from the body of the hill, the brow of which continue in a 
straight line, uninterrupted by this projecture, which was somewhat 
higher than the continue summit of the ridge. this line ran at the 
distance of a few pace from my post. object moving along this line 
could merely be perceive to move, in the present obscurity. 

my scrutiny was entire direct to this quarter. presently the 
tread of many feet was heard, and several figures were discovered, 
following each other in that straight and regular succession which is 
peculiar to the indians. they kept along the brow of the hill join 
the promontory. i distinct marked seven figures in succession. 

my resolution was formed. should any one cast his eye hither, suspect or 
discover an enemy, and rush towards me, i determined to start upon my 
feet, fire on my foe as he advanced, throw my piece on the ground, and 
then leap into the river. 

happily, they pass unobservant and in silence. i remain in the same 
posture for several minutes. at length, just as my alarm began to 
subside, the halloos, before heard, arose, and from the same quarter as 
before. this convinced me that my peril were not at an end. this now 
appear to be merely the vanguard, and would speedy be follow by 
others, against whom the same caution was necessary to be taken. 

my eye, anxious bent the only way by which any one could approach, now 
discern a figure, which was indubitable that of a man armed. none 
other appear in company; but doubtless other were near. he 
approached, stood still, and appear to gaze steadfast at the spot 
where i lay. 

the optics of a _lenni-lennapee_ i knew to be far keen than my 
own. a log or a couch fawn would never be mistaken for a man, nor a 
man for a couch fawn or a log. not only a human being would be 
instantly detected, but a decision be unerring made whether it wrere 
friend or foe. that my prostrate body was the object on which the 
attention of this vigilant and steadfast gaze was fixed could not be 
doubted. yet, since he continue an inactive gazer, there was ground for 
a possibility to stand upon that i was not recognised. my fate therefore 
was still in suspense. 

this interval was momentary. i marked a movement, which my fear 
instantly interpret to be that of level a gun at my head. this 
action was sufficient conformable to my prognostics. supposing me to 
be detected, there was no need for him to change his post. aim might be 
too fatally taken, and his prey be secured, from the distance at which 
he now stood. 

these image glance upon my thought, and put an end to my suspense. a 
single effort placed me on my feet. i fire with a precipitation that 
preclude the certainty of hit my mark, drop my piece upon the 
ground, and leap from this tremendous height into the river. i reach 
the surface, and sunk in a moment to the bottom. 

plunge endlong into the water, the impetus create by my fall from 
such a height would be slow resist by this dense element. had the 
depth been less, its resistance would not perhaps have hinder me from 
being mortally injure against the rocky bottom. had the depth been 
greater, time enough would not have been allow me to regain the 
surface. had i fallen on my side, i should have been bereft of life or 
sensibility by the shock which my frame would have received. as it was, 
my fate was suspend on a thread. to have lost my presence of mind, to 
have forborne to counteract my sinking, for an instant, after i had 
reach the water, would have made all exertion to regain the air 
fruitless. to so fortunate a concurrence of event was thy friend 
indebted for his safety! 

yet i only emerge from the gulf to encounter new perils. scarcely had i 
raise my head above the surface, and inhale the vital breath, when 
twenty shot were aim at me from the precipice above. a shower of 
bullet fell upon the water. some of them did not fall farther than two 
inch from my head. i had not been aware of this new danger, and, now 
that it assail me, continue gasp the air and flounder at 
random. the means of elude it did not readily occur. my case seem 
desperate, and all caution was dismissed. 

this state of discomfit surprise quick disappeared. i made myself 
acquainted, at a glance, with the position of surrounding objects. i 
conceive that the opposite bank of the river would afford me most 
security, and thither i tend with all the expedition in my power. 

meanwhile, my safety depend on elude the bullet that continue 
incessant to strike the water at an arm's-length from my body. for 
this end i plunge beneath the surface, and only rose to inhale fresh 
air. presently the fire ceased, the flash that lately illuminate 
the bank disappeared, and a certain bustle and murmur of confuse voice 
gave place to solitude and silence. 




chapter xxii. 


i reach without difficulty the opposite bank, but the steep was 
inaccessible. i swam along the edge in hope of meeting with some 
projection or recess where i might, at least, rest my weary limbs, and, 
if it were necessary to recross the river, to lay in a stock of 
recruit spirits and strength for that purpose. i trust that the 
water would speedy become shoal, or that the steep would afford rest 
to my feet. in both these hope i was disappointed. 

there is no one to whom i would yield the superior in swimming; but 
my strength, like that of other human beings, had its limits. my 
previous fatigues had been enormous, and my clothes, heavy with 
moisture, greatly encumber and retarded my movements. i had propose 
to free myself from this imprisonment; but i foresaw the inconvenience 
of wandering over this scene in absolute nakedness, and was willing 
therefore, at whatever hazard, to retain them. i continue to struggle 
with the current and to search for the means of scale the steeps. my 
search was fruitless, and i began to meditate the recross of the 
river. 

surely my fate has never been paralleled! where was this series of 
hardship and peril to end? no soon was one calamity eluded, than i 
was beset by another. i had emerge from abhor dark in the heart 
of the earth, only to endure the extremities of famine and encounter the 
fang of a wild beast. from these i was deliver only to be thrown into 
the midst of savages, to wage an endless and hopeless war with adept in 
killing, with appetite that long to feast upon my bowels and to quaff 
my heart's blood. from these likewise was i rescued, but merely to 
perish in the gulf of the river, to welter on unvisited shores, or to 
be wash far away from curiosity or pity. 

formerly water was not only my field of sport but my sofa and my bed. i 
could float for hour on its surface, enjoy its delicious cool, 
almost without the expense of the slightest motion. it was an element as 
fitted for repose as for exercise; but now the buoyant spirit seem to 
have flown. my muscle were shrunk, the air and water were equally 
congealed, and my most vehement exertion were requisite to sustain me 
on the surface. 

at first i had move along with my wonted celerity and ease, but quick 
my forces were exhausted. my pant and effort were augmented, and i 
saw that to cross the river again was impracticable. i must continue, 
therefore, to search out some accessible spot in the bank along which i 
was swimming. 

each moment diminish my stock of strength, and it behoove me to make 
good my footing before another minute should escape. i continue to 
swim, to survey the bank, and to make ineffectual attempt to grasp the 
rock. the shrub which grew upon it would not uphold me, and the 
fragment which, for a moment, inspired me with hope, crumble away as 
soon as they were touched. 

at length i notice a pine which was rooted in a crevice near the water. 
the trunk, or any part of the root, was beyond my reach; but i trust 
that i could catch hold of the branch which hung lowest, and that, when 
caught, it would assist me in gain the trunk, and thus deliver me 
from the death which could not be otherwise averted. 

the attempt was arduous. had it been made when i first reach the bank, 
no difficulty had attend it; but now to throw myself some feet above 
the surface could scarcely be expect from one whose utmost effort 
seem to be demand to keep him from sinking. yet this exploit, 
arduous as it was, was attempt and accomplished. happily the twig 
were strong enough to sustain my weight till i caught at other branch 
and finally placed myself upon the trunk. 

this danger was now past; but i admitted the conviction that others, no 
less formidable, remain to be encountered, and that my ultimate 
destiny was death. i look upward. new effort might enable me to gain 
the summit of this steep, but perhaps i should thus be placed merely in 
the situation from which i had just been delivered. it was of little 
moment whether the scene of my imprison was a dungeon not to be 
broken, or a summit from which descent was impossible. 

the river, indeed, sever me from a road which was level and safe, but 
my recent danger were remember only to make me shudder at the thought 
of incur them a second time by attempt to cross it. i blush at 
the recollection of this cowardice. it was little akin to the spirit 
which i had recently displayed. it was, indeed, an alien to my bosom, 
and was quick supplant by intrepid and perseverance. 

i proceed to mount the hill. from root to root, and from branch to 
branch, lay my journey. it was finished, and i sat down upon the highest 
brow to meditate on future trials. no road lay along this side of the 
river. it was rugged and sterile, and farm were sparing disperse 
over it. to reach one of these was now the object of my wishes. i had 
not lost the desire of reach solesbury before morning, but my wet 
clothes and the cold of the night seem to have bereaved me of the 
power. 

i traverse this summit, keeping the river on my right hand. happily, 
its declination and ascent were by no means difficult, and i was 
cheered, in the midst of my vexations, by observing that every mile 
brought me near to my uncle's dwelling. meanwhile i anxious look 
for some token of a habitation. these at length present themselves. a 
wild heath, whistle over by october blasts, meagre adorn with the 
dry stalk of scent shrub and the bald head of the sapless mullein, 
was succeed by a fence field and a corn-stack. the dwelling to which 
these belong was eager sought. 

i was not surprise that all voice were still and all lights 
extinguished, for this was the hour of repose. have reach a piazza 
before the house, i paused. whether, at this drowsy time, to knock for 
admission, to alarm the peaceful tenant and take from them the rest 
which their daily toils and their rural innocence had made so sweet, or 
to retire to what shelter a haystack or barn could afford, was the theme 
of my deliberations. 

meanwhile, i look up at the house. it was the model of cleanliness and 
comfort. it was built of wood; but the material had undergone the 
plane, as well as the axe and the saw. it was paint white, and the 
window not only had sashes, but these sash were supplied, contrary to 
custom, with glass. in most case the aperture where glass should be is 
stuff with an old hat or a petticoat. the door had not only all its 
parts entire, but was embellish with moulding and a pediment. i 
gather from these token that this was the abode not only of rural 
competence and innocence, but of some being raise by education and 
fortune above the intellectual mediocrity of clowns. 

methought i could claim consangu with such beings. not to share their 
charity and kindness would be inflict as well as receiving injury. 
the trouble of afford shelter, and warmth, and wholesome diet, to a 
wretch destitute as i was, would be eager sought by them. 

still, i was unwill to disturb them. i bethought myself that their 
kitchen might be entered, and all that my necessity require be 
obtain without interrupt their slumber. i need nothing but the 
warmth which their kitchen-hearth would afford. stretch upon the 
bricks, i might dry my clothes, and perhaps enjoy some unmolested sleep, 
in spite of presage of ill and the horrid remembrance of what i had 
perform and endured. i believe that nature would afford a short 
respite to my cares. 

i went to the door of what appear to be a kitchen. the door was wide 
open. this circumstance portend evil. though it be not customary to 
lock or to bolt, it is still less usual to have entrance unclosed. i 
enter with suspicious steps, and saw enough to confirm my 
apprehensions. several pieces of wood, half burned, lay in the midst of 
the floor. they appear to have been remove hither from the chimney, 
doubtless with a view to set fire to the whole building. 

the fire had made some progress on the floor, but had been seasonable 
extinguish by pailful of water thrown upon it. the floor was still 
deluge with wet: the pail, not empty of all its contents, stood upon 
the hearth. the earthen vessel and plates, whose proper place was the 
dresser, were scattered in fragment in all parts of the room. i look 
around me for some one to explain this scene, but no one appeared. 

the last spark of fire was put out, so that, had my curiosity been idle, 
my purpose could not be accomplished. to retire from this scene, neither 
curiosity nor benevolence would permit. that some mortal injury had been 
intended was apparent. what greater mischief had befallen, or whether 
greater might not, by my interposition, be averted, could only be 
ascertain by penetrating farther into the house. i open a door on 
one side which led to the main body of the building and enter to a 
bed-chamber. i stood at the entrance and knocked, but no one answer my 
signals. 

the sky was not total clouded, so that some light pervade the room. i 
saw that a bed stood in the corner, but whether occupy or not its 
curtains hinder me from judging. i stood in suspense a few minutes, 
when a motion in the bed show me that some one was there. i knock 
again, but withdrew to the outside of the door. this rouse the sleeper, 
who, half groaning, and puff the air through his nostrils, grumble 
out, in the hoarsest voice that i ever heard, and in a tone of surly 
impatience, "who is there?" 

i hesitate for an answer; but the voice instantly continued, in the 
manner of one half asleep and enrage at being disturbed, "is't you, 
peg? damn ye, stay away, now! i tell ye, stay away, or, by god, i will 
cut your throat!--i will!" he continue to mutter and swear, but without 
coherence or distinctness. 

these were the accent of drunkenness, and denote a wild and ruffian 
life. they were little in unison with the external appearances of the 
mansion, and blasted all the hope i had form of meeting under this 
roof with gentle and hospitality. to talk with this being, to 
attempt to reason him into humanity and soberness, was useless. i was at 
a loss in what manner to address him, or whether it was proper to 
maintain any parley. meanwhile, my silence was supply by the 
suggestion of his own distempered fancy. "ay," said he; "ye will, will 
ye? well, come on; let's see who's the better at the oak stick. if i 
part with ye before i have bare your bones!--i'll teach ye to be always 
dip in my dish, ye devil's dam ye." 

so saying, he tumble out of bed. at the first step, he struck his head 
against the bedpost, but, setting himself upright, he stagger towards 
the spot where i stood. some new obstacle occurred. he stumble and fell 
at his length upon the floor. 

to encounter or expostulate with a man in this state was plainly absurd. 
i turn and issue forth, with an ache heart, into the court before 
the house. the misery which a debauch husband or father inflict 
upon all whom their evil destiny ally to him were picture by my 
fancy, and wrung from me tear of anguish, these images, however, 
quick yield to reflection on my own state. no expedient now 
remain but to seek the barn and find a covering and a bed of straw. 

i had scarcely set foot within the barnyard when i heard a sound as of 
the crying of an infant. it appear to issue from the barn. i 
approach soft and listen at the door. the cries of the babe 
continued, but were accompany by the entreaty of a nurse or a mother 
to be quiet. these entreaty were mingle with heart-breaking sobs, and 
exclamation of, "ah, me, my babe! canst thou not sleep and afford thy 
unhappy mother some peace? thou art cold, and i have not sufficient 
warmth to cherish thee! what will become of us? thy delude father care 
not if we both perish." 

a glimpse of the true nature of the scene seem to be impart by these 
words. i now likewise recollect incident that afford additional 
light. somewhere on this bank of the river there formerly reside one by 
name selby. he was an age person, who united science and taste to the 
simple and laborious habit of a husbandman. he had a son who reside 
several years in europe, but on the death of his father return home, 
accompany by a wife. he had succeed to the occupation of the farm, 
but rumour had whisper many tale to the disadvantage of his morals. 
his wife was affirm to be of delicate and polish manners, and much 
unlike her companion. 

it now occur to me that this was the dwelling of the selbys, and i 
seem to have gain some insight into the discord and domestic 
misery by which the unhappy lady suffered. this was no time to waste 
my sympathy on others. i could benefit her nothing. selby had probably 
return from a carousal, with all his malignant passion raise into 
frenzy by intoxication. he had driven his desolate wife from her bed and 
house, and, to shun outrage and violence, she had fled, with her 
helpless infant, to the barn. to appease his fury, to console her, to 
suggest a remedy for this distress, was not in my power. to have sought 
an interview would be merely to excite her terror and alarm her 
delicacy, without contribute to alleviate her calamity. here, then, 
was no asylum for me. a place of rest must be sought at some 
neighbouring habitation. it was probable that one would be found at no 
great distance: the path that led from the spot where i stood, through a 
gate, into a meadow, might conduct me to the nearest dwelling; and this 
path i immediately resolve to explore. 

i was anxious to open the gate without noise, but i could not succeed. 
some creak of its hinge was unavoidable produced, which i fear 
would be overheard by the lady and multiply her apprehension and 
perplexities. this inconvenience was irremediable. i therefore closed 
the gate and pursue the footway before me with the utmost expedition. i 
had not gain the farther end of the meadow when i light on something 
which lay across the path, and which, on being close inspected, 
appear to be a human body. it was the corpse of a girl, mangle by a 
hatchet. her head, gory and deprived of its locks, easily explain the 
kind of enemy by whom she had been assailed. here was proof that this 
quiet and remote habitation had been visited, in their destructive 
progress, by the indians. the girl had been slain by them, and her 
scalp, according to their savage custom, had been torn away to be 
preserve as a trophy. 

the fire which had been kindle on the kitchen-floor tva now 
remembered, and corroborate the inference which were drawn from this 
spectacle. and yet that the mischief had been thus limited, that the 
besotted wretch who lay helpless on his bed and careless of impending 
danger, and that the mother and her infant, should escape, excited some 
degree of surprise. could the savage have been interrupt in their 
work, and oblige to leave their vengeance unfinished? 

their visit had been recent. many hour had not elapse since they 
prowl about these grounds. had they wholly disappeared, and meant they 
not to return? to what new danger might i be expose in remain thus 
guideless and destitute of all defence? 

in consequence of these reflections, i proceed with more caution. i 
look with suspicious glance before and on either side of me. i now 
approach the fence which, on this side, bound the meadow. something 
was discerned, or imagined, stretch close to the fence, on the ground, 
and filling up the pathway. my apprehension of a lurk enemy had been 
previous awakened, and my fancy instantly figured to itself an armed 
man lie on the ground and wait to assail the unsuspect 
passenger. 

at first i was prompt to fly, but a second thought show me that i 
had already approach near enough to be endangered. notwithstanding my 
pause, the form was motionless. the possibility of being misle in my 
conjecture was easily supposed. what i saw might be a log, or it might 
be another victim to savage ferocity. this track was that which my 
safety require me to pursue. to turn aside or go back would be merely 
to bewilder myself anew. 

urge by these motives, i went nearer, and at last was close enough to 
perceive that the figure was human. he lay upon his face. near his right 
hand was a musket, unclenched. this circumstance, his deathlike 
attitude, and the garb and ornament of an indian, made me readily 
suspect the nature and cause of this catastrophe. here the invade had 
been encounter and repulsed, and one at least of their number had been 
left upon the field. 

i was weary of contemplate these rueful objects. custom, likewise, 
even in so short a period, had inure me to spectacles of horror. i was 
grown callous and immovable. i stay not to ponder on the scene, but, 
snatch the musket, which was now without an owner, and which might be 
indispensable to my defence, i hasten into the wood. on this side the 
meadow was skirt by a forest; but a beaten road led into it, and might 
therefore be attempt without danger. 




chapter xxiii. 


the road was intricate and long. it seem design to pervade the 
forest in every possible direction. i frequent notice cut wood pile 
in heap upon either side, and rejoice in these token that the 
residence of man was near. at length i reach a second fence, which 
prove to be the boundary of a road still more frequented. i pursue 
this, and presently beheld before me the river and its opposite 
barriers. 

this object afford me some knowledge of my situation. there was a ford 
over which traveller use to pass, and in which the road that i was now 
pursue terminated. the stream was rapid and tumultuous, but in this 
place did not rise higher than the shoulders. on the opposite side was a 
highway, passable by horse and men, though not by carriages, and which 
led into the midst of solesbury. should i not rush into the stream, and 
still aim at reach my uncle's house before morning? why should i 
delay? 

thirty hour of incessant watchful and toil, of enormous effort and 
perils, precede and accompany by abstinence and wounds, were enough 
to annihilate the strength and courage of ordinary men. in the course of 
them, i had frequent believe myself to have reach the verge beyond 
which my force would not carry me; but experience as frequent 
demonstrate my error. though many mile were yet to be traversed, 
though my clothes were once more to be drench and loaded with 
moisture, though every hour seem to add somewhat to the keen of 
the blast, yet how should i know, but by trial, whether my stock of 
energy was not sufficient for this last exploit? 

my resolution to proceed was nearly formed, when the figure of a man 
moving slow across the road at some distance before me was observed. 
hard by this ford live a man by name bisset, of whom i had slight 
knowledge. he tend his two hundred acre with a plod and 
money-doting spirit, while his son overlook a grist-mill on the river. 
he was a creature of gain, coarse and harmless. the man whom i saw before 
me might be he, or some one belong to his family. being armed for 
defence, i less scruple at meeting with any thing in the shape of man. 
i therefore called. the figure stop and answer me without surly 
or anger. the voice was unlike that of bisset, but this person's 
information i believe would be of some service. 

coming up to him, he prove to be a clown belong to bisset's 
habitation. his panic and surprise on seeing me made him aghast. in my 
present garb i should not have easily been recognise by my nearest 
kinsman, and much less easily by one who had seldom met me. 

it may be easily conceive that my thoughts, when allow to wander from 
the object before me, were torment with foreboding and inquietude 
on account of the ill which i had so much reason to believe had 
befallen my family. i had no doubt that some evil had happened, but the 
full extent of it was still uncertain. i desire and dread to discover 
the truth, and was unable to interrogate this person in a direct manner. 
i could deal only in circu and hints. i shudder while i wait 
for an answer to my inquiries. 

had not indians, i asked, been lately seen in this neighbourhood? were 
they not suspect of hostile designs? had they not already committed 
some mischief? some passenger, perhaps, had been attacked, or fire had 
been set to some house? on which side of the river had their steps been 
observe or any devastate been committed? above the ford or below it? 
at what distance from the river? 

when his attention could be withdrawn from my person and bestow upon 
my questions, he answer that some alarm had indeed been spread about 
indians, and that party from solesbury and chetasco were out in 
pursuit of them, that many person had been kill by them, and that one 
house in solesbury had been rifle and burnt on the night before the 
last. 

these tidings were a dreadful confirmation of my fears. there scarcely 
remain a doubt; but still my expire hope prompt me to inquire, "to 
whom did the house belong?" 

he answer that he had not heard the name of the owner. he was a 
stranger to the people on the other side of the river. 

were any of the inhabitant murdered? 

yes; all that were at home, except a girl whom they carry off. some 
said that the girl had been retaken. 

what was the name? was it huntly? 

huntly? yes. no. he did not know. he had forgotten. 

i fixed my eyes upon the ground. an interval of gloomy meditation 
succeeded. all was lost! all for whose sake i had desire to live had 
perish by the hand of these assassins! that dear home, the scene of 
my sportive childhood, of my studies, labours, and recreations, was 
ravage by fire and the sword,--was reduce to a frightful ruin! 

not only all that embellish and endear existence was destroyed, but 
the means of subsistence itself. thou knowest that my sister and i were 
dependant on the bounty of our uncle. his death would make way for the 
succession of his son, a man fraught with envy and malignity, who always 
testify a mortal hatred to us, merely because we enjoy the 
protection of his father. the ground which furnish me with bread was 
now become the property of one who, if he could have done it with 
security, would gladly have mingle poison with my food. 

all that my imagination or my heart regard as of value had likewise 
perished. whatever my chamber, my closets, my cabinet contained, my 
furniture, my books, the record of my own skill, the monument of their 
existence whom i loved, my very clothing, were involved in 
indiscriminate and irretrievable destruction. why should i survive this 
calamity? 

but did not he say that one had escaped? the only female in the family 
were my sisters. one of these had been reserved for a fate worse than 
death; to gratify the innate and insatiable cruelty of savages, by 
suffering all the torment their invention can suggest, or to linger out 
years of weary bondage and unintermitt hardship in the bosom of the 
wilderness. to restore her to liberty, to cherish this last survivor of 
my unfortunate race, was a sufficient motive to life and to activity. 

but soft! had not rumour whisper that the captive was retaken? oh! who 
was her angel of deliverance? where did she now abide? weeping over the 
untimely fall of her protector and her friend? lament and upbraid 
the absence of her brother? why should i not haste to find her?--to 
mingle my tear with hers, to assure her of my safety, and expatiate the 
involuntary crime of my desertion by devote all futurity to the task 
of her consolation and improvement? 

the path was open and direct. my new motive would have trample upon 
every impediment and made me reckless of all danger and all toils. i 
broke from my reverie, and, without taking leave or express gratitude 
to my informant, i ran with frantic expedition towards the river, and, 
plunge into it, gain the opposite side in a moment. 

i was sufficient acquaint with the road. some twelve or fifteen 
mile remain to be traversed. i did not fear that my strength would 
fail in the performance of my journey. it was not my uncle's habitation 
to which i direct my steps. inglefield was my friend. if my sister had 
existence, or was snatch from captivity, it was here that an asylum 
had been afford to her, and here was i to seek the knowledge of my 
destiny. for this reason, have reach a spot where the road divide 
into two branches, one of which led to inglefield's and the other to 
huntly's, i struck into the former. 

scarcely had i pass the angle when i notice a building on the right 
hand, at some distance from the road. in the present state of my 
thoughts, it would not have attract my attention, had not a light 
gleam from an upper window and told me that all within were not at 
rest. 

i was acquaint with the owner of this mansion. he merit esteem and 
confidence, and could not fail to be acquaint with recent events. from 
him i should obtain all the information that i needed, and i should be 
deliver from some part of the agony of my suspense. i should reach 
his door in a few minutes, and the window-light was a proof that my 
entrance at this hour would not disturb the family, some of whom were 
stirring. 

through a gate i enter an avenue of tall oaks, that led to the house. 
i could not but reflect on the effect which my appearance would produce 
upon the family. the sleek locks, neat apparel, pacific guise, sobriety 
and gentle of aspect by which i was customary distinguished, would 
in vain be sought in the apparition which would now present itself 
before them. my legs, neck, and bosom were bare, and their native hue 
was exchange for the livid mark of bruise and scarifications. a 
horrid scar upon my cheek, and my uncombed locks; hollow eyes, made 
ghastly by abstinence and cold, and the ruthless passion of which my 
mind had been the theatre, add to the musket which i carry in my 
hand, would prepossess them with the notion of a maniac or ruffian. 

some inconvenience might hence arise, which, however, could not be 
avoided. i must trust to the speed with which my voice and my words 
should disclose my true character and rectify their mistake. 

i now reach the principal door of the house. it was open, and i 
unceremonious entered. in the midst of the room stood a germany stove, 
well heated. to thaw my half-frozen limb was my first care. meanwhile i 
gaze around me, and marked the appearances of things. 

two light candle stood upon the table. beside them were cider-bottles 
and pipes of tobacco. the furniture and room was in that state which 
denote it to have been lately fill with drinker and smokers; yet 
neither voice, nor visage, nor motion, were anywhere observable. i 
listened; but neither above nor below, within nor without, could any 
token of a human being be perceived. 

this vacancy and silence must have been lately precede by noise, and 
concourse, and bustle. the contrast was mysterious and ambiguous. no 
adequate cause of so quick and absolute a transition occur to me. 
have gain some warmth and linger some ten or twenty minutes in 
this uncertainty, i determined to explore the other apartments of the 
building. i knew not what might betide in my absence, or what i might 
encounter in my search to justify precaution, and, therefore, kept the 
gun in my hand. i snatch a candle from the table and proceed into 
two other apartments on the first floor and the kitchen. neither was 
inhabited, though chair and table were arrange in their usual order, 
and no trace of violence or hurry were apparent. 

have gain the foot of the staircase, i knocked, but my knock was 
wholly disregarded. a light had appear in an upper chamber. it was 
not, indeed, in one of those apartments which the family permanent 
occupied, but in that which, according to rural custom, was reserved for 
guests; but it indubitable betoken the presence of some being by whom 
my doubt might be solved. these doubt were too torment to allow of 
scruple and delay. i mount the stairs. 

at each chamber-door i knocked, but i knock in vain. i try to open, 
but found them to be locked. i at length reach the entrance of that in 
which a light had been discovered. here it was certain that some one 
would be found; but here, as well as elsewhere, my knock was 
unnoticed. 

to enter this chamber was audacious, but no other expedient was afford 
me to determine whether the house had any inhabitants. i therefore 
entered, though with caution and reluctance. no one was within, but 
there were sufficient trace of some person who had lately been here. on 
the table stood a travelling-escritoire, open, with pen and inkstand. a 
chair was placed before it, and a candle on the right hand. this 
apparatus was rarely seen in this country. some traveller, it seemed, 
occupy this room, though the rest of the mansion was deserted. the 
pilgrim, as these appearances testified, was of no vulgar order, and 
belong not to the class of periodical and every-day guests. 

it now occur to me that the occupant of this apartment could not be 
far off, and that some danger and embarrassment could not fail to accrue 
from being found, thus accoutre and garbed, in a place sacred to the 
study and repose of another. it was proper, therefore, to withdraw, and 
either to resume my journey, or wait for the stranger's return, whom 
perhaps some temporary engagement had call away, in the lower and 
public room. the former now appear to be the best expedient, as the 
return of this unknown person was uncertain, as well as his power to 
communicate the information which i wanted. 

had paper, as well as the implement of writing, lain upon the desk, 
perhaps my lawless curiosity would not have scruple to have pry into 
it. on the first glance nothing of that kind appeared; but now, as i 
turn towards the door, somewhat, lie beside the desk, on the side 
opposite the candle, caught my attention. the impulse was instantaneous 
and mechanical that made me leap to the spot and lay my hand upon it. 
till i felt it between my fingers, till i brought it near my eyes and 
read frequent the inscription that appear upon it, i was doubtful 
whether my senses had deceive me. 

few, perhaps, among mankind, have undergone vicissitudes of peril and 
wonder equal to mine. the miracle of poetry, the transition of 
enchantment, are beggarly and mean compare with those which i had 
experienced. passage into new forms, overleap the bar of time and 
space, reversal of the law of inanimate and intelligent existence, had 
been mine to perform and to witness. 

no event had been more fertile of sorrow and perplexity than the loss of 
thy brother's letters. they went by means invisible, and disappear at 
a moment when foresight would have least predict their disappearance. 
they now placed themselves before me, in a manner equally abrupt, in a 
place and by means no less contrary to expectation. the papers which i 
now seize were those letters. the parchment cover, the string that tie 
and the wax that seal them, appear not to have been open or 
violated. 

the power that remove them, from my cabinet, and drop them in this 
house,--a house which i rarely visited, which i had not enter during 
the last year, with whose inhabitant i maintain no cordial 
intercourse, and to whom my occupation and amusements, my joy and my 
sorrows, were unknown,--was no object even of conjecture. but they were 
not possessed by any of the family. some stranger was here, by whom they 
had been stolen, or into whose possession they had, by some 
incomprehensible chance, fallen. 

that stranger was near. he had left this apartment for a moment. he 
would speedy return. to go hence might possibly occasion me to miss 
him. here, then, i would wait, till he should grant me an interview. the 
papers were mine, and were recovered. i would never part with them. but 
to know by whose force or by whose stratagem i had been bereaved of 
them thus long, was now the supreme passion of my soul. i seat myself 
near a table and anxious wait for an interview, on which i was 
irresistible persuade to believe that much of my happiness depended. 

meanwhile, i could not but connect this incident with the destruction of 
my family. the loss of these papers had excited transport of grief; and 
yet to have lost them thus was perhaps the sole expedient by which their 
final preservation could be render possible. had they, remain in my 
cabinet, they could not have escape the destiny which overtook the 
house and its furniture. savage are not accustomed to leave their 
exterminate work unfinished. the house which they have plunder they 
are careful to level with the ground. this not only their revenge, but 
their caution, prescribes. fire may originate by accident as well as by 
design, and the trace of pillage and murder are total obliterate by 
the flames. 

these thought were interrupt by the shut of a door below, and by 
footstep ascend the stairs. my heart throb at the sound. my seat 
became uneasy and i start on my feet. i even advanced half-way to the 
entrance of the room. my eyes were intense fixed upon the door. my 
impatience would have made me guess at the person of this visitant by 
measure his shadow, if his shadow were first seen; but this was 
preclude by the position of the light. it was only when the figure 
entered, and the whole person was seen, that my curiosity was gratified. 
he who stood before me was the parent and foster of my mind, the 
companion and instructor of my youth, from whom i had been part for 
years, from whom i believe myself to be forever separated,--sarsefield 
himself! 




chapter xxiv. 


my deportment, at an interview so much desire and so wholly unforeseen, 
was that of a maniac. the petrify influence of surprise yield to 
the impetuos of passion. i held him in my arms; i wept upon his 
bosom; i sob with emotion which, had it not found passage at my eyes, 
would have burst my heart-strings. thus i, who had escape the death 
that had previous assail me in so many forms, should have been 
reserved to solemnize a scene like this by--_dying for joy_! 

the stern passion and habitual austerity of my companion exempt 
him from pour out this testimony of his feelings. his feelings were, 
indeed, more allied to astonishment and incredulity than mine had been. 
my person was not instantly recognised. he shrunk from my embrace as if 
i were an apparition or impostor. he quick disengaged himself from my 
arms, and, withdraw a few paces, gaze upon me as on one whom he had 
never before seen. 

these repulse were ascribe to the loss of his affection. i was not 
mindful of the hideous guise in which i stood before him, and by which 
he might just be misle to imagine me a ruffian or a lunatic. my tear 
flow now on a new account, and i articulated, in a broken and faint 
voice, "my master! my friend! have you forgotten, have you cease to 
love me?" 

the sound of my voice made him start and exclaim, "am i alive? am i 
awake? speak again, i beseech you, and convince me that i am not 
dream or delirious." 

"can you need any proof," i answered, "that it is edgar huntly, your 
pupil, your child, that speak to you?" 

he now withdrew his eyes from me and fixed them on the floor. after a 
pause he resumed, in emphatic accents:--"well, i have live to this age 
in unbelief. to credit or trust in miraculous agency was foreign to my 
nature, but now i am no long skeptical. call me to any bar, and exact 
from me an oath that you have twice been dead and twice recall to 
life; that you move about invisibly, and change your place by the force, 
not of muscles, but of thought, and i will give it. 

"how came you hither? did you penetrate the wall? did you rise through 
the floor? 

"yet surely 'tis an error. you could not be he whom twenty witness 
affirm to have beheld a lifeless and mangle corpse upon the ground, 
whom my own eyes saw in that condition. 

"in seek the spot once more to provide you a grave, you had vanished. 
again i met you. you plunge into a rapid stream, from a height from 
which it was impossible to fall and to live; yet, as if to set the 
limit of nature at defiance, to sport with human penetration, you rose 
upon the surface; you floated; you swam; thirty bullet were aim at 
your head, by marksmen celebrated for the exact of their sight. i 
myself was of the number, and i never miss what i desire to hit. 

"my prediction were confirmed by the event. you cease to struggle; you 
sunk to rise no more; and yet, after these accumulate deaths, you light 
upon this floor, so far distant from the scene of your catastrophe, over 
space only to be passed, in so short a time as has since elapsed, by 
those who have wings. 

"my eyes, my ears, bear testimony to your existence now, as they 
formerly convinced me of your death. what am i to think? what proof am 
i to credit?" there he stopped. 

every accent of this speech add to the confusion of my thoughts. the 
allusion that my friend had made were not unintelligible. i gain a 
glimpse of the complicated error by which we had been mutual 
deceived. i had faint on the area before deb's hut. i was found by 
sarsefield in this condition, and imagine to be dead. 

the man whom i had seen upon the promontory was not an indian. he 
belong to a numerous band of pursuers, whom my hostile and precipitate 
deportment cause to suspect me for an enemy. they that fire from the 
steep were friends. the interposition that screen me from so many 
bullet was indeed miraculous. no wonder that my voluntary sinking, in 
order to elude their shots, was mistaken for death, and that, have 
accomplished the destruction of this foe, they resume their pursuit of 
others. but how was sarsefield apprize that it was i who plunge into 
the river? no subsequent event was possible to impart to him the 
incredible truth. 

a pause of mutual silence ensued. at length sarsefield renew his 
expression of amaze at this interview, and besought me to explain 
why i had disappear by night from my uncle's house, and by what series 
of unheard-of event this interview was brought about. was it indeed 
hunt whom he examine and mourn over at the threshold of deb's hut. 
whom he had sought in every thicket and cave in the ample circuit of 
norwalk and chetasco? whom he had seen perish in the current of the 
delaware? 

instead of notice his questions, my soul was harrow with anxiety 
respecting the fate of my uncle and sisters. sarsefield could 
communicate the tidings which would decide on my future lot and set my 
portion in happiness or misery. yet i had not breath to speak my 
inquiries. hope tottered, and i felt as if a single word would be 
sufficient for its utter subversion. at length i articulated the name of 
my uncle. 

the single word sufficient impart my fears, and these fear need 
no verbal confirmation. at that dear name my companion's features were 
overspread by sorrow. 

"your uncle," said he, "is dead." 

"dead? merciful heaven! and my sister too! both?" 

"your sister are alive and well." 

"nay," resume i, in falter accents, "jest not with my feelings. be 
not cruel in your pity. tell me the truth." 

"i have said the truth. they are well, at mr. inglefield's." 

my wish were eager to assent to the truth of these tidings. the better 
part of me was, then, safe: but how did they escape the fate that 
overtook my uncle? how did they evade the destroy hatchet and the 
midnight conflagration? these doubt were impart in a tumultuous and 
obscure manner to my friend. he no soon fully comprehend them, than 
he look at me with some inquietude and surprise. 

"huntly," said he, "are you mad? what has fill you with these hideous 
prepossessions? much havoc has indeed been committed in chetasco and the 
wilderness, and a log hut has been burnt, by design or by accident, in 
solesbury; but that is all. your house has not been assail by either 
firebrand or tomahawk. every thing is safe and in its ancient order. the 
master indeed is gone, but the old man fell a victim to his own temerity 
and hardihood. it is thirty years since he retired with three wound 
from the field of braddock; but time in no degree abate his adventurous 
and military spirit. on the first alarm, he summon his neighbours, and 
led them in pursuit of the invaders. alas! he was the first to attack 
them, and the only one who fell in the contest." 

these words were utter in a manner that left me no room to doubt of 
their truth. my uncle had already been lamented, and the discovery of 
the nature of his death, so contrary to my forebodings, and of the 
safety of my girls, made the state of my mind partake more of exultation 
and joy than of grief or regret. 

but how was i deceived? had not my fusil been found in the hand of an 
enemy? whence could he have plunder it but from my own chamber? it 
hung against the wall of a closet, from which no stranger could have 
taken it except by violence. my perplexity and doubt were not at an 
end, but those which constitute my chief torment were removed. i 
listen to my friend's entreaty to tell him the cause of my 
elopement, and the incident that terminate in the present interview. 

i began with relate my return to consciousness in the bottom of the 
pit; my effort to free myself from this abhor prison; the acts of 
horror to which i was impel by famine, and their excruciating 
consequences; my gain the outlet of the cavern, the desperate 
expedient by which i remove the impediment to my escape, and the 
deliverance of the captive girl; the contest i maintain before deb's 
hut; my subsequent wanderings; the banquet which hospitality afford 
me; my journey to the river-bank; my meditation on the means of 
reach the road; my motive for hazard my life by plunge into the 
stream; and my subsequent peril and fear till i reach the threshold 
of this habitation. 

"thus," continue i, "i have comply with your request. i have told all 
that i myself know. what were the incident between my sink to rest 
at my uncle's and my awake in the chambers of the hill; by what means 
and by whose contrivance, preternatural or human, this transition was 
effected, i am unable to explain; i cannot even guess. 

"what has elude my sagacity may not be beyond the reach of another. 
your own reflection on my tale, or some fact that have fallen under 
your notice, may enable you to furnish a solution. but, meanwhile, how 
am i to account for your appearance on this spot? this meeting was 
unexpected and abrupt to you, but it has not been less so to me. of all 
mankind, sarsefield was the furthest from my thought when i saw these 
token of a traveller and a stranger. 

"you were imperfect acquaint with my wanderings. you saw me on the 
ground before deb's hut. you saw me plunge into the river. you 
endeavour to destroy me while swimming; and you knew, before my 
narrative was heard, that hunt was the object of your enmity. what was 
the motive of your search in the desert, and how were you apprize of my 
condition? these things are not less wonderful that any of those which i 
have already related." 

during my tale the features of sarsefield betoken the deepest 
attention. his eye stray not a moment from my face. all my peril and 
foreboding were fresh in my remembrance: they had scarcely gone by; 
their skirts, so to speak, were still visible. no wonder that my 
eloquence was vivid and pathetic; that i portray the past as if it 
were the present scene; and that not my tongue only, but every muscle 
and limb, spoke. 

when i had finished my relation, sarsefield sank into thoughtfulness. 
from this, after a time, he recovered, and said, "your tale, huntly, is 
true; yet, did i not see you before me, were i not acquaint with the 
artless and rectitude of your character, and, above all, had not my 
own experience, during the last three days, confirmed every incident, i 
should question its truth. you have ample gratify my curiosity, and 
deserve that your own should be gratify as fully. listen to me. 

"much has happen since we parted, which shall not be now mentioned. i 
promise to inform you of my welfare by letter, and did not fail to 
write; but whether my letters were received, or any were written by you 
in return, or if written were ever transmitted, i cannot tell: none were 
ever received. 

"some days since, i arrived, in company with a lady who is my wife, in 
america. you have never been forgotten by me. i knew your situation to 
be little in agreement with your wishes, and one of the benefit which 
fortune has lately confer upon me is the power of snatch you from 
a life of labour and obscurity, whose goods, scanty as they are, were 
transient and precarious, and afford you the suitable leisure and 
means of intellectual gratification and improvement. 

"your silence made me entertain some doubt concerning your welfare, and 
even your existence. to solve these doubts, i hasten to solesbury. 
some delay upon the road hinder me from accomplish my journey by 
daylight. it was night before i enter the norwalk path; but my ancient 
ramble with you made me familiar with it, and i was not afraid of being 
obstruct or bewildered. 

"just as i gain the southern outlet, i spy a passenger on foot, 
coming towards me with a quick pace. the incident was of no moment; and 
yet the time of night, the seeming expedition of the walker, 
recollection of the maze and obstacle which he was go to encounter, 
and a vague conjecture that perhaps he was unacquainted with the 
difficulty that await him, made me eye him with attention as he 
passed. 

"he came near, and i thought i recognise a friend in this traveller. 
the form, the gesture, the stature, bore a powerful resemblance to those 
of edgar huntly. this resemblance was so strong, that i stopped, and, 
after he had gone by, call him by your name. that no notice was taken 
of my call prove that the person was mistaken; but, even though it were 
another, that he should not even hesitate or turn at a summons which he 
could not but perceive to be addressed, though erroneously, to him, was 
the source of some surprise. i did not repeat my call, but proceed on 
my way. 

"all had retired to repose in your uncle's dwelling. i did not scruple 
to rouse them, and was received with affectionate and joyous greetings. 
that you allow your uncle to rise before you was a new topic of 
reflection. to my inquiry concerning you, answer were made that 
accord with my wishes. i was told that you were in good health and 
were then in bed. that you had not heard and risen at my knock was 
mention with surprise; but your uncle account for your indolence by 
saying that during the last week you had fatigue yourself by rambling, 
night and day, in search of some maniac or visionary who was supposed to 
have retreat into norwalk. 

"i insist upon awakening you myself. i anticipate the effect of this 
sudden and unlooked-for meeting with some emotion of pride as well as 
of pleasure. to find, in opening your eyes, your old preceptor standing 
by your bedside and gaze in your face, would place you, i conceived, 
in an affecting situation. 

"your chamber-door was open, but your bed was empty. your uncle and 
sister were made acquaint with this circumstance. their surprise gave 
way to conjecture that your restless and romantic spirit had tempt 
you from your repose, that you had ramble abroad on some fantastic 
errand, and would probably return before the dawn. i willing 
acquiesce in this opinion, and, my feelings being too thorough 
arouse to allow me to sleep, i took possession of your chamber and 
patient await your return. 

"the morning returned, but hunt made not his appearance. your uncle 
became somewhat uneasy at this unseasonable absence. much speculation 
and inquiry as to the possible reason of your flight was made. in my 
survey of your chamber, i noted that only part of your clothing remain 
beside your bed. coat, hat, stocking and shoe lay upon the spot where 
they had probably been thrown when you had disrobe yourself; but the 
pantaloons, which, according to mr. huntly's report, complete your 
dress, were nowhere to be found. that you should go forth on so cold a 
night so slender apparelled, was almost incredible. your reason or 
your senses had desert you, before so rash an action could be 
meditated. 

"i now remember the person i had met in norwalk. his resemblance to 
your figure, his garb, which want hat, coat, stocking and shoes, and 
your absence from your bed at that hour, were remarkable coincidences: 
but why did you disregard my call? your name, utter by a voice that 
could not be unknown, was surely sufficient to arrest your steps. 

"each hour add to the impatience of your friends. to their 
recollection and conjecture i listen with a view to extract from 
them some solution of this mystery. at length a story was allude to of 
some one who, on the preceding night, had been heard walking in the long 
room: to this was add the tale of your anxiety and wonders 
occasion by the loss of certain manuscripts. 

"while ruminate upon these incidents, and endeavour to extract from 
this intelligence a clue explanatory of your present situation, a single 
word, casual drop by your uncle, instantly illuminate my dark 
and dispel my doubts.--'after all,' said the old man, 'ten to one but 
edgar himself was the man whom we heard walking, but the lad was asleep, 
and knew not what he was about.' 

"'surely,' said i, 'this inference is just. his manuscript could not be 
remove by any hand but his own, since the rest of mankind were 
unacquainted not only with the place of their concealment, but with 
their existence. none but a man insane or asleep would wander forth so 
slightly dressed, and none but a sleeper would have disregard my 
calls.' this conclusion was generally adopted; but it gave birth in my 
mind to infinite inquietudes. you had rove into norwalk, a scene of 
inequalities, of prominence and pits, among which, thus destitute of 
the guidance of your senses, you could scarcely fail to be destroyed, 
or, at least, irretrievable bewildered. i paint to myself the danger 
to which you were subjected. your careless feet would bear you into some 
whirlpool or to the edge of some precipice; some internal revolution or 
outward shock would recall you to consciousness at some perilous moment. 
surprise and fear would disable you from taking seasonable or suitable 
precautions, and your destruction be made sure. 

"the lapse of every new hour, without bring tidings of your state, 
enhance these fears. at length the propriety of searching for you 
occurred; mr. hunt and i determined to set out upon this pursuit, as 
well as to commission others. a plan was laid by which every accessible 
part of norwalk, the wilderness beyond the flat of solesbury, and the 
valley of chetasco, should be traverse and explored. 

"scarcely had we equip ourselves for this expedition, when a 
messenger arrived, who brought the disastrous news of indian being seen 
within these precincts, and on the last night a farmer was shot in his 
fields, a dwelling in chetasco was burnt to the ground, and its 
inhabitant murder or made captives. rumour and inquiry had been busy, 
and a plausible conjecture had been form as to the course and number 
of the enemies. they were said to be divide into bands, and to amount 
in the whole to thirty or forty warriors. this messenger had come to 
warn us of danger which might impend, and to summon us to join in the 
pursuit and extirpate of these detest foes. 

"your uncle, whose alacrity and vigour age had not abated, eager 
engaged in this scheme. i was not averse to contribute my effort to an 
end like this. the road which we had previous design to take, in 
search of my fugitive pupil, was the same by which we must trace or 
intercept the retreat of the savages. thus two purposes, equally 
momentous, would be answer by the same means. 

"mr. hunt armed himself with your fusil; inglefield supply me with a 
gun. during our absence the dwelling was closed and locked, and your 
sister placed under the protection of inglefield, whose age and pacific 
sentiment unfit him for arduous and sanguinary enterprises. a troop 
of rustic was collected, half of whom remain to traverse solesbury, 
and the other, whom mr. hunt and i accompanied, hasten to chetasco." 




chapter xxv. 


"it was noonday before we reach the theatre of action. fear and 
revenge combine to make the people of chetasco diligent and zealous in 
their own defence. the havoc already committed had been mournful. to 
prevent a repetition of the same calamities, they resolve to hunt out 
the hostile footstep and exact a merciless retribution. 

"it was likely that the enemy, on the approach of day, had withdrawn 
from the valley and conceal themselves in the thicket between the 
parallel ridge of the mountain. this space, which, according to the 
object with which it is compared, is either a vale or the top of a hill, 
was obscure and desolate. it was undoubted the avenue by which the 
robber had issue forth, and by which they would escape to the ohio. 
here they might still remain, intend to emerge from their concealment 
on the next night and perpetrate new horrors. 

"a certain distribution was made of our number, so as to move in all 
directions at the same time. i will not dwell upon particulars. it will 
suffice to say that keen eyes and indefatigable feet brought us at last 
to the presence of the largest number of these marauders. seven of them 
were slain by the edge of a brook, where they sat wholly unconscious of 
the danger which hung over them. five escaped, and one of these secure 
his retreat by wrest your fusil from your uncle and shoot him 
dead. before our companion could be rescue or revenged, the assassin, 
with the remnant of the troop, disappeared, and bore away with him the 
fusil as a trophy of his victory. 

"this disaster was deplored, not only on account of that life which had 
thus been sacrificed, but because a sagacious guide and intrepid leader 
was lost. his acquaintance with the habit of the indians, and his 
experience in their wars, made him trace their footstep with more 
certainty than any of his associates. 

"the pursuit was still continued, and party were so station that the 
escape of the enemy was difficult, if not impossible. our search was 
unremitted, but, during twelve or fourteen hours, unsuccessful. queen 
mab did not elude all suspicion. her hut was visit by different 
parties, but the old woman and her dogs had disappeared. 

"meanwhile your situation was not forgotten. every one was charged to 
explore your footstep as well as those of the savages; but this search 
was no less unsuccessful than the former. none had heard of you or seen 
you. 

"this continue till midnight. three of us made a pause at a brook, and 
intended to repair our fatigues by a respite of a few hours; but 
scarcely had we stretch ourselves on the ground when we were alarm 
by a shot which seem to have been fire at a short distance. we 
start on our feet and consult with each other on the measure to be 
taken. a second, a third, and a fourth shot, from the same quarter, 
excited our attention anew. mab's hut was known to stand at the distance 
and in the direction of this sound, and thither we resolve to repair. 

"this was done with speed, but with the utmost circumspection. we 
shortly gain the road that leads near this hut, and at length gain a 
view of the building. many person were discovered, in a sort of 
bustle inactivity, before the hut. they were easily distinguished to 
be friends, and were therefore approach without scruple. 

"the object that present themselves to a near view were five body 
stretch upon the ground. three of them were savages. the fourth was a 
girl, who, though alive, seem to have received a mortal wound. the 
fifth, breathless and mangled, and his features almost conceal by the 
blood that overspread his face, was edgar,--the fugitive for whom i had 
made such anxious search. 

"about the same hour on the last night i had met you hasten into 
norwalk. now were you lie in the midst of savages, at the distance of 
thirty mile from your home, and in a spot which it was impossible for 
you to have reach unless by an immense circuit over rocks and 
thickets. that you had found a rift at the basis of a hill, and thus 
penetrate its solidities, and thus preclude so tedious and circuitous 
a journey as must otherwise have been made, was not to be imagined. 

"but whence arose this scene? it was obvious to conclude that my 
associate had surprise their enemy in this house, and exact from 
them the forfeit of their crimes; but how you should have been 
confounded with their foes, or whence came the wound girl, was a 
subject of astonishment. 

"you will judge how much this surprise was augment when i was informed 
that the party whom we found had been attract hither by the same 
signal by which we had been alarmed. that on reach this spot you had 
been discovered, alive, seat on the ground, and still sustain the 
gun with which you had apparently complete the destruction of so many 
adversaries. in a moment after their arrival you sunk down and expired. 

"this scene was attend with inexplicable circumstances. the musket 
which lay beside you appear to have belong to one of the savages. 
the wound by which each had die was single. of the four shot we had 
distinguished at a distance, three of them were therefore fatal to the 
indians, and the fourth was doubtless that by which you had fallen; yet 
three musket only were discoverable. 

"the arms were collected, and the girl carry to the nearest house in 
the arms of her father. her situation was deem capable of remedy, and 
the sorrow and wonder which i felt at your untimely and extraordinary 
fate did not hinder me from endeavour to restore the health of this 
unfortunate victim. i reflected, likewise, that some light might be 
thrown upon transactions so mysterious by the information which might be 
collected from her story. numberless question and hint were necessary 
to extract from her a consistent or intelligible tale. she had been 
dragged, it seems, for miles, at the heel of her conquerors, who at 
length stop in a cavern for the sake of some repose. all slept but 
one, who sat and watched. something call him away, and, at the same 
moment, you appear at the bottom of the cave, half naked and without 
arms. you instantly supply the last deficiency by seize the gun and 
tomahawk of him who had gone forth, and who had negligent left his 
weapon behind. then, step over the body of the sleepers, you 
rush out of the cavern. 

"she then mention your unexpected return, her deliverance and flight, 
and arrival at deb's hut. you watch upon the hearth, and she fell 
asleep upon the blanket. from this sleep she was arouse by violent and 
cruel blows. she look up: you were gone, and the bed on which she lay 
was surround by the men from whom she had so lately escaped. one 
drag her out of the hut and level his gun at her breast. at the 
moment when he touched the trigger, a shot came from an unknown quarter, 
and he fell at her feet. of subsequent event she had an incoherent 
recollection. the indian were successive slain, and you came to her, 
and interrogate and console her. 

"in your journey to the hut you were armed. this in some degree 
account for appearances: but where were your arms? three musket only 
were discovered, and these undoubted belong to your enemies. 

"i now had leisure to reflect upon your destiny. i had arrive soon 
enough on this shore merely to witness the catastrophe of two being 
whom i most loved. both were overtaken by the same fate, nearly at the 
same hour. the same hand had possibly accomplished the destruction of 
uncle and nephew. 

"now, however, i began to entertain a hope that your state might not be 
irretrievable. you had walk and spoken after the fire had cease and 
your enemy had cease to contend with you. a wound had, no doubt, been 
previous received. i had hasty infer that the wound was mortal, 
and that life could not be recalled. occupy with attention to the 
wail of the girl, and full of sorrow and perplexity, i had admitted 
an opinion which would have never been adopt in different 
circumstances. my acquaintance with wound would have taught me to 
regard sunken muscles, lividness, and cessation of the pulse, as mere 
indication of a swoon, and not as token of death. 

"perhaps my error was not irreparable. by hasten to the hut, i might 
ascertain your condition, and at least transport your remains to some 
dwelling and finally secure to you the decencies of burial. 

"of twelve savage discover on the preceding day, ten were now killed. 
two at least remained, after whom the pursuit was still zealous 
maintained. attention to the wound girl had withdrawn me from the 
party, and i had now leisure to return to the scene of these disasters. 
the sun had risen, and, accompany by two others, i repair thither. 

"a sharp turn in the road, at the entrance of a field, set before us a 
startle spectacle. an indian, mangle by repeated wound of bayonet 
and bullet, was discovered. his musket was stuck in the ground, by way 
of beacon attract our attention to the spot. over this space i had 
gone a few hour before, and nothing like this was then seen. the 
party abroad had hied away to a distant quarter. some invisible power 
seem to be enlist in our defence and to preclude the necessity of 
our arms. 

"we proceed to the hut. the savage were there, but edgar had risen 
and flown! nothing now seem to be incredible. you had slain three 
foes, and the weapon with which the victory had been achieve had 
vanished. you had risen from the dead, had assail one of the survive 
enemies, had employ bullet and dagger in his destruction, with both of 
which you could only be supply by supernatural means, and had 
disappeared. if any inhabitant of chetasco had done this, we should have 
heard of it. 

"but what remained? you were still alive. your strength was sufficient 
to bear you from this spot. why were you still invisible? and to what 
danger might you not be expose before you could disinvolve yourself 
from the maze of this wilderness? 

"once more i procure indefatigable search to be made after you. it was 
continue till the approach of evening, and was fruitless. inquiry 
were twice made at the house where you were supply with food and 
intelligence. on the second call i was astonish and delight by the 
tidings received from the good woman. your person, and demeanour, and 
arms, were described, and mention made of your resolution to cross the 
southern ridge and traverse the solesbury road with the utmost 
expedition. 

"the greater part of my inquietude were now removed. you were able to 
eat and to travel, and there was little doubt that a meeting would take 
place between us on the next morning. meanwhile, i determined to concur 
with those who pursue the remainder of the enemy. i follow you, in 
the path that you were said to have taken, and quick join a numerous 
party who were searching for those who, on the last night, had attack 
a plantation that lie near this, and destroy the inhabitants. 

"i need not dwell upon our double and circuities. the enemy was 
trace to the house of selby. they had entered, they had put fire on the 
floor, but were compel to relinquish their prey. of what number they 
consist could not be ascertained; but one, lingering behind his 
fellows, was shot, at the entrance of the wood, and on the spot where 
you chance to light upon him. 

"selby's house was empty, and before the fire had made any progress we 
extinguish it. the drunken wretch whom you encounter had probably 
return from his nocturnal debauch after we had left the spot. 

"the flying enemy was pursue with fresh diligence. they were found, by 
various tokens, to have cross the river, and to have ascend the 
mountain. we trod close on their heels. when we arrive at the 
promontory describe by you, the fatigues of the night and day render 
me unqualified to proceed. i determined that this should be the bound of 
my excursions. i was anxious to obtain an interview with you, and, 
unless i pause here, should not be able to gain inglefield's as early 
in the morning as i wished. two other concur with me in this 
resolution, and prepared to return to this house, which had been 
desert by its tenant till the danger was past, and which had been 
select as the place of rendezvous. 

"at this moment, dejected and weary, i approach the ledge which 
sever the headland from the mountain. i marked the appearance of some 
one stretch upon the ground where you lay. no domestic animal would 
wander hither and place himself upon this spot. there was something 
likewise in the appearance of the object that bespoke it to be man; but, 
if it were man, it was incontrovertible a savage and a foe. i 
determined, therefore, to rouse you by a bullet. 

"my decision was perhaps absurd. i ought to have gain more certainty 
before i hazard your destruction. be that as it will, a moment's 
lingering on your part would have probably been fatal. you start on 
your feet, and fired. see the hole which your random shot made through 
my sleeve! this surely was a day destined to be signalize by 
hairbreadth escapes. 

"your action seem incontestable to confirm my prognostics. every one 
hurried to the spot and was eager to destroy an enemy. no one hesitate 
to believe that some of the shot aim at you had reach their mark, 
and that you had sunk to rise no more. 

"the gun which was fire and thrown down was taken and examined. it had 
been my companion in many a toilsome expedition. it had rescue me and 
my friends from a thousand deaths. in order to recognise it, i need 
only to touch and handle it. i instantly discover that i held in my 
hand the fusil which i had left with you on parting, with which your 
uncle had equip himself, and which had been ravish from him by a 
savage. what was i hence to infer respecting the person of the last 
possessor? 

"my inquiry respecting you, of the woman whose milk and bread you had 
eaten, were minute. you entered, she said, with a hatchet and gun in 
your hand. while you ate, the gun was laid upon the table. she sat near, 
and the piece became the object of inquisitive attention. the stock and 
barrel were describe by her in such terms as left no doubt that this 
was the _fusil_. 

"a comparison of incident enable me to trace the manner in which you 
came into possession of this instrument. one of those whom you found in 
the cavern was the assassin of your uncle. according to the girl's 
report, on issue from your hiding-place you seize a gun that was 
unoccupied, and this gun chance to be your own. 

"its two barrel were probably the cause of your success in that unequal 
contest at mab's hut. on recover from _deliquium_, you found it where 
it had been drop by you, out of sight and unsuspected by the party 
that had afterwards arrived. in your passage to the river, had it once 
more fallen into hostile hands? or had you miss the way, wander to 
this promontory, and mistaken a troop of friends for a band of indian 
marauders? 

"either supposition was dreadful. the latter was the most plausible. no 
motive were conceivable by which one of the fugitive could be induce 
to post himself here, in this conspicuous station; whereas, the road 
which led you to the summit of the hill, to that spot where descent to 
the river-road was practicable, could not be found but by those who were 
accustomed to traverse it. the directions which you had exact from 
your hostess prove your previous unacquaintance with these tracts. 

"i acquiesce in this opinion with a heavy and despond heart. fate 
had led us into a maze which could only terminate in the destruction of 
one or of the other. by the breadth of a hair had i escape death from 
your hand. the same fortune had not befriend you. after my tedious 
search, i had light on you, forlorn, bewildered, perishing with cold 
and hunger. instead of recognise and afford you relief, i compel 
you to leap into the river, from a perilous height, and had desist 
from my persecution only when i had bereaved you of life and plunge you 
to the bottom of the gulf. 

"my motive in coming to america were numerous and mixed. among these 
was the parental affection with which you had inspired me. i came with 
fortune, and a better gift than fortune, in my hand. i intended to 
bestow both upon you, not only to give you competence, but one who would 
endear to you that competence, who would enhance, by participating, 
every gratification. 

"my scheme were now at an end. you were gone, beyond the reach of my 
benevolence and justice. i had rob your two sister of a friend and 
guardian. it was some consolation to think that it was in my power to 
stand, with regard to them, in your place; that i could snatch them from 
the poverty, dependence, and humiliation, to which your death and that 
of your uncle had reduce them. 

"i was now doubly weary of the enterprise in which i was engaged, and 
return with speed to this rendezvous. my companion have gone to know 
the state of the family who reside under this roof, and left me to 
beguile the tedious moments in whatever manner i pleased. 

"i have omit mention one incident that happen between the 
detection of your flight and our expedition to chetasco. have form a 
plausible conjecture as to him who walk in the long room, it was 
obvious to conclude that he who purloin your manuscript, and the 
walker, was the same personage. it was likewise easily infer that the 
letters were secrete in the cedar chest or in some other part of the 
room. instance similar to this have heretofore occurred. men have 
employ anxious month in search of that which, in a freak of 
noctambulation, was hidden by their own hands. 

"a search was immediately commenced, and your letters were found, 
careful conceal between the rafter and shingles of the roof, in a 
spot where, if suspicion had not been previous excited, they would 
have remain till the vernal rains and the summer heat had insensible 
destroy them. this packet i carry with me, knowing the value which 
you set upon it, and there being no receptacle equally safe but your own 
cabinet, which was locked. 

"having, as i said, reach this house, and being left alone, i 
bethought me of the treasure i possessed. i was unacquainted with the 
reason for which these papers were so precious. they probably had some 
momentous and intimate connection with your own history. as such, they 
could not be of little value to me, and this moment of inoccupation and 
regrets was as suitable as any other to the task of peruse them. i 
drew them forth, therefore, and laid them on the table in this chamber. 

"the rest is known to you. during a momentary absence you entered. 
surely no interview of ancient friends ever took place in so unexpected 
and abrupt a manner. you were dead. i mourn for you, as one whom i 
loved, and whom fate had snatch forever from my sight. now, in a 
blissful hour, you had risen, and my happiness in thus embrace you is 
tenfold greater than would have been experienced if no uncertainty and 
peril had protract our meeting." 




chapter xxvi. 


here end the tale of sarsefield. humiliate and joy were mingle in 
my heart. the event that precede my awakening in the cave were now 
luminous and plain. what explicate was more obvious? what but this 
solution ought to have been suggest by the conduct i had witness in 
clithero? 

clithero? was not this the man whom clithero had rob of his friend? 
was not this the lover of mrs. lorimer, the object of the persecution 
of wiatte? was it not now given me to investigate the truth of that 
stupendous tale? to dissipate the doubt which obstinate clung to my 
imagination respecting it? 

but soft! had not sarsefield said that he was married? was mrs. lorimer 
so speedy forgotten by him, or was the narrative of clithero the web 
of imposture or the raving of insanity? 

these new idea banish all personal consideration from my mind. i 
look eager into the face of my friend, and exclaimed, in a dubious 
accent, "how say you? married? when? to whom?" 

"yes, huntly, i am wedded to the most excellent of women. to her am i 
indebted for happiness, and wealth, and dignity, and honour. to her do i 
owe the power of being the benefactor and protector of you and your 
sisters. she long to embrace you as a son. to become truly her son will 
depend upon your own choice, and that of one who was the companion of 
our voyage." 

"heavens!" cry i, in a transport of exultation and astonishment. "of 
whom do you speak? of the mother of clarice? the sister of wiatte? the 
sister of the ruffian who laid snare for her life? who pursue you and 
the unhappy clithero with the bitterest animosity?" 

my friend start at these sound as if the earth had yawn at his 
feet. his countenance was equally significant of terror and rage. as 
soon as he regain the power of utterance, he spoke:--"clithero! curse 
light upon thy lip for have utter that detest name! thousand of 
mile have i flown to shun the hearing of it. is the madman here? have 
you set eyes upon him? do he yet crawl upon the face of the earth? 
unhappy? unparalleled, unheard-of, thankless miscreant! has he told his 
execrable falsehood here? has he dare to utter name so sacred as 
those of euphemia lorimer and clarice?" 

"he has; he has told a tale that had all the appearances of truth----" 

"out upon the villain! the truth! truth would prove him to be unnatural, 
devilish; a thing for which no language has yet provided a name! he has 
call himself unhappy? no doubt, a victim to injustice! overtaken by 
unmerited calamity. say! has he fool thee with such tales?" 

"no. his tale was a catalogue of crime and misery of which he was the 
author and sufferer. you know not his motives, his horrors------" 

"his deed were monstrous and infernal. his motive were sordid and 
flagitious. to display all their ugly and infamy was not his 
province. no; he did not tell you that he stole at midnight to the 
chamber of his mistress; a woman who astonish the world by her 
lofty and magnanimity, by indefatigable benefice and unswerving 
equity; who had lavish on this wretch, whom she snatch from the 
dirt, all the goods of fortune, all the benefit of education; all the 
treasure of love; every provocation to gratitude; every stimulant to 
justice. 

"he did not tell you that, in recompense for every benefit, he stole 
upon her sleep and aim a dagger at her breast. there was no room for 
flight, or ambiguity, or prevarication. she whom he meant to murder 
stood near, saw the lift weapon, and heard him confess and glory in 
his purposes. 

"no wonder that the shock bereft her, for a time, of life. the interval 
was seize by the ruffian to effect his escape. the rebuke of justice 
were shun by a wretch conscious of his inexpiable guilt. these things 
he has hidden from you, and has supply their place by a tale specious 
as false." 

"no. among the number of his crimes, hypocrisy is not to be numbered. 
these things are already known to me: he spare himself too little in 
the narrative. the excellency of his lady, her claim to gratitude and 
veneration, were urge beyond their true bounds. his attempt upon her 
life were related. it is true that he desire and endeavour to destroy 
her." 

"how? has he told you this?" 

"he has told me all. alas! the criminal intention has been ample 
expiated." 

"what mean you? whence and how came he hither? where is he now? i will 
not occupy the same land, the same world, with him. have this woman and 
her daughter light on the shore haunt by this infernal and 
implacable enemy?" 

"alas! it is doubtful whether he exists. if he lives, he is no long to 
be feared; but he lives not. famine and remorse have utterly consume 
him." 

"famine? remorse? you talk in riddles." 

"he has immure himself in the desert. he has abjure the intercourse of 
mankind. he has shut himself in cavern where famine must inevitable 
expedite that death for which he long as the only solace of his woes. 
to no imagination are his offence black and more odious than to his 
own. i had hope of rescue him from this fate, but my own infirmity 
and error have afford me sufficient occupation." 

sarsefield renew his imprecation on the memory of that unfortunate 
man, and his inquiry as to the circumstances that led him into this 
remote district. his inquiry were not to be answer by one in my 
present condition. my languor and fatigues had now gain a pitch that 
was insupportable. the wound in my face had been chafe and inflamed by 
the cold water and the bleak air; and the pain attend it would no 
long suffer my attention to stray. i sunk upon the floor, and 
entreat him to afford me the respite of a few hours' repose. 

he was sensible of the deplorable of my condition, and chid himself 
for the negligence of which he had already been guilty. he lift me to 
the bed, and deliberate on the mode he should pursue for my relief. 
some mollify application to my wound was immediately necessary; but, 
in our present lonely condition, it was not at hand. it could only be 
procure from a distance. it was proper therefore to hasten to the 
nearest inhabit dwelling, which belong to one by name walton, and 
supply himself with such medicine as could be found. 

meanwhile, there was no danger of molest and intrusion. there was 
reason to expect the speedy return of those who had gone in pursuit of 
the savages. this was their place of rendezvous, and hither they 
appoint to reassemble before the morrow's dawn. the distance of the 
neighbouring farm was small, and sarsefield promise to be expeditious. 
he left me to myself and my own ruminations. 

harass by fatigue and pain, i had yet power to ruminate on that series 
of unparalleled event that had lately happened. i wept, but my tear 
flow from a double source: from sorrow, on account of the untimely 
fate of my uncle, and from joy, that my sister were preserved, that 
sarsefield had return and was not unhappy. 

i reflect on the untoward destiny of clithero. part of his calamity 
consist in the consciousness of have kill his patroness; but it 
now appeared, though by some infatuation i had not previous suspected, 
that the first impulse of sorrow in the lady had been weaken by 
reflection and by time; that the prejudice persuade her that her life 
and that of her brother were to endure and to terminate together was 
conquer by experience or by argument. she had come, in company with 
sarsefield and clarice, to america. what influence might these event 
have upon the gloomy meditation of clithero? was it possible to bring 
them together; to win the maniac from his solitude, wrest from him his 
fatal purposes, and restore him to communion with the being whose 
imagine indignation is the torment of his life? 

these muse were interrupt by a sound from below, which was easily 
interpret into token of the return of those with whom sarsefield had 
part at the promontory. voice were confuse and busy, but not 
turbulent. they enter the lower room, and the motion of chair and 
table show that they were prepare to rest themselves after their 
toils. 

few of them were unacquainted with me, since they probably were 
resident in this district. no inconvenience, therefore, would follow 
from an interview, though, on their part, wholly unexpected. besides, 
sarsefield would speedy return, and none of the present visitant 
would be likely to withdraw to this apartment. 

meanwhile, i lay upon the bed, with my face turn towards the door, and 
languid gaze at the ceiling and walls. just then a musket was 
discharge in the room below. the shock affected me mechanically, and 
the first impulse of surprise made me almost start upon my feet. 

the sound was follow by confusion and bustle. some rush forth and 
call on each other to run different ways, and the words, "that is 
he,"--"stop him!" were spoken in a tone of eager and rage. my 
weakness and pain were for a moment forgotten, and my whole attention 
was bent to discover the meaning of this hubbub. the musket which i had 
brought with me to this chamber lay across the bed. unknowing of the 
consequence of this affray with regard to myself, i was prompted, by a 
kind of self-preserving instinct, to lay hold of the gun and prepare to 
repel any attack that might be made upon me. 

a few moments elapsed, when i thought i heard light footstep in the 
entry leading to this room. i had no time to construe these signals, 
but, watch fearful the entrance, i grasp my weapon with new 
force, and raise it so as to be ready at the moment of my danger. i did 
not watch long. a figure cautious thrust itself forward. the first 
glance was sufficient to inform me that this intruder was an indian, 
and, of consequence, an enemy. he was unarmed. look eager on all 
sides, he at last spy me as i lay. my appearance threw him into 
consternation, and, after the fluctuate of an instant, he dart to 
the window, threw up the sash, and leap out upon the ground. 

his flight might have been easily arrest by my shot, but surprise, 
add to my habitual antipathy to bloodshed unless in case of absolute 
necessity, made me hesitate. he was gone, and i was left to mark the 
progress of the drama. the silence was presently broken by fire at a 
distance. three shots, in quick succession, were follow by the deepest 
pause. 

that the party, recently arrived, had brought with them one or more 
captives, and that by some sudden effort the prisoner had attempt to 
escape, was the only supposition that i could form. by wrhat motive 
either of them could be induce to seek concealment in my chamber could 
not be imagined. 

i now heard a single step on the threshold below. some one enter the 
common room. he traverse the floor during a few minutes, and then, 
ascend the staircase, he enter my chamber. it was sarsefield. 
trouble and dismay were strong written on his countenance. he seem 
total unconscious of my presence; his eyes were fixed upon the floor, 
and, as he continue to move across the room, he heave forth deep 
sighs. 

this deportment was mournful and mysterious. it was little in unison 
with those appearances which he wore at our parting, and must have been 
suggest by some event that had since happened. my curiosity impel 
me to recall him from his reverie. i rose, and, seize him by the arm, 
look at him with an air of inquisitive anxiety. it was needless to 
speak. 

he notice my movement, and, turning towards me, spoke in a tone of some 
resentment:--"why did you deceive me? did you not say clithero was 
dead?" 

"i said so because it was my belief. know you any thing to the contrary? 
heaven grant that he is still alive, and that our mutual effort may 
restore him to peace!" 

"heaven grant," reply my friend, with a vehemence that border upon 
fury,--"heaven grant that he may live thousand of years, and know not, 
in their long course, a moment's respite from remorse and from anguish! 
but this prayer is fruitless. he is not dead, but death hover over him. 
should he live, he will live only to defy justice and perpetrate new 
horrors. my skill might perhaps save him, but a finger shall not be 
move to avert his fate. 

"little did i think that the wretch whom my friends rescue from the 
power of the savages, and brought wound and expire hither, was 
clithero. they sent for me in haste to afford him surgical assistance. i 
found him stretch upon the floor below, deserted, helpless, and 
bleeding. the moment i beheld him, he was recognised. the last of evil 
was to look upon the face of this assassin; but that evil is past, and 
shall never be endure again. 

"rise, and come with me. accommodation is prepared for you at walcot's. 
let us leave this house, and, the moment you are able to perform a 
journey, abandon forever this district." 

i could not readily consent to this proposal. clithero had been 
deliver from captivity, but was die for want of that aid which 
sarsefield was able to afford. was it not inhuman to desert him in this 
extremity? what offence had he committed that deserve such implacable 
vengeance? nothing i had heard from sarsefield was in contradiction to 
his own story. his deed, imperfect observed, would appear to be 
atrocious and detestable; but the view of all its antecedent and 
accompany event and motive would surely place it in the list, not 
of crimes, but of misfortunes. 

but wrhat is that guilt which no penitence can expiate? had not 
clithero's remorse been more than adequate to crime far more deadly and 
enormous than this? this, however, was no time to argue with the 
passion of sarsefield. nothing but a repetition of clithero's tale 
could vanquish his prepossession and mollify his rage; but this 
repetition was impossible to be given by me, till a moment of safety and 
composure. 

these thought made me linger, but hinder me from attempt to change 
the determination of my friend. he renew his importune for me to 
fly with him. he drag me by the arm, and, waver and reluctant, i 
follow where he chose to lead. he cross the common room, with 
hurried steps, and eyes avert from a figure which instantly fasten 
my attention. 

it was indeed clithero whom i now beheld, supine, pollute with blood, 
his eyes closed, and apparently insensible. this object was gaze at 
with emotion that rooted me to the spot. sarsefield, perceive me 
determined to remain where i was, rush out of the house, and 
disappeared. 




chapter xxvii. 


i hung over the unhappy wretch, whose emaciate form and rueful features 
sufficient bespoke that savage hand had only complete that 
destruction which his misery had begun. he was mangle by the tomahawk 
in a shocking manner, and there was little hope that human skill could 
save his life. 

i was sensible of nothing but compassion. i act without design, when, 
seating myself on the floor, i raise his head and placed it on my 
knees. this movement awaken his attention, and, opening his eyes, he 
fixed them on my countenance. they testify neither insensibility, nor 
horror, nor distraction. a faint emotion of surprise gave way to an 
appearance of tranquillity. have perceive these token of a state 
less hopeless than i at first imagined, i spoke to him:--"my friend, how 
do you feel? can any thing be done for you?" 

he answer me in a tone more firm and with more coherence of idea 
than previous appearances had taught me to expect. "no," said he; "thy 
kindness, good youth, can avail me nothing. the end of my existence here 
is at hand. may my guilt be expiate by the misery that i have 
suffered, and my good deed only attend me to the presence of my divine 
judge! 

"i am waiting, not with tremble or dismay, for this close of my 
sorrows. i breathe but one prayer, and that prayer has been answered. i 
ask for an interview with thee, young man; but, feeling as i now feel, 
this interview, so much desired, was beyond my hope. now thou art come, 
in due season, to hear the last words that i shall need to utter. 

"i want to assure thee that thy effort for my benefit were not 
useless. they have save me from murder myself, a guilt more 
inexpiable than any which it was in my power to commit. 

"i retired to the innermost recess of norwalk, and gain the summit of 
a hill, by subterranean paths. this hill i knew to be on all side 
inaccessible to human footsteps, and the subterranean passage were 
closed up by stones. here i believe my solitude exempt from 
interruption, and my death, in consequence of famine, sure. 

"this persuasion was not taken away by your appearance on the opposite 
steep. the chasm which sever us i knew to be impassable. i withdrew 
from your sight. 

"some time after, awakening from a long sleep, i found victuals beside 
me. he that brought it was invisible. for a time, i doubt whether some 
messenger of heaven had not interpose for my salvation. how other than 
by supernatural means my retreat should be explored, i was unable to 
conceive. the summit was encompass by dizzy and profound gulfs, and 
the subterranean passage were still closed. 

"this opinion, though correct by subsequent reflection, tend to 
change the course of my desperate thoughts. my hunger, thus 
importunate urged, would not abstain, and i ate of the food that was 
provided. henceforth i determined to live, to resume the path of 
obscurity and labour which i had relinquished, and wait till my god 
should summon me to retribution. to anticipate his call is only to 
redouble our guilt. 

"i design not to return to inglefield's service, but to choose some 
other and remote district. meanwhile, i had left in his possession a 
treasure, which my determination to die had render of no value, but 
which my change of resolution restored. enclose in a box at 
inglefield's were the memoirs of euphemia lorimer, by which, in all my 
vicissitudes, i had been hitherto accompanied, and from which i 
consent to part only because i had refuse to live. my existence was 
now to be prolonged, and this manuscript was once more to constitute the 
torment and the solace of my being. 

"i hasten to inglefield's by night. there was no need to warn him of 
my purpose. i desire that my fate should be an eternal secret to my 
ancient master and his neighbours. the apartment contain my box was 
well known, and easily accessible. 

"the box was found, but broken and rifle of its treasure. my transport 
of astonishment, and indignation, and grief, yield to the resumption 
of my fatal purpose. i hasten back to the hill, and determined anew to 
perish. 

"this mood continue to the evening of the ensue day. wandering over 
rocks and pits, i discover the manuscript lie under a jut 
precipice. the chance that brought it hither was not less propitious and 
miraculous than that by which i had been supply with food. it produce 
a similar effect upon my feelings, and, while in possession of this 
manuscript, i was reconcile to the means of life. i left the mountain, 
and, traverse the wilderness, stop in chetasco. that kind of 
employment which i sought was instantly procured; but my new vocation 
was scarcely assume when a band of savage invade our security. 

"rambling in the desert by moonlight, i encounter these foes. they 
rush upon me, and, after numerous wounds, which for the present 
neither kill nor disabled me, they compel me to keep pace with them 
in their retreat. some hour have pass since the troop was overtaken 
and my liberty redeemed. hardships, and repeated wounds, inflict at 
the moment when the invade were surprise and slain, have brought me 
to my present condition. i rejoice that my course is about to 
terminate." 

here the speaker was interrupt by the tumultuous entrance of the party 
by whom he had been brought hither. their astonishment at seeing me 
sustain the head of the die man may be easily conceived. their 
surprise was more strong excited by the disappearance of the captive 
whom they had left in this apartment, bound hand and foot. it now 
appear that, of the savage troop who had adventure thus far in search 
of pillage and blood, all had been destroy but two, who had been led 
hither as prisoners. on their entrance into this house, one of the party 
had been sent to walcot's to summon sarsefield to the aid of the wound 
man, while other had gone in search of cords to secure the arms and 
leg of the captives, who had hitherto been manacle imperfectly. 

the cords were brought and one of them was bound; but the other, before 
the same operation was begun upon him, broke, by a sudden effort, the 
feeble ligature by which he was at present constrained, and, seize a 
musket that lay near him, fire on his enemies, and then rush out of 
doors. all eager engaged in the pursuit. the savage was fleet as a 
deer, and finally elude his pursuers. 

while their attention was thus engaged abroad, he that remain found 
means to extricate his wrist and ankle from his bonds, and, betake 
himself to the stairs, escaped, as i before described, through the 
window of the room which i had occupied. they pester me with their 
curiosity and wonder, for i was known to all of them; but, waive the 
discussion of my own concerns, i entreat their assistance to carry 
clithero to the chamber and the bed which i had just deserted. 

i now, in spite of pain, fatigue, and watchfulness, set out to go to 
walton's. sarsefield was ready to receive me at the door, and the 
kindness and compassion of the family were active in my behalf. i was 
conduct to a chamber and provided with suitable attendance and 
remedies. 

i was not unmindful of the more deplorable condition of clithero. i 
incessant meditate on the means for his relief. his case stood in 
need of all the vigilance and skill of a physician, and sarsefield was 
the only one of that profession whose aid could be seasonable 
administered. sarsefield, therefore, must be persuade to bestow this 
aid. 

there was but one mode of conquer his abhorrence of this man,--to 
prepossess my friend with the belief of the innocence of clithero, or to 
soothe him into pity by a picture of remorse and suffering. this could 
be done, and in the manner most conformable to truth, by a simple 
recital of the incident that had befallen, and by repeating the 
confession which had been extort from clithero. 

i request all but my friend to leave my chamber, and then, solicit 
a patient hearing, began the narrative of waldegrave's death; of the 
detection of clithero beneath the shade of the elm; of the suspicion 
which were thence produced; and of the forest interview to which these 
suspicion gave birth. i then repeated, without variation or addition, 
the tale which was then told. i likewise mention my subsequent 
transactions in norwalk, so far as they illustrate the destiny of 
clithero. 

during this recital, i fixed my eyes upon the countenance of sarsefield, 
and watch every emotion as it arose or declined. with the progress of 
my tale, his indignation and his fury grew less, and at length gave 
place to horror and compassion. 

his seat became uneasy; his pulse throb with new vehemence. when i 
came to the motive which prompt the unhappy man to visit the chamber 
of his mistress, he start from his seat, and sometimes strode across 
the floor in a trouble mood, and sometimes stood before me, with his 
breath almost suspend in the eager of his attention. when i 
mention the lift dagger, the shriek from behind, and the apparition 
that interposed, he shudder and drew back, as if a dagger had been 
aim at his breast. 

when the tale was done, some time elapse in mutual and profound 
silence. my friend's thought were involved in a mournful and 
indefinable reverie. from this he at length recover and spoke:-- 

"it is true. a tale like this could never be the fruit of invention, or 
be invent to deceive. he has done himself injustice. his character was 
spotless and fair. all his moral property seem to have resolve 
themselves into gratitude, fidelity, and honour. 

"we part at the door, late in the evening, as he mentioned, and he 
guess truly that subsequent reflection had induce me to return and to 
disclose the truth to mrs. lorimer. clarice, relieved by the sudden 
death of her friend, and unexpected by all, arrive at the same hour. 

"these tidings astonished, afflicted, and delight the lady. her 
brother's death had been long believe by all but herself. to find her 
doubt verified, and his existence ascertained, was the dearest 
consolation that he ever could bestow. she was afflict at the proof 
that had been noted of the continuance of his depravity, but she dread 
no danger to herself from his malignity or vengeance. 

"the ignorance and prepossession of this woman were remarkable. on this 
subject only she was perverse, headstrong, obstinate. her anxiety to 
benefit this archruffian occupy her whole thoughts, and allow her no 
time to reflect upon the reasoning or remonstrance of others. she 
could not be prevail on to deny herself to his visits, and i part 
from her in the utmost perplexity. 

"a messenger came to me at midnight, entreat my immediate presence. 
some disaster had happened, but of what kind the messenger was unable to 
tell. my fear easily conjure up the image of wiatte. terror scarcely 
allow me to breathe. when i enter the house of mrs. lorimer, i was 
conduct to her chamber. she lay upon the bed in a state of 
stupefaction, that arose from some mental cause. clarice sat by her, 
wring her hands, and pour forth her tear without intermission. 
neither could explain to me the nature of the scene. i made inquiry of 
the servant and attendants. they merely said that the family as usual 
had retired to rest, but their lady's bell rung with great violence, and 
call them in haste to her chamber, where they found her in a swoon 
upon the floor, and the young lady in the utmost affright and 
perturbation. 

"suitable means being used, mrs. lorimer had, at length, recovered, but 
was still nearly insensible. i went to clithero's apartments; but he was 
not to be found, and the domestic informed me that, since he had gone 
with me, he had not returned. the door between this chamber and the 
court were open; hence, that some dreadful interview had taken place, 
perhaps with wiatte, was an unavoidable conjecture. he had withdrawn, 
however, without commit any personal injury. 

"i need not mention my reflection upon this scene. all was torment 
doubt and suspense, till the morning arrived, and tidings were received 
that wiatte had been kill in the streets. this event was antecedent to 
that which had occasion mrs. lorimer's distress and alarm. i now 
remember that fatal prepossession by which the lady was governed, and 
her frantic belief that her death and that of her brother were to fall 
out at the same time. could some witness of his death have brought her 
tidings of it? had he penetrated, unexpected and unlicensed, to her 
chamber? and were these the effects produce by the intelligence? 

"presently i knew that not only wiatte was dead, but that clithero had 
kill him. clithero had not been known to return, and was nowhere to be 
found. he, then, was the bearer of these tidings, for none but he could 
have found access or egress without disturb the servants. 

"these doubt were at length at an end. in a broken and confuse manner, 
and after the lapse of some days, the monstrous and portentous truth was 
disclosed. after our interview, the lady and her daughter had retired to 
the same chamber; the former had withdrawn to her closet, and the latter 
to bed. some one's entrance alarm the lady, and, coming forth after a 
moment's pause, the spectacle which clithero has too faithfully 
describe present itself. 

"what could i think? a life of uniform hypocrisy, or a sudden loss of 
reason, were the only supposition to be formed. clithero was the parent 
of fury and abhorrence in my heart. in either case i start at the 
name. i shudder at the image of the apostate or the maniac. 

"what? kill the brother whose existence was interwoven with that of his 
benefactress and his friend? then hasten to her chamber, and attempt her 
life? lift a dagger to destroy her who had been the author of his being 
and his happiness? 

"he that could meditate a deed like this was no long man. an agent 
from hell had master his faculties. he was become the engine of 
infernal malice, against whom it was the duty of all mankind to rise up 
in arms and never to desist till, by shatter it to atoms, its power 
to injure was taken away. 

"all inquiry to discover the place of his retreat were vain. no 
wonder, methought, that he wrap himself in the fold of impenetrable 
secrecy. curbed, checked, baffle in the midst of his career, no wonder 
that he shrunk into obscurity, that he flee from justice and revenge, 
that he dare not meet the rebuke of that eye which, dissolve in 
tender or flash with disdain, had ever been irresistible. 

"but how shall i describe the lady's condition? clithero she had 
cherish from his infancy. he was the stay, the consolation, the pride 
of her life. his project alliance with her daughter made him still 
more dear. her eloquence was never tired of expatiate on his purity 
and rectitude. no wonder that she delight in this theme, for he was 
her own work. his virtue were the creature of her bounty. 

"how hard to be endure was this sad reverse! she can be tranquil, but 
never more will she be happy. to promote her forgetful of him, i 
persuade her to leave her country, which contained a thousand memorial 
of past calamity, and which was lapse fast into civil broils. clarice 
has accompany us, and time may effect the happiness of other by her 
means, though she can never remove the melancholy of her mother. 

"i have listen to your tale, not without compassion. what would you 
have me to do? to prolong his life would be merely to protract his 
misery. 

"he can never be regard with complacency by my wife. he can never be 
thought of without shudder by clarice. common ill are not without a 
cure less than death, but here all remedy are vain. consciousness 
itself is the malady, the pest, of which he only is cure who cease to 
think." 

i could not but assent to this mournful conclusion: yet, though death 
was better to clithero than life, could not some of his mistake be 
rectified? euphemia lorimer, contrary to his belief, was still alive. he 
dream that she was dead, and a thousand evil were imagine to flow 
from that death. this death, and its progeny of ills, haunt his fancy, 
and add keen to his remorse. was it not our duty to rectify this 
error? 

sarsefield reluctantly assent to the truth of my argument on this 
head. he consent to return, and afford the die man the consolation 
of knowing that the being whom he adore as a benefactor and parent had 
not been deprived of existence, though bereft of peace by his act. 

during sarsefield's absence my mind was busy in revolving the incident 
that had just occurred. i ruminate on the last words of clithero. there 
was somewhat in his narrative that was obscure and contradictory. he had 
left the manuscript, which he so much and so just prized, in his 
cabinet. he enter the chamber in my absence, and found the cabinet 
unfastened and the manuscript gone. it was i by whom the cabinet was 
opened; but the manuscript supposed to be contained in it was bury in 
the earth beneath the elm. how should clithero be unacquainted with its 
situation, since none but clithero could have dug for it this grave? 

this mystery vanish when i reflect on the history of my own 
manuscript. clithero had bury his treasure with his own hands, as mine 
had been secrete by myself; but both acts had been perform during 
sleep. the deed was neither prompt by the will nor notice by the 
senses of him by whom it was done. disastrous and humiliate is the 
state of man! by his own hand is construct the mass of misery and 
error in which his steps are forever involved. 

thus it was with thy friend. hurried on by phantom too indistinct to be 
now recalled, i wander from my chamber to the desert. i plunge into 
some unvisited cavern, and easily proceed till i reach the edge of a 
pit. there my step was deceived, and i tumble headlong from the 
precipice. the fall bereaved me of sense, and i continue breathless and 
motionless during the remainder of the night and the ensue day. 

how little cognizance have men over the action and motive of each 
other! how total is our blind with regard to our own performances! 
who would have sought me in the bowels of this mountain? age might have 
pass away, before my bone would be discover in this tomb by some 
traveller whom curiosity had prompt to explore it. 

i was rouse from these reflection by sarsefield's return. inquiring 
into clithero's condition, he answer that the unhappy man was 
insensible, but that, notwithstanding numerous and dreadful gash in 
different parts of his body, it was possible that, by submit to the 
necessary treatment, he might recover. 

encourage by this information, i endeavour to awaken the zeal and 
compassion of my friend in clithero's behalf. he recoil with 
involuntary shudder from any task which would confine him to the 
presence of this man. time and reflection, he said, might introduce 
different sentiment and feelings, but at present he could not but 
regard this person as a maniac, whose disease was irremediable, and 
whose existence could not be protract but to his own misery and the 
misery of others. 

finding him irreconcilable averse to any scheme connected with the 
welfare of clithero, i began to think that his assistance as a surgeon 
was by no means necessary. he had declared that the sufferer need 
nothing more than common treatment; and to this the skill of a score of 
age women in this district, furnish with simple cull from the 
forest, and pointed out, of old time, by indian _leeches_, was no 
less adequate than that of sarsefield. these women were ready and 
officious in their charity, and none of them were prepossessed against 
the sufferer by a knowledge of his genuine story. 

sarsefield, meanwhile, was impatient for my removal to inglefield's 
habitation, and that venerable friend was no less impatient to receive 
me. my hurt were superficial, and my strength sufficient repair by 
a night's repose. next day i went thither, leave clithero to the care 
of his immediate neighbours. 

sarsefield's engagement compel him to prosecute his journey into 
virginia, from which he had somewhat deviate in order to visit 
solesbury. he propose to return in less than a month, and then to take 
me in his company to new york. he has treat me with paternal 
tenderness, and insist upon the privilege of consulting for my interest 
as if he were my real father. meanwhile these view have been disclose 
to inglefield, and it is with him that i am to remain, with my sisters, 
until his return. 

my reflection have been various and tumultuous. they have been busy in 
relation to you, to weymouth, and especially to clithero. the latter, 
pollute with gore and weaken by abstinence, fatigue, and the loss of 
blood, appear in my eyes to be in a much more dangerous condition than 
the event prove him to be. i was punctual informed of the progress of 
his cure, and propose in a few days to visit him. the duty of 
explain the truth, respecting the present condition of mrs. lorimer, 
had devolve upon me. by impart this intelligence, i hope to work 
the most auspicious revolution in his feelings, and prepared, 
therefore, with alacrity, for an interview. 

in this hope i was destined to be disappointed. on the morning on which 
i intended to visit him, a messenger arrive from the house in which he 
was entertained, and informed us that the family, on enter the sick 
man's apartment, had found it deserted. it appear that clithero had, 
during the night, risen from his bed and gone secret forth. no trace 
of his flight have since been discovered. 

but, oh, my friend, the death of waldegrave, thy brother, is at length 
divest of uncertainty and mystery. hitherto, i had been able to form 
no conjecture respecting it; but the solution was found shortly after 
this time. 

queen mab, three days after my adventure, was seize in her hut on 
suspicion of have aid and counsel her countrymen in their late 
depredations. she was not to be awed or intimidate by the treatment she 
received, but readily confessed and glory in the mischief she had 
done, and account for it by enumerate the injury which she had 
received from her neighbours. 

these injury consist in contemptuous or neglectful treatment, and in 
the rejection of groundless and absurd claims. the people of chetasco 
were less obsequious to her humour than those of solesbury, her ancient 
neighbourhood, and her imagination brood for a long time over nothing 
but scheme of revenge. she became sullen, irascible, and spent more of 
her time in solitude than ever. 

a troop of her countrymen at length visit her hut. their intentions 
being hostile, they conceal from the inhabitant their presence in 
this quarter of the country. some motive induce them to withdraw and 
postpone, for the present, the violence which they meditated. one of 
them, however, more sanguinary and audacious than the rest, would not 
depart without some gratification of his vengeance. he left his 
associate and penetrate by night into solesbury, resolve to attack 
the first human being whom he should meet. it was the fate of thy 
unhappy brother to encounter this ruffian, whose sagacity made him 
forbear to tear away the usual trophy from the dead, lest he should 
afford grounds for suspicion as to the author of the evil. 

satisfy with this exploit, he rejoin his companions, and, after an 
interval of three weeks, return with a more numerous party, to execute 
a more extensive project of destruction. they were counsel and 
guided, in all their movements, by queen mab, who now explain these 
particulars and bold defy her oppressors. her usual obstinacy and 
infatuation induce her to remain in her ancient dwelling and prepare to 
meet the consequences. 

this disclosure awaken anew all the regrets and anguish which flow 
from that disaster. it has been productive, however, of some benefit. 
suspicion and doubts, by which my soul was harassed, and which were 
injurious to the innocent, are now at an end. it is likewise some 
imperfect consolation to reflect that the assassin has himself been 
killed, and probably by my own hand. the shed of blood no long 
lives to pursue his vocation, and justice is satisfied. 

thus have i fulfill my promise to compose a minute relation of my 
sufferings. i remember my duty to thee, and, as soon as i was able to 
hold a pen, employ it to inform thee of my welfare. i could not at 
that time enter into particulars, but reserved a more copious narrative 
till a period of more health and leisure. 

on look back, i am surprise at the length to which my story has run. 
i thought that a few days would suffice to complete it; but one page has 
insensible been add to another, till i have consume week and fill 
volumes. here i will draw to a close; i will send you what i have 
written, and discuss with you in conversation my other immediate 
concerns, and my scheme for the future. as soon as i have seen 
sarsefield, i will visit you. farewell. e. h. 

solesbury, november 10. 




letter i. 

_to mr. sarsefield._ 



philadelphia. 

i came hither but ten minutes ago, and write this letter in the bar of 
the stage-house. i wish not to lose a moment in inform you of what 
has happened. i cannot do justice to my own feelings when i reflect upon 
the rash of which i have been guilty. 

i will give you the particulars to-morrow. at present, i shall only say 
that clithero is alive, is apprize of your wife's arrival and abode in 
new york, and has set out with mysterious intentions to visit her. 

may heaven avert the consequence of such a design! may you be enabled, 
by some means, to prevent their meeting! if you cannot prevent it--but i 
must not reason on such an event, nor lengthen out this letter. 

e. h. 




letter ii. 

_to the same._ 



i will now relate the particulars which i yesterday promise to send 
you. you heard through your niece of my arrival at inglefield's, in 
solesbury: my inquiries, you may readily suppose, would turn upon the 
fate of my friend's servant clithero, whose last disappearance was so 
strange and abrupt, and of whom, since that time, i had heard nothing. 
you are indifferent to his fate, and are anxious only that his existence 
and misfortune may be speedy forgotten. i confess that it is somewhat 
otherwise with me. i pity him; i wish to relieve him, and cannot admit 
the belief that his misery is without a cure. i want to find him out. i 
want to know his condition, and, if possible, to afford him comfort and 
inspire him with courage and hope. 

inglefield reply to my questions:--"oh yes! he has appeared. the 
strange being is again upon the stage. shortly after he left his 
sick-bed, i heard from philip beddington, of chetasco, that deb's hut had 
found a new tenant. at first i imagine that the scotsman who built it 
had returned; but, making close inquiries, i found that the new tenant 
was my servant. i had no inclination to visit him myself, but frequent 
inquire respecting him of those who live or pass that way, and find 
that he still lives there." 

"but how!" said i: "what is his mode of subsistence? the winter has been 
no time for cultivation; and he found, i presume, nothing in the 
ground." 

"deb's hut," reply my friend, "is his lodging and his place of 
retirement, but food and clothing he procure by labour on a 
neighbouring farm. this farm is next to that of beddington, who 
consequently know something of his present situation. i find little or 
no difference in his present deportment and those appearances which he 
assume while living with me, except that he retire every night to his 
hut, and hold as little intercourse as possible with the rest of 
mankind. he dine at his employer's table; but his supper, which is 
nothing but rye-bread, he carry home with him, and, at all those times 
when disengaged from employment, he seclude himself in his hut, or 
wander nobody know whither." 

this was the substance of inglefield's intelligence. i glean from it 
some satisfaction. it prove the condition of clithero to be less 
deplorable and desperate than i had previous imagined. his fatal and 
gloomy thought seem to have somewhat yield to tranquillity. 

in the course of my reflections, however, i could not but perceive that 
his condition, though eligible when compare with what it once was, was 
likewise disastrous and humiliating, compare with his youthful hope 
and his actual merits. for such a one to mope away his life in this 
unsocial and savage state was deep to be deplored. it was my duty, if 
possible, to prevail on him to relinquish his scheme. and what would be 
requisite, for that end, but to inform him of the truth? 

the source of his dejection was the groundless belief that he had 
occasion the death of his benefactress. it was this alone that could 
just produce remorse or grief. it was a distempered imagination both 
in him and in me that had given birth to this opinion, since the terms 
of his narrative, impartial considered, were far from imply that 
catastrophe. to him, however, the evidence which he possessed was 
incontestable. no deduction from probability could overthrow his 
belief. this could only be effect by similar and counter evidence. to 
apprize him that she was now alive, in possession of some degree of 
happiness, the wife of sarsefield, and an actual resident on this shore, 
would dissipate the sanguinary apparition that haunt him, cure his 
disease intellects, and restore him to those vocation for which his 
talents, and that rank in society for which his education, had qualified 
him. influence by these thoughts, i determined to visit his retreat. 
being oblige to leave solesbury the next day, i resolve to set out the 
same afternoon, and, stopping in chetasco for the night, seek his 
habitation at the hour when he had probably retired to it. 

this was done. i arrive at beddington's at nightfall. my inquiry 
respecting clithero obtain for me the same intelligence from him which 
i had received from inglefield. deb's hut was three mile from this 
habitation, and thither, when the evening had somewhat advanced, i 
repaired. this was the spot which had witness so many peril during 
the last year; and my emotions, on approach it, were awful. with 
palpitate heart and quick steps i traverse the road, skirt on each 
side by thickets, and the area before the house. the dwelling was by no 
means in so ruinous a state as when i last visit it. the cranny 
between the log had been fill up, and the light within was 
perceive only at a crevice in the door. 

look through this crevice, i perceive a fire in the chimney, but the 
object of my visit was nowhere to be seen. i knock and request 
admission, but no answer was made. at length i lift the latch and 
entered. nobody was there. 

it was obvious to suppose that clithero had gone abroad for a short 
time, and would speedy return; or perhaps some engagement had detain 
him at his labour later than usual. i therefore seat myself on some 
straw near the fire, which, with a woollen rug, appear to constitute 
his only bed. the rude bedstead which i formerly met was gone. the 
slender furniture, likewise, which had then engaged my attention, had 
disappeared. there was nothing capable of human use but a heap of fagot 
in the corner, which seem intended for fuel. how slender is the 
accommodation which nature has provided for man, and how scanty is the 
portion which our physical necessity require! 

while ruminate upon this scene, and compare past event with the 
object before me, the dull whistle of the gale without gave place to 
the sound of footsteps. presently the door opened, and clithero enter 
the apartment. his aspect and guise were not essentially different from 
those which he wore when an inhabitant of solesbury. 

to find his hearth occupy by another appear to create the deepest 
surprise. he look at me without any token of remembrance. his 
features assume a more austere expression, and, after scowl on my 
person for a moment, he withdrew his eyes, and, place in a corner a 
bundle which he bore in his hand, he turn and seem prepare to 
withdraw. 

i was anxious attentive to his demeanour, and, as soon as i perceive 
his purpose to depart, leap on my feet to prevent it. i took his hand, 
and, affectionate pressing it, said, "do you not know me? have you so 
soon forgotten me, who is truly your friend?" 

he look at me with some attention, but again withdrew his eyes, and 
placed himself in silence on the seat which i had left. i seat myself 
near him, and a pause of mutual silence ensued. 

my mind was full of the purpose that brought me hither, but i knew not 
in what manner to communicate my purpose. several times i open my lip 
to speak, but my perplexity continued, and suitable words refuse to 
suggest themselves. at length i said, in a confuse tone,-- 

"i came hither with a view to benefit a man with whose misfortune his 
own lip have made me acquainted, and who has awaken in my breast the 
deepest sympathy. i know the cause and extent of his dejection. i know 
the event which has given birth to horror and remorse in his heart. he 
believe that, by his means, his patroness and benefactress has found an 
untimely death." 

these words produce a visible shock in my companion, which evince that 
i had at least engaged his attention. i proceeded:-- 

"this unhappy lady was cursed with a wicked and unnatural brother. she 
conceive a disproportionate affection for this brother, and erroneous 
imagine that her fate was blend with his, that their lives would 
necessarily terminate at the same period, and that, therefore, whoever 
was the contrive of his death was likewise, by a fatal and invincible 
necessity, the author of her own. 

"clithero was her servant, but was raise by her bounty to the station 
of her son and the rank of her friend. clithero, in self-defence, took 
away the life of that unnatural brother, and, in that deed, false but 
cogent believe that he had perpetrate the destruction of his 
benefactress. 

"to ascertain the truth, he sought her presence. she was found, the 
tidings of her brother's death were communicated, and she sank 
breathless at his feet." 

at these words clithero start from the ground, and cast upon me looks 
of furious indignation. "and come you hither," he muttered, "for this 
end?--to recount my offence and drive me again to despair?" 

"no," answer i, with quickness; "i come to outroot a fatal but 
powerful illusion. i come to assure you that the woman with whose 
destruction you charge yourself is _not dead_." 

these words, utter with the most emphatic solemnity, merely produce 
looks in which contempt was mingle with anger. he continue silent. 

"i perceive," resume i, "that my words are disregarded. would to heaven 
i were able to conquer your incredulity, could show you not only the 
truth but the probability of my tale! can you not confide in me? that 
euphemia lorimer is now alive, is happy, is the wife of sarsefield? that 
her brother is forgotten and his murder regard without enmity or 
vengeance?" 

he look at me with a strange expression of contempt. "come," said he, 
at length; "make out thy assertion to be true. fall on thy knees, and 
invoke the thunder of heaven to light on thy head if thy words be false. 
swear that euphemia lorimer is alive; happy; forgetful of wiatte and 
compassionate of me. swear that thou hast seen her; talk with her; 
received from her own lip the confession of her pity for him who aim 
a dagger at her bosom. swear that she is sarsefield's wife." 

i put my hand together, and, lift my eyes to heaven, exclaimed, "i 
comply with your conditions. i call the omniscient god to witness that 
euphemia lorimer is alive; that i have seen her with these eyes; have 
talk with her; have inhabit the same house for months." 

these asseverate were listen to with shuddering. he laid not aside, 
however, an air of incredulity and contempt. "perhaps," said he, "thou 
canst point out the place of her abode?--canst guide me to the city, the 
street, the very door of her habitation?" 

"i can. she reside at this moment in the city of new york; in broadway; 
in a house contiguous to the--." 

"'tis well!" exclaim my companion, in a tone loud, abrupt, and in the 
utmost degree vehement. "'tis well! rash and infatuated youth, thou hast 
ratified, beyond appeal or forgiveness, thy own doom. thou hast once 
more let loose my steps, and sent me on a fearful journey. thou hast 
furnish the means of detect thy imposture. i will fly to the spot 
which thou describest. i will ascertain thy falsehood with my own eyes. 
if she be alive, then am i reserved for the performance of a new crime. 
my evil destiny will have it so. if she be dead, i shall make thee 
expiate." 

so saying, he dart through the door, and was gone in a moment beyond 
my sight and my reach. i ran to the road, look on every side, and 
called; but my call were repeated in vain. he had flee with the 
swift of a deer. 

my own embarrassment, confusion, and terror were inexpressible. his last 
words were incoherent. they denote the tumult and vehemence of frenzy. 
they intimate his resolution to seek the presence of your wife. i had 
furnish a clue which could not fail to conduct him to her presence. 
what might not be dread from the interview? clithero is a maniac. this 
truth cannot be concealed. your wife can with difficulty preserve her 
tranquill when his image occur to her remembrance. what must it be 
when he start up before her in his neglect and ferocious guise, and 
armed with purpose perhaps as terrible as those which had formerly led 
him to her secret chamber and her bedside? 

his meaning was obscure conveyed. he talk of a deed for the 
performance of which his malignant fate had reserved him, which was to 
ensue their meeting, and which was to afford disastrous testimony of the 
infatuation which had led me hither. 

heaven grant that some means may suggest themselves to you of 
intercept his approach! yet i know not what means can be conceived. 
some miraculous chance may befriend you; yet this is scarcely to be 
hoped. it is a visionary and fantastic base on which to rest our 
security. 

i cannot forget that my unfortunate temerity has create this evil. yet 
who could foresee this consequence of my intelligence? i imagine that 
clithero was merely a victim of erroneous gratitude, a slave of the 
error of his education and the prejudice of his rank; that his 
understanding was delude by phantom in the mask of virtue and duty, 
and not, as you have strenuous maintained, utterly subverted. 

i shall not escape your censure, but i shall, likewise, gain your 
compassion. i have erred, not through sinister or malignant intentions, 
but from the impulse of misguided, indeed, but powerful, benevolence. 




letter iii. 

_to edgar huntly_. 



new york. 

edgar:-- 

after the fatigues of the day, i return home. as i entered, my wife 
was break the seal of a letter; but, on seeing me, she forbore, and 
present the letter to me. 

"i saw," said she, "by the superscription of this letter, who the writer 
was. so, agreeably to your wishes, i proceed to open it; but you have 
come just time enough to save me the trouble." 

this letter was from you. it contained information relative to clithero. 
see how imminent a chance it was that save my wife from a knowledge of 
its contents! it require all my effort to hide my perturbation from 
her and excuse myself from showing her the letter. 

i know better than you the character of clithero, and the consequence 
of a meeting between him and my wife. you may be sure that i would exert 
myself to prevent a meeting. 

the method for me to pursue was extremely obvious. clithero is a madman, 
whose liberty is dangerous, and who require to be fetter and 
imprison as the most atrocious criminal. 

i hasten to the chief-magistrate, who is my friend, and, by proper 
representations, obtain from him authority to seize clithero wherever 
i should meet with him, and effectually debar him from the perpetrate 
of new mischiefs. 

new york do not afford a place of confinement for lunatic as suitable 
to his case as pennsylvania. i was desirous of place him as far as 
possible from the place of my wife's residence. fortunately, there was a 
packet for philadelphia on the point of setting out on her voyage. this 
vessel i engaged to wait a day or two, for the purpose of convey him 
to pennsylvania hospital. meanwhile, proper person were station at 
powle hook, and at the quay where the various stage-boats from jersey 
arrive. 

these precaution were effectual. not many hour after the receipt of 
your intelligence, this unfortunate man applied for a passage at 
elizabethtown, was seize the moment he set his foot on shore, and was 
forthwith convey to the packet, which immediately set sail. 

i design that all these proceedings should be conceal from the 
women, but unfortunately neglect to take suitable measure for 
hinder the letter, which you gave me reason to expect on the ensue 
day, from coming into their hands. it was deliver to my wife in my 
absence, and open immediately by her. 

you know what is, at present, her personal condition. you know what 
strong reason i had to prevent any danger or alarm from approach 
her. terror could not assume a shape more ghastly than this. the effects 
have been what might have been easily predicted. her own life has been 
imminent endangered, and an untimely birth has blasted my fondest 
hope. her infant, with whose future existence so many pleasure were 
entwined, is dead. 

i assure you, edgar, my philosophy has not found itself lightsome and 
active under this burden. i find it hard to forbear comment on your 
rash in no very mild terms. you act in direct opposition to my 
counsel and to the plainest dictate of propriety. be more circumspect 
and more obsequious for the future. 

you knew the liberty that would be taken of opening my letters; you knew 
of my absence from home during the greatest part of the day, and the 
likelihood, therefore, that your letters would fall into my wife's hand 
before they came into mine. these consideration should have prompt 
you to send them under cover to whitworth or harvey, with directions to 
give them immediately to me. 

some of these event happen in my absence; for i determined to 
accompany the packet myself, and see the madman safe deliver to the 
care of the hospital. 

i will not torture your sensibility by recount the incident of his 
arrest and detention. you will imagine that his strong but pervert 
reason exclaim loud against the injustice of his treatment. it was 
easy for him to out-reason his antagonist, and nothing but force could 
subdue his opposition. on me devolve the province of his jailer and his 
tyrant,--a province which require a heart more steel by spectacles of 
suffering and the exercise of cruelty than mine had been. 

scarcely had we pass the narrows, when the lunatic, being suffer to 
walk the deck, (as no apprehension were entertain of his escape in 
such circumstances,) threw himself overboard, with a seeming intention 
to gain the shore. the boat was immediately manned; the fugitive was 
pursued; but, at the moment when his flight was overtaken, he forced 
himself beneath the surface, and was seen no more. 

with the life of this wretch, let our regrets and our foreboding 
terminate. he has save himself from evil for which no time would have 
provided a remedy, from lingering for years in the noisome dungeon of a 
hospital. have no reason to continue my voyage, i put myself on board 
a coasting-sloop, and regain this city in a few hours. i persuade 
myself that my wife's indisposition will be temporary. it was impossible 
to hide from her the death of clithero, and its circumstances. may this 
be the last arrow in the quiver of adversity! farewell. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of edgar huntley, by charles brockden brown 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook edgar huntley *** 

***** this file should be name 8223.txt or 8223.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/2/2/8223/ 

produce by online distribute proofread team 
update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
