the project gutenberg ebook of the three impostors, by arthur machen 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the three impostor 
or the transmute 

author: arthur machen 

release date: march 8, 2011 [ebook #35517] 
[last updated: july 16, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the three impostor *** 




produce by marc d'hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org 




the three impostor 

or the transmute 

by 

arthur machen 



translator of 'l'heptameron' and 'le moyen de parvenir'; 

author of 'the chronicle of clemendy' and 'the great god pan' 



boston: robert bros, 1895 

london: john lane, vigo st. 




contents 

prologue 
adventure of the gold tiberiu 
the encounter of the pavement 
novel of the dark valley 
adventure of the missing brother 
novel of the black seal 
incident of the private bar 
the decorative imagination 
novel of the iron maid 
the recluse of bayswater 
novel of the white powder 
strange occurrence in clerkenwell 
history of the young man with spectacles 
adventure of the desert residence 




the three impostors. 




prologue. 


"and mr. joseph walter is go to stay the night?" said the smooth 
clean-shaven man to his companion, an individual not of the most 
charming appearance, who had chosen to make his ginger-colored mustache 
merge into a pair of short chin-whiskers. 

the two stood at the hall door, grin evil at each other; and 
presently a girl ran quick down, the stairs, and join them. she was 
quite young, with a quaint and piquant rather than a beautiful face, and 
her eyes were of a shining hazel. she held a neat paper parcel in one 
hand, and laugh with her friends. 

"leave the door open," said the smooth man to the other, as they were 
go out. "yes, by----," he went on with an ugly oath. "we'll leave the 
front door on the jar. he may like to see company, you know." 

the other man look doubtful about him. "is it quite prudent do you 
think, davies?" he said, pause with his hand on the moulder 
knocker. "i don't think lipsiu would like it. what do you say, helen?" 

"i agree with davies. davies is an artist, and you are commonplace, 
richmond, and a bit of a coward. let the door stand open, of course. but 
what a pity lipsiu had to go away! he would have enjoy himself." 

"yes," reply the smooth mr. davies, "that summons to the west was very 
hard on the doctor." 

the three pass out, leave the hall door, cracked and riven with 
frost and wet, half open, and they stood silent for a moment under the 
ruinous shelter of the porch. 

"well," said the girl, "it is done at last. i shall hurry no more on the 
track of the young man with spectacles." 

"we owe a great deal to you," said mr. davies politely; "the doctor said 
so before he left. but have we not all three some farewell to make? i, 
for my part, propose to say good-by, here, before this picturesque but 
mouldy residence, to my friend mr. burton, dealer in the antique and 
curious," and the man lift his hat with an exaggerate bow. 

"and i," said richmond, "bid adieu to mr. wilkins, the private 
secretary, whose company has, i confess, become a little tedious." 

"farewell to miss lally, and to miss leicester also," said the girl, 
making as she spoke a delicious courtesy. "farewell to all occult 
adventure; the farce is played." 

mr. davies and the lady seem full of grim enjoyment, but richmond 
tug at his whiskers nervously. 

"i feel a bit shaken up," he said. "i've seen rough things in the 
states, but that crying noise he made gave me a sickish feeling. and 
then the smell--but my stomach was never very strong." 

the three friends move away from the door, and began to walk slow up 
and down what had been a gravel path, but now lay green and pulpy with 
damp mosses. it was a fine autumn evening, and a faint sunlight shone on 
the yellow wall of the old desert house, and show the patch of 
gangrenous decay, and all the stains, the black drift of rain from the 
broken pipes, the scabrous blot where the bare brick were exposed, the 
green weeping of a gaunt laburnum that stood beside the porch, and 
ragged mark near the ground where the reek clay was gain on the 
worn foundations. it was a queer rambling old place, the centre perhaps 
two hundred years old, with dormer window slope from the tile roof, 
and on each side there were georgia wings; bow window had been carry 
up to the first floor, and two dome-like cupola that had once been 
paint a bright green were now gray and neutral. broken urn lay upon 
the path, and a heavy mist seem to rise from the unctuous clay; the 
neglect shrubberies, grown all tangle and unshapen, smelt dank and 
evil, and there was an atmosphere all about the desert mansion that 
propose thought of an open grave. the three friends look dismal 
at the rough grass and the nettle that grew thick over lawn and 
flower-beds; and at the sad water-pool in the midst of the weeds. there, 
above green and oily scum instead of lilies, stood a rust triton on 
the rocks, sound a dirge through a shatter horn; and beyond, beyond 
the sunk fence and the far meadows; the sun slid down and shone red 
through the bar of the elm trees. 

richmond shiver and stamp his foot. "we had better be go soon," 
he said; "there is nothing else to be done here." 

"no," said davies, "it is finished at last. i thought for some time we 
should never get hold of the gentleman with the spectacles. he was a 
clever fellow, but, lord! he broke up badly at last. i can tell you he 
look white at me when i touched him on the arm in the bar. but where 
could he have hidden the thing? we can all swear it was not on him." 

the girl laughed, and they turn away, when richmond gave a violent 
start. "ah!" he cried, turning to the girl, "what have you got there? 
look, davies, look! it's all ooze and dripping." 

the young woman glance down at the little parcel she was carrying, and 
partially unfold the paper. 

"yes, look both of you," she said; "it's my own idea. don't you think it 
will do nicely for the doctor's museum? it come from the right hand, 
the hand that took the gold tiberius." 

mr. davies nod with a good deal of approbation, and richmond lift 
his ugly high-crowned bowler, and wipe his forehead with a dingy 
handkerchief. 

"i'm going," he said; "you two can stay if you like." 

the three went round by the stable path, past the wither wilderness of 
the old kitchen garden, and struck off by a hedge at the back, making 
for a particular point in the road. about five minutes later two 
gentlemen, whom idle had led to explore these forgotten outskirts of 
london, came saunter up the shadowy carriage drive. they had spy 
the desert house from the road, and as they observe all the heavy 
desolate of the place they began to moralize in the great style, with 
considerable debt to jeremy taylor. 

"look, dyson," said the one as they drew nearer, "look at those upper 
windows; the sun is setting, and though the pane are dusty, yet 

"the grimy sash an oriel burns." 

"phillipps," reply the elder and (it must be said) the more pompous of 
the two, "i yield to fantasy, i cannot withstand the influence of the 
grotesque. here, where all is fall into dim and dissolution, and 
we walk in cedarn gloom, and the very air of heaven go moulder to 
the lungs, i cannot remain commonplace. i look at that deep glow on the 
panes, and the house lie all enchanted; that very room, i tell you, is 
within all blood and fire." 




adventure of the gold tiberius. 


the acquaintance between mr. dyson and mr. charles phillipp arose from 
one of those myriad chance which are every day do their work in the 
street of london. mr. dyson was a man of letters, and an unhappy 
instance of talent misapplied. with gift that might have placed him in 
the flower of his youth among the most favored of bentley's favorite 
novelists, he had chosen to be perverse; he was, it is true, familiar 
with scholastic logic, but he knew nothing of the logic of life, and he 
flatter himself with the title of artist, when he was in fact but an 
idle and curious spectator of other men's endeavors. amongst many 
delusions, he cherish one most fondly, that he was a strenuous worker; 
and it was with a gesture of supreme weary that he would enter his 
favorite resort, a small tobacco shop in great queen street, and 
proclaim to any one who care to listen that he had seen the rising and 
setting of two successive suns. the proprietor of the shop, a 
middle-aged man of singular civility, tolerate dyson partly out of good 
nature, and partly because he was a regular customer; he was allow to 
sit on an empty cask, and to express his sentiment on literary and 
artistic matter till he was tired or the time for close came; and if 
no fresh customer were attracted, it is believe that none were turn 
away by his eloquence. dyson, was addict to wild experiment in 
tobacco; he never weary of try new combinations, and one evening he 
had just enter the shop and given utterance to his last preposterous 
formula, when a young fellow, of about his own age, who had come in a 
moment later, ask the shopman to duplicate the order on his account, 
smile politely, as he spoke, to mr. dyson's address. dyson felt 
profound flattered, and after a few phrase the two enter into 
conversation, and in an hour's time the tobacconist saw the new friends 
sitting side by side on a couple of casks, deep in talk. 

"my dear sir," said dyson, "i will give you the task of the literary man 
in a phrase. he has got to do simply this: to invent a wonderful story, 
and to tell it in a wonderful manner." 

"i will grant you that," said mr. phillipps, "but you will allow me to 
insist that in the hand of the true artist in words all story are 
marvellous, and every circumstance has its peculiar wonder. the matter 
is of little consequence, the manner is everything. indeed, the highest 
skill is shown in taking matter apparently commonplace and transmute 
it by the high alchemy of style into the pure gold of art." 

"that is indeed a proof of great skill, but it is great skill exert 
foolishly, or at least unadvisedly. it is as if a great violinist were 
to show us what marvellous harmony he could draw from a child's 
banjo." 

"no, no, you are really wrong. i see you take a radical mistaken view 
of life. but we must thresh this out. come to my rooms; i live not far 
from here." 

it was thus that mr. dyson became the associate of mr. charles 
phillipps, who live in a quiet square not far from holborn. thenceforth 
they haunt each other's rooms at intervals, sometimes regular, and 
occasional the reverse, and made appointments to meet at the shop in 
queen street, where their talk rob the tobacconist's profit of half 
its charm. there was a constant jar of literary formulas, dyson 
exalt the claim of the pure imagination, while phillipps, who was a 
student of physical science and something of an ethnologist, insist 
that all literature ought to have a scientific basis. by the mistaken 
benevolence of deceased relative both young men were placed out of 
reach of hunger, and so, meditate high achievements, idle their time 
pleasant away, and revel in the careless joy of a bohemian 
devoid of the sharp seasoning of adversity. 

one night in june mr. phillipp was sitting in his room in the calm 
retirement of red lion square. he had open the window, and was smoking 
placidly, while he watch the movement of life below. the sky was 
clear, and the afterglow of sunset had linger long about it; and the 
flush twilight of a summer evening, vie with the gas-lamps in the 
square, had fashion a chiaroscuro that had in it something unearthly; 
and the children, racing to and fro upon the pavement, the lounge 
idle by the public, and the casual passers-by rather flickered, and 
hover in the play of lights than stood out substantial things. by 
degree in the house opposite one window after another leap out a 
square of light, now and again a figure would shape itself against a 
blind and vanish, and to all this semi-theatrical magic the runs and 
flourish of brave italy opera play a little distance off on a 
piano-organ seem an appropriate accompaniment, while the deep-muttered 
bass of the traffic of holborn never ceased. phillipp enjoy the scene 
and its effects; the light in the sky fade and turn to darkness, and 
the square gradual grew silent, and still he sat dream at the 
window, till the sharp peal of the house bell rouse him, and look at 
his watch he found that it was past ten o'clock. there was a knock at 
the door, and his friend mr. dyson entered, and, according to his 
custom, sat down in an armchair and began to smoke in silence. 

"you know, phillipps," he said at length, "that i have always battle 
for the marvellous. i remember your maintain in that chair that one 
has no business to make use of the wonderful, the improbable, the odd 
coincidence in literature, and you took the ground that it was wrong to 
do so, because, as a matter of fact, the wonderful and the improbable 
don't happen, and men's lives are not really shaped by odd coincidence. 
now, mind you, if that were so, i would not grant your conclusion, 
because i think the "criticism-of-life" theory is all nonsense; but i 
deny your premise. a most singular thing has happen to me to-night." 

"really, dyson, i am very glad to hear it. of course i oppose your 
argument, whatever it may be; but if you would be good enough to tell me 
of your adventure i should be delighted." 

"well, it came about like this. i have had a very hard day's work; 
indeed, i have scarcely move from my old bureau since seven o'clock 
last night. i want to work out that idea we discuss last tuesday, 
you know, the notion of the fetish-worshipper." 

"yes, i remember. have you been able to do anything with it?" 

"yes; it came out better than i expected; but there were great 
difficulties, the usual agony between the conception and the execution. 
anyhow i got it done at about seven o'clock to-night, and i thought i 
should like a little of the fresh air. i went out and wander rather 
aimless about the streets; my head was full of my tale, and i didn't 
much notice where i was going. i got into those quiet place to the 
north of oxford street as you go west, the genteel residential 
neighborhood of stucco and prosperity. i turn east again without 
knowing it, and it was quite dark when i pass along a sombre little 
by-street, ill light and empty. i did not know at the time in the 
least where i was, but i found out afterwards that it was not very far 
from tottenham court road. i stroll idle along, enjoy the 
stillness; on one side there seem to be the back premises of some 
great shop; tier after tier of dusty window lift up into the night, 
with gibbet-like contrivance for raise heavy goods, and below large 
doors, fast closed and bolted, all dark and desolate. then there came a 
huge pantechnicon warehouse; and over the way a grim blank wall, as 
forbidding as the wall of a jail, and then the headquarters of some 
volunteer regiment, and afterwards a passage leading to a court where 
wagon were standing to be hired. it was, one might almost say, a street 
devoid of inhabitants, and scarce a window show the glimmer of a 
light. i was wonder at the strange peace and dim there, where it 
must be close to some roaring main artery of london life, when sudden 
i heard the noise of dashing feet tear along the pavement at full 
speed, and from a narrow passage, a mews or something of that kind, a 
man was discharge as from a catapult under my very nose and rush past 
me, fling something from him as he ran. he was gone and down another 
street in an instant, almost before i knew what had happened, but i 
didn't much bother about him, i was watch something else. i told you 
he had thrown something away; well, i watch what seem a line of 
flame flash through the air and fly quiver over the pavement, and in 
spite of myself i could not help tear after it. the impetus lessened, 
and i saw something like a bright half-penny roll slow and slower, and 
then deflect towards the gutter, hover for a moment on the edge, and 
dance down into a drain. i believe i cry out in positive despair, 
though i hadn't the least notion what i was hunting; and then to my joy 
i saw that, instead of drop into the sewer, it had fallen flat 
across two bars. i stoop down and picked it up and whip it into my 
pocket, and i was just about to walk on when i heard again that sound of 
dashing footsteps. i don't know why i did it, but as a matter of fact i 
dive down into the mews, or whatever it was, and stood as much in the 
shadow as possible. a man went by with a rush a few pace from where i 
was standing, and i felt uncommonly pleased that i was in hiding. i 
couldn't make out much feature, but i saw his eyes gleam and his 
teeth showing, and he had an ugly-looking knife in one hand, and i 
thought things would be very unpleasant for gentleman number one if the 
second robber, or robbed, or what you like, caught him up. i can tell 
you, phillipps, a fox hunt is exciting enough, when the horn blow clear 
on a winter morning, and the hound give tongue, and the red-coats 
charge away, but it's nothing to a man hunt, and that's what i had a 
slight glimpse of to-night. there was murder in the fellow's eyes as he 
went by, and i don't think there was much more than fifty seconds 
between the two. i only hope it was enough." 

dyson leant back in his armchair and relit his pipe, and puffed 
thoughtfully. phillipp began to walk up and down the room, muse over 
the story of violent death fleeting in chase along the pavement, the 
knife shining in the lamplight, the fury of the pursuer, and the terror 
of the pursued. 

"well," he said at last, "and what was it, after all, that you rescue 
from the gutter?" 

dyson jump up, evidently quite startled. "i really haven't a notion. i 
didn't think of looking. but we shall see." 

he fumble in his waistcoat pocket and drew out a small and shining 
object, and laid it on the table. it glow there beneath the lamp with 
the radiant glory of rare old gold; and the image and the letters stood 
out in high relief, clear and sharp, as if it had but left the mint a 
month before. the two men bent over it, and phillipp took it up and 
examine it closely. 

"imp. tiberiu cæsar augustus," he read the legend, and then, look at 
the reverse of the coin, he stare in amazement, and at last turn to 
dyson with a look of exultation. 

"do you know what you have found?" he said. 

"apparently a gold coin of some antiquity," said dyson, coolly. 

"quite so, a gold tiberius. no, that is wrong. you have found _the_ gold 
tiberius. look at the reverse." 

dyson look and saw the coin was stamp with the figure of a faun 
standing amidst reeds and flowing water. the features, minute as they 
were, stood out in delicate outline; it was a face lovely and yet 
terrible, and dyson thought of the well-known passage of the lad's 
playmate, gradual grow with his growth and increase with his 
stature, till the air was fill with the rank fume of the goat. 

"yes," he said, "it is a curious coin. do you know it?" 

"i know about it. it is one of the comparatively few historical object 
in existence; it is all storied like those jewel we have read of. a 
whole cycle of legend has gather round the thing; the tale go that 
it form part of an issue struck by tiberiu to commemorate an infamous 
excess. you see the legend on the reverse: 'victoria.' it is said that 
by an extraordinary accident the whole issue was thrown into the melting 
pot, and that only this one coin escaped. it glint through history and 
legend, appear and disappearing, with interval of a hundred years in 
time and continent in place. it was discover by an italy humanist, 
and lost and rediscovered. it has not been heard of since 1727, when sir 
joshua byrde, a turkey merchant, brought it home from aleppo, and 
vanish with it a month after he had shown it to the virtuosi, no man 
knew or know where. and here it is!" 

"put it into your pocket, dyson," he said, after a pause. "i would not 
let any one have a glimpse of the thing, if i were you. i would not talk 
about it. did either of the men you saw see you?" 

"well, i think not. i don't think the first man, the man who was vomit 
out of the dark passage, saw anything at all; and i am sure that the 
second could not have seen me." 

"and you didn't really see them. you couldn't recognize either the one 
or the other if you met him in the street to-morrow?" 

"no, i don't think i could. the street, as i said, was dim lighted, 
and they ran like mad-men." 

the two men sat silent for some time, each weave his own fancies of 
the story; but lust of the marvellous was slow overpowering dyson's 
more sober thoughts. 

"it is all more strange than i fancied," he said at last. "it was queer 
enough what i saw; a man is saunter along a quiet, sober, every-day 
london street, a street of gray house and blank walls, and there, for a 
moment, a veil seem drawn aside, and the very fume of the pit steam up 
through the flagstones, the ground glows, red hot, beneath his feet, and 
he seem to hear the hiss of the infernal caldron. a man flying in mad 
terror for his life, and furious hate pressing hot on his steps with 
knife drawn ready; here indeed is horror. but what is all that to what 
you have told me? i tell you, phillipps, i see the plot thicken, our 
steps will henceforth be dogged with mystery, and the most ordinary 
incident will teem with significance. you may stand out against it, and 
shut your eyes, but they will be forced open; mark my words, you will 
have to yield to the inevitable. a clue, tangle if you like, has been 
placed by chance in our hands; it will be our business to follow it up. 
as for the guilty person or person in this strange case, they will be 
unable to escape us, our nets will be spread far and wide over this 
great city, and suddenly, in the street and place of public resort, we 
shall in some way or other be made aware that we are in touch with the 
unknown criminal. indeed, i almost fancy i see him slow approach 
this quiet square of yours; he is loiter at street corners, 
wandering, apparently without aim, down far-reaching thoroughfares, but 
all the while coming near and nearer, drawn by an irresistible 
magnetism, as ship were drawn to the loadstone rock in the eastern 
tale." 

"i certainly think," reply phillipps, "that, if you pull out that coin 
and flourish it under people's nose as you are do at the present 
moment, you will very probably find yourself in touch with the criminal, 
or a criminal. you will undoubted be rob with violence. otherwise, 
i see no reason why either of us should be troubled. no one saw you 
secure the coin, and no one know you have it. i, for my part, shall 
sleep peacefully, and go about my business with a sense of security and 
a firm dependence on the natural order of things. the event of the 
evening, the adventure in the street, have been odd, i grant you, but i 
resolute decline to have any more to do with the matter, and, if 
necessary, i shall consult the police. i will not be enslave by a gold 
tiberius, even though it swim into my ken in a manner which is somewhat 
melodramatic." 

"and i for my part," said dyson, "go forth like a knight-errant in 
search of adventure. not that i shall need to seek; rather adventure 
will seek me; i shall be like a spider in the midst of his web, 
responsive to every movement, and ever on the alert." 

shortly afterwards dyson took his leave, and mr. phillipp spent the 
rest of the night in examine some flint arrow-heads which he had 
purchased. he had every reason to believe that they were the work of a 
modern and not a palæolithic man, still he was far from gratify when a 
close scrutiny show him that his suspicion were well founded. in his 
anger at the turpitude which would impose on an ethnologist, he 
completely forgot dyson and the gold tiberius; and when he went to bed 
at first sunlight, the whole tale had fade utterly from his thoughts. 




the encounter of the pavement. 


mr. dyson, walking leisurely along oxford. street, and staring with 
bland inquiry at whatever caught his attention, enjoy in all its rare 
flavor the sensation that he was really very hard at work. his 
observation of mankind, the traffic, and the shop-windows tickle his 
faculty with an exquisite bouquet; he look serious, as one looks on 
whom charge of weight and moment are laid, and he was attentive in his 
glance to right and left, for fear lest he should miss some 
circumstance of more acute significance. he had narrowly escape being 
run over at a crossing by a charge van, for he hate to hurry his 
steps, and indeed the afternoon was warm; and he had just halt by a 
place of popular refreshment, when the astound gesture of a well 
dress individual on the opposite pavement held him enchant and 
gasp like a fish. a treble line of hansoms, carriages, vans, cabs, 
and omnibuses, was tear east and west, and not the most daring 
adventurer of the crossing would have care to try his fortune; but the 
person who had attract dyson's attention seem to rage on the very 
edge of the pavement, now and then dart forward at the hazard of 
instant death, and at each repulse absolutely dance with excitement, 
to the rich amusement of the passers-by. at last, a gap that would, have 
try the courage of a street-boy appear between the serried lines of 
vehicles, and the man rush across in a frenzy, and escape by a 
hair's breadth pounce upon dyson as a tiger pounce on her prey. "i saw 
you look about you," he said, sputter out his words in his intense 
eagerness; "would you mind telling me this? was the man who came out of 
the aerate bread shop and jumped, into the hansom three minutes ago a 
youngish look man with dark whiskers and spectacles? can't you speak, 
man? for heaven's sake can't you speak? answer me; it's a matter of life 
and death." 

the words bubble and boil out of the man's mouth in the fury of his 
emotion, his face went from red to white, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on his forehead, and he stamp his feet as he spoke and tore with 
his hand at his coat, as if something swell and choke him, stopping 
the passage of his breath. 

"my dear sir," said dyson, "i always like to be accurate. your 
observation was perfectly correct. as you say, a youngish man, a man, i 
should say, of somewhat timid bearing, ran rapid out of the shop here, 
and bounce into a hansom that must have been wait for him, as it 
went eastward at once. your friend also wore spectacles, as you say. 
perhaps you would like me to call a hansom for you to follow the 
gentleman?" 

"no, thank you; it would be waste of time." the man gulp down 
something which appear to rise in his throat, and dyson was alarm to 
see him shake with hysterical laughter, and he clung hard to a 
lamp-post and sway and stagger like a ship in a heavy gale. 

"how shall i face the doctor?" he murmur to himself. "it is too hard 
to fail at the last moment." then he seem to recollect himself, and 
stood straight again, and look quiet at dyson. i owe you an apology 
for my violence, he said at last. "many men would not be so patient as 
you have been. would you mind add to your kindness by walking with me 
a little way? i feel a little sick; i think it's the sun." 

dyson nod assent, and devoted himself to a quiet scrutiny of this 
strange personage as they move on together. the man was dress in 
quiet taste, and the most scrupulous observer could find nothing amiss 
with the fashion or make of his clothes, yet, from his hat to his boots, 
everything seem inappropriate. his silk hat, dyson thought, should 
have been a high bowler of odious pattern worn with a baggy 
morning-coat, and an instinct told him that the fellow did not commonly 
carry a clean pocket-handkerchief. the face was not of the most 
agreeable pattern, and was in no way improve by a pair of bulbous 
chin-whiskers of a ginger hue, into which mustache of light color 
merge imperceptibly. yet in spite of these signal hung out by nature, 
dyson felt that the individual beside him was something more than 
compact of vulgarity. he was struggle with himself, holding his 
feelings in check, but now and again passion would mount black to his 
face, and it was evidently by a supreme effort that he kept himself 
from rage like a madman. dyson found something curious and a little 
terrible in the spectacle of an occult emotion thus strive for the 
mastery, and threaten to break out at every instant with violence, 
and they had gone some distance before the person whom he had met by so 
odd a hazard was able to speak quietly. 

"you are really very good," he said. "i apologize again; my rude was 
really most unjustifiable. i feel my conduct demand an explanation, and 
i shall be happy to give it you. do you happen to know of any place near 
here where one could sit down? i should really be very glad." 

"my dear sir," said dyson, solemnly, "the only café in london is close 
by. pray do not consider yourself as bound to offer me any explanation, 
but at the same time i should be most happy to listen to you. let us 
turn down here." 

they walk down a sober street and turn into what seem a narrow 
passage past an iron-barred gate thrown back. the passage was paved with 
flagstones, and decorate with handsome shrub in pot on either side, 
and the shadow of the high wall made a cool which was very 
agreeable after the hot breath of the sunny street. presently the 
passage open out into a tiny square, a charming place, a morsel of 
france transplant into the heart of london. high wall rose on either 
side, cover with glossy creepers, flower-beds beneath were gay with 
nasturtiums, geraniums, and marigolds, and odorous with mignonette, and 
in the centre of the square a fountain hidden by greenery sent a cool 
shower continual plash into the basin beneath, and the very noise 
made this retreat delightful. chair and table were disposed at 
convenient intervals, and at the other end of the court broad door had 
been thrown back; beyond was a long, dark room, and the turmoil of 
traffic had become a distant murmur. within the room one or two men were 
sitting at the tables, writing and sipping, but the courtyard was empty. 

"you see, we shall be quiet," said dyson. "pray sit down here, mr.--?" 

"wilkins. my name is henry wilkins." 

"sit here, mr. wilkins. i think you will find that a comfortable seat. i 
suppose you have not been here before? this is the quiet time; the place 
will be like a hive at six o'clock, and the chair and table will 
overflow into that little alley there." 

a waiter came in response to the bell; and after dyson had polite 
inquire after the health of m. annibault, the proprietor, he ordered a 
bottle of the wine of champigny. 

"the wine of champigny," he observe to mr. wilkins, who was evidently a 
good deal compose by the influence of the place, "is a tourainian wine 
of great merit. ah, here it is; let me fill your glass. how do you find 
it?" 

"indeed," said mr. wilkins, "i should have pronounced it a fine 
burgundy. the bouquet is very exquisite. i am fortunate in lighting upon 
such a good samaritan as yourself. i wonder you did not think me mad. 
but if you knew the terror that assail me, i am sure you would no 
long be surprise at conduct which was certainly most unjustifiable." 

he sip his wine, and leant back in his chair, relish the drip and 
trickle of the fountain, and the cool green that hedge in this 
little port of refuge. 

"yes," he said at last, "that is indeed an admirable wine. thank you; 
you will allow me to offer you another bottle?" 

the waiter was summoned, and descended through a trap-door in the floor 
of the dark apartment, and brought up the wine. mr. wilkins lit a 
cigarette, and dyson pull out his pipe. 

"now," said mr. wilkins, "i promise to give you an explanation of my 
strange behavior. it is rather a long story, but i see, sir, that you 
are no mere cold observer of the ebb and flow of life. you take, i 
think, a warm and an intelligent interest in the chance of your 
fellow-creatures, and i believe you will find what i have to tell not 
devoid of interest." 

mr. dyson signify his assent to these propositions, and though he 
thought mr. wilkins's diction a little pompous, prepared to interest 
himself in his tale. the other, who had so rage with passion half an 
hour before, was now perfectly cool, and when he had smoke out his 
cigarette, he began in an even voice to relate the 




novel of the dark valley. 


i am the son of a poor but learned clergyman in the west of 
england,--but i am forgetting, these detail are not of special 
interest. i will brief state, then, that my father, who was, as i 
have said, a learned man, had never learnt the specious arts by which 
the great are flattered, and would never condescend to the despicable 
pursuit of self-advertisement. though his fond for ancient 
ceremony and quaint customs, combine with a kindness of heart that 
was unequalled and a primitive and fervent piety, endear him to his 
moor-land parishioners, such were not the steps by which clergy then 
rose in the church, and at sixty my father was still incumbent of the 
little benefice he had accept in his thirtieth year. the income of the 
living was barely sufficient to support life in the decencies which are 
expect of the anglican parson; and when my father die a few years 
ago, i, his only child, found myself thrown upon the world with a 
slender capital of less than a hundred pounds, and all the problem of 
existence before me. i felt that there was nothing for me to do in the 
country, and as usually happen in such eases, london drew me like a 
magnet. one day in august, in the early morning, while the dew still 
glitter on the turf, and on the high green bank of the lane, a 
neighbor drove me to the railway station, and i bade good-bye to the 
land of the broad moor and unearthly battlements of the wild tors. it 
was six o'clock as we near london; the faint sickly fume of the 
brickfield about acton came in puff through the open window, and a 
mist was rising from the ground. presently the brief view of successive 
streets, prim and uniform, struck me with a sense of monotony; the hot 
air seem to grow hotter; and when we had roll beneath the dismal and 
squalid houses, whose dirty and neglect back yard border the line 
near paddington, i felt as if i should be stifle in this faint 
breath of london. i got a hansom and drove off, and every street 
increase my gloom; gray house with blind drawn down, whole 
thoroughfare almost desolate, and the foot-passengers who seem to 
stagger weary along rather than walk, all made me feel a sink at 
heart. i put up for the night at a small hotel in a street leading from 
the strand, where my father had stay on his few brief visit to town; 
and when i went out after dinner, the real gayety and bustle of the 
strand and fleet street could cheer me but little, for in all this great 
city there was no single human being whom i could claim even as an 
acquaintance. i will not weary you with the history of the next year, 
for the adventure of a man who sink are too trite to be worth 
recalling. my money did not last me long; i found that i must be neat 
dressed, or no one to whom i applied would so much as listen to me; and 
i must live in a street of decent reputation if i wish to be treat 
with common civility. i applied for various posts, for which, as i now 
see, i was completely devoid of qualification; i try to become a clerk 
without have the smallest notion of business habits, and i found, to 
my cost, that a general knowledge of literature and an execrable style 
of penmanship are far from being look upon with favor in commercial 
circles. i had read one of the most charming of the works of a famous 
novelist of the present day, and i frequent the fleet street tavern 
in the hope of making literary friends, and so get the 
introduction which i understood were indispensable in the career of 
letters. i was disappointed; i once or twice venture to address 
gentlemen who were sitting in adjoin boxes, and i was answered, 
polite indeed, but in a manner that told me my advances were unusual. 
pound by pound, my small resources melted; i could no long think of 
appearances; i migrate to a shy quarter, and my meal became mere 
observances. i went out at one and return to my room at two, but 
nothing but a milk-cake had occur in the interval. in short, i became 
acquaint with misfortune; and as i sat amidst slush and ice on a seat 
in hyde park, munch a piece of bread, i realize the bitter of 
poverty, and the feelings of a gentleman reduce to something far below 
the condition of a vagrant. in spite of all discouragement i did not 
desist in my effort to earn a living. i consult advertisement 
columns, i kept my eyes open for a chance, i look in at the window of 
stationers' shops, but all in vain. one evening i was sitting in a free 
library, and i saw an advertisement in one of the papers. it was 
something like this: "wanted, by a gentleman a person of literary taste 
and abilities as secretary and amanuensis. must not object to travel." 
of course i knew that such an advertisement would have answer by the 
hundred, and i thought my own chance of secure the post extremely 
small; however, i applied at the address given, and wrote to mr. smith, 
who was stay at a large hotel at the west end. i must confess that my 
heart gave a jump when i received a note a couple of days later, ask 
me to call at the cosmopole at my earliest convenience. i do not know, 
sir, what your experience of life may have been, and so i cannot tell 
whether you have known such moments. a slight sickness, my heart beating 
rather more rapid than usual, a choke in the throat, and a 
difficulty of utterance; such were my sensation as i walk to the 
cosmopole. i had to mention the name twice before the hall porter could 
understand me, and as i went upstairs my hand were wet. i was a good 
deal struck by mr. smith's appearance; he look younger than i did, and 
there was something mild and hesitate about his expression. he was 
reading when i came in, and he look up when i gave my name. "my dear 
sir," he said, "i am really delight to see you. i have read very 
careful the letter you were good enough to send me. am i to understand 
that this document is in your own handwriting?" he show me the letter 
i had written, and i told him i was not so fortunate as to be able to 
keep a secretary myself. "then, sir," he went on, "the post i advertise 
is at your service. you have no objection to travel, i presume?" as you 
may imagine, i closed pretty eager with the offer he made, and thus i 
enter the service of mr. smith. for the first few week i had no 
special duties; i had received a quarter's salary, and a handsome 
allowance was made me in lieu of board and lodging. one morning, 
however, when i call at the hotel according to instructions, my master 
informed me that i must hold myself in readiness for a sea-voyage, and, 
to spare unnecessary detail, in the course of a fortnight we had landed 
at new york. mr. smith told me that he was engaged on a work of a 
special nature, in the compilation of which some peculiar research had 
to be made; in short, i was given to understand that we were to travel 
to the far west. 

after about a week had been spent in new york we took our seat in the 
cars, and began a journey tedious beyond all conception. day after day, 
and night after night, the great train roll on, thread its way 
through city the very name of which were strange to me, passing at 
slow speed over perilous viaducts, skirt mountain range and pine 
forests, and plunge into dense tract of wood, where mile after mile 
and hour after hour the same monotonous growth of brushwood met the eye, 
and all along the continual clatter and rattle of the wheels upon the 
ill-laid lines made it difficult to hear the voice of our 
fellow-passengers. we were a heterogeneous and ever-changing company; 
often i woke up in the dead of night with the sudden grind jar of the 
brakes, and look out found that we had stop in the shabby street 
of some frame-built town, light chiefly by the flare window of the 
saloon. a few rough-looking fellow would often come out to stare at the 
cars, and sometimes passenger got down, and sometimes there was a party 
of two or three wait on the wooden sidewalk to get on board. many of 
the passenger were english; humble household torn up from the moorings 
of a thousand years, and bound for some problematic paradise in the 
alkali desert or the rockies. i heard the men talk to one another of 
the great profit to be made on the virgin soil of america, and two or 
three, who were mechanics, expatiate on the wonderful wages given to 
skilled labor on the railway and in the factory of the states. this 
talk usually fell dead after a few minutes, and i could see a sickness 
and dismay in the face of these men as they look at the ugly brush or 
at the desolate expanse of the prairie, dot here and there with 
frame-houses, devoid of garden, or flower or trees, standing all alone 
in what might have been a great gray sea frozen into stillness. day 
after day the wave sky line, and the desolate of a land without form 
or color or variety, appall the heart of such of us as were 
englishmen, and once in the night as i lay awake i heard a woman weeping 
and sobbing, and ask what she had done to come to such a place. her 
husband try to comfort her in the broad speech of gloucestershire, 
telling her the ground was so rich that one had only to plough it up and 
it would grow sunflower of itself, but she cry for her mother and 
their old cottage and the beehives, like a little child. the sad of 
it all overwhelm me, and i had no heart to think of other matters; the 
question of what mr. smith could have to do in such a country, and of 
what manner of literary research could be carry on in the wilderness, 
hardly trouble me. now and again my situation struck me as peculiar; i 
had been engaged as a literary assistant at a handsome salary, and yet 
my master was still almost a stranger to me; sometimes he would come to 
where i was sitting in the car and make a few banal remark about the 
country, but for the most part of the journey he sat by himself, not 
speak to any one, and so far as i could judge, deep in his thoughts. 
it was i think on the fifth day from new york when i received, the 
intimate that we should shortly leave the cars; i had been watch 
some distant mountain which rose wild and savage before us, and i was 
wonder if there were human being so unhappy as to speak of home in 
connection with those piles of lumber rock, when mr. smith touched me 
lightly on the shoulder. "you will be glad to be done with, the cars, i 
have no doubt, mr. wilkins," he said. "you were look at the 
mountains, i think? well, i hope we shall be there to-night. the train 
stop at reading, and i dare say we shall manage to find our way." 

a few hour later the brakeman brought the tram to a standstill at the 
reading depot and we got out. i notice that the town, though of course 
built almost entire of frame-houses, was large and busy than any we 
had pass for the last two days. the depot was crowded, and as the bell 
and whistle sounded, i saw that a number of person were prepare to 
leave the cars, while an even greater number were wait to get on 
board. besides the passengers, there was a pretty dense crowd of people, 
some of whom had come to meet or to see off their friends and relatives, 
while other were mere loafers. several of our english fellow passenger 
got down at reading, but the confusion was so great that they were lost 
to my sight almost immediately. mr. smith beckon to me to follow him, 
and we were soon in the thick of the mass; and the continual ring of 
bells, the hubbub of voices, the shriek of whistles, and the hiss of 
escape steam, confuse my senses, and i wonder dim as i struggle 
after my employer, where we were going, and how we should be able to 
find our way through an unknown country. mr. smith had put on a 
wide-brimmed hat, which he had slope over his eyes, and as all the men 
wore hat of the same pattern, it was with some difficulty that i 
distinguished him in the crowd. we got free at last, and he struck down 
a side street, and made one or two sharp turn to right and left. it was 
get dusk, and we seem to be passing through a shy portion of the 
town, there were few people about in the ill-lighted streets, and these 
few were men of the most unprepossess pattern. sudden we stop 
before a corner house, a man was standing at the door, apparently on the 
look-out for some one, and i notice that he and smith gave sharp 
glance one to the other. 

"from new york city, i expect, mister?" 

"from new york!" 

"all right; they 're ready, and you can have 'em when you choose. i know 
my orders, you see, and i mean to run this business through." 

"very well, mr. evans, that is what we want. our money is good, you 
know. bring them round." 

i had stood silent, listen to this dialogue, and wonder what it 
meant. smith began to walk impatient up and down the street, and the 
man evans was still standing at his door. he had given a sharp whistle, 
and i saw him look me over in a quiet leisurely way, as if to make 
sure of my face for another time. i was thinking what all this could 
mean, when an ugly, slouch lad came up a side passage, leading two 
raw-boned horses. 

"get up, mr. wilkins, and be quick about it," said smith. "we ought to 
be on our way." 

we rode off together into the gathering darkness, and before long i 
look back and saw the far plain behind us, with the lights of the town 
glimmer faintly; and in front rose the mountains. smith guide his 
horse on the rough track as surely as if he had been riding along 
piccadilly, and i follow him as well as i could. i was weary and 
exhausted, and scarcely took note of anything; i felt that the track was 
a gradual ascent, and here and there i saw great boulder by the road. 
the ride made but little impression on me; i have a faint recollection 
of passing through a dense black pine forest, where our horse had to 
pick their way among the rocks, and i remember the peculiar effect of 
the rarefied air as we kept still mount higher and higher. i think i 
must have been half asleep for the latter half of the ride, and it was 
with a shock that i heard smith saying-- 

"here we are, wilkins. this is blue-rock park. you will enjoy the view 
to-morrow. to-night we will have something to eat, and then go to bed." 

a man came out of a rough-looking house and took the horses, and we 
found some fry steak and coarse whiskey await us inside. i had come 
to a strange place. there were three rooms,--the room in which we had 
supper, smith's room and my own. the deaf old man who did the work slept 
in a sort of shed, and when i woke up the next morning and walk out i 
found that the house stood in a sort of hollow amongst the mountains; 
the clump of pine and some enormous bluish-gray rocks that stood here 
and there between the tree had given the place the name of blue-rock 
park. on every side the snow-covered mountain surround us, the breath 
of the air was as wine, and when i climb the slope and look down, i 
could see that, so far as any human fellowship was concerned i might as 
well have been wreck on some small island in mid-pacific. the only 
trace of man i could see was the rough log-house where i had slept, and 
in my ignorance i did not know that there were similar house within 
comparatively easy distance, as distance is reckon in the rockies. but 
at the moment, the utter, dreadful lonely rush upon me, and the 
thought of the great plain and the great sea that part me from the 
world i knew, caught me by the throat, and i wonder if i should die 
there in that mountain hollow. it was a terrible instant, and i have not 
yet forgotten it. of course i manage to conquer my horror; i said i 
should be all the strong for the experience, and i made up my mind to 
make the best of everything. it was a rough life enough, and rough 
enough board and lodging. i was left entire to myself. smith i 
scarcely ever saw, nor did i know when he was in the house. i have often 
thought he was far away, and have been surprise to see him walking out 
of his room, lock the door behind him and putt the key in his 
pocket; and on several occasion when i fancy he was busy in his room, 
i have seen him come in with his boots cover with dust and dirt. so 
far as work went i enjoy a complete sinecure; i had nothing to do but 
to walk about the valley, to eat, and to sleep. with one thing and 
another i grew accustomed, to the life, and manage to make myself 
pretty comfortable, and by degree i began to venture farther away from 
the house, and to explore the country. one day i had contrived to get 
into a neighboring valley, and sudden i came upon a group of men 
saw timber. i went up to them, hope that perhaps some of them might 
be englishmen; at all event they were human beings, and i should hear 
articulate speech, for the old man i have mentioned, besides being half 
blind and stone deaf, was wholly dumb so far as i was concerned. i was 
prepared to be welcome in a rough and ready fashion, without much, of 
the form of politeness, but the grim glance and the short gruff 
answer i received astonish me. i saw the men glancing oddly at each 
other, and one of them who had stop work began fingering a gun, and i 
was oblige to return on my path utter curse on the fate which had 
brought me into a land where men were more brutish than the very brutes. 
the solitude of the life began to oppress me as with a nightmare, and a 
few days later i determined to walk to a kind of station some mile 
distant, where a rough inn was kept for the accommodation of hunter and 
tourists. english gentlemen occasional stop there for the night, 
and i thought i might perhaps fall in with some one of better manners 
than the inhabitant of the country. i found as i had expect a group 
of men lounge about the door of the log-house that serve as a hotel, 
and as i came near i could see that head were put together and looks 
interchanged, and when i walk up the six or seven trapper stare at 
me in stony ferocity, and with something of the disgust that one eyes a 
loathsome and venomous snake. i felt that i could bear it no longer, and 
i call out:-- 

"is there such a thing as an englishman here, or any one with a little 
civilization?" 

one of the men put his hand to his belt, but his neighbor checked him 
and answer me. 

"you'll find we've got some of the resources of civilization before very 
long, mister, and i expect you'll not fancy them extremely. but anyway, 
there's an englishman tarry here, and i've no doubt he'll be glad to 
see you. there you are, that's mr. d'aubernoun." 

a young man, dress like an english country squire, came and stood at 
the door, and look at me. one of the men pointed to me and said:-- 

"that's the individual we were talk about last night. thought you 
might like to have a look at him, squire, and here he is." 

the young fellow's good-natured english face cloud over, and he 
glance stern at me, and turn away with a gesture of contempt and 
aversion. 

"sir," i cried, "i do not know what i have done to be treat in this 
manner. you are my fellow-countryman, and i expect some courtesy." 

he gave me a black look and made as if he would go in, but he change 
his mind, and face me. 

"you are rather imprudent, i think, to behave in this manner. you must 
be count on a forbearance which cannot last very long; which may last 
a very short time, indeed. and let me tell you this, sir, you may call 
yourself an englishman and drag the name of england through the dirt, 
but you need not count on any english influence to help you. if i were 
you, i would not stay here much longer." 

he went into the inn, and the men quiet watch my face, as i stood 
there, wonder whether i was go mad. the woman of the house came 
out and stare at me as if i were a wild beast or a savage, and i turn 
to her, and spoke quietly. 

"i am very hungry and thirsty, i have walk a long way. i have plenty 
of money. will you give me something to eat and drink?" 

"no, i won't," she said. "you had better quit this." 

i crawl home like a wound beast, and lay down on my bed. it was all 
a hopeless puzzle to me. i knew nothing but rage and shame and terror, 
and i suffer little more when i pass by a house in an adjacent 
valley, and some children who were play outside ran from me 
shrieking. i was forced to walk to find some occupation. i should have 
die if i had sat down quiet in blue rock park and look all day at 
the mountains; but wherever i saw a human being i saw the same glance of 
hatred and aversion, and once as i was crossing a thick brake i heard a 
shot, and the venomous hiss of a bullet close to my ear. 

one day i heard a conversation which astound me; i was sitting behind 
a rock resting, and two men came along the track and halted. one of them 
had got his feet entangle in some wild vines, and swore fiercely, but 
the other laughed, and said they were useful things sometimes. 

"what the hell do you mean?" 

"oh, nothing much. but they 're uncommon tough, these here vines, and 
sometimes rope is skerse and dear." 

the man who had sworn chuckle at this, and i heard them sit down and 
light their pipes. 

"have you seen him lately?" ask the humorist. 

"i sighted him the other day, but the darn bullet went high. he's got 
his master's luck, i expect, sir, but it can't last much longer. you 
heard about him go to jinks's and try his brass, but the young 
britisher down him pretty considerable, i can tell you." 

"what the devil is the meaning of it?" 

"i don't know, but i believe it'll have to be finished, and done in the 
old style, too. you know how they fix the niggers?" 

"yes, sir, i've seen a little of that. a couple of gallon of 
kerosene'll cost a dollar at brown's store, but i should say it's cheap 
anyway." 

they move off after this, and i lay still behind the rock, the sweat 
pour down my face. i was so sick that i could barely stand, and i 
walk home as slow as an old man, leaning on my stick. i knew that 
the two men had been talk about me, and i knew that some terrible 
death was in store for me. that night i could not sleep. i toss on the 
rough bed and torture myself to find out the meaning of it all. at last 
in the very dead of night i rose from the bed, and put on my clothes, 
and went out. i did not care where i went, but i felt that i must walk 
till i had tired myself out. it was a clear moonlight night, and in a 
couple of hour i found i was approach a place of dismal reputation 
in the mountains, a deep cleft in the rocks, known as black gulf cañon. 
many years before, an unfortunate party of englishmen and englishwomen 
had camp here and had been surround by indians. they were captured, 
outraged, and put to death with almost inconceivable tortures, and the 
roughest of the trapper or woodsmen gave the cañon a wide berth even in 
the day-time. as i crush through the dense brushwood which grew above 
the cañon, i heard voices, and wonder who could be in such a place at 
such a time, i went on, walking more careful and making as little 
noise as possible. there was a great tree grow on the very edge of 
the rocks, and i lay down and look out from behind the trunk. black 
gulf cañon was below me, the moonlight shining bright into its very 
depths from midheaven, and casting shadow as black as death from the 
pointed rock, and all the sheer rock on the other side, overhang the 
cañon, was in darkness. at interval a light veil obscure the 
moonlight, as a filmy cloud fleet across the moon; and a bitter wind 
blew shrill across the gulf. i look down as i have said, and saw 
twenty men standing in a semicircle round a rock; i count them one by 
one, and knew most of them. they were the very vilest of the vile, more 
vile than any den in london could show, and there was murder and worse 
than murder on the head of not a few. facing them and me stood mr. 
smith with the rock before him, and on the rock was a great pair of 
scales, such, as are use in the stores. i heard his voice ring down 
the cañon as i lay beside the tree, and my heart turn cold as i heard 
it. 

"life for gold," he cried, "a life for gold. the blood and the life of 
an enemy for every pound of gold." 

a man step out and raise one hand, and with the other flung a bright 
lump of something into the pan of the scales, which clang down, and 
smith mutter something in his ear. then he cry again:-- 

"blood for gold; for a pound of gold, the life of an enemy. for every 
pound of gold upon the scales, a life." 

one by one the men came forward, each lift up his right hand; and the 
gold was weigh in the scales, and each time smith lean forward and 
spoke to each man in his ear. then he cry again:-- 

"desire and lust, for gold on the scales. for every pound of gold, 
enjoyment of desire." 

i saw the same thing happen as before; the uplift hand, and the metal 
weighed, and the mouth whispering, and black passion on every face. 

then, one by one, i saw the men again step up to smith. a mutter 
conversation seem to take place; i could see that smith was explain 
and directing, and i notice that he gesticulate a little as one who 
points out the way, and once or twice he move his hand quick as if 
he would show that the path was clear and could not be missed. i kept my 
eyes so intent on his figure that i noted little else, and at last it 
was with a start that i realize that the cañon was empty. a moment 
before i thought i had seen the group of villainous faces, and the two 
standing, a little apart by the rock; i had look down a moment, and 
when i glance again into the cañon there was no one there. in dumb 
terror i made my way home, and i fell asleep in an instant from 
exhaustion. no doubt i should have slept on for many hours, but when i 
woke up, the sun was only rising, and the light shone in on my bed. i 
had start up from sleep with the sensation of have received a 
violent shock, and as i look in confusion about me i saw to my 
amaze that there were three men in the room. one of them had his 
hand on my shoulder and spoke to me. 

"come, mister, wake up. your time's up now, i reckon, and the boys are 
wait for you outside, and they 're in a big hurry. come on; you can 
put on your clothes, it's kind of chilly this morning." 

i saw the other two men smile sour at each other, but i understood 
nothing. i simply pull on my clothes, and said i was ready. 

"all right, come on then. you go first, nichols, and jim and i will give 
the gentleman an arm." 

they took me out into the sunlight, and then i understood the meaning of 
a dull murmur that had vague perplexed me while i was dressing. there 
were about two hundred men wait outside, and some women too, and when 
they saw me there was a low mutter growl. i did not know what i had 
done, but that noise made my heart beat and the sweat come out on my 
face. i saw confusedly, as through a veil, the tumult and toss of the 
crowd, discordant voice were speaking, and amongst all those face 
there was not one glance of mercy, but a fury of lust that i did not 
understand. i found myself presently walking in a sort of procession up 
the slope of the valley, and on every side of me there were men with 
revolver in their hands. now and then a voice struck me, and i heard 
words and sentence of which i could form no connected story. but i 
understood that there was one sentence of execration; i heard scraps of 
story that seem strange and improbable. some one was talk of men, 
lure by cunning device from their home and murder with hideous 
tortures, found writhe like wound snake in dark and lonely places, 
only crying for some one to stab them to the heart, and so end their 
torments; and i heard another voice speak of innocent girl who had 
vanish for a day or two, and then had come back and died, blush red 
with shame even in the agony of death. i wonder what it all meant, 
and what was to happen, but i was so weary that i walk on in a dream, 
scarcely longing for anything but sleep. at last we stopped. we had 
reach the summit of the hill, overlook blue rock valley, and i saw 
that i was standing beneath a clump of tree where i had often sat. i 
was in the midst of a ring of armed men, and i saw that two or three men 
were very busy with piles of wood, while other were fingering a rope. 
then there was a stir in the crowd, and a man was pushed forward. his 
hand and feet were tight bound with cord, and though his face was 
unutterable villainous i pity him for the agony that work his 
features and twist his lips. i knew him; he was amongst those that had 
gather round smith in black gulf cañon. in an instant he was unbound, 
and strip naked; and borne beneath one of the trees, and his neck 
encircle by a noose that went around the trunk. a hoarse voice gave 
some kind of order; there was a rush of feet, and the rope tightened; 
and there before me i saw the blacken face and the writhe limb and 
the shameful agony of death. one after another, half a dozen men, all of 
whom i had seen in the cañon the night before, were strangle before me, 
and their body were flung forth on the ground. then there was a pause, 
and the man who had rouse me a short while before, came up to me and 
said:-- 

"now, mister, it's your turn. we give you five minutes to cast up your 
accounts, and when that's clocked, by the living god we will burn you 
alive at that tree." 

it was then i awoke and understood. i cry out:-- 

"why, what have i done? why should you hurt me? i am a harmless man, i 
never did you any wrong." i cover my face with my hands; it seem so 
pitiful, and it was such a terrible death. 

"what have i done?" i cry again. "you must take me for some other man. 
you cannot know me." 

"you black-hearted devil," said the man at my side, "we know you well 
enough. there's not a man within thirty mile of this that won't curse 
jack smith when you are burning in hell." 

"my name is not smith," i said, with some hope left in me. "my name is 
wilkins. i was mr. smith's secretary, but i knew nothing of him." 

"hark at the black liar," said the man. "secretary be damned! you were 
clever enough, i dare say, to slink out at night, and keep your face in 
the dark, but we've track you out at last. but your time's up. come 
along." 

i was drag to the tree and bound to it with chains, and i saw the 
piles of wood heap all about me, and shut my eyes. then i felt myself 
drench all over with some liquid, and look again, and a woman 
grin at me. she had just empty a great can of petroleum over me and 
over the wood. a voice shouted, "fire away," and i faint and knew 
nothing more. 

when i open my eyes i was lie on a bed in a bare comfortless room. a 
doctor was holding some strong salts to my nostrils, and a gentleman 
standing by the bed, whom i afterwards found to be the sheriff, 
address me:-- 

"say, mister," he began, "you've had an uncommon narrow squeak for it. 
the boys were just about lighting up when i came along with the posse, 
and i had as much as i could do to bring you off, i can tell you. and, 
mind you, i don't blame, them; they had made up their minds, you see, 
that you were the head of the black gulf gang, and at first nothing i 
could say would persuade them you weren't jack smith. luckily, a man 
from here name evans, that came along with us, allow he had seen you 
with jack smith, and that you were yourself. so we brought you along and 
jail you, but you can go if you like, when you're through with this 
faint turn." 

i got on the car the next day, and in three week i was in london; 
again almost penniless. but from that time my fortune seem to change. 
i made influential friends in all directions; bank director court my 
company, and editor positively flung themselves into my arms. i had 
only to choose my career, and after a while i determined that i was 
meant by nature for a life of comparative leisure. with an ease that 
seem almost ridiculous i obtain a well-paid position in connection 
with a prosperous politics club. i have charming chambers in a central 
neighborhood close to the parks; the club _chef_ exert himself when i 
lunch or dine, and the rarest vintage in the cellar are always at my 
disposal. yet, since my return to london, i have never known a day's 
security or peace; i tremble when i awake lest smith should be standing 
at my bed, and every step i take seem to bring me near to the edge of 
the precipice. smith, i knew, had escape free from the raid of the 
vigilantes, and i grew faint at the thought that he would in all 
probability return to london, and that sudden and unprepared i should 
meet him face to face. every morning as i left my house, i would peer up 
and down the street, expect to see that dread figure await me; i 
have delay at street corners, my heart in my mouth, sickening at the 
thought that a few quick steps might bring us together; i could not bear 
to frequent the theatre or music halls, lest by some bizarre chance he 
should prove to be my neighbor. sometimes, i have been forced, against 
my will, to walk out at night, and then in silent square the shadow 
have made me shudder, and in the medley of meeting in the crowded 
thoroughfares, i have said to myself, "it must come soon or later; he 
will surely return to town, and i shall see him when i feel most 
secure." i scan the newspaper for hint or intimate of approach 
danger, and no small type nor report of trivial interest was allow to 
pass unread. especially i read and re-read the advertisement columns, 
but without result. month pass by and i was undisturbed till, though 
i felt far from safe, i no long suffer from the intolerable 
oppression of instant and ever present terror. this afternoon as i was 
walking quiet along oxford street, i raise my eyes, and look across 
the road, and then at last i saw the man who had so long haunt my 
thoughts. 

* * * * * 

mr. wilkins finished his wine, and lean back in his chair, look 
sadly at dyson; and then, as if a thought struck him, fish out of an 
inner pocket a leather letter case, and hand a newspaper cutting 
across the table. 

dyson glance close at the slip, and saw that it had been extract 
from the column of an evening paper. it ran as follows:-- 

wholesale lynching. 

shocking story. 

a dalziel telegram from reading (colorado) states that advice received 
there from blue bock park report a frightful instance of popular 
vengeance. for some time the neighborhood has been terrorize by the 
crime of a gang of desperadoes, who, under the cover of a careful 
plan organization, have perpetrate the most infamous cruelty on 
men and women. a vigilance committee was formed, and it was found that 
the leader of the gang was a person name smith, living in blue rock 
park. action was taken, and six of the worst in the band were summary 
strangle in the presence of two or three hundred men and women. smith 
is said to have escaped. 

* * * * * 

"this is a terrible story," said dyson; "i can well believe that your 
days and nights are haunt by such fearful scene as you have 
described. but surely you have no need to fear smith? he has much, more 
cause to fear you. consider, you have only to lay your information 
before the police, and a warrant would be immediately issue for his 
arrest. besides, you will, i am sure, excuse me for what i am go to 
say." 

"my dear sir," said mr. wilkins, "i hope you will speak to me with 
perfect freedom." 

"well, then, i must confess that my impression was that you were rather 
disappointed at not being able to stop the man before he drove off. i 
thought you seem annoy that you could not get across the street." 

"sir, i did not know what i was about. i caught sight of the man, but it 
was only for a moment, and the agony you witness was the agony of 
suspense. i was not perfectly certain of the face; and the horrible 
thought that smith was again in london overwhelm me. i shudder at 
the idea of this incarnate fiend, whose soul is black with shocking 
crimes, mingle free and unobserved amongst the harmless crowds, 
meditate perhaps a new and more fearful cycle of infamies. i tell 
you, sir, that an awful being stalk through the streets, a being before 
whom the sunlight itself should blacken, and the summer air grow chill 
and dank. such thought as these rush upon me with the force of a 
whirlwind; i lost my senses." 

"i see. i partly understand your feelings, but i would impress on you 
that you have nothing really to fear. depend upon it, smith will not 
molest you in any way. you must remember he himself has had a warning; 
and indeed from the brief glance i had of him, he seem to me to be a 
frightened-looking man. however, i see it is get late, and if you 
will excuse me, mr. wilkins, i think i will be going. i dare say we 
shall often meet here." 

dyson walk off smartly, ponder the strange story chance had brought 
him, and finding on cool reflection that there was something a little 
strange in mr. wilkins's manner, for which not even so weird a catalogue 
of experience could altogether account. 




adventure of the missing brother. 


mr. charles phillipp was, as has been hinted, a gentleman of pronounced 
scientific tastes. in his early days he had devoted himself with fond 
enthusiasm to the agreeable study of biology, and a brief monograph on 
the embryology of the microscopic holothuria had form his first 
contribution to the belle lettres. later, he had somewhat relax the 
severity of his pursuits, and had dabble in the more frivolous subject 
of palæontology and ethnology; he had a cabinet in his sitting-room 
whose drawers were stuff with rude flint implements, and a charming 
fetish from the south sea was the dominant note in the decorative 
scheme of the apartment. flatter himself with the title of 
materialist, he was in truth one of the most credulous of men, but he 
require a marvel to be neat drape in the robe of science before he 
would give it any credit, and the wildest dream took solid shape to him 
if only the nomenclature were severe and irreproachable; he laugh at 
the witch, but quail before the powers of the hypnotist, lift his 
eyebrow when christianity was mentioned, but adore protyle and the 
ether. for the rest, he pride himself on a boundless scepticism; the 
average tale of wonder he heard with nothing but contempt, and he would 
certainly not have credit a word or syllable of dyson's story of the 
pursuer and pursue unless the gold coin had been produce as visible 
and tangible evidence. as it was he half suspect that dyson had 
impose on him; he knew his friend's disorder fancies, and his habit 
of conjure up the marvellous to account for the entire commonplace; 
and on the whole he was inclined to think that the so-called fact in 
the odd adventure had been grave distort in the telling. since the 
evening on which he had listen to the tale, he had paid dyson a visit, 
and had deliver himself of some serious talk on the necessity of 
accurate observation, and the folly, as he put it, of use a 
kaleidoscope instead of a telescope in the view of things, to which 
remark his friend had listen with a smile that was extremely sardonic 
"my dear fellow," dyson had remark at last, "you will allow me to tell 
you that i see your drift perfectly. however, you will be astonish to 
hear that i consider you to be the visionary, while i am a sober and 
serious spectator of human life. you have gone round the circle, and 
while you fancy yourself far in the golden land of new philosophies, you 
are in reality a dwell in a metaphorical clapham; your scepticism has 
defeat itself and become a monstrous credulity; you are in fact in the 
position of the bat or owl, i forget which it was, who deny the 
existence of the sun at noonday, and i shall be astonish if you do not 
one day come to me full of contrition for your manifold intellectual 
errors, with a humble resolution to see things in their true light for 
the future." this tirade had left mr. phillipp unimpressed; he 
considered dyson as hopeless, and he went home to gloat over some 
primitive stone implement that a friend had sent him from india. he 
found that his landlady, seeing them display in all their rude 
formless upon the table, had remove the collection to the dustbin, 
and had replace it by lunch; and the afternoon was spent in malodorous 
research. mrs. brown, hearing these stone spoken of as very valuable 
knives, had call him in his hearing "poor mr. phillipps," and between 
rage and evil odor he spent a sorry afternoon. it was four o'clock 
before he had complete his work of rescue; and, overpower with the 
flavor of decay cabbage-leaves, phillipp felt that he must have a 
walk to gain an appetite for the evening meal. unlike dyson, he walk 
fast, with his eyes on the pavement, absorb in his thought and 
oblivious of the life around him; and he could not have told by what 
street he had passed, when he sudden lift up his eyes and found 
himself in leicester square. the grass and flower pleased him, and he 
welcome the opportunity of rest for a few minutes, and glancing 
round, he saw a bench which had only one occupant, a lady, and as she 
was seat at one end, phillipp took up a position at the other 
extremity, and began to pass in angry review the event of the 
afternoon. he had notice as he came up to the bench that the person 
already there was neat dressed, and to all appearance young; her face 
he could not see, as it was turn away in apparent contemplation of the 
shrubs, and moreover shield with her hand; but it would be do 
wrong to mr. phillipp to imagine that his choice of a seat was dictate 
by any hope of an affair of the heart; he had simply prefer the 
company of one lady to that of five dirty children, and have seat 
himself was immerse directly in thought of his misfortunes. he had 
meditate change his lodgings; but now, on a judicial review of the 
case in all its bearings, his calm judgment told him that the race of 
landlady is like to the race of the leaves, and that there was but 
little to choose between them. he resolved, however, to talk to mrs. 
brown, the offender, very cool and yet severely, to point out the 
extreme indiscretion of her conduct, and to express a hope for better 
things in the future. with this decision register in his mind, 
phillipp was about to get up from the seat and move off, when he was 
intense annoy to hear a stifle sob, evidently from the lady, who 
still continue her contemplation of the shrub and flower-beds. he 
clutch his stick desperately, and in a moment would have been in full 
retreat, when the lady turn her face towards him, and with a mute 
entreaty bespoke his attention. she was a young girl with a quaint and 
piquant rather than a beautiful face, and she was evidently in the 
bitterest distress, and mr. phillipp sat down again, and cursed his 
chance heartily. the young lady look at him with a pair of charming 
eyes of a shining hazel, which show no trace of tears, though a 
handkerchief was in her hand; she bit her lip, and seem to struggle 
with some overpowering grief, and her whole attitude was all beseech 
and imploring. phillipp sat on the edge of the bench gaze awkward 
at her, and wonder what was to come next, and she look at him still 
without speaking. 

"well, madam," he said at last, "i understood from your gesture that you 
wish to speak to me. is there anything i can do for you? though, if 
you will pardon me, i cannot help saying that that seem highly 
improbable." 

"ah, sir," she said in a low murmur voice, "do not speak harsh to 
me. i am in sore straits, and i thought from your face that i could 
safe ask your sympathy, if not your help." 

"would you kindly tell me what is the matter?" said phillipps. "perhaps 
you would like some tea?" 

"i knew i could not be mistaken," the lady replied. "that offer of 
refreshment bespeak a generous mind. but tea, alas! is powerless to 
console me. if you will let me, i will endeavor to explain my trouble." 

"i should be glad if you would." 

"i will do so, and i will try and be brief, in spite of the numerous 
complication which have made me, young as i am, tremble before what 
seem the profound and terrible mystery of existence. yet the grief 
which now rack my very soul is but too simple; i have lost my brother." 

"lost your brother! how on earth can that be?" 

"i see i must trouble you with a few particulars. my brother, then, who 
is by some years my elder, is a tutor in a private school in the extreme 
north of london. the want of means deprived him of the advantage of a 
university education; and lacking the stamp of a degree, he could not 
hope for that position which his scholarship and his talent entitle 
him to claim. he was thus forced to accept the post of classical master 
at dr. saunderson's highgate academy for the son of gentlemen, and he 
has perform his duty with perfect satisfaction to his principal for 
some years. my personal history need not trouble you; if will be enough 
if i tell you that for the last month i have been governess in a family 
reside at tooting. my brother and i have always cherish the warmest 
mutual affection; and though circumstances into which i need not enter 
have kept us apart for some time, yet we have never lost sight of one 
another. we made up our mind that unless one of us was absolutely 
unable to rise from a bed of sickness, we would never let a week pass by 
without meeting, and some time ago we chose this square as our 
rendezvous on account of its central position and its convenience of 
access. and indeed, after a week of distasteful toil, my brother felt 
little inclination for much walking, and we have often spent two or 
three hour on this bench, speak of our prospects and of happy 
days, when we were children. in the early spring it was cold and chilly; 
still we enjoy the short respite, and i think that we were often taken 
for a pair of lovers, as we sat close together, eager talking. 
saturday after saturday we have met each other here, and though the 
doctor told him it was madness, my brother would not allow the influenza 
to break the appointment. that was some time ago; last saturday we had 
a long and happy afternoon, and separate more cheerful than usual, 
feeling that the coming week would be bearable, and resolve that our 
next meeting should be if possible still more pleasant. i arrive here 
at the time agree upon, four o'clock, and sat down and watch for my 
brother, expect every moment to see him advance towards me from 
that gate at the north side of the square. five minutes pass by, and 
he had not arrived; i thought he must have miss his train, and the 
idea that our interview would be cut short by twenty minutes, or perhaps 
half an hour, sadden me; i had hope we should be so happy together 
to-day. suddenly, move by i know not what impulse, i turn abrupt 
round, and how can i describe to you my astonishment when i saw my 
brother advance slow towards me from the southern side of the 
square, accompany by another person. my first thought, i remember, had 
in it something of resentment that this man, whoever he was, should 
intrude himself into our meeting; i wonder who it could possibly be, 
for my brother had, i may say, no intimate friends. then as i look 
still at the advance figures, another feeling took possession of me; 
it was a sensation of bristle fear, the fear of the child in the dark, 
unreasonable and unreasoning, but terrible, clutch at my heart as 
with the cold grip of a dead man's hands. yet i overcame the feeling, 
and look steady at my brother, wait for him to speak, and more 
close at his companion. then i notice that this man was leading my 
brother rather than walking arm-in-arm with him; he was a tall man, 
dress in quite ordinary fashion. he wore a high bowler hat, and, in 
spite of the warmth of the day, a plain black overcoat, tight 
buttoned, and i notice his trousers, of a quiet black and gray stripe. 
the face was commonplace too, and indeed i cannot recall any special 
features, or any trick of expression; for though i look at him as he 
came near, curious enough his face made no impression on me, it was as 
though i had seen a well-made mask. they pass in front of me, and to 
my unutterable astonishment i heard my brother's voice speak to me, 
though his lip did not move, nor his eyes look into mine. it was a 
voice i cannot describe, though i knew it, but the words came to my ear 
as if mingle with plash water and the sound of a shallow brook 
flowing amidst stones. i heard, then, the words, 'i cannot stay,' and 
for a moment the heaven and the earth seem to rush together with the 
sound of thunder, and i was thrust forth from the world into a black 
void without beginning and without end. for, as my brother pass me, i 
saw the hand that held him by the arm, and seem to guide him, and in 
one moment of horror i realize that it was as a formless thing that has 
moulder for many years in the grave. the flesh was peel in strip 
from the bones, and hung apart dry and granulated, and the finger that 
encircle my brother's arm were all unshapen, claw-like things, and one 
was but a stump from which the end had rot off. when i recover my 
senses i saw the two passing out by that gate. i pause for a moment, 
and then with a rush as of fire to my heart i knew that no horror 
could, stay me, but that i must follow my brother and save him, even 
though all hell rose up against me. i ran out and look up the 
pavement, and saw the two figures walking amidst the crowd. i ran across 
the road, and saw them turn up that side street, and i reach the 
corner a moment later. in vain i look to right and left, for neither 
my brother nor his strange guardian was in sight; two elderly men were 
coming down arm-in-arm, and a telegraph boy was walking lusty along 
whistling. i remain there a moment horror-struck, and then i bowed my 
head and return to this seat, where you found me. now, sir, do you 
wonder at my grief? oh, tell me what has happen to my brother, or i 
feel i shall go mad." 

mr. phillipps, who had listen with exemplary patience to this tale, 
hesitate a moment before he spoke. 

"my dear madam," he said at length, "you have known how to engage me in 
your service, not only as a man, but as a student of science. as a 
fellow-creature i pity you most profoundly; you must have suffer 
extremely from what you saw, or rather from what you fancy you saw. 
for, as a scientific observer, it is my duty to tell you the plain 
truth, which, indeed, besides being true, must also console you. allow 
me to ask you then to describe your brother." 

"certainly," said the lady, eagerly; "i can describe him accurately. my 
brother is a somewhat young-looking man; he is pale, has small black 
whiskers, and wear spectacles. he has rather a timid, almost a 
frightened expression, and looks about him nervous from side to side. 
think, think! surely you must have seen him. perhaps you are an 
_habitué_ of this engaging quarter; you may have met him on some 
previous saturday. i may have been mistaken in supposing that he turn 
up that side street; he may have gone on, and you may have pass each 
other. oh, tell me, sir, whether you have not seen him?" 

"i am afraid i do not keep a very sharp lookout when i am walking," said 
phillipps, who would have pass his mother unnoticed; "but i am sure 
your description is admirable. and now will you describe the person, 
who, you say, held your brother by the arm?" 

"i cannot do so. i told you, his face seem devoid of expression or 
salient feature. it was like a mask." 

"exactly; you cannot describe what you have never seen. i need hardly 
point out to you the conclusion to be drawn; you have been the victim of 
an hallucination. you expect to see your brother, you were alarm 
because you did not see him, and unconsciously, no doubt, your brain 
went to work, and finally you saw a mere projection of your own morbid 
thoughts; a vision of your absent brother, and a mere confusion of 
terror incorporated in a figure which you can't describe. of course 
your brother has been in some way prevent from coming to meet you as 
usual. i expect you will hear from him in a day or two." 

the lady look seriously at mr. phillipps, and then for a second there 
seem almost a twinkling as of mirth about her eyes, but her face 
cloud sadly at the dogmatic conclusion to which the scientist was 
led so irresistibly. 

"ah," she said, "you do not know. i cannot doubt the evidence of my 
waking senses. besides, perhaps i have had experience even more 
terrible. i acknowledge the force of your arguments, but a woman has 
intuition which never deceive her. believe me, i am not hysterical; 
feel my pulse, it is quite regular." 

she stretch out her hand with a dainty gesture, and a glance that 
enrapture phillipp in spite of himself. the hand held out to him was 
soft and white and warm, and as, in some confusion, he placed his 
finger on the purple vein, he felt profound touched by the spectacle 
of love and grief before him. 

"no," he said, as he release her wrist, "as you say, you are evidently 
quite yourself. still, you must be aware that living men do not possess 
dead hands. that sort of thing doesn't happen. it is, of course, barely 
possible that you did see your brother with another gentleman, and that 
important business prevent him from stopping. as for the wonderful 
hand, there may have been some deformity, a finger shot off by accident, 
or something of that sort." 

the lady shook her head mournfully. 

"i see you are a determined rationalist," she said. "did you not hear me 
say that i have had experience even more terrible? i too was once a 
sceptic, but after what i have known i can no long affect to doubt." 

"madam," reply mr. phillipps, "no one shall make me deny my faith. i 
will never believe, nor will i pretend to believe, that two and two make 
five, nor will i on any pretence admit the existence of two-sided 
triangles." 

"you are a little hasty," rejoin the lady. "but may i ask you if you 
ever heard the name of professor gregg, the authority on ethnology and 
kindred subjects?" 

"i have done much more than merely hear of professor gregg," said 
phillipps. "i always regard him as one of our most acute and 
clear-headed observers; and his last publication, the 'text-book of 
ethnology,' struck me as being quite admirable in its kind. indeed, the 
book had but come into my hand when i heard of the terrible accident 
which cut short gregg's career. he had, i think, taken a country house 
in the west of england for the summer, and is supposed to have fallen 
into a river. so far as i remember, his body was never recovered." 

"sir, i am sure that you are discreet. your conversation seem to 
declare as much, and the very title of that little work of yours which 
you mentioned, assure me that you are no empty trifler. in a word, i 
feel that i may depend on you. you appear to be under the impression 
that professor gregg is dead; i have no reason to believe that that is 
the case." 

"what?" cry phillipps, astonish and perturbed. "you do not hint that 
there was anything disgraceful? i cannot believe it. gregg was a man of 
clearest character; his private life was one of great benevolence; and 
though i myself am free from delusions, i believe him to have been a 
sincere and devout christian. surely you cannot mean to insinuate that 
some disreputable history forced him to flee the country?" 

"again you are in a hurry," reply the lady. "i said nothing of all 
this. briefly, then, i must tell you that professor gregg left his house 
one morning in full health both of mind and body. he never returned, but 
his watch and chain, a purse contain three sovereign in gold and 
some loose silver, with a ring that he wore habitually, were found three 
days later on a wild and savage hillside, many mile from the river. 
these articles were placed beside a limestone rock of fantastic form; 
they had been wrap into a parcel with a kind of rough parchment which 
was secure with gut. the parcel was opened, and the inner side of the 
parchment bore an inscription done with some red substance; the 
character were undecipherable, but seem to be a corrupt cuneiform." 

"you interest me intensely," said phillips. "would you mind continue 
your story? the circumstance you have mention seem to me of the most 
inexplicable character, and i thirst for an elucidation." 

the young lady seem to meditate for a moment, and she then proceed 
to relate the 




novel of the black seal. 


i must now give you some fuller particulars of my history. i am the 
daughter of a civil engineer, steven lal by name, who was so 
unfortunate as to die sudden at the outset of his career, and before 
he had accumulate sufficient means to support his wife and her two 
children. my mother contrived to keep the small household go on 
resources which must have been incredible small; we live in a remote 
country village, because most of the necessaries of life were cheap 
than in a town, but even so we were brought up with the severest 
economy. my father was a clever and well-read man, and left behind him a 
small but select collection of books, contain the best greek, latin, 
and english classics, and these books were the only amusement we 
possessed. my brother, i remember, learned latin out of descartes' 
"meditationes," and i, in place of the little tale which children are 
usually told to read, had nothing more charming than a translate of 
the "gesta romanorum." we grew up thus, quiet and studious children, and 
in course of time my brother provided for himself in the manner i have 
mentioned. i continue to live at home; my poor mother had become an 
invalid, and demand my continual care, and about two years ago she 
die after many month of painful illness. my situation was a terrible 
one; the shabby furniture barely suffice to pay the debt i had been 
forced to contract, and the books i despatch to my brother, knowing 
how he would value them. i was absolutely alone. i was aware how poorly 
my brother was paid; and though i came up to london in the hope of 
finding employment, with the understanding that he would defray my 
expenses, i swore it should only be for a month, and that if i could not 
in that time find some work, i would starve rather than deprive him of 
the few miserable pound he had laid by for his day of trouble. i took a 
little room in a distant suburb, the cheapest that i could find. i live 
on bread and tea, and i spent my time in vain answer of 
advertisements, and vain walk to address i had noted. day follow 
on day, and week on week, and still i was unsuccessful, till at last the 
term i had appoint drew to a close, and i saw before me the grim 
prospect of slow die of starvation. my landlady was good-natured in 
her way; she knew the slender of my means, and i am sure that she 
would not have turn me out of doors. it remain for me then to go 
away, and to try and die in some quiet place. it was winter then, and a 
thick white fog gather in the early part of the afternoon, becoming 
more dense as the day wore on; it was a sunday, i remember, and the 
people of the house were at chapel. at about three o'clock i crept out 
and walk away as quick as i could, for i was weak from abstinence. 
the white mist wrap all the street in silence, and a hard frost had 
gather thick upon the bare branch of the trees, and frost crystal 
glitter on the wooden fences, and on the cold cruel ground beneath my 
feet. i walk on, turning to right and left in utter haphazard, without 
care to look up at the name of the streets, and all that i remember 
of my walk on that sunday afternoon seem but the broken fragment of an 
evil dream. in a confuse vision i stumble on, through road half town 
and half country; gray field melting into the cloudy world of mist on 
one side of me, and on the other comfortable villa with a glow of 
firelight flicker on the walls; but all unreal, red brick walls, and 
light windows, vague trees, and glimmer country, gas-lamps 
beginning to star the white shadows, the vanish perspective of the 
railway line beneath high embankments, the green and red of the signal 
lamps,--all these were but momentary pictures flash on my tired brain 
and senses numb by hunger. now and then i would hear a quick step 
ring on the iron road, and men would pass me well wrap up, walking 
fast for the sake of warmth, and no doubt eager foretaste the 
pleasure of a glowing hearth, with curtains tight drawn about the 
frost panes, and the welcome of their friends; but as the early 
evening darken and night approached, foot-passengers got few and 
fewer, and i pass through street after street alone. in the white 
silence i stumble on, as desolate as if i trod the street of a bury 
city; and as i grew more weak and exhausted, something of the horror of 
death was fold thick round my heart. suddenly, as i turn a 
corner, some one accost me courteous beneath the lamp-post, and i 
heard a voice ask if i could kindly point the way to avon road. at 
the sudden shock of human accent i was prostrate and my strength gave 
way, and i fell all huddle on the side-walk and wept and sob and 
laugh in violent hysteria. i had gone out prepared to die, and as i 
step across the threshold that had sheltered me, i conscious bade 
adieu to all hope and all remembrances; the door clang behind me with 
the noise of thunder, and i felt that an iron curtain had fallen on the 
brief passage of my life, and that henceforth i was to walk a little 
way in a world, of gloom and shadow; i enter on the stage of the first 
act of death. then came my wandering in the mist, the white wrapping 
all things, the void streets, and muffle silence, till when that voice 
spoke to me, it was as if i had die and life return to me. in a few 
minutes i was able to compose my feelings, and as i rose i saw that i 
was confront by a middle-aged gentleman of specious appearance, neat 
and correct dressed. he look at me with an expression of great pity, 
but before i could stammer out my ignorance of the neighborhood, for 
indeed i had not the slightest notion of where i had wandered, he spoke. 

"my dear madam," he said, "you seem in some terrible distress. you 
cannot think how you alarm me. but may i inquire the nature of your 
trouble? i assure you that you can safe confide in me." 

"you are very kind," i replied; "but, i fear there is nothing to be 
done. my condition seem a hopeless one." 

"oh, nonsense, nonsense! you are too young to talk like that. come, let 
us walk down here, and you must tell me your difficulty. perhaps i may 
be able to help you." 

there was something very soothe and persuasive in his manner, and as 
we walk together, i gave him an outline of my story, and told of the 
despair that had oppress me almost to death. 

"you were wrong to give in so completely," he said, when i was silent. 
"a month is too short a time in which to feel one's way in london. 
london, let me tell you, miss lally, do not lie open and undefended; 
it is a fortify place, fosse and double-moated with curious 
intricacies. as must always happen in large towns, the conditions of 
life have become hugely artificial; no mere simple palisade is run up to 
oppose the man or woman who would take the place by storm, but serried 
lines of subtle contrivances, mines, and pitfall which it needs a 
strange skill to overcome. you, in your simplicity, fancy you had only 
to shout for these wall to sink into nothingness, but the time is gone 
for such startle victory as these. take courage; you will learn the 
secret of success before very long." 

"alas, sir," i replied, "i have no doubt your conclusion are correct, 
but at the present moment i seem to be in a fair way to die of 
starvation. you spoke of a secret; for heaven's sake, tell it me, if you 
have any pity for my distress." 

he laugh genially. "there lie the strange of it all. those who 
know the secret cannot tell it if they would; it is positively as 
ineffable as the central doctrine of freemasonry. but i may say this, 
that you yourself have penetrate at least the outer husk of the 
mystery," and he laugh again. 

"pray do not jest with me," i said. "what have i done, _que sais-je_? i 
am so far ignorant that i have not the slightest idea of how my next 
meal is to be provided." 

"excuse me. you ask what you have done? you have met me. come, we will 
fence no longer. i see you have self-education, the only education 
which is not infinite pernicious, and i am in want of a governess for 
my two children. i have been a widower for some years; my name is gregg. 
i offer you the post i have named, and shall we say a salary of a 
hundred a year?" 

i could only stutter out my thanks, and slip a card with his address 
and a bank-note by way of earnest into my hand, mr. gregg bade me 
good-bye, ask me to call in a day or two. 

such was my introduction to professor gregg, and can you wonder that the 
remembrance of despair and the cold blast that had blown from the gate 
of death upon me, made me regard him as a second father? before the 
close of the week. i was install in my new duties; the professor had 
lease an old brick manor house in a western suburb of london, and here, 
surround by pleasant lawn and orchards, and soothe with the murmur 
of the ancient elm that rock their bough above the roof, the new 
chapter of my life began. knowing as you do the nature of the 
professor's occupations, you will not be surprise to hear that the 
house teem with books; and cabinet full of strange and even hideous 
object fill every available nook in the vast low rooms. gregg was a 
man whose one thought was for knowledge, and i too before long caught 
something of his enthusiasm, and strove to enter into his passion for 
research. in a few month i was perhaps more his secretary than the 
governess of the two children, and many a night i have sat at the desk 
in the glow of the shade lamp while he, pace up and down in the rich, 
gloom of the firelight, dictate to me the substance of his "text-book 
of ethnology." but amidst these more sober and accurate study i always 
detect a something hidden, a longing and desire for some object to 
which he did not allude, and now and then he would break short in what 
he was saying and lapse into revery, entranced, as it seem to me, by 
some distant prospect of adventurous discovery. the text-book was at 
last finished, and we began to receive proof from the printers, which 
were intrust to me for a first reading, and then underwent the final 
revision of the professor. all the while his weary of the actual 
business he was engaged on increased, and it was with the joyous laugh 
of a schoolboy when term is over that he one day hand me a copy of the 
book. "there," he said, "i have kept my word; i promise to write it, 
and it is done with. now i shall be free to live for stranger things; i 
confess it, miss lally, i covet the renown of columbus. you will, i 
hope, see me play the part of an explorer." 

"surely," i said, "there is little left to explore. you have been born a 
few hundred years too late for that." 

"i think you are wrong," he replied; "there are still, depend upon it, 
quaint undiscovered country and continent of strange extent. ah, miss 
lally, believe me, we stand amidst sacrament and mystery full of awe, 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be. life, believe me, is no 
simple thing, no mass of gray matter and congery of vein and muscle 
to be laid naked by the surgeon's knife; man is the secret which i am 
about to explore, and before i can discover him i must cross over 
welter sea indeed, and ocean and the mists of many thousand years. 
you know the myth of the lost atlantis; what if it be true, and i am 
destined to be call the discover of that wonderful land?" 

i could see excitement boil beneath his words, and in his face was 
the heat of the hunter; before me stood a man who believe himself 
summon to tourney with the unknown. a pang of joy possessed me when i 
reflect that i was to be in a way associate with him in the 
adventure, and i too burn with the lust of the chase, not pause to 
consider that i knew not what we were to unshadow. 

the next morning professor gregg took me into his inner study, where 
range against the wall stood a nest of pigeon-holes, every drawer 
neat labelled, and the result of years of toil classified in a few 
feet of space. 

"here," he said, "is my life; here are all the fact which i have 
gather together with so much pains, and yet it is all nothing. no, 
nothing to what i am about to attempt. look at this;" and he took me to 
an old bureau, a piece fantastic and faded, which stood in a corner of 
the room. he unlock the front and open one of the drawers. 

"a few scraps of paper," he went on, point to the drawer, "and a lump 
of black stone, rudely annotate with queer mark and scratches,--that 
is all that drawer holds. here you see is an old envelope with the dark 
red stamp of twenty years ago, but i have pencil a few lines at the 
back; here is a sheet of manuscript, and here some cutting from 
obscure local journals. and if you ask me the subject matter of the 
collection, it will not seem extraordinary. a servant girl at a 
farmhouse, who disappear from her place and has never been heard of, a 
child supposed to have slip down some old working on the mountains, 
some queer scribble on a limestone rock, a man murder with a blow 
from a strange weapon; such is the scent i have to go upon. yes, as you 
say, there is a ready explanation for all this; the girl may have run 
away to london, or liverpool, or new york; the child may be at the 
bottom of the disused shaft; and the letters on the rock may be the idle 
whim of some vagrant. yes, yes, i admit all that; but i know i hold the 
true key. look!" and he held me out a slip of yellow paper. 

"characters found inscribe on a limestone rock on the gray hills," i 
read, and then there was a word erased, presumable the name of a county, 
and a date some fifteen years back. beneath was trace a number of 
uncouth characters, shaped somewhat like wedge or daggers, as strange 
and outlandish as the hebrew alphabet. 

"now the seal," said professor gregg, and he hand me the black stone, 
a thing about two inch long, and something like an old-fashioned 
tobacco stopper, much enlarged. 

i held it up to the light, and saw to my surprise the character on the 
paper repeated on the seal. 

"yes," said the professor, "they are the same. and the mark on the 
limestone rock were made fifteen years ago, with some red substance. and 
the character on the seal are four thousand years old at least. perhaps 
much more." 

"is it a hoax?" i said. 

"no, i anticipate that. i was not to be led to give my life to a 
practical joke. i have test the matter very carefully. only one person 
besides myself know of the mere existence of that black seal. besides, 
there are other reason which i cannot enter into now." 

"but what do it all mean?" i said. "i cannot understand to what 
conclusion all this leads." 

"my dear miss lally, that is a question i would rather leave unanswered 
for some little time. perhaps i shall never be able to say what secret 
are held here in solution; a few vague hints, the outline of village 
tragedies, a few mark done with red earth upon a rock, and an ancient 
seal. a queer set of data to go upon? half-a-dozen pieces of evidence, 
and twenty years before even so much could be got together; and who 
know what mirage or terra incognita may be beyond all this? i look 
across deep waters, miss lally, and the land beyond may be but a haze 
after all. but still i believe it is not so, and a few month will show 
whether i am right or wrong." 

he left me, and alone i endeavor to fathom the mystery, wonder to 
what goal such eccentric odds and end of evidence could lead. i myself 
am not wholly devoid of imagination, and i had reason to respect the 
professor's solidity of intellect; yet i saw in the contents of the 
drawer but the material of fantasy, and vain try to conceive what 
theory could be found on the fragment that had been placed before me. 
indeed, i could discover in what i had heard and seen but the first 
chapter of an extravagant romance; and yet deep in my heart i burn 
with curiosity, and day after day i look eager in professor gregg's 
face for some hint of what was to happen. 

it was one evening after dinner that the word came. 

"i hope you can make your preparation without much trouble," he said 
sudden to me. "we shall be leave here in a week's time." 

"really!" i said in astonishment. "where are we going?" 

"i have taken a country house in the west of england, not far from 
caermaen, a quiet little town, once a city, and the headquarters of a 
roman legion. it is very dull there, but the country is pretty, and the 
air is wholesome." 

i detect a glint in his eyes, and guess that this sudden move had 
some relation to our conversation of a few days before. 

"i shall just take a few books with me," said professor gregg, "that is 
all. everything else will remain here for our return. i have got a 
holiday," he went on, smile at me, "and i shan't be sorry to be quit 
for a time of my old bone and stone and rubbish. do you know," he went 
on, "i have been grind away at fact for thirty years; it is time for 
fancies." 

the days pass quickly; i could see that the professor was all 
quiver with suppress excitement, and i could scarce credit the 
eager appetence of his glance as we left the old manor house behind us, 
and began our journey. we set out at mid-day, and it was in the dusk of 
the evening that we arrive at a little country station. i was tired, 
and excited, and the drive through, the lane seem all a dream. first 
the desert street of a forgotten village, while i heard professor 
gregg's voice talk of the augustan legion and the clash of arms, and 
all the tremendous pomp that follow the eagles; then the broad river 
swimming to full tide with the last afterglow glimmer dusky in the 
yellow water, the wide meadows, and the cornfield whitening, and the 
deep lane winding on the slope between the hill and the water. at last 
we began to ascend, and the air grew rarer; i look down and saw the 
pure white mist track the outline of the river like a shroud, and a 
vague and shadowy country, imagination and fantasy of swelling hill 
and hanging woods, and half-shaped outline of hill beyond, stand in 
the distance the glare of the furnace fire on the mountain, grow by 
turn a pillar of shining flame, and fade to a dull point of red. we 
were slow mount a carriage drive, and then there came to me the 
cool breath and the scent of the great wood that was above us; i seem 
to wander in its deepest depths, and there was the sound of trickle 
water, the scent of the green leaves, and the breath of the summer 
night. the carriage stop at last, and i could scarcely distinguish 
the form of the house as i wait a moment at the pillar porch; and 
the rest of the evening seem a dream of strange things bound by the 
great silence of the wood and the valley and the river. 

the next morning when i awoke and look out of the bow window of the 
big old-fashioned bedroom, i saw under a gray sky a country that was 
still all mystery. the long, lovely valley, with the river winding in 
and out below, crossed, in mid vision by a mediæval bridge of vaulted 
and buttress stone, the clear presence of the rising ground beyond, 
and the wood that i had only seen in shadow the night before, seem 
tinge with enchantment, and the soft breath, of air that sigh in at 
the open pane was like no other wind. i look across the valley, and 
beyond, hill follow on hill as wave on wave, and here a faint blue 
pillar of smoke rose still in the morning air from the chimney of an 
ancient gray farmhouse, there was a rugged height crown with dark 
firs, and in the distance i saw the white streak of a road that climb 
and vanish into some unimagined country. but the boundary of all was a 
great wall of mountain, vast in the west, and ending like a fortress 
with a steep ascent and a domed tumulus clear against the sky. 

i saw professor gregg walking up and down the terrace path below the 
windows, and it was evident that he was revel in the sense of 
liberty, and the thought that he had, for a while, bidden good-bye to 
task-work. when i join him there was exultation in his voice as he 
pointed out the sweep of valley and the river that wound beneath the 
lovely hills. 

"yes," he said, "it is a strange beautiful country; and to me, at 
least, it seem full of mystery. you have not forgotten the drawer i 
show you, miss lally? no; and you have guess that i have come here 
not merely for the sake of the children and the fresh air?" 

"i think i have guess as much as that," i replied; "but you must 
remember i do not know the mere nature of your investigations; and as 
for the connection between the search and this wonderful valley, it is 
past my guessing." 

he smile queer at me. "you must not think i am making a mystery for 
the sake of mystery," he said. "i do not speak out because, so far, 
there is nothing to be spoken, nothing definite i mean, nothing that can 
be set down in hard black and white, as dull and sure and irreproachable 
as any blue book. and then i have another reason: many years ago a 
chance paragraph in a newspaper caught my attention, and focus in an 
instant the vagrant thought and half-formed fancies of many idle and 
speculative hour into a certain hypothesis. i saw at once that i was 
tread on a thin crust; my theory was wild and fantastic in the 
extreme, and i would not for any consideration have written a hint of it 
for publication. but i thought that in the company of scientific men 
like myself, men who knew the course of discovery, and were aware that 
the gas that blazes and flares in the gin-palace was once a wild 
hypothesis; i thought that with such men as these i might hazard my 
dream--let us say atlantis, or the philosopher's stone, or what you 
like--without danger of ridicule. i found i was gross mistaken; my 
friends look blank at me and at one another, and i could see 
something of pity, and something also of insolent contempt, in the 
glance they exchanged. one of them call on me next day, and hint 
that i must be suffering from overwork and brain exhaustion. 'in plain 
terms,' i said, 'you think i am go mad. i think not;' and i show 
him out with some little appearance of heat. since that day i vow that 
i would never whisper the nature of my theory to any living soul; to no 
one but yourself have i ever shown the contents of that drawer. after 
all, i may be following a rainbow; i may have been misle by the play of 
coincidence; but as i stand here in this mystic hush and silence amidst 
the wood and wild hills, i am more than ever sure that i am hot on the 
scent. come, it is time we went in." 

to me in all this there was something both of wonder and excitement; i 
knew how in his ordinary work professor gregg move step by step, 
test every inch of the way, and never venture on assertion without 
proof that was impregnable. yet i divine more from his glance and the 
vehemence of his tone than from the spoken word that he had in his every 
thought the vision of the almost incredible continual with him; and i, 
who was with some share of imagination no little of a sceptic, offend 
at a hint of the marvellous, could not help ask myself whether he was 
cherish a monomania, and barring out from this one subject all the 
scientific method of his other life. 

yet, with, this image of mystery haunting my thoughts, i surrender 
wholly to the charm of the country. above the fade house on the 
hillside began the great forest; a long dark line seen from the oppose 
hills, stretch above the river for many a mile from north to south, 
and yielding in the north to even wild country, barren and savage 
hills, and ragged common land, a territory all strange and unvisited, 
and more unknown to englishmen than the very heart of africa. the space 
of a couple of steep field alone separate the house from the wood, and 
the children were delight to follow me up the long alley of 
undergrowth, between smooth pleach wall of shining beech, to the 
highest point in the wood, whence one look on one side across the 
river and the rise and fall of the country to the great western mountain 
wall, and on the other, over the surge and dip of the myriad tree of 
the forest, over level meadow and the shining yellow sea to the faint 
coast beyond. i use to sit at this point on the warm sunlit turf which 
marked the track of the roman road, while the two children race about 
hunting for the whinberry that grew here and there on the banks. here 
beneath the deep blue sky and the great cloud rolling, like olden 
galleon with sail full-bellied, from the sea to the hills, as i 
listen to the whisper charm of the great and ancient wood, i live 
solely for delight, and only remember strange things when we would 
return to the house, and find professor gregg either shut up in the 
little room he had made his study, or else pace the terrace with the 
look, patient and enthusiastic, of the determined seeker. 

one morning, some eight or nine days after our arrival, i look out of 
my window and saw the whole landscape transmute before me. the cloud 
had dip low and hidden the mountain in the west, and a southern wind 
was driving the rain in shift pillar up the valley, and the little 
brooklet that burst the hill below the house now raged, a red torrent, 
down to the river. we were perforce oblige to keep snug within doors, 
and when i had attend to my pupils, i sat down in the morning-room 
where the ruins of a library still encumber an old-fashioned bookcase. 
i had inspect the shelves once or twice, but their contents had fail 
to attract me; volumes of eighteenth century sermons, an old book on 
farriery, a collection of "poems" by "persons of quality," prideaux's 
"connection," and an odd volume of pope were the boundary of the 
library, and there seem little doubt that everything of interest or 
value had been removed. now, however, in desperation, i began to 
re-examine the musty sheepskin and calf bindings, and found, much to my 
delight, a fine old quarto print by the stephani, contain the three 
books of pomponiu mela, "de situ orbis," and other of the ancient 
geographers. i knew enough of latin to steer my way through an ordinary 
sentence, and i soon became absorb in the odd mixture of fact and 
fancy; light shining on a little of the space of the world, and beyond 
mist and shadow and awful forms. glancing over the clear-printed pages, 
my attention was caught by the heading of a chapter in solinus, and i 
read the words:-- 

mira de intimi gentibu libyae, de lapide 
hexecontalitho. 

"the wonders of the people that inhabit the inner parts of libya, and of 
the stone call sixtystone." 

the odd title attract me and i read on:-- 

"gens ista avia et secreta habitat, in montibu horrendi foeda 
mysteria celebrat. de hominibu nihil aliud illi præferunt quam 
figuram, ab humano ritu prorsu exulant, oderunt deum lucis. stridunt 
potiu quam loquuntur; vox absona nec sine horrore auditur. lapide 
quodam gloriantur, quem hexecontalithon vocant, dicunt enim hunc lapidem 
sexaginta nota ostendere. cuju lapidi nomen secretum ineffabile 
colunt: quod ixaxar." 

"this folk," i translate to myself, "dwells in remote and secret 
places, and celebrate foul mystery on savage hills. nothing have they 
in common with men save the face, and the customs of humanity are wholly 
strange to them; and they hate the sun. they hiss rather than speak; 
their voice are harsh, and not to be heard without fear. they boast of 
a certain stone, which they call sixtystone; for they say that it 
display sixty characters. and this stone has a secret unspeakable name; 
which is ixaxar." 

i laugh at the queer inconsequence of all this, and thought it fit for 
sinbad the sailor or other of the supplementary nights. when i saw 
professor gregg in the course of the day, i told him of my find in the 
bookcase, and the fantastic rubbish i had been reading. to my surprise, 
he look up at me with an expression of great interest. 

"that is really very curious," he said. "i have never thought it worth 
while to look into the old geographers, and i daresay i have miss a 
good deal. ah, that is the passage, is it. it seem a shame to rob you 
of your entertainment, but i really think i must carry off the book." 

the next day the professor call to me to come to the study. i found 
him sitting at a table in the full light of the window, scrutinize 
something very attentive with a magnifying-glass. 

"ah, miss lally," he began, "i want to use your eyes. this glass is 
pretty good, but not like my old one that i left in town. would you 
mind examine the thing yourself, and telling me how many character 
are cut on it?" 

he hand me the object in his hand, and i saw that it was the black 
seal he had shown me in london, and my heart began to beat with the 
thought that i was presently to know something. i took the seal, and 
holding it up to the light checked off the grotesque dagger-shaped 
character one by one. 

"i make sixty-two," i said at last. 

"sixty-two? nonsense; it's impossible. ah, i see what you have done, you 
have count that and that," and he pointed to two mark which i had 
certainly taken as letters with the rest. 

"yes, yes," professor gregg went on; "but those are obvious scratches, 
done accidentally; i saw that at once. yes, then that's quite right. 
thank you very much, miss lally." 

i was go away, rather disappointed at my have been call in merely 
to count a number of mark on the black seal, when sudden there 
flash into my mind what i had read in the morning. 

"but, professor gregg, i cried, breathless, the seal, the seal. why, it 
is the stone hexecontalitho that solinu write of; it is ixaxar." 

"yes," he said, "i suppose it is. or it maybe a mere coincidence. it 
never do to be too sure, you know, in these matters. coincidence 
kill the professor." 

i went away puzzle by what i had heard, and as much as ever at a loss 
to find the ruling clew in this maze of strange evidence. for three days 
the bad weather lasted, change from driving rain to a dense mist, fine 
and dripping, and we seem to be shut up in a white cloud that veiled 
all the world away from us. all the while professor gregg was darkl 
in his room, unwilling, it appeared, to dispense confidence or talk of 
any kind, and i heard him walking to and fro with a quick, impatient 
step, as if he were in some way weary of inaction. the fourth morning 
was fine, and at breakfast the professor said briskly:-- 

"we want some extra help about the house; a boy of fifteen or sixteen, 
you know. there are a lot of little odd job that take up the maids' 
time, which a boy could do much better." 

"the girl have not complain to me in any way," i replied. "indeed, 
anne said there was much less work than in london, owe to there being 
so little dust." 

"ah, yes, they are very good girls. but i think we shall do much better 
with a boy. in fact, that is what has been bother me for the last two 
days." 

"bothering you?" i said in astonishment, for as a matter of fact the 
professor never took the slightest interest in the affair of the house. 

"yes," he said, "the weather, you know. i really couldn't go out in that 
scotch mist; i don't know the country very well, and i should have lost 
my way. but i am go to get the boy this morning." 

"but how do you know there is such a boy as you want anywhere about?" 

"oh, i have no doubt as to that. i may have to walk a mile or two at the 
most, but i am sure to find just the boy i require." 

i thought the professor was poking, but though his tone was airy enough 
there was something grim and set about his features that puzzle me. he 
got his stick, and stood at the door look meditative before him, 
and as i pass through the hall he call to me. 

"by the way, miss lally, there was one thing i want to say to you. i 
daresay you may have heard that some of these country lad are not over 
bright; idiot would be a harsh word to use, and they are usually 
call 'naturals,' or something of the kind, i hope you won't mind if 
the boy i am after should turn out not too keen-witted; he will be 
perfectly harmless, of course, and blacking boots doesn't need much 
mental effort." 

with that he was gone, stride up the road that led to the wood; and i 
remain stupefied, and then for the first time my astonishment was 
mingle with a sudden note of terror, arise i knew not whence, and all 
unexplained even to myself, and yet i felt about my heart for an instant 
something of the chill of death, and that shapeless, formless dread of 
the unknown that is worse than death itself. i try to find courage in 
the sweet air that blew up from the sea, and in the sunlight after rain, 
but the mystic wood seem to darken around me; and the vision of the 
river coil between the reeds, and the silver gray of the ancient 
bridge, fashion in my mind symbol of vague dread, as the mind of a 
child fashion terror from things harmless and familiar. 

two hour later professor gregg returned. i met him as he came down the 
road, and ask quiet if he had been able to find a boy. 

"oh, yes," he answered; "i found one easily enough. his name is jervase 
cradock, and i expect he will make himself very useful. his father has 
been dead for many years, and the mother, whom i saw, seem very glad 
at the prospect of a few shilling extra coming in on saturday nights. 
as i expected, he is not too sharp, has fit at times, the mother said; 
but as he will not be trust with the china, that doesn't much matter, 
do it? and he is not in any way dangerous, you know, merely a little 
weak." 

"when is he coming?" 

"to-morrow morning at eight o'clock. anne will show him what he has to 
do, and how to do it. at first he will go home every night, but perhaps 
it may ultimately turn out more convenient for him to sleep here, and 
only go home for sundays." 

i found nothing to say to all this. professor gregg spoke in a quiet 
tone of matter-of-fact, as indeed was warrant by the circumstance; and 
yet i could not quell my sensation of astonishment at the whole affair. 
i knew that in reality no assistance was want in the housework, and 
the professor's prediction that the boy he was to engage might prove a 
little "simple," follow by so exact a fulfilment, struck me as bizarre 
in the extreme. the next morning i heard from, the housemaid that the 
boy cradock had come at eight, and that she had been try to make him 
useful. "he doesn't seem quite all there, i don't think, miss," was her 
comment; and later in the day i saw him helping the old man who work 
in the garden. he was a youth of about fourteen, with black hair and 
black eyes, and an olive skin, and i saw at once from the curious 
vacancy of his expression that he was mental weak. he touched his 
forehead awkward as i went by, and i heard him answer the garden 
in a queer, harsh voice that caught my attention; it gave me the 
impression of some one speak deep below under the earth, and there 
was a strange sibilance, like the hiss of the phonograph as the 
pointer travels over the cylinder. i heard that he seem anxious to do 
what he could, and was quite docile and obedient, and morgan the 
gardener, who knew his mother, assured me he was perfectly harmless. 
"he's always been a bit queer," he said, "and no wonder, after what his 
mother went through before he was born. i did know his father, thomas 
cradock, well, and a very fine workman he was too, indeed. he got 
something wrong with his lung owe to working in the wet woods, and 
never got over it, and went off quite sudden like. and they do say as 
how mrs. cradock was quite off her head; anyhow, she was found by mr. 
hillyer, ty coch, all crouch up on the gray hills, over there, crying 
and weeping like a lost soul. and jervase he was born about eight month 
afterwards, and as i was saying, he was a bit queer always; and they do 
say when he could scarcely walk he would frighten the other children 
into fit with the noise he would make." 

a word in the story had stir up some remembrance within me, and 
vague curious, i ask the old man where the gray hill were. 

"up there," he said, with the same gesture he had use before; "you go 
past the fox and hounds, and through the forest, by the old ruins. it's 
a good five mile from here, and a strange sort of a place. the poorest 
soil between this and monmouth, they do say, though it's good feed for 
sheep. yes, it was a sad thing for poor mrs. cradock." 

the old man turn to his work, and i stroll on down the path between 
the espaliers, gnarled and gouty with age, thinking of the story i had 
heard, and grope for the point in it that had some key to my memory. 
in an instant it came before me; i had seen the phrase "gray hills" on 
the slip of yellow paper that professor gregg had taken from the 
drawer in his cabinet. again i was seize with pang of mingle 
curiosity and fear; i remember the strange character copy from the 
limestone rock, and then again their identity with the inscription on 
the age-old seal, and the fantastic fable of the latin geographer. i 
saw beyond doubt that, unless coincidence had set all the scene and 
disposed all these bizarre event with curious art, i was to be a 
spectator of things far remove from the usual and customary traffic and 
jostle of life. professor gregg i noted day by day. he was hot on his 
trail, grow lean with eagerness; and in the evenings, when the sun 
was swimming on the verge of the mountain, he would pace the terrace to 
and fro with his eyes on the ground, while the mist grew white in the 
valley, and the still of the evening brought far voice near, and 
the blue smoke rose a straight column from the diamond-shaped chimney of 
the gray farmhouse, just as i had seen it on the first morning. i have 
told you i was of sceptical habit; but though i understood little or 
nothing, i began to dread, vain propose to myself the iterate 
dogma of science that all life is material, and that in the system of 
things there is no undiscovered land even beyond the remotest stars, 
where the supernatural can find a footing. yet there struck in on this 
the thought that matter is as really awful and unknown as spirit, that 
science itself but dally on the threshold, scarcely gain more than 
a glimpse of the wonders of the inner place. 

there is one day that stand up from amidst the other as a grim red 
beacon, betoken evil to come. i was sitting on a bench in the garden, 
watch the boy cradock weeding, when i was sudden alarm by a harsh 
and choke sound, like the cry of a wild beast in anguish, and i was 
unspeakable shock to see the unfortunate lad standing in full view 
before me, his whole body quiver and shake at short interval as 
though shock of electricity were passing through him, and his teeth 
grinding, and foam gathering on his lips, and his face all swollen and 
blacken to a hideous mask of humanity. i shriek with terror, and 
professor gregg came running; and as i pointed to cradock, the boy with 
one convulsive shudder fell face forward, and lay on the wet earth, his 
body writhe like a wound blind-worm, and an inconceivable babble of 
sound burst and rattling and hiss from his lips; he seem to 
pour forth an infamous jargon, with words, or what seem words, that 
might have belong to a tongue dead since untold ages, and bury deep 
beneath nilotic mud, or in the inmost recess of the mexico forest. 
for a moment the thought pass through my mind, as my ear were still 
revolt with that infernal clamor, "surely this is the very speech of 
hell," and then i cry out again and again, and ran away shudder to 
my inmost soul. i had seen professor gregg's face as he stoop over the 
wretched boy and raise him, and i was appall by the glow of 
exultation that shone on every lineament and feature. as i sat in my 
room with drawn blinds, and my eyes hidden in my hands, i heard heavy 
steps beneath, and i was told afterwards that professor gregg had 
carry cradock to his study, and had lock the door. i heard voice 
murmur indistinctly, and i tremble to think of what might be passing 
within a few feet of where i sat; i long to escape to the wood and 
sunshine, and yet i dread the sight that might confront me on the 
way. and at last, as i held the handle of the door nervously, i heard 
professor gregg's voice calling to me with a cheerful ring: "it's all 
right now, miss lally," he said. "the poor fellow has got over it, and i 
have been arrange for him to sleep here after to-morrow. perhaps i may 
be able to do something for him." 

"yes," he said later, "it was a very painful sight, and i don't wonder 
you were alarmed. we may hope that good food will build him up a little, 
but i am afraid he will never be really cured;" and he affected the 
dismal and conventional air with which one speak of hopeless illness, 
and yet beneath it i detect the delight that leapt up rampant within 
him, and fought and struggle to find utterance. it was as if one 
glance down on the even surface of the sea, clear and immobile, and saw 
beneath rage depths, and a storm of contend billows. it was indeed 
to me a torture and offensive problem that this man, who had so 
bounteous rescue me from the sharp of death, and show himself 
in all the relations of life full of benevolence and pity and kindly 
forethought, should so manifest be for once on the side of the demons, 
and take a ghastly pleasure in the torment of an afflict 
fellow-creature. apart, i struggle with the horned difficulty, and 
strove to find the solution, but without the hint of a clue; beset by 
mystery and contradiction, i saw nothing that might help me, and began 
to wonder whether, after all, i had not escape from the white mist of 
the suburb at too dear a rate. i hint something of my thought to the 
professor; i said enough to let him know that i was in the most acute 
perplexity, but the moment after regret what i had done, when i saw 
his face contort with a spasm of pain. 

"my dear miss lally," he said, "you surely do not wish to leave us? no, 
no, you would not do it. you do not know how i rely on you; how 
confident i go forward, assured that you are here to watch over my 
children. you, miss lally, are my rear-guard; for, let me tell you, that 
the business in which i am engaged is not wholly devoid of peril. you 
have not forgotten what i said the first morning here; my lip are shut 
by an old and firm resolve, till they can open to utter no ingenious 
hypothesis or vague surmise but irrefragable fact, as certain as a 
demonstration in mathematics. think over it, miss lally, not for a 
moment would i endeavor to keep you here against your own instincts, and 
yet i tell you frankly that i am persuade that it is here, here amidst 
the woods, that your duty lies." 

i was touched by the eloquence of his tone, and by the remembrance that 
the man, after all, had been my salvation, and i gave him my hand on a 
promise to serve him loyal and without question. a few days later the 
rector of our church, a little church, gray and severe and quaint, that 
hover on the very bank of the river and watch the tide swim and 
return, came to see us, and professor gregg easily persuade him to stay 
and share our dinner. mr. meyrick was a member of an antique family of 
squires, whose old manor house stood amongst the hill some seven mile 
away, and thus rooted in the soil, the rector was a living store of all 
the old fade customs and lore of the country. his manner, genial with 
a deal of retired oddity, won on professor gregg; and towards the 
cheese, when a curious burgundy had begun its incantations, the two men 
glow like the wine, and talk of philology with the enthusiasm of a 
burgess over the peerage. the parson was expound the pronunciation of 
the welsh _ll_, and produce sound like the gurgle of his native 
brooks, when professor gregg struck in. 

"by the way," he said, "that was a very odd word i met with the other 
day. you know my boy, poor jervase cradock. well, he has got the bad 
habit of talk to himself, and the day before yesterday i was walking 
in the garden here and heard him; he was evidently quite unconscious of 
my presence. a lot of what he said i couldn't make out, but one word, 
struck me distinctly. it was such an odd sound; half-sibilant, 
half-guttural, and as quaint as those double _ll_'s you have been 
demonstrating. i do not know whether i can give you an idea of the 
sound. "ishakshar" is perhaps as near as i can get; but the _k_ ought to 
be a greece _chi_ or a spain _j_. now what do it mean in welsh?" 

"in welsh?" said the parson. "there is no such word in welsh, nor any 
word remotely resemble it. i know the book-welsh, as they call it, and 
the colloquial dialect as well as any man, but there's no word like 
that from anglesea to usk. besides, none of the cradock speak a word of 
welsh; it's die out about here." 

"really. you interest me extremely, mr. meyrick. i confess the word 
didn't strike me as have the welsh ring. but i thought it might be 
some local corruption." 

"no, i never heard such a word, or anything like it. indeed," he added, 
smile whimsically, "if it belong to any language, i should say it 
must be that of the fairies,--the tylwydd têg, as we call them." 

the talk went on to the discovery of a roman villa in the neighborhood; 
and soon after i left the room, and sat down apart to wonder at the 
drawing together of such strange clue of evidence. as the professor had 
spoken of the curious word, i had caught the glint of his eye upon me; 
and though the pronunciation he gave was grotesque in the extreme, i 
recognize the name of the stone of sixty character mention by 
solinus, the black seal shut up in some secret drawer of the study, 
stamp forever by a vanish race with sign that no man could read, 
sign that might, for all i knew, be the veil of awful things done long 
ago, and forgotten before the hill were mould into form. 

when, the next morning, i came down, i found professor gregg pace the 
terrace in his eternal walk. 

"look at that bridge," he said when he saw me, "observe the quaint and 
gothic design, the angle between the arches, and the silvery gray of 
the stone in the awe of the morning light. i confess it seem to me 
symbolic; it should illustrate a mystical allegory of the passage from 
one world to another." 

"professor gregg," i said quietly, "it is time that i knew something of 
what has happened, and of what is to happen." 

for the moment he put me off, but i return again with the same 
question in the evening, and then professor gregg flame with 
excitement. "don't you understand yet?" he cried. "but i have told you a 
good deal; yes, and shown you a good deal. you have heard pretty nearly 
all that i have heard, and seen what i have seen; or at least," and his 
voice chill as he spoke, "enough to make a good deal clear as noonday. 
the servant told you, i have no doubt, that the wretched boy cradock 
had another seizure the night before last; he awoke me with cries in 
that voice you heard in the garden, and i went to him, and god forbid 
you should see what i saw that night. but all this is useless; my time 
here is drawing to a close; i must be back in town in three weeks, as i 
have a course of lecture to prepare, and need all my books about me. in 
a very few days it will be all over, and i shall no long hint, and no 
long be liable to ridicule as a madman and a quack. no, i shall speak 
plainly, and i shall be heard with such emotion as perhaps no other man 
has ever drawn from the breast of his fellows." 

he paused, and seem to grow radiant with the joy of great and 
wonderful discovery. 

"but all that is for the future, the near future certainly, but still 
the future," he went on at length. "there is something to be done yet; 
you will remember my telling you that my research were not altogether 
devoid of peril? yes, there is a certain amount of danger to be faced; i 
did not know how much when i spoke on the subject before, and to a 
certain extent i am still in the dark. but it will be a strange 
adventure, the last of all, the last demonstration in the chain." 

he was walking up and down the room as he spoke, and i could hear in his 
voice the contend tone of exultation and despondence, or perhaps i 
should say awe, the awe of a man who go forth on unknown waters, and i 
thought of his allusion to columbus on the night he had laid his book 
before me. the evening was a little chilly, and a fire of log had been 
light in the study where we were, and the remittent flame and the glow 
on the wall remind me of the old days. i was sitting silent in an 
armchair by the fire, wonder over all i had heard, and still vain 
speculate as to the secret spring conceal from me under all the 
phantasmagoria i had witnessed, when i became sudden aware of a 
sensation that change of some sort had been at work in the room, and 
that there was something unfamiliar in its aspect. for some time i 
look about me, try in vain to localize the alteration that i knew 
had been made; the table by the window, the chairs, the fade settee 
were all as i had known them. suddenly, as a sought-for recollection 
flash into the mind, i knew what was amiss. i was facing the 
professor's desk, which stood on the other side of the fire, and above 
the desk was a grimy look bust of pitt, that i had never seen there 
before. and then i remember the true position of this work of art; in 
the furthest corner by the door was an old cupboard, project into the 
room, and on the top of the cupboard, fifteen feet from the floor, the 
bust had been, and there no doubt it had delayed, accumulate dirt 
since the early years of the century. 

i was utterly amazed, and sat silent still, in a confusion of thought. 
there was, so far as i knew, no such thing as a step-ladder in the 
house, for i had ask for one to make some alteration in the curtains 
of my room; and a tall man standing on a chair would have found it 
impossible to take down the bust. it had been placed not on the edge of 
the cupboard, but far back against the wall; and professor gregg was, if 
anything, under the average height. 

"how on earth did you manage to get down pitt?" i said at last. 

the professor look curious at me, and seem to hesitate a little. 

"they must have found you a step-ladder, or perhaps the garden brought 
in a short ladder from outside." 

"no, i have had no ladder of any kind. now, miss lally," he went on with 
an awkward simulation of jest, "there is a little puzzle for you; a 
problem in the manner of the inimitable holmes; there are the facts, 
plain and patent; summon your acute to the solution of the puzzle. 
for heaven's sake," he cry with a break voice, "say no more about 
it. i tell you, i never touched the thing," and he went out of the room 
with horror manifest on his face, and his hand shook and jar the door 
behind him. 

i look round the room in vague surprise, not at all realize what had 
happened, making vain and idle surmise by way of explanation, and 
wonder at the stirring of black waters by an idle word, and the 
trivial change of an ornament. "this is some petty business, some whim 
on which i have jarred," i reflected; "the professor is perhaps 
scrupulous and superstitious over trifles, and my question may have 
outrage unacknowledged fears, as though one kill a spider or spill 
the salt before the very eyes of a practical scotchwoman." i was 
immerse in these fond suspicions, and began to plume myself a little on 
my immune from such empty fears, when the truth fell heavy as lead 
upon my heart, and i recognize with cold terror that some awful 
influence had been at work. the bust was simply inaccessible; without a 
ladder no one could have touched it. 

i went out to the kitchen and spoke as quiet as i could to the 
housemaid. 

"who move that bust from the top of the cupboard, anne?" i said to her. 
"professor gregg say he has not touched it. did you find an old 
step-ladder in one of the outhouses?" 

the girl look at me blankly. 

"i never touched it," she said. "i found it where it is now the other 
morning when i dust the room. i remember now, it, was wednesday 
morning, because it was the morning after cradock was taken bad in the 
night. my room is next to his, you know, miss," the girl went on 
piteously; "and it was awful to hear how he cry and call out name 
that i couldn't understand. it made me feel all afraid, and then master 
came, and i heard him speak, and he took down cradock to the study and 
gave him something." 

"and you found that bust move the next morning?" 

"yes, miss, there was a queer sort of a smell in the study when i came 
down and open the windows; a bad smell it was, and i wonder what it 
could be. do you know, miss, i went a long time ago to the zoo in london 
with my cousin thomas barker, one afternoon that i had off, when i was 
at mrs. prince's in stanhope gate, and we went into the snake-house to 
see the snakes, and it was just the same sort of a smell, very sick it 
made me feel, i remember, and i got barker to take me out. and it was 
just the same kind of a smell in the study, as i was saying, and i was 
wonder what it could be from, when i see that bust with pitt cut in 
it standing on the master's desk, and i thought to myself, now who has 
done that, and how have they done it? and when i came to dust the 
things, i look at the bust, and i saw a great mark on it where the 
dust was gone, for i don't think it can have been touched with a duster 
for years and years, and it wasn't like finger-marks, but a large patch 
like, broad and spread out. so i pass my hand over it, without 
thinking what i was doing, and where that patch was it was all sticky 
and slimy, as if a snail had crawl over it. very strange, isn't it, 
miss? and i wonder who can have done it, and how that mess was made." 

the well-meant gabble of the servant touched me to the quick. i lay down 
upon my bed, and bit my lip that i should not cry out loud in the sharp 
anguish of my terror and bewilderment. indeed, i was almost mad with 
dread; i believe that if it had been daylight i should have flee hot 
foot, forget all courage and all the debt of gratitude that was due 
to professor gregg, not care whether my fate were that i must starve 
slow so long as i might escape from the net of blind and panic fear 
that every day seem to draw a little close round me. if i knew, i 
thought, if i knew what there were to dread, i could guard against it; 
but here, in this lonely house, shut in on all side by the olden wood 
and the vaulted hills, terror seem to spring inconsequent from every 
covert, and the flesh is aghast at the half-heard murmur of horrible 
things. all in vain i strove to summon scepticism to my aid, and 
endeavor by cool common-sense to buttress my belief in a world of 
natural order, for the air that blew in at the open window was a mystic 
breath, and in the dark i felt the silence go heavy and sorrowful 
as a mass of requiem, and i conjure image of strange shape gathering 
fast amidst the reeds, beside the wash of the river. 

in the morning, from the moment that i set foot in the breakfast-room i 
felt that the unknown plot was drawing to a crisis; the professor's face 
was firm and set, and he seem hardly to hear our voice when we spoke. 

"i am go out for rather a long walk," he said, when the meal was 
over. "you mustn't be expect me, now, or thinking anything has 
happen if i don't turn up to dinner. i have been get stupid 
lately, and i dare say a miniature walking tour will do me good. perhaps 
i may even spend the night in some little inn, if i find any place that 
looks clean and comfortable." 

i heard this, and knew by my experience of professor gregg's manner that 
it was no ordinary business or pleasure that impel him. i knew not, 
nor even remotely guessed, where he was bound, nor had i the vaguest 
notion of his errand, but all the fear of the night before returned; and 
as he stood, smiling, on the terrace, ready to set out, i implore him 
to stay, and to forget all his dream of the undiscovered continent. 

"no, no, miss lally," he replied, still smiling, "it's too late now. 
_vestigia nulla retrorsum_, you know, is the device of all true 
explorers, though i hope it won't be literally true in my ease. but, 
indeed, you are wrong to alarm yourself so; i look upon my little 
expedition as quite commonplace; no more exciting than a day with the 
geology hammers. there is a risk, of course, but so there is on the 
commonest excursion. i can afford to be jaunty; i am do nothing so 
hazardous as 'arry do a hundred times over in the course of every bank 
holiday. well, then, you must look more cheerfully; and so good-by till 
to-morrow at latest." 

he walk brisk up the road, and i saw him open the gate that mark 
the entrance of the wood, and then he vanish in the gloom of the 
trees. 

all the day pass heavy with a strange dark in the air, and again 
i felt as if imprison amidst the ancient woods, shut in an olden land 
of mystery and dread, and as if all was long ago and forgotten by the 
living outside. i hope and dreaded, and when the dinner-hour came, i 
wait expect to hear the professor's step in the hall, and his voice 
exult at i knew not what triumph. i compose my face to welcome him 
gladly, but the night descended dark, and he did not come. 

in the morning when the maid knock at my door, i call out to her, 
and ask if her master had returned; and when she reply that his 
bedroom stood open and empty, i felt the cold clasp of despair. still, i 
fancy he might have discover genial company, and would return for 
luncheon, or perhaps in the afternoon, and i took the children for a 
walk in the forest, and try my best to play and laugh with them, and 
to shut out the thought of mystery and veiled terror. hour after hour i 
waited, and my thought grew darker; again the night came and found me 
watching, and at last, as i was making much ado to finish my dinner, i 
heard steps outside and the sound of a man's voice. 

the maid came in and look oddly at me. 

"please, miss," she began, "mr. morgan the garden wants to speak to 
you for a minute, if you didn't mind." 

"show him in, please," i answered, and i set my lip tight. 

the old man came slow into the room, and the servant shut the door 
behind him. 

"sit down, mr. morgan," i said; "what is it that you want to say to me?" 

"well, miss, mr. gregg he gave me something for you yesterday morning, 
just before he went off; and he told me particular not to hand it up 
before eight o'clock this evening exactly, if so be as he wasn't back 
again home before, and if he should come home before i was just to 
return it to him in his own hands. so, you see, as mr. gregg isn't here 
yet, i suppose i'd better give you the parcel directly." 

he pull out something from his pocket, and gave it to me, half rising. 
i took it silently, and seeing that morgan seem doubtful as to what he 
was to do next, i thank him and bade him good-night, and he went out. 
i was left alone in the room with the parcel in my hand,--a paper parcel 
neat seal and direct to me, with the instruction morgan had 
quote all written in the professor's large loose hand. i broke the 
seal with a choke at my heart, and found an envelope inside, 
address also, but open, and i took the letter out. 

* * * * * 

"my dear miss lally," it began, "to quote the old logic manual, the case 
of your reading this note is a case of my have made a blunder of some 
sort, and, i am afraid, a blunder that turn these lines into a 
farewell. it is practically certain that neither you nor anyone else 
will ever see me again. i have made my will with provision for this 
eventuality, and i hope you will consent to accept the small remembrance 
address to you, and my sincere thanks for the way in which you join 
your fortune to mine. the fate which has come upon me is desperate and 
terrible beyond the remotest dream of man; but this fate you have a 
right to know--if you please. if you look in the left-hand drawer of my 
dressing-table, you will find the key of the escritoire, properly 
labelled. in the well of the escritoire is a large envelope seal and 
address to your name. i advise you to throw it forthwith into the 
fire; you will sleep better of nights if you do so. but if you must know 
the history of what has happened, it is all written down for you to 
read." 

* * * * * 

the signature was firm written below, and again i turn the page and 
read out the words one by one, aghast and white to the lips, my hand 
cold as ice, and sickness choke me. the dead silence of the room, and 
the thought of the dark wood and hill close me in on every side, 
oppress me, helpless and without capacity, and not knowing where to 
turn for counsel. at last i resolve that though knowledge should haunt 
my whole life and all the days to come, i must know the meaning of the 
strange terror that had so long torment me, rising gray, dim, and 
awful, like the shadow in the wood at dusk. i careful carry out 
professor gregg's directions, and not without reluctance broke the seal 
of the envelope, and spread out his manuscript before me. that 
manuscript i always carry with me, and i see that i cannot deny your 
unspoken request to read it. this, then, was what i read that night, 
sitting at the desk, with a shade lamp beside me. 

the young lady who call herself miss lal then proceed to recite:-- 

* * * * * 

_the statement of william gregg, f.r.s., etc._ 

it is many years since the first glimmer of the theory which is now 
almost, if not quite, reduce to fact dawn first on my mind. a 
somewhat extensive course of miscellaneous and obsolete reading had done 
a good deal to prepare the way, and, later, when i became somewhat of a 
specialist and immerse myself in the study known as ethnological, i 
was now and then startle by fact that would not square with orthodox 
scientific opinion, and by discovery that seem to hint at something 
still hidden for all our research. more particularly i became convinced 
that much of the folk-lore of the world is but an exaggerate account of 
event that really happened, and i was especially drawn to consider the 
story of the fairies, the good folk of the celtic races. here i 
thought i could detect the fringe of embroidery and exaggeration, the 
fantastic guise, the little people dress in green and gold sporting in 
the flowers, and i thought i saw a distinct analogy between the name 
given to this race (supposed to be imaginary) and the description of 
their appearance and manners. just as our remote ancestor call the 
dread being "fair" and "good" precisely because they dread them, so 
they had dress them up in charming forms, knowing the truth to be the 
very reverse. literature, too, had gone early to work, and had lent a 
powerful hand in the transformation, so that the playful elves of 
shakespeare are already far remove from the true original, and the real 
horror is disguise in a form of prankish mischief. but in the old 
tales, the story that use to make men cross themselves as they sat 
round the burning logs, we tread a different stage; i saw a widely 
oppose spirit in certain history of children and of men and women who 
vanish strange from the earth. they would be seen by a peasant in 
the field walking towards some green and round hillock, and seen no 
more on earth; and there are story of mother who have left a child 
quiet sleep with the cottage door rudely barred with a piece of 
wood, and have returned, not to find the plump and rosy little saxon, 
but a thin and wizened creature, with sallow skin and black piercing 
eyes, the child of another race. then, again, there were myth dark 
still; the dread of witch and wizard, the lurid evil of the sabbath, and 
the hint of demon who mingle with the daughter of men. and just as we 
have turn the terrible "fair folk" into a company of benignant, if 
freakish, elves, so we have hidden from us the black foul of the 
witch and her companion under a popular _diablerie_ of old women and 
broomstick and a comic cat with tail on end. so the greece call the 
hideous fury benevolent ladies, and thus the northern nation have 
follow their example. i pursue my investigations, steal odd hour 
from other and more imperative labors, and i ask myself the question: 
supposing these tradition to be true, who were the demon who are 
report to have attend the sabbaths? i need not say that i laid aside 
what i may call the supernatural hypothesis of the middle ages, and came 
to the conclusion that fairy and devil were of one and the same race 
and origin; invention, no doubt, and the gothic fancy of old days had 
done much in the way of exaggeration and distortion; yet i firm 
believe that beneath all this imagery there was a black background of 
truth. as for some of the allege wonders, i hesitated. while i should 
be very loth to receive any one specific instance of modern spiritualism 
as contain even a grain of the genuine, yet i was not wholly prepared 
to deny that human flesh may now and then, once perhaps in ten million 
cases, be the veil of powers which seem magical to us; powers which, so 
far from proceeding from the heights and leading men thither, are in 
reality survival from the depths of being. the amoeba and the snail 
have powers which we do not possess; and i thought it possible that the 
theory of reversion might explain many things which seem wholly 
inexplicable. thus stood my position; i saw good reason to believe that 
much of the tradition, a vast deal of the earliest and uncorrupted 
tradition of the so-called fairies, represent solid fact, and i 
thought that the purely supernatural element in these traditions, was to 
be account for on the hypothesis that a race which had fallen out of 
the grand march of evolution might have retained, as a survival, certain 
powers which would be to us wholly miraculous. such was my theory as it 
stood conceive in my mind; and working with, this in view, i seem to 
gather confirmation from every side, from the spoils of a tumulus or a 
barrow, from a local paper report an antiquarian meeting in the 
country, and from general literature of all kinds. amongst other 
instances, i remember being struck by the phrase "articulate-speaking 
men" in homer, as if the writer knew or had heard of men whose speech 
was so rude that it could hardly be term articulate; and on my 
hypothesis of a race who had lag far behind the rest, i could easily 
conceive that such a folk would speak a jargon but little remove from 
the inarticulate noise of brute-beasts. 

thus i stood, satisfy that my conjecture was at all event not far 
remove from fact, when a chance paragraph in a small country print one 
day arrest my attention. it was a short account of what was to all 
appearance the usual sordid tragedy of the village; a young girl 
unaccountable missing, and evil rumor blatant and busy with her 
reputation. yet i could read between the lines that all this scandal was 
purely hypothetical, and in all probability invent to account for what 
was in any other manner unaccountable. a flight to london or liverpool, 
or an undiscovered body lie with a weight about its neck in the foul 
depths of a woodland pool, of perhaps murder,--such were the theory of 
the wretched girl's neighbors. but as i idle scan the paragraph, a 
flash of thought pass through me with the violence of an electric 
shock: what if the obscure and horrible race of the hill still 
survived, still remain haunting wild places, and barren hills, and now 
and then repeating the evil of gothic legend, unchanged and 
unchangeable as the turanian shelta, or the basque of spain. i have 
said that the thought came with violence; and indeed i drew in my breath 
sharply, and clung with both hand to my elbow-chair, in a strange 
confusion of horror and elation. it was as if one of my _confrères_ of 
physical science, roam in a quiet english wood, had been sudden 
stricken aghast by the presence of the slimy and loathsome terror of the 
ichthyosaurus, the original of the story of the awful worm kill by 
valorous knights, or had seen the sun darken by the pterodactyl, the 
dragon of tradition. yet as a resolute explore of knowledge, the 
thought of such a discovery threw me into a passion of joy, and i cut 
out the slip from the paper, and put it in a drawer in my old bureau, 
resolve that it should be but the first piece in a collection of the 
strangest significance. i sat long that evening dream of the 
conclusion i should establish, nor did cooler reflection at first dash 
my confidence. yet as i began to put the case fairly, i saw that i might 
be building on an unstable foundation; the fact might possibly be in 
accordance with local opinion; and i regard the affair with a mood of 
some reserve. yet i resolve to remain perch on the look-out, and i 
hug to myself the thought that i alone was watch and wakeful, 
while the great crowd of think and search stood heedless and 
indifferent, perhaps letting the most prerogative fact pass by 
unnoticed. 

several years elapse before i was enable to add to the contents of the 
drawer; and the second find was in reality not a valuable one, for it 
was a mere repetition of the first, with only the variation of another 
and distant locality. yet i gain something; for in the second case, as 
in the first, the tragedy took place in a desolate and lonely country, 
and so far my theory seem justified. but the third piece was to me far 
more decisive. again, amongst outland hills, far even from a main road 
of traffic, an old man was found done to death, and the instrument of 
execution was left beside him. here, indeed, there was rumor and 
conjecture, for the deadly tool was a primitive stone axe, bound by gut 
to the wooden handle, and surmise the most extravagant and improbable 
were indulge in. yet, as i thought with a kind of glee, the wildest 
conjecture went far astray; and i took the pains to enter into 
correspondence with the local doctor, who was call at the inquest. he, 
a man of some acuteness, was dumfoundered. "it will not do to speak of 
these things in country places, he wrote to me; but, frankly, professor 
gregg, there is some hideous mystery here. i have obtain possession of 
the stone axe, and have been so curious as to test its powers. i took it 
into the back-garden of my house one sunday afternoon when my family and 
the servant were all out, and there, sheltered by the poplar hedges, i 
made my experiments. i found the thing utterly unmanageable. whether 
there is some peculiar balance, some nice adjust of weights, which 
require incessant practice, or whether an effectual blow can be struck 
only by a certain trick of the muscles, i do not know; but i assure you 
that i went into the house with but a sorry opinion of my athletic 
capacities. it was like an inexperienced man try 'putting the 
hammer;' the force exert seem to return on oneself, and i found 
myself hurl backwards with violence, while the axe fell harmless to 
the ground. on another occasion i try the experiment with a clever 
woodman of the place; but this man, who had handle his axe for forty 
years, could do nothing with the stone implement, and miss every 
stroke most ludicrously. in short, if it were not so supreme absurd, i 
should say that for four thousand years no one on earth could have 
struck an effective blow with the tool that undoubted was use to 
murder the old man." this, as may be imagined, was to me rare news; and 
afterwards, when i heard the whole story, and learned that the 
unfortunate old man had babble tale of what might be seen at night on 
a certain wild hillside, hint at unheard-of wonders, and that he had 
been found cold one morning on the very hill in question, my exultation 
was extreme, for i felt i was leave conjecture far behind me. but the 
next step was of still greater importance. i had possessed for many 
years an extraordinary stone seal,--a piece of dull black stone, two 
inch long from the handle to the stamp, and the stamp end a rough 
hexagon an inch and a quarter in diameter. altogether, it present the 
appearance of an enlarge tobacco-stopper of an old-fashioned make. it 
had been sent to me by an agent in the east, who informed me that it had 
been found near the site of the ancient babylon. but the character 
engrave on the seal were to me an intolerable puzzle. somewhat of the 
cuneiform pattern, there were yet striking differences, which i 
detect at the first glance, and all effort to read the inscription on 
the hypothesis that the rule for decipher the arrow-headed writing 
would apply prove futile. a riddle such as this stung my pride, and at 
odd moments i would take the black seal out of the cabinet, and 
scrutinize it with so much idle perseverance that every letter was 
familiar to my mind, and i could have drawn the inscription from memory 
without the slightest error. judge then of my surprise, when i one day 
received from a correspondent in the west of england a letter and an 
enclosure that positively left me thunderstruck. i saw careful trace 
on a large piece of paper the very character of the black seal, without 
alteration of any kind, and above the inscription my friend had written: 
_inscription found on a limestone rock on the grey hills, monmouthshire. 
done in some red earth and quite recent_. i turn to the letter. my 
friend wrote: "i send you the enclose inscription with all due reserve. 
a shepherd who pass by the stone a week ago swear that there was then 
no mark of any kind. the characters, as i have noted, are form by 
drawing some red earth over the stone, and are of an average height of 
one inch. they look to me like a kind of cuneiform character, a good 
deal altered, but this of course is impossible. it may be either a hoax 
or more probably some scribble of the gypsies, who are plentiful enough 
in this wild country. they have, as you are aware, many hieroglyphics 
which they use in communicate with one another. i happen to visit 
the stone in question two days ago in connection with a rather painful 
incident which has occur here." 

as may be supposed, i wrote immediately to my friend, thank him for 
the copy of the inscription, and ask him in a casual manner, the 
history of the incident he mentioned. to be brief, i heard that a woman 
name cradock, who had lost her husband a day before, had set out to 
communicate the sad news to a cousin who live some five mile away. she 
took a short cut which led by the gray hills. mrs. cradock, who was then 
quite a young woman, never arrive at her relative's house. late that 
night a farmer who had lost a couple of sheep, supposed to have wander 
from the flock, was walking over the gray hills, with a lantern and his 
dog. his attention was attract by a noise, which he describe as a 
kind of wailing, mournful and pitiable to hear; and, guide by the 
sound, he found the unfortunate mrs. cradock crouch on the ground by 
the limestone rock, sway her body to and fro, and lament and 
crying in so heart-rending a manner that the farmer was, as he says, at 
first oblige to stop his ears, or he would have run away. the woman 
allow herself to be taken home, and a neighbor came to see to her 
necessities. all the night she never cease her crying, mix her 
lament with words of some unintelligible jargon, and when the doctor 
arrive he pronounced her insane. she lay on her bed for a week, now 
wailing, as people said, like one lost and damn for eternity, and now 
sunk in a heavy coma; it was thought that grief at the loss of her 
husband had unsettled her mind, and the medical man did not at one time 
expect her to live. i need not say that i was deep interested in this 
story, and i made my friend write to me at interval with all the 
particulars of the case. i heard then that in the course of six week 
the woman gradual recover the use of her faculty and some month 
later she gave birth to a son, christen jervase, who unhappily prove 
to be of weak intellect. such were the fact known to the village; but 
to me while i whiten at the suggest thought of the hideous 
enormity that had doubtless been committed, all this was nothing short 
of conviction, and i incautious hazard a hint of something like the 
truth to some scientific friends. the moment the words had left my lip 
i bitter regret have spoken, and thus given away the great secret 
of my life, but with a good deal of relief mixed with indignation, i 
found my fear altogether misplaced, for my friends ridicule me to my 
face, and i was regard as a madman; and beneath a natural anger i 
chuckle to myself, feeling as secure amidst these blockheads, as if i 
had confide what i knew to the desert sands. 

but now, knowing so much, i resolve i would know all, and i 
concentrated my effort on the task of decipher the inscription on 
the black seal. for many years i made this puzzle the sole object of my 
leisure moments; for the greater portion of my time was, of course, 
devoted to other duties, and it was only now and then that i could 
snatch a week of clear research. if i were to tell the full history of 
this curious investigation, this statement would be wearisome in the 
extreme, for it would contain simply the account of long and tedious 
failure. by what i knew already of ancient script i was well-equipped 
for the chase, as i always term it to myself. i had correspondent 
amongst all the scientific men in europe, and, indeed, in the world, and 
i could not believe that in these days any character, however ancient 
and however perplexed, could long resist the search-light i should bring 
to bear upon it. yet, in point of fact, it was fully fourteen years 
before i succeeded. with every year my professional duty increased, 
and my leisure became smaller. this no doubt retarded me a good deal; 
and yet, when i look back on those years i am astonish at the vast 
scope of my investigate of the black seal. i made my bureau a centre, 
and from all the world and from all the age i gather transcript of 
ancient writing. nothing, i resolved, should pass me unawares, and the 
faintest hint should be welcome and follow up. but as one covert 
after another was try and prove empty of result, i began in the 
course of years to despair, and to wonder whether the black seal were 
the sole relic of some race that had vanish from the world and left no 
other trace of its existence,--had perished, in fine, as atlantis is 
said to have done, in some great cataclysm, its secret perhaps drown 
beneath the ocean or mould into the heart of the hills. the thought 
chill my warmth a little, and though i still persevered, it was no 
long with the same certainty of faith. a chance came to the rescue. i 
was stay in a considerable town in the north of england, and took the 
opportunity of go over the very creditable museum that had for some 
time been establish in the place. the curator was one of my 
correspondents; and, as we were look through one of the mineral 
cases, my attention was struck by a specimen, a piece of black stone 
some four inch square, the appearance of which remind me in a 
measure of the black seal. i took it up carelessly, and was turning it 
over in my hand, when i saw, to my astonishment, that the under side was 
inscribed. i said, quiet enough, to my friend the curator that the 
specimen interested me, and that i should be much oblige if he would 
allow me to take it with me to my hotel for a couple of days. he, of 
course, made no objection, and i hurried to my rooms, and found that my 
first glance had not deceive me. there were two inscriptions; one in 
the regular cuneiform character, another in the character of the black 
seal, and i realize that my task was accomplished. i made an exact copy 
of the two inscriptions; and when i got to my london study, and had the 
seal before me, i was able seriously to grapple with the great problem. 
the interpret inscription on the museum specimen, though in itself 
curious enough, did not bear on my quest, but the transliterate made 
me master of the secret of the black seal. conjecture, of course, had to 
enter into my calculations; there was here and there uncertainty about a 
particular ideograph, and one sign recur again and again on the seal 
baffle me for many successive nights. but at last the secret stood open 
before me in plain english, and i read the key of the awful 
transmute of the hills. the last word was hardly written, when with 
finger all tremble and unsteady i tore the scrap of paper into the 
minutest fragments, and saw them flame and blacken in the red hollow of 
the fire, and then i crush the gray film that remain into finest 
powder. never since then have i written those words; never will i write 
the phrase which tell me how man can be reduce to the slime from which 
he came, and be forced to put on the flesh of the reptile and the snake. 
there was now but one thing remaining. i knew; but i desire to see, and 
i was after some time able to take a house in the neighborhood of the 
gray hills, and not far from the cottage where mrs. cradock and her son 
jervase resided. i need not go into a full and detailed account of the 
apparently inexplicable event which have occur here, where i am 
writing this. i knew that i should find in jervase cradock something of 
the blood of the "little people," and i found later that he had more 
than once encounter his kinsmen in lonely place in that lonely land. 
when i was summon one day to the garden, and found him in a seizure 
speak or hiss the ghastly jargon of the black seal, i am afraid 
that exultation prevail over pity. i heard burst from his lip the 
secret of the underworld, and the word of dread, "ishakshar," the 
signification of which i must be excuse from giving. 

but there is one incident i cannot pass over unnoticed. in the waste 
hollow of the night i awoke at the sound of those hiss syllable i 
knew so well; and on go to the wretched boy's room, i found him 
convulse and foam at the mouth, struggle on the bed as if he 
strove to escape the grasp of writhe demons. i took him down to my 
room and lit the lamp, while he lay twist on the floor, calling on 
the power within his flesh to leave him. i saw his body swell and become 
distend as a bladder, while the face blacken before my eyes; and 
then at the crisis i did what was necessary according to the directions 
on the seal, and putt all scruple on one side, i became a man of 
science, observant of what was passing. yet the sight i had to witness 
was horrible, almost beyond the power of human conception and the most 
fearful fantasy; something pushed out from the body there on the floor, 
and stretch forth, a slimy waver tentacle, across the room, and 
grasp the bust upon the cupboard, and laid it down on my desk. 

when it was over, and i was left to walk up and down all the rest of the 
night, white and shuddering, with sweat pour from my flesh, i vain 
try to reason with myself; i said, truly enough, that i had seen 
nothing really supernatural, that a snail push out his horn and 
drawing them in was but an instance on a small scale of what i had 
witnessed; and yet horror broke through all such reasoning and left me 
shatter and loathing myself for the share i had taken in the night's 
work. 

there is little more to be said. i am go now to the final trial and 
encounter; for i have determined that there shall be nothing wanting, 
and i shall meet the "little people" face to face. i shall have the 
black seal and the knowledge of its secret to help me, and if i 
unhappily do not return from my journey, there is no need to conjure up 
here a picture of the awful of my fate. 

pause a little at the end of professor gregg's statement, miss lal 
continue her tale in the following words:-- 

such was the almost incredible story that the professor had left behind 
him. when i had finished reading it, it was late at night, but the next 
morning i took morgan with me, and we proceed to search the gray hill 
for some trace of the lost professor. i will not weary you with a 
description of the savage desolate of that tract of country, a tract 
of utterest loneliness, of bare green hill dot over with gray 
limestone boulders, worn by the ravage of time into fantastic semblance 
of men and beasts. finally, after many hour of weary searching, we 
found what i told you--the watch and chain, the purse, and the 
ring--wrapped in a piece of coarse parchment. when morgan cut the gut 
that bound the parcel together, and i saw the professor's property, i 
burst into tears, but the sight of the dread character of the black 
seal repeated on the parchment froze me to silent horror, and i think i 
understood for the first time the awful fate that had come upon my late 
employer. 

i have only to add that professor gregg's lawyer treat my account of 
what had happen as a fairy tale, and refuse even to glance at the 
document i laid before him. it was he who was responsible for the 
statement that appear in the public press, to the effect that 
professor gregg had been drowned, and that his body must have been swept 
into the open sea. 

miss lal stop speak and look at mr. phillipps, with a glance 
of some enquiry. he, for his part, was sunken in a deep revery of 
thought; and when he look up and saw the bustle of the evening 
gathering in the square, men and women hurry to partake of dinner, 
and crowd already besetting the music-halls, all the hum and press of 
actual life seem unreal and visionary, a dream in the morning after an 
awakening. 

"i thank you," he said at last, "for your most interesting story, 
interesting to me, because i feel fully convinced of its exact truth." 

"sir," said the lady, with some energy of indignation, "you grieve and 
offend me. do you think i should waste my time and yours by concoct 
fiction on a bench in leicester square?" 

"pardon me, miss lally, you have a little misunderstood me. before you 
began i knew that whatever you told would be told in good faith, but 
your experience have a far higher value than that of _bona fides_. the 
most extraordinary circumstances in your account are in perfect harmony 
with the very latest scientific theories. professor lodge would, i am 
sure, value a communication from you extremely; i was charm from the 
first by his daring hypothesis in explanation of the wonders of 
spiritualism (so called), but your narrative put the whole matter out 
of the range of mere hypothesis." 

"alas, sir, all this will not help me. you forget, i have lost my 
brother under the most startle and dreadful circumstances. again, i 
ask you, did you not see him as you came here? his black whiskers, his 
spectacles, his timid glance to right and left; think, do not these 
particulars recall his face to your memory?" 

"i am sorry to say i have never seen any one of the kind," said 
phillipps, who had forgotten all about the missing brother. "but let me 
ask you a few questions. did you notice whether professor gregg--" 

"pardon me, sir, i have stay too long. my employer will be expect 
me. i thank you for your sympathy. good bye." 

before mr. phillipp had recover from his amaze at this abrupt 
departure, miss lal had disappear from his gaze, passing into the 
crowd that now throng the approach to the empire. he walk home in 
a pensive frame of mind, and drank too much tea. at ten o'clock he had 
made his third brew, and had sketch out the outline of a little work 
to be call _protoplasmic reversion_. 




incident of the private bar. 


mr. dyson often meditate at odd moments over the singular tale he had 
listen to at the café de la touraine. in the first place he cherish 
a profound conviction that the words of truth were scattered with a too 
niggardly and sparing hand over the agreeable history of mr. smith and 
the black gulf cañon; and, secondly, there was the undeniable fact of 
the profound agitation of the narrator, and his gesture on the 
pavement, too violent to be simulated. the idea of a man go about 
london haunt by the fear of meeting a young man with spectacles struck 
dyson as supreme ridiculous; he search his memory for some precedent 
in romance, but without success; he paid visit at odd times to the 
little café, hope to find mr. wilkins there; and he kept a sharp watch 
on the great generation of the spectacled men without much doubt that he 
would remember the face of the individual whom he had seen dart out of 
the aerate bread shop. all his peregrination and researches, however, 
seem to lead to nothing of value, and dyson need all his warm 
conviction of his innate detective powers and his strong scent for 
mystery to sustain him in his endeavors. in fact, he had two affair on 
hand; and every day, as he pass through street crowded or deserted, 
and lurk in the obscure districts, and watch at corners, he was more 
than surprise to find that the affair of the gold coin persistent 
avoid him; while the ingenious wilkins, and the young man with 
spectacles whom he dreaded, seem to have vanish from the pavements. 

he was ponder these problem one evening in a house of call in the 
strand, and the obstinacy with which the person he so ardent desire 
to meet hung back gave the modest tankard before him an additional touch 
of bitter. as it happened, he was alone in his compartment, and, without 
thinking, he utter aloud the burden of his meditations. "how bizarre 
it all is!" he said, "a man walking the pavement with the dread of a 
timid-looking young man with spectacles continual hover before his 
eyes. and there was some tremendous feeling at work, i could swear to 
that." quick as thought, before he had finished the sentence, a head 
pop round the barrier, and was withdrawn again; and while dyson was 
wonder what this could mean, the door of the compartment was swung 
open, and a smooth, clean-shaven, and smile gentleman entered. 

"you will excuse me, sir," he said politely, "for intrude on your 
thoughts, but you made a remark a minute ago." 

"i did," said dyson; "i have been puzzle over a foolish matter, and i 
thought aloud. as you heard what i said, and seem interested, perhaps 
you may be able to relieve my perplexity?" 

"indeed. i scarcely know; it is an odd coincidence. one has to be 
cautions. i suppose, sir, that you would have no repulsion in assist 
the end of justice." 

"justice," reply dyson, "is a term of such wide meaning, that i too 
feel doubtful about give an answer. but this place is not altogether 
fit for such a discussion; perhaps you would come to my rooms?" 

"you are very kind; my name is burton, but i am sorry to say i have not 
a card with me. do you live near here?" 

"within ten minutes' walk." 

mr. burton took out his watch and seem to be making a rapid 
calculation. 

"i have a train to catch," he said; "but after all, it is a late one. 
so, if you don't mind, i think i will come with you. i am sure we should 
have a little talk together. we turn up here?" 

the theatre were filling as they cross the strand, the street seem 
alive with voices, and dyson look fondly about him. the glittering 
lines of gas-lamps, with here and there the blind radiance of an 
electric light, the hansom that flash to and fro with ring bells, 
the laden buses, and the eager hurry east and west of the foot 
passengers, made his most enchanting picture; and the graceful spire of 
st. mary le strand, on the one hand, and the last flush of sunset on the 
other, were to him a cause of thanksgiving, as the gorse blossom to 
linnæus. mr. burton caught his look of fond as they cross the 
street. 

"i see you can find the picturesque in london," he said. "to me this 
great town is as i see it is to you, the study and the love of life. yet 
how few there are that can pierce the veil of apparent monotony and 
meanness! i have read in a paper which is said to have the largest 
circulation in the world, a comparison between the aspect of london and 
paris, a comparison which should be positively laureat, as the great 
masterpiece of fatuous stupidity. conceive if you can a human being of 
ordinary intelligence prefer the boulevard to our london streets; 
imagine a man calling for the wholesale destruction of our most charming 
city, in order that the dull uniform of that white sepulchre call 
paris should be reproduce here in london. is it not positively 
incredible?" 

"my dear sir," said dyson, regarding burton with a good deal of 
interest. "i agree most heartily with your opinions, but i really cannot 
share your wonder. have you heard how much george eliot received for 
'romola'? do you know what the circulation of 'robert elsmere' was? do 
you read 'tit bits' regularly? to me, on the contrary, it is constant 
matter both for wonder and thanksgiving that london was not 
boulevard twenty years ago. i praise that exquisite jagged sky line 
that stand up against the pale greens and fade blues and flush 
cloud of sunset, but i wonder even more than i praise. as for st. mary 
le strand, its preservation is a miracle, nothing more or less. a thing 
of exquisite beauty _versus_ four bus abreast! really, the conclusion 
is too obvious. didn't you read the letter of the man who propose that 
the whole mysterious system, the immemorial plan of compute easter, 
should, be abolish off-hand because he doesn't like his son have his 
holiday as early as march 20th? but shall we be go on?" 

they had linger at the corner of a street on the north side of the 
strand, enjoy the contrast and the glamour of the scene. dyson 
pointed the way with a gesture, and they stroll up the comparatively 
desert streets, slant a little to the right, and thus arrive at 
dyson's lodging on the verge of bloomsbury. mr. burton took a 
comfortable armchair by the open window, while dyson lit the candle and 
produce the whiskey and soda and cigarettes. 

"they tell me these cigarette are very good," he said, "but i know 
nothing about it myself. i hold at last that there is only one tobacco, 
and that is shag. i suppose i could not tempt you to try a pipeful?" 

mr. burton smiling refuse the offer, and picked out a cigarette from 
the box. when he had smoke it half through, he said with some 
hesitation:-- 

"it is really kind of you to have me here, mr. dyson; the fact is that 
the interests at issue are far too serious to be discuss in a bar, 
where, as you found for yourself, there may be listeners, voluntary or 
involuntary, on each side. i think the remark i heard you make was 
something about the oddity of an individual go about london in deadly 
fear of a young man with spectacles." 

"yes, that was it." 

"well, would you mind confiding to me the circumstances that gave rise 
to the reflection?" 

"not in the least; it was like this." and he ran over in brief outline 
the adventure in oxford street, dwelling on the violence of mr. 
wilkins's gestures, but wholly suppress the tale told in the café. 
"he told me he live in constant terror of meeting this man; and i left 
him when i thought he was cool enough to look after himself," said 
dyson, ending his narrative. 

"really," said mr. burton. "and you actually saw this mysterious 
person." 

"yes." 

"and could you describe him?" 

"well, he look to me a youngish man, pale and nervous. he had small 
black side whiskers, and wore rather large spectacles." 

"but this is simply marvellous! you astonish me. for i must tell you 
that my interest in the matter is this. i am not in the least in terror 
of meeting a dark young man with spectacles, but i shrewd suspect a 
person of that description would much rather not meet me. and yet the 
account you give of the man tally exactly. a nervous glance to right 
and left--is it not so? and, as you observed, he wear prominent 
spectacles, and has small black whiskers. there cannot be surely two 
people exactly identical--one a cause of terror, and the other, i should 
imagine, extremely anxious to get out of the way. but have you seen this 
man since?" 

"no, i have not; and i have been look out for him pretty keenly. but, 
of course, he may have left london, and england too for the matter of 
that." 

hardly, i think. well, mr. dyson, it is only fair that i should explain 
my story, now that i have listened, to yours. i must tell you, then, 
that i am an agent for curiosity and precious things of all kinds. an 
odd employment, isn't it? of course i wasn't brought up to the business; 
i gradual fell into it. i have always been fond of things queer and 
rare, and by the time i was twenty i had made half a dozen collections. 
it is not generally known how often farm laborer come upon rarities; 
you would be astonish if i told you what i have seen turn up by the 
plough. i live in the country in those days, and i use to buy anything 
the men on the farm brought me; and i had the queerest set of rubbish, 
as my friends call my collection. but that's how i got the scent of 
the business, which means everything; and, later on, it struck me that i 
might very well turn my knowledge to account and add to my income. since 
those early days i have been in most quarters of the world, and some 
very valuable things have pass through my hands, and i have had to 
engage in difficult and delicate negotiations. you have possibly heard 
of the khan opal--called in the east 'the stone of a thousand and one 
colors'? well, perhaps the conquest of that stone was my greatest 
achievement. i call it myself the stone of the thousand and one lies, 
for i assure you that i had to invent a cycle of folk-lore before the 
rajah who own it would consent to sell the thing. i subsidize 
wandering story-tellers, who told tale in which the opal play a 
frightful part; i hire a holy man, a great ascetic, to prophesy against 
the thing in the language of eastern symbolism; in short, i frightened 
the rajah out of his wits. so you see there is room for diplomacy in 
the traffic i am engaged in. i have to be ever on my guard, and i have 
often been sensible that unless i watch every step and weigh every 
word my life would not last me much longer. last april i became aware of 
the existence of a highly valuable antique gem. it was in southern 
italy, and in the possession of person who were ignorant of its real 
value. it has always been my experience that it is precisely the 
ignorant who are most difficult to deal with. i have met farmer who 
were under the impression that a shilling of george i. was a find of 
almost incalculable value; and all the defeat i have sustain have 
been at the hand of people of this description. reflect on these 
facts, i saw that the acquisition of the gem i have mention would be 
an affair demanding the nicest diplomacy; i might possibly have got it 
by offering a sum approach its real value, but i need not point out 
to you that such a proceeding would be most unbusinesslike. indeed, i 
doubt whether it would have been successful, for the cupidity of such 
person is arouse by a sum which seem enormous, and the low cunning 
which serve them in place of intelligence immediately suggest that the 
object for which such an amount is offer must be worth at least 
double. of course, when it is a matter of an ordinary curiosity--an old 
jug, a carve chest, or a queer brass lantern--one do not much care; 
the cupidity of the owner defeat its object, the collector laughs, and 
go away, for he is aware that such things are by no means unique. but 
this gem i fervent desire to possess; and as i did not see my way to 
give more than a hundredth part of its value, i was conscious that 
all my, let us say, imaginative and diplomatic powers would have to be 
exerted. i am sorry to say that i came to the conclusion that i could 
not undertake to carry the matter through single-handed, and i 
determined to confide in my assistant, a young man name william 
robbins, whom i judge to be by no means devoid of capacity. my idea was 
that robbin should get himself up as a low-class dealer in precious 
stones; he could patter a little italian, and would go to the town in 
question and manage to see the gem we were after, possibly by offering 
some trifling articles of jewelry for sale, but that i left to be 
decided, then my work was to begin, but i will not trouble you with a 
tale told twice over. in due course, then, robbin went off to italy 
with an assortment of uncut stone and a few rings, and some jewelry i 
bought in birmingham, on purpose for his expedition. a week later i 
follow him, travel leisurely, so that i was a fortnight later in 
arrive at our common destination. there was a decent hotel in the 
town, and on my inquiring of the landlord whether there were many 
stranger in the place, he told me very few; he had heard there was an 
englishman stay in a small tavern, a pedlar he said, who sold 
beautiful trinket very cheaply, and want to buy old rubbish. for five 
or six days i took life leisurely, and i must say i enjoy myself. it 
was part of my plan to make the people think i was an enormously rich 
man; and i knew that such item as the extravagance of my meals, and the 
price of every bottle of wine i drank, would not be suffered, as sancho 
panza put it, to rot in the landlord's breast. at the end of the week i 
was fortunate enough to make the acquaintance of signor melini, the 
owner of the gem i coveted, at the café, and with his ready hospitality 
and my geniality i was soon establish as a friend of the house. on my 
third or fourth visit i manage to make the italy talk about the 
english pedlar, who, they said, spoke a most detest italian. 'but 
that do not matter,' said the signora melini, 'for he has beautiful 
things, which he sell very very cheap.' 'i hope you may not find he has 
cheat you,' i said, 'for i must tell you that english people give 
these fellow a very wide berth. they usually make a great parade of the 
cheap of their goods, which often turn out to be double the price of 
better articles in the shops,' they would not hear of this, and signora 
melini insist on showing me the three ring and the bracelet she had 
bought of the pedlar. she told me the price she had paid; and after 
scrutinize the articles carefully, i had to confess that she had made 
a bargain, and indeed robbin had sold her the things at about fifty per 
cent below market value. i admire the trinket as i gave them back to 
the lady, and i hint that the pedlar must be a somewhat foolish 
specimen of his class. two days later, as i was taking my vermouth at 
the café with signor melini, he led the conversation back to the pedlar, 
and mention casual that he had shown the man a little curiosity, for 
which he had made rather a handsome offer. 'my dear sir,' i said, 'i 
hope you will be careful. i told you that the travel tradesman do 
not bear a very high reputation in england; and notwithstanding his 
apparent simplicity, this fellow may turn out to be an arrant cheat. may 
i ask you what is the nature of the curiosity you have shown him?' he 
told me it was a little thing, a pretty little stone with some figures 
cut on it: people said it was old. 'i should like to examine it,' i 
replied; 'as it happen i have, seen a good deal of these gems. we have 
a fine collection of them in our museum at london.' in due course i was 
shown the article, and i held the gem i so covet between my fingers. i 
look at it coolly, and put it down careless on the table. 'would you 
mind telling me, signor,' i said, 'how much my fellow-countryman offer 
you for this?' 'well,' he said, 'my wife say the man must be mad; he 
said he would give me twenty lire for it.' 

"i look at him quietly, and took up the gem and pretended to examine 
it in the light more carefully; i turn it over and over, and finally 
pull out a magnify glass from my pocket, and seem to search every 
line in the cutting with minutest scrutiny. 'my dear sir,' i said at 
last, 'i am inclined to agree with signora melini. if this gem were 
genuine, it would be worth some money; but as it happen to be a rather 
bad forgery, it is not worth twenty centesimi. it was sophisticated, i 
should imagine, some time in the last century, and by a very unskilful 
hand.' 'then we had better get rid of it,' said melini. 'i never thought 
it was worth anything myself. of course i am sorry for the pedlar, but 
one must let a man know his own trade. i shall tell him we will take the 
twenty lire.' 'excuse me,' i said, 'the man wants a lesson. it would be 
a charity to give him one. tell him that you will not take anything 
under eighty lire, and i shall be much surprise if he do not close 
with you at once. 

"a day or two later i heard that the english pedlar had gone away, after 
debase the mind of the country people with birmingham art jewelry; 
for i admit that the gold sleeve links like kidney beans, the silver 
chain made apparently after the pattern of a dog-chain, and the initial 
brooches, have always been heavy on my conscience. i cannot acquit 
myself of have indirect contribute to debauch the taste of a simple 
folk; but i hope that the end i had in view may finally outbalance this 
heavy charge. soon afterwards, i paid a farewell visit at the melinis, 
and the signor informed me with an oily chuckle that the plan i had 
suggest had been completely successful. i congratulate him on his 
bargain, and went away after express a wish that heaven might send 
many such pedlar in his path. 

"nothing of interest occur on my return journey. i had arrange that 
robbin was to meet me at a certain place on a certain day, and i went 
to the appointment full of the coolest confidence; the gem had been 
conquered, and i had only to reap the fruits of victory. i am sorry to 
shake that trust in our common human nature which i am sure you possess, 
but i am compel to tell you that up to the present date i have never 
set eyes on my man robbins, or on the antique gem in his custody. i have 
found out that he actually arrive in london, for he was seen three 
days before my arrival in england by a pawnbroker of my acquaintance 
consume his favorite beverage, four ale, in the tavern where we met 
to-night. since then he has not been heard of. i hope you will now 
pardon my curiosity as to the history and adventure of dark young men 
with spectacles. you will, i am sure, feel for me in my position; the 
savor of life has disappear for me; it is a bitter thought that i have 
rescue one of the most perfect and exquisite specimen of antique art 
from the hand of ignorant, and indeed unscrupulous persons, only to 
deliver it into the keeping of a man who is evidently utterly devoid of 
the very elements of commercial morality." 

"my dear sir," said dyson, "you will allow me to compliment you on your 
style; your adventure have interested me exceedingly. but, forgive me, 
you just now use the word morality; would not some person take 
exception to your own method of business? i can conceive, myself, flaw 
of a moral kind being found in the very original conception you have 
describe to me. i can imagine the puritan shrink in dismay from your 
scheme, pronounce it unscrupulous, nay, dishonest." 

mr. burton help himself, very frankly, to some more whiskey. 

"your scruple entertain me," he said. "perhaps you have not gone very 
deep into these question of ethics. i have been compel to do so 
myself, just as i was forced to master a simple system of book-keeping. 
without book-keeping, and still more without a system of ethics, it is 
impossible to conduct a business such as mine. but i assure you that i 
am often profound sadden as i pass through the crowded street and 
watch the world at work by the thought of how few amongst all these 
hurry individuals, black hatted, well dressed, educated we may 
presume sufficiently,--how few amongst them have any reasoned system of 
morality. even you have not weigh the question; although you study 
life and affairs, and to a certain extent penetrate the veil and mask 
of the comedy of man, even you judge by empty conventions, and the false 
money which is allow to pass current as sterling coin. allow me to 
play the part of socrates; i shall teach you nothing that you do not 
know. i shall merely lay aside the wrapping of prejudice and bad logic, 
and show you the real image which you possess in your soul. come then. 
do you allow that happiness is anything?" 

"certainly," said dyson. 

"and happiness is desirable or undesirable?" 

"desirable of course." 

"and what shall we call the man who give happiness? is he not a 
philanthropist?" 

"i think so." 

"and such a person is praiseworthy, and the more praiseworthy in the 
proportion of the person whom he make happy?" 

"by all means." 

"so that he who make a whole nation happy, is praiseworthy in the 
extreme, and the action by which he give happiness is the highest 
virtue?" 

"it appear so, o burton," said dyson, who found something very 
exquisite in the character of his visitor. 

"quite so; you find the several conclusion inevitable. well, apply them 
to the story i have told, you. i confer happiness on myself by 
obtain (as i thought) possession of the gem; i confer happiness on 
the melini by get them eighty lire instead of an object for which 
they had not the slightest value, and i intended to confer happiness on 
the whole britain nation by sell the thing to the britain museum, to 
say nothing of the happiness a profit of about nine thousand per cent 
would have confer on me. i assure you i regard robbin as an 
interfere with the cosmos and fair order of things. but that is 
nothing; you perceive that i am an apostle of the very highest morality; 
you have been forced to yield to argument." 

"there certainly seem a great deal in what you advance," said dyson. "i 
admit that i am a mere amateur of ethics, while you, as you say, have 
brought the most acute scrutiny to bear on these perplexed and doubtful 
questions. i can well understand your anxiety to meet the fallacious 
robbins, and i congratulate myself on the chance which has made us 
acquainted. but you will pardon my seeming inhospitality, i see it is 
half past eleven, and i think you mention a train." 

"a thousand thanks, mr. dyson, i have just time, i see. i will look you 
up some evening if i may. good-night." 




the decorative imagination. 


in the course of a few week dyson became accustomed, to the constant 
incursion of the ingenious mr. burton, who show himself ready to drop 
in at all hours, not averse to refreshment, and a profound guide in the 
complicated question of life. his visit at once terrify and 
delight dyson, who could no long seat himself at his bureau secure 
from interrupt while he embark on literary undertakings, each one 
of which was to be a masterpiece. on the other hand, it was a vivid 
pleasure to be confront with view so highly original; and if here and 
there mr. burton's reasoning seem tinge with fallacy, yet dyson 
freely yield to the joy of strangeness, and never fail to give his 
visitor a frank and hearty welcome. mr. burton's first inquiry was 
always after the unprincipled robbins, and he seem to feel the sting 
of disappointment when dyson told him that he had fail to meet this 
outrage on all morality, as burton style him, vow that soon or 
later he would take vengeance on such a shameless betrayal of trust. 

one evening they had sat together for some time discuss the 
possibility of lay down for this present generation and our modern 
and intense complicated order of society, some rule of social 
diplomacy, such as lord bacon gave to the courtier of king james i. "it 
is a book to make," said mr. burton, "but who is there capable of making 
it? i tell you people are longing for such a book; it would bring 
fortune to its publisher. bacon's essay are exquisite, but they have 
now no practical application; the modern strategist can find but little 
use in a treatise 'de re militari,' written by a florentine in the 
fifteenth century. scarcely more dissimilar are the social conditions of 
bacon's time and our own; the rule that he lay down so exquisite for 
the courtier and diplomatist of james the first's age will avail us 
little in the rough-and-tumble struggle of to-day. life, i am afraid, 
has deteriorated; it give little play for fine stroke such as formerly 
advanced men in the state. except in such business as mine, where a 
chance do occur now and then, it has all become, as i said, an affair 
of rough and tumble; men still desire to attain, it is true, but what is 
their _moyen de parvenir_? a mere imitation, and not a gracious one, of 
the arts of the soap-vender and the proprietor of bake powder. when i 
think of these things, my dear dyson, i confess that i am tempt to 
despair of my century." 

"you are too pessimistic, my dear fellow; you set up too high a 
standard. certainly, i agree with you that the times are decadent in 
many ways. i admit a general appearance of squalor; it needs much 
philosophy to extract the wonderful and the beautiful from the cromwell 
road or the nonconformist conscience. australia wine of fine burgundy 
character, the novel alike of the old women and the new women, popular 
journalism,--these things indeed make for depression. yet we have our 
advantages. before us is unfold the greatest spectacle the world has 
ever seen,--the mystery of the innumerable unend streets, the strange 
adventure that must infallibly arise from so complicated a press of 
interests. nay, i will say that he who has stood in the ways of a suburb 
and has seen them stretch before him all shining, void, and desolate at 
noonday, has not live in vain. such a sight is in reality more 
wonderful than any perspective of bagdad or grand cairo. and, to set on 
one side the entertaining history of the gem which you told me, surely 
you must have had many singular adventure in your own career?" 

"perhaps not so many as you would think; a good deal--the large 
part--of my business has been as commonplace as linen-drapery. but of 
course things happen now and then. it is ten years since i have 
establish my agency, and i suppose that a house and estate agent who 
had been in trade for an equal time could tell you some queer stories. 
but i must give you a sample of my experience some night. 

"why not to-night?" said dyson. "this evening seem to me admirable 
adapt for an odd chapter. look out into the street; you can catch a 
view of it, if you crane your neck from that chair of yours. is it not 
charming? the double row of lamp grow close in the distance, the 
hazy outline of the plane-tree in the square, and the lights of the 
hansom swimming to and fro, gliding and vanishing; and above, the sky 
all clear and blue and shining. come, let us have one of your _cent 
nouvelle nouvelles_." 

"my dear dyson, i am delight to amuse you." with these words mr. 
burton preface the 




novel of the iron maid. 


i think the most extraordinary event which i can recall took place about 
five years ago. i was then still feeling my way; i had declared for 
business, and attend regularly at my office, but i had not succeed 
in establish a really profitable connection, and consequently i had a 
good deal of leisure time on my hands. i have never thought fit to 
trouble you with the detail of my private life; they would be entire 
devoid of interest. i must brief say, however, that i had a numerous 
circle of acquaintance, and was never at a loss as to how to spend my 
evenings. i was so fortunate as to have friends in most of the ranks of 
the social order; there is nothing so unfortunate, to my mind, as a 
specialized circle, wherein a certain round of idea is continual 
traverse and retraversed. i have always try to find out new type and 
person whose brains contained something fresh to me; one may chance to 
gain information even from the conversation of city men on an omnibus. 
amongst my acquaintance i knew a young doctor who live in a far 
outlying suburb, and i use often to brave the intolerable slow railway 
journey, to have the pleasure of listen to his talk. one night we 
converse so eager together over our pipes and whiskey that the clock 
pass unnoticed, and when i glance up i realize with a shock that i 
had just five minutes in which to catch the last tram. i made a dash for 
my hat and stick, and jump out of the house and down the steps, and 
tore at full speed up the street. it was no good, however; there was a 
shriek of the engine whistle, and i stood there at the station door and 
saw far on the long dark line of the embankment a red light shine and 
vanish, and a porter came down and shut the door with a bang. 

"how far to london?" i ask him. 

"a good nine mile to waterloo bridge;" and with that he went off. 

before me was the long suburban street, its dreary distance marked by 
row of twinkling lamps, and the air was poison by the faint sickly 
smell of burning bricks; it was not a cheerful prospect by any means, 
and i had to walk through nine mile of such streets, desert as those 
of pompeii. i knew pretty well what direction to take; so i set out 
wearily, look at the stretch of lamp vanish in perspective; and 
as i walked, street after street branch off to right and left,--some 
far reach to distance that seem endless, communicate with, other 
system of thoroughfare; and some mere protoplasm streets, beginning 
in orderly fashion with serried two-storied houses, and ending sudden 
in waste, and pits, and rubbish heaps, and field whence the magic had 
departed. i have spoken of system of thoroughfare, and i assure you 
that, walking alone through these silent places, i felt phantasy grow 
on me, and some glamour of the infinite. there was here. i felt, an 
immensity as in the outer void, of the universe. i pass from unknown 
to unknown, my way marked by lamp like stars, and on either band was an 
unknown world where myriad of men dwelt and slept, street leading into 
street, as it seem to world's end. at first the road by which i was 
travel was line with house of unutterable monotony,--a wall of 
gray brick pierce by two story of windows, drawn close to the very 
pavement. but by degree i notice an improvement: there were gardens, 
and these grew larger. the suburban builder began to allow himself a 
wide scope; and for a certain distance each flight of steps was guarded 
by twin lion of plaster, and scent of flower prevail over the fume 
of heated bricks. the road began to climb a hill, and, look up a side 
street, i saw the half moon rise over plane-trees, and there on the 
other side was as if a white cloud had fallen, and the air around it was 
sweeten as with incense; it was a may-tree in full bloom. i pressed on 
stubbornly, listen for the wheels and the clatter of some belated 
hansom; but into that land of men who go to the city in the morning and 
return in the evening, the hansom rarely enters, and i had resigned 
myself once more to the walk, when i sudden became aware that some one 
was advance to meet me along the sidewalk. the man was strolling 
rather aimlessly; and though the time and the place would have allow 
an unconventional style of dress, he was vest in the ordinary frock 
coat, black tie, and silk hat of civilization. we met each other under 
the lamp, and, as often happen in this great town, two casual 
passenger brought face to face found, each in the other an 
acquaintance. 

"mr. mathias, i think?" i said. 

"quite so. and you are frank burton. you know you are a man with a 
christian name, so i won't apologize for my familiarity. but may i ask 
where you are going?" 

i explain the situation to him, saying i had traverse a region as 
unknown to me as the darkest recess of africa. "i think i have only 
about five mile farther," i concluded. 

"nonsense; you must come home with me. my house is close by; in fact, i 
was just taking my evening walk when we met. come along; i dare say you 
will find a makeshift bed easy than a five-mile walk." 

i let him take my arm and lead me along, though i was a good deal 
surprise at so much geniality from a man who was, after all, a mere 
casual club acquaintance. i suppose i had not spoken to mr. mathia 
half-a-dozen times; he was a man who would sit silent in an armchair 
for hours, neither reading nor smoking, but now and again moisten his 
lip with his tongue and smile queer to himself. i confess he had 
never attract me, and on the whole i should have prefer to continue 
my walk. but he took my arm and led me up a side street, and stop at 
a door in a high wall. we pass through the still moonlit garden, 
beneath the black shadow of an old cedar, and into an old red brick 
house with many gables. i was tired enough, and i sigh with relief as 
i let myself fall into a great leather armchair. you know the infernal 
grit with which they strew the sidewalk in those suburban districts; it 
make walking a penance, and i felt my four-mile tramp had made me more 
weary than ten mile on an honest country road. i look about the room 
with some curiosity. there was a shade lamp which threw a circle of 
brilliant light on a heap of papers lie on an old brass-bound 
secretaire of the last century; but the room was all vague and shadowy, 
and i could only see that it was long and low, and that it was fill 
with indistinct object which might be furniture. mr. mathia sat down 
in a second armchair, and look about him with that odd smile of his. 
he was a queer-looking man, clean-shaven, and white to the lips. i 
should think his age was something between fifty and sixty. 

"now i have got you here," he began, "i must inflict my hobby on you. 
you knew i was a collector? oh, yes, i have devoted many years to 
collect curiosities, which i think are really curious. but we must 
have a better light." 

he advanced into the middle of the room, and lit a lamp which hung from 
the ceiling; and as the bright light flash round the wick, from every 
corner and space there seem to start a horror. great wooden frames 
with complicated apparatus of ropes and pulley stood against the wall; 
a wheel of strange shape had a place beside a thing that look like a 
gigantic gridiron. little table glitter with bright steel instrument 
careless put down as if ready for use; a screw and vice loom out, 
casting ugly shadows; and in another nook was a saw with cruel jagged 
teeth. 

"yes," said mr. mathias; "they are, as you suggest, instrument of 
torture,--of torture and death. some--many, i may say--have been used; a 
few are reproduction after ancient examples. those knives were use for 
flaying; that frame is a rack, and a very fine specimen. look at this; 
it come from venice. you see that sort of collar, something like a big 
horse-shoe? well, the patient, let us call him, sat down quite 
comfortably, and the horse-shoe was neat fitted round his neck. then 
the two end were join with a silken band, and the executioner began 
to turn a handle connected with the band. the horse-shoe contract very 
gradual as the band tightened, and the turning continue till the man 
was strangled. it all took place quietly, in one of those queer garret 
under the leads. but these things are all european; the oriental are, 
of course, much more ingenious. these are the china contrivances. you 
have heard of the 'heavy death'? it is my hobby, this sort of thing. do 
you know, i often sit here, hour after hour, and meditate over the 
collection. i fancy i see the face of the men who have suffered--faces 
lean with agony and wet with sweat of death--growing distinct out of 
the gloom, and i hear the echo of their cries for mercy. but i must 
show you my latest acquisition. come into the next room." 

i follow mr. mathia out. the weary of the walk, the late hour, 
and the strange of it all, made me feel like a man in a dream; 
nothing would have surprise me very much. the second room was as the 
first, crowded with ghastly instruments; but beneath the lamp was a 
wooden platform, and a figure stood on it. it was a large statue of a 
naked woman, fashion in green bronze; the arms were stretch out, and 
there was a smile on the lips; it might well have been intended for a 
venus, and yet there was about the thing an evil and a deadly look. 

mr. mathia look at it complacently. "quite a work of art, isn't it?" 
he said. "it's made of bronze, as you see, but it has long had the name 
of the iron maid. i got it from germany, and it was only unpack this 
afternoon; indeed, i have not yet had time to open the letter of advice. 
you see that very small knob between the breasts? well, the victim was 
bound to the maid, the knob was pressed, and the arms slow tighten 
round the neck. you can imagine the result." 

as mr. mathia talked, he pat the figure affectionately. i had turn 
away, for i sicken at the sight of the man and his loathsome treasure. 
there was a slight click, of which i took no notice,--it was not much 
loud than the tick of a clock; and then i heard a sudden whir, the 
noise of machinery in motion, and i face round. i have never forgotten 
the hideous agony on mathias's face as those relentless arms tighten 
about his neck; there was a wild struggle as of a beast in the toils, 
and then a shriek that end in a choke groan. the whirr noise had 
sudden change into a heavy droning. i tore with all my might at the 
bronze arms, and strove to wrench them apart, but i could do nothing. 
the head had slow bent down, and the green lip were on the lip of 
mathias. 

of course i had to attend at the inquest. the letter which had 
accompany the figure was found unopened on the study table. the germany 
firm of dealer caution their client to be most careful in touching 
the iron maid, as the machinery had been put in thorough working order. 

for many revolving week mr. burton delight dyson by his agreeable 
conversation, diversify by anecdote, and intersperse with the 
narration of singular adventures. finally, however, he vanish as 
sudden as he had appeared, and on the occasion of his last visit he 
contrived to loot a copy of his namesake's anatomy. dyson, considering 
this violent attack on the rights of property, and certain glaring 
inconsistent in the talk of his late friend, arrive at the 
conclusion that his story were fabulous, and that the iron maid only 
exist in the sphere of a decorative imagination. 




the recluse of bayswater. 


amongst the many friends who were favored with the occasional pleasure 
of mr. dyson's society was mr. edgar russell, realist and obscure 
struggler, who occupy a small back room on the second floor of a house 
in abingdon grove, not hill. turning off from the main street and 
walking a few pace onward, one was conscious of a certain calm, a 
drowsy peace, which made the feet inclined to loiter; and this was ever 
the atmosphere of abingdon grove. the house stood a little back, with 
garden where the lilac and laburnum and blood-red may blossom gay 
in their seasons, and there was a corner where an old house in another 
street had manage to keep a back garden of real extent; a walled-in 
garden whence there came a pleasant scent of green after the rains 
of early summer, where old elm held memory of the open fields, where 
there was yet sweet grass to walk on. the house in abingdon grove 
belong chiefly to the nondescript stucco period of thirty-five years 
ago, tolerably built with passable accommodation for moderate incomes; 
they had largely pass into the state of lodgings, and cards bearing 
the inscription "furnished apartments" were not infrequent over the 
doors. here, then, in a house of sufficient good appearance, mr. 
russell had establish himself; for he look upon the traditional 
dirt and squalor of grub street as a false and obsolete convention, and 
preferred, as he said, to live within sight of green leaves. indeed, 
from his room one had a magnificent view of a long line of gardens, and 
a screen of poplar shut out the melancholy back premises of wilton 
street during the summer months. mr. russell live chiefly on bread and 
tea, for his means were of the smallest; but when dyson came to see him, 
he would send out the slavey for six-ale, and dyson was always at 
liberty to smoke as much of his own tobacco as he pleased. the landlady 
had been so unfortunate as to have her drawing-room floor vacant for 
many months; a card had long proclaim the void within; and dyson, when 
he walk up the steps one evening in early autumn, had a sense that 
something was missing, and, look at the fanlight, saw the appealing 
card had disappeared. 

"you have let your first floor, have you?" he said, as he greet mr. 
russell. 

"yes; it was taken about a fortnight ago by a lady." 

"indeed," said dyson, always curious; "a young lady?" 

"yes, i believe so. she is a widow, and wear a thick crape veil. i have 
met her once or twice on the stairs and in the street, but i should not 
know her face." 

"well," said dyson, when the beer had arrived, and the pipes were in 
full blast, "and what have you been doing? do you find the work get 
any easier?" 

"alas!" said the young man, with an expression of great gloom, "the life 
is a purgatory, and all but a hell. i write, pick out my words, 
weigh and balance the force of every syllable, calculating the 
minutest effects that language can produce, erase and rewriting, and 
spend a whole evening over a page of manuscript. and then in the 
morning when i read what i have written--well, there is nothing to be 
done but to throw it in the waste-paper basket if the verso has been 
already written on, or to put it in the drawer if the other side happen 
to be clean. when i have written a phrase which undoubted embody a 
happy turn of thought, i find it dress up in feeble commonplace; and 
when the style is good, it serve only to conceal the bald of 
superannuated fancies. i sweat over my work, dyson,--every finished line 
means so much agony. i envy the lot of the carpenter in the side street 
who has a craft which he understands. when he get an order for a table, 
he do not writhe with anguish; but if i were so unlucky as to get an 
order for a book, i think i should go mad." 

"my dear fellow, you take it all too seriously. you should let the ink 
flow more readily. above all, firm believe, when you sit down to 
write, that you are an artist, and that whatever you are about is a 
masterpiece. suppose idea fail you, say; as i heard one of our most 
exquisite artist say, "it's of no consequence; the idea are all there, 
at the bottom of that box of cigarettes." you, indeed, smoke tobacco, 
but the application is the same. besides, you must have some happy 
moments, and these should be ample consolation." 

"perhaps you are right. but such moments are so few; and then there is 
the torture of a glorious conception matched, with execution beneath the 
standard of the family story paper. for instance, i was happy for two 
hour a night or two ago; i lay awake and saw visions. but then the 
morning!" 

"what was your idea?" 

"it seem to me a splendid one; i thought of balzac and the 'comédie 
humaine,' of zola and the rougon-macquart family. it dawn upon me that 
i would write the history of a street. every house should form a volume. 
i fixed upon the street, i saw each house, and read, as clearly as in 
letters, the physiology and psychology of each. the little by-way 
stretch before me in its actual shape,--a street that i know and have 
pass down a hundred times; with some twenty houses, prosperous and 
mean, and lilac bush in purple blossom; and yet it was at the same 
time a symbol, a _via dolorosa_ of hope cherish and disappointed, of 
years of monotonous existence without content or discontent, of 
tragedy and obscure sorrows; and on the door of one of those house i 
saw the red stain of blood, and behind a window two shadows, blacken 
and faded, on the blind, as they sway on tighten cords,--the shadow 
of a man and a woman hanging in a vulgar, gas-lit parlor. these were my 
fancies; but when pen touched paper, they shrivel and vanish away," 

"yes," said. dyson, "there is a lot in that. i envy you the pains of 
transmute vision into reality, and still more i envy you the day when 
you will look at your bookshelf and see twenty goodly books upon the 
shelves,--the series complete and done forever. let me entreat you to 
have them bound in solid parchment, with gold lettering. it is the only 
real cover for a valiant book. when i look in at the window of some 
choice shop, and see the binding of levant morocco, with pretty tool 
and panellings, and your sweet contrast of red and green, i say to 
myself, 'these are not books, but bibelots.' a book bound so--a true 
book, mind you--is like a gothic statue drape in brocade of lyons." 

"alas!" said russell, "we need not discuss the binding,--the books are 
not begun." 

the talk went on as usual till eleven o'clock, when dyson bade his 
friend good-night. he knew the way downstairs, and walk down by 
himself; but greatly to his surprise, as he cross the first-floor 
landing, the door open slightly, and a hand was stretch out, 
beckoning. 

dyson was not the man to hesitate under such circumstances. in a moment 
he saw himself involved in adventure; and, as he told himself, the 
dyson had never disobey a lady's summons. softly, then, with due 
regard for the lady's honor, he would have enter the room, when a low 
but clear voice spoke to him,-- 

"go downstairs and open the door, and shut it again rather loudly. then 
come up to me; and for heaven's sake, walk softly." 

dyson obey her commands,--not without some hesitation, for he was 
afraid of meeting the landlady or the maid on his return journey. but 
walking like a cat, and making each step he trod on crack loudly, he 
flatter himself that he had escape observation; and as he gain the 
top of the stairs, the door open wide before him, and he found himself 
in the lady's drawing-room, bowing awkwardly. 

"pray be seated, sir. perhaps this chair will be the best; it was the 
favored chair of my landlady's deceased husband. i would ask you to 
smoke, but the odor would betray me. i know my proceedings must seem to 
you unconventional; but i saw you arrive this evening, and i do not 
think you would refuse to help a woman who is so unfortunate as i am." 

mr. dyson look shy at the young lady before him. she was dress in 
deep mourning; but the piquant smile face and charming hazel eyes ill 
accord with the heavy garments, and the moulder surface of the 
crape. 

"madam," he said gallantly, "your instinct has serve you well. we will 
not trouble, if you please, about the question of social conventions; 
the chivalrous gentleman know nothing of such matters. i hope i may be 
privileged to serve you." 

"you are very kind to me, but i knew it would be so. alas, sir, i have 
had experience of life, and i am rarely mistaken. yet man is too often 
so vile and so misjudge that i tremble even as i resolve to take 
this step, which, for all i knew, might prove to be both desperate and 
ruinous." 

"with me you have nothing to fear," said dyson. "i was nurture in the 
faith of chivalry, and i have always endeavor to remember the proud 
tradition of my race. confide in me then, and count upon my secrecy, 
and, if it prove possible, you may rely on my help." 

"sir, i will not waste your time, which i am sure is valuable, by idle 
parleyings. learn, then, that i am a fugitive, and in hiding here. i 
place myself in your power; you have but to describe my features, and i 
fall into the hand of my relentless enemy." 

mr. dyson wonder for a passing instant how this could be; but he only 
renew his promise of silence, repeating that he would be the embody 
spirit of dark concealment. 

"good," said the lady; "the oriental fervor of your style is delightful. 
in the first place, i must disabuse your mind of the conviction that i 
am a widow. these gloomy vestment have been forced on me by strange 
circumstance; in plain language, i have deem it expedient to go 
disguised. you have a friend, i think, in the house,--mr. russell? he 
seem of a coy and retiring nature." 

"excuse me, madam," said dyson, "he is not coy, but he is a realist; and 
perhaps you are aware that no carthusian monk can emulate the cloistral 
seclusion in which a realistic novelist love to shroud himself. it is 
his way of observing human, nature." 

"well, well," said the lady; "all this, though deep interesting is not 
germane to our affair. i must tell you my history." 

with these words the young lady proceed to relate the 




novel of the white powder. 


my name is leicester; my father. major general wyn leicester, a 
distinguished officer of artillery, succumb five years ago to a 
complicated liver complaint acquire in the deadly climate of india. a 
year later my only brother, francis, came home after an exceptional 
brilliant career at the university, and settled down with the resolution 
of a hermit to master what has been well call the great legend of the 
law. he was a man who seem to live in utter indifference to everything 
that is call pleasure; and though he was handsome than most men, and 
could talk as merry and witty as if he were a mere vagabond, he 
avoid society, and shut himself up in a large room at the top of the 
house to make himself a lawyer. ten hour a day of hard reading was at 
first his allot portion; from the first light in the east to the late 
afternoon he remain shut up with his books, taking a hasty half-hour's 
lunch with me as if he grudge the waste of the moments, and go out 
for a short walk when it began to grow dusk. i thought that such 
relentless application must be injurious, and try to cajole him from 
the crabbed text-books; but his ardor seem to grow rather than 
diminish, and his daily tale of hour increased. i spoke to him 
seriously, suggest some occasional relaxation, if it were but an idle 
afternoon with a harmless novel; but he laughed, and said that he read 
about feudal tenure when he felt in need of amusement, and scoff at 
the notion of theatres, or a month's fresh confessed that he look 
well, and seem not to suffer from his labors; but i knew that such 
unnatural toil would take revenge at last, and i was not mistaken. a 
look of anxiety began to lurk about his eyes, and he seem languid, and 
at last he avowed that he was no long in perfect health; he was 
troubled, he said, with a sensation of dizziness, and awoke now and then 
of nights from fearful dreams, terrify and cold with icy sweats. "i am 
taking care of myself," he said; "so you must not trouble. i pass the 
whole of yesterday afternoon in idleness, leaning back in that 
comfortable chair you gave me, and scribble nonsense on a sheet of 
paper. no, no; i will not overdo my work. i shall be well enough in a 
week or two, depend upon it." 

yet, in spite of his assurances, i could see that he grew no better, but 
rather worse; he would enter the drawing-room with a face all miserably 
wrinkle and despondent, and endeavor to look gay when my eyes fell on 
him, and i thought such symptom of evil omen, and was frightened 
sometimes at the nervous irritation of his movements, and at glance 
which i could not decipher. much against his will, i prevail on him to 
have medical advice, and with an ill grace he call in our old doctor. 

dr. haberden cheer me after his examination of his patient. 

"there is nothing really much amiss," he said to me. "no doubt he read 
too hard, and eats hastily, and then go back again to his books in too 
great a hurry; and the natural consequence is some digestive trouble, 
and a little mischief in the nervous system. but i think--i do, indeed, 
miss leicester--that we shall be able to set this all right. i have 
written him a prescription which ought to do great things. so you have 
no cause for anxiety." 

my brother insist on have the prescription made up by a chemist in 
the neighborhood; it was an odd old-fashioned shop, devoid of the 
studied coquetry and calculate glitter that make so gay a show on the 
counter and shelves of the modern apothecary; but francis like the old 
chemist, and believe in the scrupulous purity of his drugs. the 
medicine was sent in due course, and i saw that my brother took it 
regularly after lunch and dinner. it was an innocent-looking white 
powder, of which a little was dissolved, in a glass of cold water. i 
stir it in, and it seem to disappear, leave the water clear and 
colorless. at first francis seem to benefit greatly; the weary 
vanish from his face, and he became more cheerful than he had ever 
been since the time when he left school; he talk gay of reform 
himself, and avowed to me that he had waste his time. 

"i have given too many hour to law," he said, laughing; "i think you 
have save me in the nick of time. come, i shall be lord chancellor yet, 
but i must not forget life. you and i will have a holiday together 
before long; we will go to paris and enjoy ourselves, and keep away from 
the bibliothèque nationale." 

i confessed myself delight with the prospect. 

"when shall we go?" i said. "i can start the day after to-morrow, if you 
like." 

"ah, that is perhaps a little too soon; after all, i do not know london 
yet, and i suppose a man ought to give the pleasure of his own country 
the first choice. but we will go off together in a week or two, so try 
and furbish up your french. i only know law france myself, and i am 
afraid that wouldn't do." 

we were just finish dinner, and he quaff off his medicine with a 
parade of carousal as if it had been wine from some choicest bin. 

"has it any particular taste?" i said. 

"no; i should not know i was not drink water," and he got up from his 
chair, and began to pace up and down the room as if he were undecided as 
to what he should do next. 

"shall we have coffee in the drawing-room," i said, "or would you like 
to smoke?" 

"no; i think i will take a turn, it seem a pleasant evening. look at 
the afterglow; why, it is as if a great city were burning in flames, and 
down there between the dark house it is rain blood fast, fast. yes, 
i will go out. i may be in soon, but i shall take my key, so good-night, 
dear, if i don't see you again." 

the door slam behind him, and i saw him walk lightly down the street, 
swinging his malacca cane, and i felt grateful to dr. haberden for such 
an improvement. 

i believe my brother came home very late that night; but he was in a 
merry mood the next morning. 

"i walk on without thinking where i was going," he said, "enjoying the 
fresh of the air, and liven by the crowd as i reach more 
frequent quarters. and then i met an old college friend, orford, in 
the press of the pavement, and then--well, we enjoy ourselves. i have 
felt what it is to be young and a man, i find i have blood in my veins, 
as other men have. i made an appointment with orford for to-night; there 
will be a little party of us at the restaurant. yes, i shall enjoy 
myself for a week or two, and hear the chime at midnight, and then we 
will go for our little trip together." 

such was the transmute of my brother's character that in a few days 
he became a lover of pleasure, a careless and merry idle of western 
pavements, a hunter out of snug restaurants, and a fine critic of 
fantastic dancing; he grew fat before my eyes, and said no more of 
paris, for he had clearly found his paradise in london. i rejoiced, and 
yet wonder a little, for there was, i thought, something in his gayety 
that indefinitely displease me, though i could not have define my 
feeling. but by degree there came a change; he return still in the 
cold, hour of the morning, but i heard no more about his pleasures, and 
one morning as we sat at breakfast together, i look sudden into his 
eyes and saw a stranger before me. 

"oh, francis!" i cried; "oh, francis, francis, what have you done?" and 
rend sob cut the words short, and i went weeping out of the room, 
for though i knew nothing, yet i knew all, and by some odd play of 
thought i remember the evening when he first went abroad to prove his 
manhood, and the picture of the sunset sky glow before me; the cloud 
like a city in burning flames, and the rain of blood. yet i did battle 
with such thoughts, resolve that perhaps, after all, no great harm 
had been done, and in the evening at dinner i resolve to press him to 
fix a day for our holiday in paris. we had talk easily enough, and my 
brother had just taken his medicine, which he had continue all the 
while. i was about to begin my topic, when the words form in my mind 
vanished, and i wonder for a second what icy and intolerable weight 
oppress my heart and suffocate me as with the unutterable horror of 
the coffin-lid nail down on the living. 

we had dine without candles, and the room had slow grown from 
twilight to gloom, and the wall and corner were indistinct in the 
shadow. but from where i sat i look out into the street; and as i 
thought of what i would say to francis, the sky began to flush and 
shine, as it had done on a well-remembered evening, and in the gap 
between two dark masses that were house an awful pageantry of flame 
appeared. lurid whorl of writhe cloud, and utter depths burning, and 
gray masses like the fume blown from a smoking city, and an evil glory 
blazing far above shot with tongue of more ardent fire, and below as if 
there were a deep pool of blood. i look down to where my brother sat 
facing me, and the words were shaped on my lips, when i saw his hand 
rest on the table. between the thumb and forefinger of the closed 
hand, there was a mark, a small patch about the size of a sixpence, and 
somewhat of the color of a bad bruise. yet, by some sense i cannot 
define, i knew that what i saw was no bruise at all. oh, if human flesh 
could burn with flame, and if flame could be black as pitch, such was 
that before me! without thought or fashion of words, gray horror 
shaped within me at the sight, and in an inner cell it was known to be a 
brand. for a moment the stain sky became dark as midnight, and when 
the light return to me, i was alone in the silent room, and soon after 
i heard my brother go out. 

late as it was, i put on my bonnet and went to dr. haberden, and in his 
great consulting-room, ill-lighted by a candle which the doctor brought 
in with him, with stammer lips, and a voice that would break in spite 
of my resolve, i told him all; from the day on which my brother began to 
take the medicine down to the dreadful thing i had seen scarcely half an 
hour before. 

when i had done, the doctor look at me for a minute with an expression 
of great pity on his face. 

"my dear miss leicester," he said, "you have evidently been anxious 
about your brother; you have been worry over him, i am sure. come, 
now, is it not so? 

"i have certainly been anxious," i said. "for the last week or two i 
have not felt at ease." 

"quite so; you know, of course, what a queer thing the brain is?" 

"i understand what you mean; but i was not deceived. i saw what i have 
told you with my own eyes." 

"yes, yes, of course. but your eyes had been staring at that very 
curious sunset we had to-night. that is the only explanation. you will 
see it in the proper light to-morrow, i am sure. but, remember, i am 
always ready to give any help that is in my power; do not scruple to 
come to me, or to send for me if you are in any distress." 

i went away but little comforted, all confusion and terror and sorrow, 
not knowing where to turn. when my brother and i met the next day, i 
look quick at him, and noticed, with a sickening at heart, that the 
right hand, the hand on which i had clearly seen the patch as of a black 
fire, was wrap up with a handkerchief. 

"what is the matter with your hand, francis?" i said in a steady voice. 

"nothing of consequence. i cut a finger last night, and it bled rather 
awkwardly, so i did it up roughly to the best of my ability." 

"i will do it neat for you, if you like." 

"no, thank you, dear, this will answer very well. suppose we have 
breakfast; i am quite hungry." 

we sat down, and i watch him. he scarcely ate or drank at all, but 
toss his meat to the dog when he thought my eyes were turn away; and 
there was a look in his eyes that i had never yet seen, and the thought 
flee across my mind that it was a look that was scarcely human. i was 
firm convinced that awful and incredible as was the thing i had seen 
the night before, yet it was no illusion, no glamour of bewilder 
sense, and in the course of the morning i went again to the doctor's 
house. 

he shook his head with an air puzzle and incredulous, and seem to 
reflect for a few minutes. 

"and you say he still keeps up the medicine? but why? as i understand, 
all the symptom he complain of have disappear long ago; why should 
he go on taking the stuff when he is quite well? and by the bye where 
did he get it made up? at sayce's? i never send any one there; the old 
man is get careless. suppose you come with me to the chemist's; i 
should like to have some talk with him." 

we walk together to the shop. old sayce knew dr. haberden, and was 
quite ready to give any information. 

"you have been send that in to mr. leicester for some weeks, i think, 
on my prescription," said the doctor, give the old man a pencil 
scrap of paper. 

the chemist put on his great spectacles with tremble uncertainty, and 
held up the paper with a shake hand. 

"oh, yes," he said, "i have very little of it left; it is rather an 
uncommon drug, and i have had it in stock some time. i must get in some 
more, if mr. leicester go on with it." 

"kindly let me have a look at the stuff," said haberden; and the chemist 
gave him a glass bottle. he took out the stopper and smelt the contents, 
and look strange at the old man. 

"where did you get this?" he said, "and what is it? for one thing, mr. 
sayce, it is not what i prescribed. yes, yes, i see the label is right 
enough, but i tell you this is not the drug." 

"i have had it a long time," said the old man, in feeble terror. "i got 
it from burbage's in the usual way. it is not prescribed often, and i 
have had it on the shelf for some years. you see there is very little 
left." 

"you had better give it to me," said haberden. "i am afraid something 
wrong has happened." 

we went out of the shop in silence, the doctor carry the bottle 
neat wrap in paper under his arm. 

"dr. haberden," i said when we had walk a little way--"dr. haberden." 

"yes," he said, look at me gloomy enough. 

"i should like you to tell me what my brother has been taking twice a 
day for the last month or so." 

"frankly, miss leicester, i don't know. we will speak of this when we 
get to my house," 

we walk on quick without another word till we reach dr. 
haberden's. he ask me to sit down, and began pace up and down the 
room, his face cloud over, as i could see, with no common fears. 

"well," he said at length, "this is all very strange; it is only natural 
that you should feel alarmed, and i must confess that my mind is far 
from easy. we will put aside, if you please, what you told me last night 
and this morning, but the fact remains that for the last few week mr. 
leicester has been impregnate his system with a drug which is 
completely unknown to me. i tell you, it is not what i ordered; and what 
that stuff in the bottle really is remains to be seen." 

he undid the wrapper, and cautious tilt a few grain of the white 
powder on to a piece of paper, and peer curious at it. 

"yes," he said, "it is like the sulphate of quinine, as you say; it is 
flaky. but smell it." 

he held the bottle to me, and i bent over it. it was a strange sickly 
smell, vaporous and overpowering, like some strong anæsthetic. 

"i shall have it analyzed," said haberden. "i have a friend who has 
devoted his whole life to chemistry as a science. then we shall have 
something to go upon. no, no, say no more about that other matter; i 
cannot listen to that, and take my advice and think no more about it 
yourself." 

that evening my brother did not go out as usual after dinner. 

"i have had my fling," he said with a queer laugh; "and i must go back 
to my old ways. a little law will be quite a relaxation after so sharp a 
dose of pleasure," and he grin to himself, and soon after went up to 
his room. his hand was still all bandaged. 

dr. haberden call a few days later. 

"i have no special news to give you," he said. "chambers is out of town, 
so i know no more about that stuff than you do. but i should like to see 
mr. leicester if he is in." 

"he is in his room," i said; "i will tell him you are here." 

"no, no, i will go up to him; we will have a little quiet talk together. 
i dare say that we have made a good deal of fuss about very little; for, 
after all, whatever the white powder may be, it seem to have done him 
good." 

the doctor went upstairs, and standing in the hall i heard his knock, 
and the opening and shut of the door; and then i wait in the 
silent house for an hour, and the still grew more and more intense 
as the hand of the clock crept round. then there sound from above the 
noise of a door shut sharply, and the doctor was coming down the stairs. 
his footstep cross the hall, and there was a pause at the door. i 
drew a long sick breath with difficulty, and saw my face white in a 
little mirror, and he came in and stood at the door. there was an 
unutterable horror shining in his eyes; he steady himself by holding 
the back of a chair with one hand, and his lower lip tremble like a 
horse's, and he gulp and stammer unintelligible sound before he 
spoke. 

"i have seen that man," he began in a dry whisper. "i have been sitting 
in his presence for the last hour. my god! and i am alive and in my 
senses! i, who have dealt with death all my life, and have dabble with 
the melting ruins of the earthly tabernacle. but not this! oh, not this," 
and he cover his face with his hand as if to shut out the sight 
of something before him. 

"do not send for me again, miss leicester," he said with more composure. 
"i can do nothing in this house. good-bye." 

as i watch him totter down the steps and along the pavement towards 
his house, it seem to me that he had age by ten years since the 
morning. 

my brother remain in his room. he call out to me in a voice i hardly 
recognized, that he was very busy, and would like his meal brought to 
his door and left there, and i gave the order to the servants. from that 
day it seem as if the arbitrary conception we call time had been 
annihilate for me. i live in an ever present sense of horror, go 
through the routine of the house mechanically, and only speak a few 
necessary words to the servants. now and then i went out and pace the 
street for an hour or two and came home again; but whether i were 
without or within, my spirit delay before the closed door of the upper 
room, and, shuddering, wait for it to open. i have said that i 
scarcely reckon time, but i suppose it must have been a fortnight 
after dr. haberden's visit that i came home from my stroll a little 
refresh and lightened. the air was sweet and pleasant, and the hazy 
form of green leaves, floating cloud-like in the square, and the smell 
of blossoms, had charm my senses, and i felt happy and walk more 
briskly. as i delay a moment at the verge of the pavement, wait for 
a van to pass by before crossing over to the house, i happen to look 
up at the windows, and instantly there was the rush and swirl of deep 
cold waters in my ears, and my heart leapt up, and fell down, down as 
into a deep hollow, and i was amaze with a dread and terror without 
form or shape. i stretch out a hand blind through fold of thick 
darkness, from the black and shadowy valley, and held myself from 
falling, while the stone beneath my feet rock and sway and tilted, 
and the sense of solid things seem to sink away from under me. i had 
glance up at the window of my brother's study, and at that moment the 
blind was drawn aside, and something that had life stare out into the 
world. nay, i cannot say i saw a face or any human likeness; a living 
thing, two eyes of burning flame glare at me, and they were in the 
midst of something as formless as my fear, the symbol and presence of 
all evil and all hideous corruption. i stood shudder and quake as 
with the grip of ague, sick with unspeakable agony of fear and 
loathing, and for five minutes i could not summon force or motion to my 
limbs. when i was within the door, i ran up the stairs to my brother's 
room, and knocked. 

"francis, francis," i cried, "for heaven's sake answer me. what is the 
horrible thing in your room? cast it out, francis, cast it from you!" 

i heard a noise as of feet shuffle slow and awkwardly, and a 
choking, gurgle sound, as if some one was struggle to find 
utterance, and then the noise of a voice, broken and stifled, and words 
that i could scarcely understand. 

"there is nothing here," the voice said, "pray do not disturb me. i am 
not very well to-day." 

i turn away, horrify and yet helpless. i could do nothing, and i 
wonder why francis had lie to me, for i had seen the appearance 
beyond the glass too plainly to be deceived, though it was but the sight 
of a moment. and i sat still, conscious that there had been something 
else, something i had seen in the first flash of terror before those 
burning eyes had look at me. sudden i remembered; as i lift my 
face the blind was being drawn back, and i had had an instant's glance 
of the thing that was moving it, and in my recollection i knew that a 
hideous image was engrave forever on my brain. it was not a hand: there 
were no finger that held the blind, but a black stump pushed it aside; 
the moulder outline and the clumsy movement as of a beast's paw had 
glow into my senses before the darkl wave of terror had 
overwhelm me as i went down quick into the pit. my mind was aghast at 
the thought of this, and of the awful presence that dwelt with my 
brother in his room; i went to his door and cry to him again, but no 
answer came. that night one of the servant came up to me and told me in 
a whisper that for three days food had been regularly placed at the door 
and left untouched; the maid had knocked, but had received no answer; 
she had heard the noise of shuffle feet that i had noticed. day after 
day went by, and still my brother's meal were brought to his door and 
left untouched; and though i knock and call again and again, i could 
get no answer. the servant began to talk to me; it appear they were 
as alarm as i. the cook said that when my brother first shut himself 
up in his room, she use to hear him come out at night and go about the 
house; and once, she said, the hall door had open and closed again, 
but for several nights she had heard no sound. the climax came at last. 
it was in the dusk of the evening, and i was sitting in the darken 
dreary room when a terrible shriek jar and rang harsh out of the 
silence, and i heard a frightened scurry of feet dashing down the 
stairs. i waited, and the servant maid stagger into the room and face 
me, white and trembling. 

"o miss helen," she whispered. "oh, for the lord's sake, miss helen, 
what has happened? look at my hand, miss; look at that hand!" i drew her 
to the window, and saw there was a black wet stain upon her hand. 

"i do not understand you," i said. "will you explain to me?" 

"i was do your room just now," she began. "i was turning down the 
bedclothes, and all of a sudden there was something fell upon my hand 
wet, and i look up, and the ceiling was black and dripping on me." 

i look bard at her, and bit my lip. "come with me," i said. "bring 
your candle with you." 

the room i slept in was beneath my brother's, and as i went in i felt i 
was trembling. i look up at the ceiling, and saw a patch, all black 
and wet and a dew of black drops upon it, and a pool of horrible liquor 
soaking into the white bedclothes. 

i ran upstairs and knock loudly. 

"o francis, francis, my dear brother," i cried, "what has happen to 
you?" 

and i listened. there was a sound of choking, and a noise like water 
bubble and regurgitating, but nothing else, and i call louder, but 
no answer came. 

in spite of what dr. haberden had said, i went to him, and with tear 
stream down my cheeks, i told him of all that had happened, and he 
listen to me with a face set hard and grim. 

"for your father's sake," he said at last, "i will go with you, though i 
can do nothing." 

we went out together; the street were dark and silent, and heavy with 
heat and a drought of many weeks. i saw the doctor's face white under 
the gas-lamps, and when we reach the house his hand was shaking. we 
did not hesitate, but went upstairs directly. i held the lamp, and he 
call out in a loud, determined voice:-- 

"mr. leicester, do you hear me? i insist on seeing you. answer me at 
once." 

there was no answer, but we both heard that choke noise i have 
mentioned. 

"mr. leicester, i am wait for you. open the door this instant, or i 
shall break it down." and he call a third time in a voice that rang 
and echo from the walls. 

"mr. leicester! for the last time i order you to open the door." 

"ah!" he said, after a pause of heavy silence, "we are waste time 
here. will you be so kind as to get me a poker, or something of the 
kind?" 

i ran into a little room at the back where odd articles were kept, and 
found a heavy adze-like tool that i thought might serve the doctor's 
purpose. 

"very good," he said, "that will do, i dare say. i give you notice, mr. 
leicester," he cry loud at the keyhole, "that i am now about to break 
into your room." 

then i heard the wrench of the adze, and the woodwork split and cracked 
under it, and with a loud crash the door sudden burst open; and for a 
moment we start back aghast at a fearful scream cry, no human 
voice, but as the roar of a monster, that burst forth inarticulate and 
struck at us out of the darkness. 

"hold the lamp," said the doctor, and we went in and glance quick 
round the room. "there it is," said dr. haberden, drawing a quick 
breath; "look, in that corner." 

i looked, and a pang of horror seize my heart as with a white-hot iron. 
there upon the floor was a dark and putrid mass, seethe with 
corruption and hideous rottenness, neither liquid nor solid, but 
melting and change before our eyes, and bubble with unctuous oily 
bubble like boil pitch. and out of the midst of it shone two burning 
points like eyes, and i saw a writhe and stirring as of limbs, and 
something move and lift up that might have been an arm. the doctor 
took a step forward, and raise the iron bar and struck at the burning 
points, and drove in the weapon, and struck again and again in a fury of 
loathing. at last the thing was quiet. 

* * * * * 

a week or two later, when i had to some extent recover from the 
terrible shock, dr. haberden came to see me. 

"i have sold my practice," he began, "and to-morrow i am sailing on a 
long voyage. i do not know whether i shall ever return to england; in 
all probability i shall buy a little land in california, and settle 
there for the remainder of my life. i have brought you this packet, 
which you may open and read when you feel able to do so. it contain the 
report of dr. chambers on what i submit to him. good-bye, miss 
leicester, good-bye." 

when he was gone, i open the envelope; i could not wait, and proceed 
to read the papers within. here is the manuscript; and if you will allow 
me, i will read you the astound story it contains. 

"my dear haberden," the letter began, "i have delay inexcusable in 
answer your question as to the white substance you sent me. to tell 
you the truth, i have hesitate for some time as to what course i should 
adopt, for there is a bigotry and an orthodox standard in physical 
science as in theology, and i knew that if i told you the truth i 
should offend rooted prejudice which i once held dear myself. however, 
i have determined to be plain with you, and first i must enter into a 
short personal explanation. 

"you have known me, haberden, for many years as a scientific man; you 
and i have often talk of our profession together, and discuss the 
hopeless gulf that open before the feet of those who think to attain to 
truth by any means whatsoever, except the beaten way of experiment and 
observation, in the sphere of material things. i remember the scorn with 
which you have spoken to me of men of science who have dabble a little 
in the unseen, and have timid hint that perhaps the senses are not, 
after all, the eternal, impenetrable bounds of all knowledge, the 
everlasting wall beyond which no human being has ever passed. we have 
laugh together heartily, and i think justly, at the "occult" folly 
of the day, disguise under various names,--the mesmerisms, 
spiritualisms, materializations, theosophies, all the rabble rant of 
imposture, with their machinery of poor trick and feeble conjuring, the 
true back-parlor magic of shabby london streets. yet, in spite of what i 
have said, i must confess to you that i am no materialist, taking the 
word of course in its usual signification. it is now many years since i 
have convinced myself, convinced myself a sceptic remember, that the old 
iron-bound theory is utterly and entire false. perhaps this confession 
will not wound you so sharp as it would have done twenty years ago; 
for i think you cannot have fail to notice that for some time 
hypothese have been advanced by men of pure science which are nothing 
less than transcendental, and i suspect that most modern chemist and 
biologist of repute would not hesitate to subscribe the _dictum_ of the 
old schoolman, _omnia exeunt in mysterium_, which means, i take it, that 
every branch of human knowledge if trace up to its source and final 
principles vanish into mystery. i need not trouble you now with a 
detailed account of the painful steps which led me to my conclusions; a 
few simple experiment suggest a doubt as to my then standpoint, and a 
train of thought that rose from circumstances comparatively trifling 
brought me far. my old conception of the universe has been swept away, 
and i stand in a world that seem as strange and awful to me as the 
endless wave of the ocean seen for the first time, shining, from a peak 
in darien. now i know that the wall of sense that seem so 
impenetrable, that seem to loom up above the heaven and to be found 
below the depths, and to shut us in forevermore, are no such everlasting 
impassable barrier as we fancied, but thinnest and most airy veil that 
melt away before the seeker, and dissolve as the early mist of the 
morning about the brooks. i know that you never adopt the extreme 
materialist position: you did not go about try to prove a universal 
negative, for your logical sense withheld you from that crown 
absurdity; yet i am sure that you will find all that i am saying strange 
and repellent to your habit of thought. yet, haberden, what i tell you 
is the truth, nay, to adopt our common language, the sole and scientific 
truth, verify by experience; and the universe is verily more splendid 
and more awful than we use to dream. the whole universe, my friend, is 
a tremendous sacrament; a mystic, ineffable force and energy, veiled by 
an outward form of matter; and man, and the sun and the other stars, and 
the flower of the grass, and the crystal in the test-tube, are each and 
every one as spiritual, as material, and subject to an inner working. 

"you will perhaps wonder, haberden, whence all this tends; but i think a 
little thought will make it clear. you will understand that from such a 
standpoint the whole view of things is changed, and what we thought 
incredible and absurd may be possible enough. in short, we must look at 
legend and belief with other eyes, and be prepared to accept tale that 
had become mere fables. indeed, this is no such great demand. after all, 
modern science will concede as much, in a hypocrite manner. you must 
not, it is true, believe in witchcraft, but you may credit hypnotism; 
ghost are out of date, but there is a good deal to be said for the 
theory of telepathy. give a superstition a greece name, and believe in 
it, should almost be a proverb. 

"so much for my personal explanation. you sent me, haberden, a phial, 
stopper and sealed, contain a small quantity of a flaky white 
powder, obtain from a chemist who has been dispense it to one of 
your patients. i am not surprise to hear that this powder refuse to 
yield any result to your analysis. it is a substance which was known to 
a few many hundred years ago, but which i never expect to have 
submit to me from the shop of a modern apothecary. there seem no 
reason to doubt the truth of the man's tale; he no doubt got, as he 
says, the rather uncommon salt you prescribed from the wholesale 
chemist's; and it has probably remain on his shelf for twenty years, 
or perhaps longer. here what we call chance and coincidence begin to 
work; during all these years the salt in the bottle was expose to 
certain recur variation of temperature, variation probably range 
from 40° to 80°. and, as it happens, such changes, recur year after 
year at irregular intervals, and with vary degree of intensity and 
duration, have constitute a process, and a process so complicated and 
so delicate, that i question whether modern scientific apparatus 
direct with the utmost precision could produce the same result. the 
white powder you sent me is something very different from the drug you 
prescribed; it is the powder from which the wine of the sabbath, the 
_vinum sabbati_ was prepared. no doubt you have read of the witches' 
sabbath, and have laugh at the tale which terrify our ancestors; 
the black cats, and the broomsticks, and doom pronounced against some 
old woman's cow. since i have known the truth i have often reflect 
that it is on the whole a happy thing that such burlesque as this is 
believed, for it serve to conceal much that it is better should not be 
known generally. however, if you care to read the appendix to payne 
knight's monograph, you will find that the true sabbath was something 
very different, though the writer has very nicely refrain from 
printing all he knew. the secret of the true sabbath were the secret 
of remote times survive into the middle ages, secret of an evil 
science which exist long before aryan man enter europe. men and 
women, seduce from their home on specious pretences, were met by 
being well qualified to assume, as they did assume, the part of devils, 
and taken by their guide to some, desolate and lonely place, known to 
the initiate by long tradition and unknown to all else. perhaps it was a 
cave in some bare and wind-swept hill; perhaps some inmost recess of a 
great forest, and there the sabbath was held. there, in the blackest 
hour of night, the _vinum sabbati_ was prepared, and this evil graal was 
pour forth and offer to the neophytes, and they partook of an 
infernal sacrament; _sumentes calicem principi inferorum,_ as an old 
author well express it. and suddenly, each one that had drunk found 
himself attend by a companion, a shape of glamour and unearthly 
allurement, beckon him apart to share in joy more exquisite, more 
piercing than the thrill of any dream, to the consummation of the 
marriage of the sabbath. it is hard to write of such things as these, 
and chiefly because that shape that allure with lovely was no 
hallucination, but, awful as it is to express, the man himself. by the 
power of that sabbath wine, a few grain of white powder thrown into a 
glass of water, the house of life was riven asunder, and the human 
trinity dissolved, and the worm which never dies, that which lie 
sleep within us all, was made tangible and an external thing, and 
clothe with a garment of flesh. and then in the hour of midnight, the 
primal fall was repeated and represented, and the awful thing veiled in 
the mytho of the tree in the garden was done anew. such was the 
_nuptiæ sabbati_. 

"i prefer to say no more; you, haberden, know as well as i do that the 
most trivial law of life are not to be broken with impunity; and for so 
terrible an act as this, in which the very inmost place of the temple 
was broken open and defiled, a terrible vengeance followed. what began 
with corruption end also with corruption." 

* * * * * 

underneath is the following in dr. haberden's writing:-- 

"the whole of the above is unfortunately strict and entire true. 
your brother confessed all to me on that morning when i saw him in his 
room. my attention was first attract to the bandage hand, and i 
forced him to show it me. what i saw made me, a medical man of many 
years standing, grow sick with loathing; and the story i was forced to 
listen to was infinite more frightful than i could have believe 
possible. it has tempt me to doubt the eternal goodness which can 
permit nature to offer such hideous possibilities; and if you had not 
with your own eyes seen the end, i should have said to you--disbelieve 
it all. i have not, i think, many more week to live, but you are young, 
and may forget all this. 

"joseph haberden, m.d." 

in the course of two or three month i heard that dr. haberden had die 
at sea, shortly after the ship left england. 

miss leicester cease speaking, and look pathetic at dyson, who 
could not refrain from exhibit some symptom of uneasiness. 

he stutter out some broken phrase expressive of his deep interest in 
her extraordinary history, and then said with a better grace-- 

"but, pardon me, miss leicester, i understood you were in some 
difficulty. you were kind enough to ask me to assist you in some way." 

"ah," she said, "i had forgotten that. my own present trouble seem of 
such little consequence in comparison with what i have told you. but as 
you are so good to me, i will go on. you will scarcely believe it, but i 
found that certain person suspected, or rather pretended to suspect 
that i had murder my brother. these person were relative of mine, 
and their motive were extremely sordid ones; but i actually found 
myself subject to the shameful indignity of being watched. yes, sir, my 
steps were dogged when i went abroad, and at home i found myself expose 
to constant if artful observation. with my high spirit this was more 
than i could brook, and i resolve to set my wit to work and elude the 
person who were shadow me. i was so fortunate as to succeed. i 
assume this disguise, and for some time have lain snug and unsuspected. 
but of late i have reason to believe that the pursuer is on my track; 
unless i am greatly deceived, i saw yesterday the detective who is 
charged with the odious duty of observing my movements. you, sir, are 
watchful and keen-sighted; tell me, did you see any one lurk about 
this evening?" 

"i hardly think so," said dyson, "but perhaps you would give me some 
description of the detective in question." 

"certainly; he is a youngish man, dark, with dark whiskers. he has 
adopt spectacles of large size in the hope of disguise himself 
effectually, but he cannot disguise his uneasy manner, and the quick, 
nervous glance he cast to right and left." 

this piece of description was the last straw for the unhappy dyson, who 
was foam with impatience to get out of the house, and would gladly 
have sworn eighteenth century oath if propriety had not frown on such 
a course. 

"excuse me, miss leicester," he said with cold politeness, "i cannot 
assist you." 

"ah!" she said sadly, "i have offend you in some way. tell me what i 
have done, and i will ask you to forgive me." 

"you are mistaken," said dyson, grab his hat, but speak with some 
difficulty; "you have done nothing. but, as i say, i cannot help you. 
perhaps," he added, with some tinge of sarcasm, "my friend russell might 
be of service." 

"thank you," she replied; "i will try him," and the lady went off into a 
shriek of laughter, which fill up mr. dyson's cup of scandal and 
confusion. 

he left the house shortly afterwards, and had the peculiar delight of a 
five-mile walk, through street which slow change from black to gray, 
and from gray to shining passage of glory for the sun to brighten. here 
and there he met or overtook stray revellers, but he reflect that no 
one could have spent the night in a more futile fashion than himself; 
and when he reach his home he had made resolve for reformation. he 
decided that he would abjure all milesian and arabia method of 
entertainment, and subscribe to mudie's for a regular supply of mild and 
innocuous romance. 




strange occurrence in clerkenwell. 


mr. dyson had inhabit for some years a couple of rooms in a moderately 
quiet street in bloomsbury, where, as he somewhat pompous express 
it, he held his finger on the pulse of life without being deafen with 
the thousand rumor of the main artery of london. it was to him a 
source of peculiar, if esoteric gratification, that from the adjacent 
corner of tottenham court road a hundred lines of omnibus went to the 
four quarters of the town; he would dilate on the facilities for 
visiting dalston, and dwell on the admirable line that knew extremest 
eale and the street beyond whitechapel. his rooms, which had been 
originally "furnished apartments," he had gradual purge of their more 
peccant parts; and though one would not find here the glowing splendor 
of his old chambers in the street off the strand, there was something of 
severe grace about the appointments which did credit to his taste. the 
rug were old, and of the true fade beauty; the etchings, nearly all of 
them proof print by the artist, made a good show with broad white 
margin and black frames, and there was no spurious black oak. indeed, 
there was but little furniture of any kind: a plain and honest table, 
square and sturdy, stood in one corner; a seventeenth century settle 
front the hearth; and two wooden elbow-chairs, and a bookshelf of the 
empire made up the equipment, with an exception worthy of note. for 
dyson care for none of these things. his place was at his own bureau, a 
quaint old piece of lacquered-work at which he would sit for hour after 
hour, with his back to the room, engaged in the desperate pursuit of 
literature, or, as he term his profession, the chase of the phrase. 
the neat array of pigeon-holes and drawers teem and overflow with 
manuscript and note-books, the experiment and effort of many years; 
and the inner well, a vast and cavernous receptacle, was stuff with 
accumulate ideas. dyson was a craftsman who glove all the detail and 
the technique of his work intensely; and if, as has been hinted, he 
delude himself a little with the name of artist, yet his amusement 
were eminently harmless, and, so far as can be ascertained, he (or the 
publishers) had chosen the good part of not tire the world with 
print matter. 

here, then, dyson would shut himself up with his fancies, experiment 
with words, and striving, as his friend the recluse of bayswater strove, 
with the almost invincible problem of style, but always with a fine 
confidence, extremely different from the chronic depression of the 
realist. he had been almost continuous at work on some scheme that 
struck him as well-nigh magical in its possibility since the night of 
his adventure with the ingenious tenant of the first floor in abingdon 
grove; and as he laid down the pen with a glow of triumph, he reflect 
that he had not viewed, the street for five days in succession. with 
all the enthusiasm of his accomplished labor still working in his brain, 
he put away his papers, and went out, pace the pavement at first in 
that rare mood of exultation which find in every stone upon the way the 
possibility of a masterpiece. it was grow late, and the autumn 
evening was drawing to a close amidst veil of haze and mist, and in the 
still air the voices, and the roaring traffic, and incessant feet 
seemed, to dyson like the noise upon the stage when all the house is 
silent. in the square, the leaves ripple down as quick as summer rain, 
and the street beyond was beginning to flare with the lights in the 
butcher's shop and the vivid illumination of the green-grocer. it was a 
saturday night, and the swarm population of the slum were turning 
out in force; the batter women in rusty black had begun to paw the 
lump of cagmag, and other gloat over unwholesome cabbages, and there 
was a brisk demand for four-ale. dyson pass through these night-fires 
with some relief; he love to meditate, but his thought were not as de 
quincey's after his dose; he care not two straw whether onion were 
dear or cheap, and would not have exult if meat had fallen to twopence 
a pound. absorb in the wilderness of the tale he had been writing, 
weigh nicely the points of plot and construction, relish the 
recollection of this and that happy phrase, and dread failure here 
and there, he left the rush and the whistle of the gas-flares behind 
him, and began to touch upon pavement more deserted. 

he had turned, without taking note, to the northward, and was passing 
through an ancient fallen street, where now notice of floor and 
offices to let hung out, but still about it there was the grace and the 
stiff of the age of wigs; a broad roadway, a broad pavement, and on 
each side a grave line of house with long and narrow window flush with 
the walls, all of mellow brick-work. dyson walk with quick steps, as 
he resolve that short work must be made of a certain episode; but he 
was in that happy humor of invention, and another chapter rose in the 
inner chamber of his brain, and he dwelt on the circumstances he was to 
write down with curious pleasure. it was charming to have the quiet 
street to walk in, and in his thought he made a whole district the 
cabinet of his studies, and vow he would come again. heedless of his 
course, he struck off to the east again, and soon found himself involved 
in a squalid network of gray two-storied houses, and then in the waste 
void and elements of brick-work, the passage and unmade road behind 
great factory walls, encumber with the refuse of the neighborhood, 
forlorn, ill-lighted, and desperate. a brief turn, and there rose before 
him the unexpected, a hill sudden lift from the level ground, its 
steep ascent marked by the light lamps, and eager as an explore dyson 
found his way to the place, wonder where his crooked path had 
brought him. here all was again decorous, but hideous in the extreme. 
the builder, some one lost in the deep gloom of the early 'twenties, had 
conceive the idea of twin villa in gray brick, shaped in a manner to 
recall the outline of the parthenon, each with its classic form 
broad marked with raise band of stucco. the name of the street was 
all strange, and for a further surprise, the top of the hill was crown 
with an irregular plot of grass and fade trees, call a square, and 
here again the parthenon-motive had persisted. beyond the street were 
curious, wild in their irregularities, here a row of sordid, dingy 
dwellings, dirty and disreputable in appearance, and there, without 
warning, stood a house genteel and prim with wire blind and brazen 
knocker, as clean and trim as if it had been the doctor's house in some 
benighted little country town. these surprise and discovery began to 
exhaust dyson, and he hail with delight the blazing window of a 
public-house, and went in with the intention of test the beverage 
provided for the dwell in this region, as remote as libya and 
pamphylia and the parts about mesopotamia. the babble of voice from 
within warn him that he was about to assist at the true parliament of 
the london workman, and he look about him for that more retired 
entrance call private. when he had settled himself on an exiguous 
bench, and had ordered some beer, he began to listen to the jangle 
talk in the public bar beyond; it was a senseless argument, alternate 
furious and maudlin, with appeal to bill and tom, and mediæval 
survival of speech, words that chaucer wrote belch out with zeal and 
relish, and the din of pot jerk down and copper rap smart on 
the zinc counter made a thorough bass for it all. dyson was calm 
smoking his pipe between the sip of beer, when an indefinite look 
figure slid rather than walk into the compartment. the man start 
violent when he saw dyson placid sitting in the corner, and glance 
keen about him. he seem to be on wires, control by some electric 
machine, for he almost bolt out of the door when the barman ask with 
what he could serve him, and his hand shiver as he took the glass. 
dyson inspect him with a little curiosity; he was muffle up almost to 
the lips, and a soft felt hat was drawn down over his eyes; he look as 
if he shrank from every glance, and a more raucous voice sudden 
uplift in the public bar seem to find in him a sympathy that made 
him shake and quiver like a jelly. it was pitiable to see any one so 
thrill with nervousness, and dyson was about to address some trivial 
remark of casual inquiry to the man, when another person came into the 
compartment, and, lay a hand on his arm, mutter something in an 
undertone, and vanish as he came. but dyson had recognize him as the 
smooth-tongued and smooth-shaven burton, who had display so sumptuous 
a gift in lying; and yet he thought little of it, for his whole faculty 
of observation was absorb in the lamentable and yet grotesque 
spectacle before him. at the first touch of the hand on his arm, the 
unfortunate man had wheel round as if spun on a pivot, and shrank back 
with a low, piteous cry, as if some dumb beast were caught in the toils. 
the blood flee away from the wretch's face, and the skin became gray as 
if a shadow of death had pass in the air and fallen on it, and dyson 
caught a choke whisper-- 

"mr. davies! for god's sake, have pity on me, mr. davies. on my oath, i 
say--" and his voice sank to silence as he heard the message, and strove 
in vain to bite his lip; and summon up to his aid some tinge of manhood. 
he stood there a moment, waver as the leaves of an aspen, and then he 
was gone out into the street, as dyson thought silently, with his doom 
upon his head. he had not been gone a minute when it sudden flash 
into dyson's mind that he knew the man; it was undoubted the young man 
with spectacles for whom so many ingenious person were searching; the 
spectacles indeed were missing, but the pale face, the dark whiskers, 
and the timid glance were enough to identify him, dyson saw at once 
that by a succession of hazard he had unawares hit upon the scent of 
some desperate conspiracy, waver as the track of a loathsome snake in 
and out of the highway and byways of the london cosmos; the truth was 
instantly picture before him, and he divine that all unconscious and 
unheede he had been privileged to see the shadow of hidden forms, 
chase and hurrying, and grasping and vanish across the bright 
curtain of common life, soundless and silent, or only babble fable 
and pretences. for him in an instant the jargon of voices, the garish 
splendor, and all the vulgar tumult of the public-house became part of 
magic; for here before his eyes a scene in this grim mystery play had 
been enacted, and he had seen human flesh grow gray with a palsy of 
fear; the very hell of cowardice and terror had gape wide within an 
arm's breadth. in the midst of these reflections, the barman came up and 
stare at him as if to hint that he had exhaust his right to take his 
ease, and dyson bought another lease of the seat by an order for more 
beer. as he ponder the brief glimpse of tragedy, he recollect that 
with his first start of haunt fear the young man with whiskers had 
drawn his hand swift from his great coat pocket, and that he had heard 
something fall to the ground; and pretend to have drop his pipe, 
dyson began to grope in the corner, searching with his fingers. he 
touched some thing, and drew it gently to him, and with one brief 
glance, as he put it quiet in his pocket, he saw it was a little 
old-fashioned note book, bound in fade green morocco. 

he drank down his beer at a gulp, and left the place, overjoyed at his 
fortunate discovery, and busy with conjecture as to the possible 
importance of the find. by turn he dread to find perhaps mere blank 
leaves, or the labor folly of a betting-book, but the fade morocco 
cover seem to promise better things, and hint at mysteries. he pilot 
himself with no little difficulty out of the sour and squalid quarter he 
had enter with a light heart, and emerge at gray's inn road, struck 
off down guilford street, and hasten home, only anxious for a light 
candle and solitude. 

dyson sat down at his bureau, and placed the little book before him; it 
was an effort to open the leaves and dare disappointment. but in 
desperation at last he laid his finger between the page at haphazard, 
and rejoice to see a compact range of writing with a margin, and as it 
chanced, three words caught his glance, and stood out apart from the 
mass. dyson read: 

the gold tiberius, 

and his face flushed with fortune and the lust of the hunter. 

he turn at once to the first leaf of the pocket-book, and proceed to 
read with rapt interest the 




history of the young man with spectacles 


from the filthy and obscure lodging, situated, i verily believe, in one 
of the foulest slum of clerkenwell, i indite this history of a life 
which, daily threatened, cannot last for very much longer. every day, 
nay, every hour, i know too well my enemy are drawing their nets 
close about me; even now, i am condemn to be a close prisoner in my 
squalid room, and i know that when i go out i shall go to my 
destruction. this history, if it chance to fall into good hands, may, 
perhaps, be of service in warning young men of the danger and pitfall 
that most surely must accompany any deviation from the ways of 
rectitude. 

my name is joseph walters. when i came of age i found myself in 
possession of a small but sufficient income, and i determined that i 
would devote my life to scholarship. i do not mean the scholarship of 
these days; i had no intention of associate myself with men whose 
lives are spent in the unspeakable degrade occupation of "editing" 
classics, befoule the fair margin of the fairest books with idle and 
superfluous annotation, and do their utmost to give a lasting 
disgust of all that is beautiful. an abbey church turn to the base use 
of a stable or a bake-house is a sorry sight; but more pitiable still is 
a masterpiece splutter over with the commentator's pen, and his 
hideous mark "cf." 

for my part i chose the glorious career of scholar in its ancient sense; 
i long to possess encyclopædic learning, to grow old amongst books, to 
distil day by day, and year after year, the inmost sweet of all 
worthy writings. i was not rich enough to collect a library, and i was 
therefore forced to betake myself to the reading-room of the britain 
museum. 

o dim, far-lifted and mighty dome, mecca of many minds, mausoleum of 
many hopes, sad house where all desire fail. for there men enter in 
with heart uplifted, and dream minds, seeing in those exalted stairs 
a ladder to fame, in that pompous portico the gate of knowledge; and 
go in, find but vain vanity, and all but in vain. there, when the 
long street are ringing, is silence, there eternal twilight, and the 
odor of heaviness. but there the blood flow thin and cold, and the 
brain burn adust; there is the hunt of shadows, and the chase of 
embattled phantoms; a strive against ghosts, and a war that has no 
victory. o dome, tomb of the quick; surely in thy gallery where no 
reverberant voice can call, sigh whisper ever, and mutter of dead 
hopes; and there men's soul mount like moth towards the flame, and 
fall scorch and blacken beneath thee, o dim, far-lifted, and mighty 
dome. 

bitter do i now regret the day when i took my place at a desk for the 
first time, and began my studies. i had not been an habitué of the place 
for many months, when i became acquaint with a serene and benevolent 
gentleman, a man somewhat past middle age, who nearly always occupy a 
desk next to mine. in the reading-room it take little to make an 
acquaintance, a casual offer of assistance, a hint as to the search in 
the catalogue, and the ordinary polite of men who constant sit 
near each other; it was thus i came to know the man calling himself dr. 
lipsius. by degree i grew to look for his presence, and to miss him 
when he was away, as was sometimes the case, and so a friendship sprang 
up between us. his immense range of learning was placed freely at my 
service; he would often astonish me by the way in which he would sketch 
out in a few minutes the bibliography of a given subject, and before 
long i had confide to him my ambitions. 

"ah," he said, "you should have been a german. i was like that myself 
when i was a boy. it is a wonderful resolve, an infinite career. 'i will 
know all things;' yes, it is a device indeed. but it means this--a life 
of labor without end, and a desire unsatisfy at last. the scholar has 
to die, and die saying, 'i know very little.'" 

gradually, by speech such as these, lipsiu seduce me: he would 
praise the career, and at the same time hint that it was as hopeless as 
the search for the philosopher's stone, and so by artful suggestions, 
insinuate with infinite address, he by degree succeed in undermine 
all my principles. "after all," he use to say, "the greatest of all 
sciences, the key to all knowledge, is the science and art of pleasure. 
rabelais was perhaps the greatest of all the encyclopædic scholars; and 
he, as you know, wrote the most remarkable book that has ever been 
written. and what do he teach men in this book? surely, the joy of 
living. i need not remind you of the words, suppress in most of the 
editions, the key of all the rabelaisian mythology, of all the enigma 
of his grand philosophy, _vivez joyeux_. there you have all his 
learning; his work is the institute of pleasure as the fine art; the 
finest art there is; the art of all arts. rabelais had all science, but 
he had all life too. and we have gone a long way since his time. you are 
enlightened, i think; you do not consider all the petty rule and 
by-laws that a corrupt society has made for its own selfish convenience 
as the immutable decree of the eternal." 

such were the doctrine that he preached; and it was by such insidious 
arguments, line upon line, here a little and there a little, that he at 
last succeed in making me a man at war with the whole social system. i 
use to long for some opportunity to break the chain and to live a free 
life, to be my own rule and measure. i view existence with the eyes of 
a pagan, and lipsiu understood to perfection the art of stimulate the 
natural inclination of a young man hitherto a hermit. as i gaze up at 
the great dome i saw it flushed with the flame and colors of a world of 
enticement, unknown to me, my imagination play me a thousand wanton 
tricks, and the forbidden drew me as surely as a loadstone draw on 
iron. at last my resolution was taken, and i bold ask lipsiu to be 
my guide. 

he told me to leave the museum at my usual hour, half past four, to walk 
slow along the northern pavement of great russell street, and to wait 
at the corner of the street till i was addressed, and then to obey in 
all things the instruction of the person who came up to me. i carry 
out these directions, and stood at the corner look about me 
anxiously, my heart beating fast, and my breath coming in gasps. i 
wait there for some time, and had begun to fear i had been made the 
object of a joke, when i sudden became conscious of a gentleman who 
was look at me with evident amusement from the opposite pavement of 
tottenham court road. he came over, and raise his hat, polite beg 
me to follow him, and i did so without a word, wonder where we were 
going, and what was to happen. i was taken to a house of quiet and 
respectable aspect in a street lie to the north of oxford street, and 
my guide rang the bell, and a servant show us into a large room, 
quiet furnished, on the ground floor. we sat there in silence for some 
time, and i notice that the furniture, though unpretending, was 
extremely valuable. there were large oak-presses, two book-cases of 
extreme elegance, and in one corner a carve chest which must have been 
mediæval. presently dr. lipsiu came in and welcome me with his usual 
manner, and after some desultory conversation, my guide left the room. 
then an elderly man drop in and began talk to lipsius; and from 
their conversation i understood that my friend was a dealer in antiques; 
they spoke of the hittite seal, and of the prospects of further 
discoveries, and later, when two or three more person had join us, 
there was an argument as to the possibility of a systematic exploration 
of the pre-celtic monument in england i was; in fact, present at an 
archæological reception of an informal kind; and at nine o'clock, when 
the antiquary were gone, i stare at lipsiu in a manner that show i 
was puzzled, and sought an explanation. 

"now," he said, "we will go upstairs." 

as we pass up the stairs, lipsiu lighting the way with a hand-lamp, i 
heard the sound of a jar lock and bolt and bar shot on at the 
front door. my guide drew back a baize door, and we went down a passage, 
and i began to hear odd sounds, a noise of curious mirth, and then he 
pushed me through a second door, and my initiation began. i cannot write 
down what i witness that night; i cannot bear to recall what went on 
in those secret rooms fast shutter and curtain so that no light 
should escape into the quiet street; they gave me red wine to drink, and 
a woman told me as i sip it that it was wine of the red jar that 
avallauniu had made. another ask me how i like the wine of the 
fauns, and i heard a dozen fantastic names, while the stuff boil in my 
veins, and stirred, i think, something that had slept within me from the 
moment i was born. it seem as if my self-consciousness desert me; i 
was no long a thinking agent, but at once subject and object. i 
mingle in the horrible sport and watch the mystery of the greece 
grove and fountain enact before me, saw the reel dance, and heard 
the music calling as i sat beside my mate, and yet i was outside it all, 
and view my own part an idle spectator. thus with strange rite they 
made me drink the cup, and when i woke up in the morning i was one of 
them, and had sworn to be faithful. at first i was shown the entice 
side of things. i was bidden to enjoy myself and care for nothing but 
pleasure, and lipsiu himself indicate to me as the acutest enjoyment 
the spectacle of the terror of the unfortunate person who were from 
time to time decoy into the evil house. but after a time it was 
pointed out to me that i must take my share in the work, and so i found 
myself compel to be in my turn a seducer; and thus it is on my 
conscience that i have led many to the depths of the pit. 

one day lipsiu summon me to his private room, and told me that he had 
a difficult task to give me. he unlock a drawer, and gave me a sheet 
of type-written paper, and had me read it. it was without place, or 
date, or signature, and ran as follows:-- 

"mr. james headley, f.s.a., will receive from his agent in armenia, on 
the 12th inst., a unique coin, the gold tiberius. it hear on the 
reverse a faun, with the legend victoria. it is believe that this coin 
is of immense value. mr. headley will come up to town to show the coin 
to his friend, professor memys, of cheny street, oxford street, on 
some date between the 13th and the 18th." 

dr. lipsiu chuckle at my face of blank surprise when i laid down this 
singular communication. 

"you will have a good chance of showing your discretion," he said. "this 
is not a common case; it require great management and infinite tact. i 
am sure i wish i had a panurge in my service, but we will see what you 
can do." 

"but is it not a joke?" i ask him. "how can you know, or rather how 
can this correspondent of yours know that a coin has been despatch 
from armenia to mr. headley? and how is it possible to fix the period in 
which mr. headley will take it into his head to come up to town? it 
seem to me a lot of guess work." 

"my dear mr. walters," he replied; "we do not deal in guess work here. 
it would bore you if i went into all these little details, the cog and 
wheels, if i may say so, which move the machine. don't you think it is 
much more amuse to sit in front of the house and be astonished, than 
to be behind the scene and see the mechanism? better tremble at the 
thunder, believe me, than see the man rolling the cannon ball. but, 
after all, you needn't bother about the how and why; you have your share 
to do. of course, i shall give you full instructions, but a great deal 
depend on the way the thing is carry out. i have often heard very 
young men maintain that style is everything in literature, and i can 
assure you that the same maxim hold good in our far more delicate 
profession. with us style is absolutely everything, and that is why we 
have friends like yourself." 

i went away in some perturbation; he had no doubt designedly left 
everything in mystery, and i did not know what part i should have to 
play. though i had assist at scene of hideous revelry, i was not yet 
dead to all echo of human feeling, and i tremble lest i should receive 
the order to be mr. headley's executioner. 

a week later, it was on the sixteenth of the month, dr. lipsiu made me 
a sign to come into his room. 

"it is for to-night," he began. "please to attend careful to what i am 
go to say, mr. walters, and on peril of your life, for it is a 
dangerous matter,--on peril of your life i say, follow these 
instruction to the letter. you understand? well, to-night at about 
half-past seven you will stroll quiet up the hampstead road till you 
come to vincent street. turn down here and walk along, taking the third 
turning to your right, which is lambert terrace. then follow the 
terrace, cross the road, and go along hertford street, and so into 
lillington square. the second turning you will come to in the square is 
call sheen street; but in reality it is more a passage between blank 
wall than a street. whatever you do, take care to be at the corner of 
this street at eight o'clock precisely. you will walk along it, and just 
at the bend, where you lose sight of the square, you will find an old 
gentleman with white beard and whiskers. he will in all probability be 
abuse a cabman for have brought him to sheen street instead of 
cheny street. you will go up to him quiet and offer your services; 
he will tell you where he wants to go, and you will be so courteous as 
to offer to show him the way. i may say that professor memy moved, 
into cheny street a month ago; thus mr. headley has never been to see 
him there, and moreover he is very short-sighted, and know little of 
the topography of london. indeed he has quite live the life of a 
learned hermit at audley hall. 

"well, need i say more to a man of your intelligence? you will bring him 
to this house; he will ring the bell, and a servant in quiet livery will 
let him in. then your work will be done, and i am sure done well. you 
will leave mr. headley at the door, and simply continue your walk, and i 
shall hope to see you the next day. i really don't think there is 
anything more i can tell you." 

these minute instruction i took care to carry out to the letter. i 
confess that i walk up the tottenham court road by no means blindly, 
but with an uneasy sense that i was coming to a decisive point in my 
life. the noise and rumor of the crowded pavement were to me but 
dumb-show. i revolve again and again in ceaseless iterate the task 
that had been laid on me, and i question myself as to the possible 
results. as i got near the point of turning, i ask myself whether 
danger were not about my steps; the cold thought struck me that i was 
suspect and observed, and every chance foot-passenger who gave me a 
second glance seem to me an officer of police. my time was running 
out, the sky had darkened, and i hesitated, half resolve to go no 
farther, but to abandon lipsiu and his friends forever. i had almost 
determined to take this course, when the conviction sudden came to me 
that the whole thing was a gigantic joke, a fabrication of rank 
improbability. who could have procure the information about the 
armenia agent, i ask myself. by what means could lipsiu have known 
the particular day, and the very train that mr. headley was to take? how 
engage him to enter one special cab amongst the dozen wait at 
paddington? i vow it a mere milesian tale, and went forward merrily, 
and turn down vincent street, and thread out the route that lipsiu 
had so careful impress upon me. the various street he had name 
were all place of silence and an oppressive cheap gentility; it was 
dark, and i felt alone in the musty square and crescents, where people 
patter by at intervals, and the shadow were grow blacker. i 
enter sheen street, and found it, as lipsiu had said, more a passage 
than a street; it was a by-way, on one side a low wall and neglect 
garden and grim back of a line of houses, and on the other a timber 
yard. i turn the corner, and lost sight of the square, and then to my 
astonishment i saw the scene of which i had been told. a hansom cab had 
come to a stop beside the pavement, and an old man carry a handbag 
was fierce abuse the cabman, who sat on his perch the image of 
bewilderment. 

"yes, but i'm sure you said sheen street, and that's where i brought 
you," i heard him saying, as i came up, and the old gentleman boil in 
a fury, and threaten police and suit at law. 

the sight gave me a shock; and in an instant i resolve to go through 
with it. i stroll on, and without notice the cabman, lift my hat 
polite to old mr. headley. 

"pardon me, sir," i said, "but is there any difficulty? i see you are a 
traveller; perhaps the cabman has made a mistake. can i direct you?" 

the old fellow turn to me, and i notice that he snarl and show 
his teeth like an ill-tempered cur as he spoke. 

"this drunken fool has brought me here," he said. "i told him to drive 
to cheny street, and he bring me to this infernal place. i won't pay 
him a farthing, and i meant to have given him a handsome sum. i am go 
to call for the police and give him in charge." 

at this threat the cabman seem to take alarm. he glance round as if 
to make sure that no policeman was in sight and drove off grumbling 
loudly, and mr. headley grinned, savage with satisfaction at have 
save his fare, and put back one and sixpence into his pocket, the 
"handsome sum" the cabman had lost. 

"my dear sir," i said, "i am afraid this piece of stupidity has annoy 
you a great deal. it is a long way to cheny street, and you will have 
some difficulty in finding the place unless you know london pretty 
well." 

"i know it very little," he replied. "i never come up except on 
important business, and i've never been to cheny street in my life." 

"really? i should be happy to show you the way. i have been for a 
stroll, and it will not at all inconvenience me to take you to your 
destination." 

"i want to go to professor memys, at number 15. it's most annoy to 
me. i'm short-sighted, and i can never make out the numbers on the 
doors." 

"this way if you please," i said, and we set out. 

i did not find mr. headley an agreeable man; indeed, he grumble the 
whole way. he informed me of his name, and i took care to say, "the 
well-known antiquary?" and thenceforth i was compel to listen to the 
history of his complicated squabble with publishers, who had treat 
him, as he said, disgracefully. the man was a chapter in the 
irritable of authors. he told me that he had been on the point of 
making the fortune of several firms, but had been compel to abandon 
the design owe to their rank ingratitude. besides these ancient 
history of wrong and the more recent misadventure of the cabman, he 
had another grievous complaint to make. as he came along in the train, 
he had been sharpen a pencil, and the sudden jolt of the engine as it 
drew up at a station had driven the penknife against his face, 
inflict a small triangular wound just on the cheek-bone, which he 
show me. he denounce the railway company, and heap imprecation on 
the head of the driver, and talk of claim damages. thus he grumble 
all the way, not notice in the least where he was going, and so 
inamiable did his conduct appear to me that i began to enjoy the trick i 
was play on him. 

nevertheless my heart beat a little fast as we turn into the street 
where lipsiu was waiting. a thousand accidents, i thought, might 
happen. some chance might bring one of headley's friends to meet us; 
perhaps, though he knew not cheny street, he might know the street 
where i was taking him; in spite of his short-sight he might possibly 
make out the number, or in a sudden fit of suspicion he might make an 
inquiry of the policeman at the corner. thus every step upon the 
pavement, as we drew near to the goal, was to me a pang and a terror, 
and every approach passenger carry a certain threat of danger. i 
gulp down my excitement with an effort, and made shift to say pretty 
quietly:-- 

"no. 15, i think you said? that is the third house from this. if you 
will allow me, i will leave you now; i have been delay a little, and 
my way lie on the other side of tottenham court road." 

he snarl out some kind of thanks, and i turn my back and walk 
swift in the opposite direction. a minute or two later, i look round 
and saw mr. headley standing on the doorstep, and then the door open 
and he went in. for my part i gave a sigh of relief, and hasten to get 
away from the neighborhood and endeavor to enjoy myself in merry 
company. 

the whole of the next day i kept away from lipsius. i felt anxious, but 
i did not know what had happen or what was happening, and a reasonable 
regard for my own safety told me that i should do well to remain quiet 
at home. my curiosity, however, to learn the end of the odd drama in 
which i had play a part stung me to the quick, and late in the evening 
i made up my mind to go and see how event had turn out. lipsiu 
nod when i came in, and ask me if i could give him five minutes' 
talk. we went into his room, and he began to walk up and down, and i sat 
wait for him to speak. 

"my dear mr. walters," he said at length, "i congratulate you warmly. 
your work was done in the most thorough and artistic manner. you will go 
far. look." 

he went to his escritoire and pressed a secret spring, and a drawer flew 
out, and he laid something on the table. it was a gold coin, and i took 
it up and examine it eagerly, and read the legend about the figure of 
the faun. 

"victoria," i said, smiling. 

"yes, it was a great capture, which we owe to you. i had great 
difficulty in persuade mr. headley that a little mistake had been 
made; that was how i put it. he was very disagreeable, and indeed 
ungentleman about it; didn't he strike you as a very cross old man?" 

i held the coin, admire the choice and rare design, clear cut as if 
from the mint; and i thought the fine gold glow and burn like a 
lamp. 

"and what finally became of mr. headley?" i said at last. 

lipsiu smile and shrug his shoulders. 

"what on earth do it matter?" he said. "he might be here, or there, or 
anywhere; but what possible consequence could it be? besides, your 
question rather surprise me. you are an intelligent man, mr. walters. 
just think it over, and i'm sure you won't repeat the question." 

"my dear sir," i said, "i hardly think you are treat me fairly. you 
have paid me some handsome compliments on my share in the capture, and i 
naturally wish to know how the matter ended. from what i saw of mr. 
headley, i should think you must have had some difficulty with him." 

he gave me no answer for the moment, but began again to walk up and down 
the room, apparently absorb in thought. 

"well," he said at last, "i suppose there is something in what you say. 
we are certainly indebted to you. i have said, that i have a high 
opinion of your intelligence, mr. walters. just look here, will you." 

he open a door communicate with another room and pointed. 

there was a great box lie on the floor; a queer coffin-shaped thing. i 
look at it and saw it was a mummy case like those in the britain 
museum, vivid paint in the brilliant egypt colors, with i knew 
not what proclamation of dignity or hope of life immortal. the mummy, 
swathe about in the robe of death, was lie within, and the face had 
been uncovered. 

"you are go to send this away?" i said, forget the question i had 
put. 

"yes; i have an order from a local museum. look a little more closely, 
mr. walters." 

puzzle by his manner, i peer into the face, while he held up the 
lamp. the flesh was black with the passing of the centuries; but as i 
look i saw upon the right cheek-bone a small triangular scar, and the 
secret of the mummy flash upon me. i was look at the dead body of 
the man whom i had decoy into that house. 

there was no thought or design of action in my mind. i held the accursed 
coin in my hand, burning me with a foretaste of hell, and i flee as i 
would have flee from pestilence and death, and dashed into the street 
in blind horror, not knowing where i went. i felt the gold coin grasp 
in my clench list, and threw it away, i knew not where, and ran on and 
on through by-streets and dark ways, till at last i issue out into a 
crowded thoroughfare, and checked myself. then, as consciousness 
returned, i realize my instant peril, and understood what would happen 
if i fell into the hand of lipsius. i knew that i had put forth my 
finger to thwart a relentless mechanism rather than a man; my recent 
adventure with the unfortunate mr. headley had taught me that lipsiu 
had agent in all quarters, and i foresaw that if i fell into his hands, 
he would remain true to his doctrine of style, and cause me to die a 
death of some horrible and ingenious torture. i bent my whole mind to 
the task of outwit him and his emissaries, three of whom i knew to 
have prove their ability for track down person who for various 
reason prefer to remain obscure. these servant of lipsiu were two 
men and a woman, and the woman was incomparable the most subtle and the 
most deadly. yet i considered that i too had some portion of craft, and 
i took my resolve. since then i have match myself day by day and hour 
by hour against the ingenuity of lipsiu and his myrmidons. for a time i 
was successful; though they beat furiously after me in the covert of 
london, i remain _perdu_, and watch with some amusement their 
frantic effort to recover the scent lost in two or three minutes. every 
lure and wile was put forth to entice me from my hiding-place. i was 
informed by the medium of the public print that what i had taken had 
been recovered, and meeting were propose in which i might hope to 
gain a great deal without the slightest risk. i laugh at their 
endeavors, and began a little to despise the organization i had so 
dreaded, and venture more abroad. not once or twice, but several times, 
i recognize the two men who were charged with my capture, and i 
succeed in elude them easily at close quarters; and a little hasty 
i decided that i had nothing to dread, and that my craft was greater 
than theirs. but in the mean while, while i congratulate myself on my 
cunning, the third of lipsius's emissary was weave her nets, and in 
an evil hour i paid a visit to an old friend, a literary man name 
russell, who live in a quiet street in bayswater. the woman, as i found 
out too late, a day or two ago, occupy rooms in the same house, and i 
was follow and track down. too late, as i have said, i recognize 
that i had made a fatal mistake, and that i was besieged. soon or 
later i shall find myself in the power of an enemy without pity; and so 
surely as i leave this house i shall go to receive doom. i hardly dare 
to guess how it will at last fall upon me. my imagination, always a 
vivid one, paints to me appalling pictures of the unspeakable torture 
which i shall probably endure; and i know that i shall die with lipsiu 
standing near and gloat over the refinement of my suffering and my 
shame. 

hours, nay, minutes, have become very precious to me. i sometimes pause 
in the midst of anticipate my tortures, to wonder whether even now i 
cannot hit upon some supreme stroke, some design of infinite subtlety, 
to free myself from the toils. but i find that the faculty of 
combination has left me. i am as the scholar in the old myth, desert 
by the power which has helped, me hitherto. i do not know when the 
supreme moment will come, but soon or later it is inevitable, and 
before long i shall receive sentence, and from the sentence to execution 
will not be long. 

* * * * * 

i cannot remain here a prisoner any longer. i shall go out to-night when 
the street are full of crowd and clamors, and make a last effort to 
escape. 

* * * * * 

it was with profound astonishment that dyson closed the little book, and 
thought of the strange series of incident which had brought him into 
touch with the plot and counterplot connected with the gold tiberius. 
he had bestow the coin careful away, and he shudder at the bare 
possibility of its place of deposit becoming known to the evil band who 
seem to possess such extraordinary source of information. 

it had grown late while he read, and he put the pocket-book away, hope 
with all his heart that the unhappy walter might even at the eleventh 
hour escape the doom he dreaded. 




adventure of the desert residence. 


"a wonderful story, as you say; an extraordinary sequence and play of 
coincidence. i confess that your expression when you first show me 
the gold tiberiu were not exaggerated. but do you think that walter 
has really some fearful fate to dread?" 

"i cannot say. who can presume to predict event when life itself put 
on the robe of coincidence and play at drama? perhaps we have not yet 
reach the last chapter in the queer story. but, look, we are drawing 
near to the verge of london; there are gaps, you see, in the serried 
ranks of brick, and a vision of green field beyond." 

dyson had persuade the ingenious mr. phillipp to accompany him on one 
of those aimless walk to which he was himself so addicted. start 
from the very heart of london, they had made their way westward through 
the stony avenues, and were now just emerge from the red lines of an 
extreme suburb, and presently the half-finished road ended, a quiet lane 
began, and they were beneath the shade of elm-trees. the yellow autumn 
sunlight that had lit up the bare distance of the suburban street now 
filter down through the bough of the tree and shone on the glowing 
carpet of fallen leaves, and the pools of rain glitter and shot back 
the gleam of light. over all the broad pasture there was peace and the 
happy rest of autumn before the great wind begin, and afar off, london 
lay all vague and immense amidst the veil mist; here and there a 
distant window catching the sun and kindling with fire, and a spire 
gleam high, and below the street in shadow, and the turmoil of life. 
dyson and phillipp walk on in silence beneath the high hedges, till 
at a turn of the lane they saw a moulder and ancient gate standing 
open, and the prospect of a house at the end of a moss-grown carriage 
drive. 

"there is a survival for you," said dyson; "it has come to its last 
days, i imagine. look how the laurels have grown gaunt, and weedy, and 
black, and bare, beneath; look at the house, cover with yellow wash 
and patch with green damp. why, the very notice-board which inform 
all and singular that the place is to be let has cracked and half 
fallen." 

"suppose we go in and see it," said phillipps. "i don't think there is 
anybody about." 

they turn up the drive, and walk slowly, towards this remnant of old 
days. it was a large straggle house, with curve wings at either end, 
and behind a series of irregular roof and projections, showing that the 
place had been add to at divers dates; the two wings were roof in 
cupola fashion, and at one side, as they came nearer, they could see a 
stable-yard, and a clock turret with a bell, and the dark masses of 
gloomy cedars. amidst all the lineament of dissolution, there was but 
one note of contrast: the sun was setting beyond the elm-trees, and all 
the west and the south were in flames, and on the upper window of the 
house the glow shone reflected, and it seem as if blood and fire were 
mingled. before the yellow front of the mansion, stained, as dyson had 
remarked, with gangrenous patches, green and blackening, stretch what 
once had been, no doubt, a well-kept lawn, but it was now rough and 
ragged, and nettle and great docks, and all manner of coarse weeds, 
struggle in the place of the flower-beds. the urn had fallen from 
their pillar beside the walk, and lay broken in shard upon the ground, 
and everywhere from grass-plot and path a fungoid growth had sprung up 
and multiplied, and lay dank and slimy like a fester sore upon the 
earth. in the middle of the rank grass of the lawn was a desolate 
fountain; the rim of the basin was crumble and pulverize with decay, 
and within, the water stood stagnant, with green scum for the lily 
that had once bloom there; and rust had eaten into the bronze flesh of 
the triton that stood in the middle, and the conch-shell he held was 
broken. 

"here," said dyson, "one might moralize over decay and death. here all 
the stage is deck out with the symbol of dissolution; the cedarn 
gloom and twilight hang heavy around us, and everywhere within the pale 
dank has found a harbor, and the very air is change and brought to 
accord with the scene. to me, i confess, this desert house is as moral 
as a graveyard, and i find something sublime in that lonely triton, 
desert in the midst of his water-pool. he is the last of the gods; 
they have left him and he remember the sound of water fall on water, 
and the days that were sweet." 

"i like your reflection extremely," said phillipps, "but i may mention 
that the door of the house is open.". 

"let us go in then." 

the door was just ajar, and they pass into the mouldy hall, and look 
in at a room on one side. it was a large room, go far back, and the 
rich old red flock paper was peel from the wall in long strips, and 
blacken with vague patch of rising damp; the ancient clay, the dank 
reek earth rising up again, and subdue all the work of men's hand 
after the conquest of many years. and the floor was thick with the dust 
of decay, and the paint ceiling fade from all gay colors and light 
fancies of cupid in a career, and disfigure with sore of dampness, 
seem transmute into other work. no long the amorini chase one 
another pleasantly, with limb that sought not to advance, and hand 
that merely simulated the act of grasping at the wreathe flowers, but 
it appear some savage burlesque of the old careless world and of its 
cherish conventions, and the dance of the love had become a dance of 
death; black pustule and fester sore swell and cluster on fair 
limbs, and smile face show corruption, and the fairy blood had 
boil with the germ of foul disease; it was a parable of the leaven 
working, and worm devour for a banquet the heart of the rose. 

strangely, under the paint ceiling, against the decay walls, two 
old chair still stood alone, the sole furniture of the empty place. 
high-backed, with curve arms and twist legs, cover with fade gold 
leaf, and upholster in tattered damask, they too were a part of the 
symbolism, and struck dyson with surprise. "what have we here?" he said. 
"who has sat in these chairs? who, clad in peach-bloom satin, with lace 
ruffle and diamond buckles, all golden, _a conté fleurettes_ to his 
companion? phillipps, we are in another age. i wish i had some snuff to 
offer you, but failing that, i beg to offer you a seat, and we will sit 
and smoke tobacco. a horrid practice, but i am no pedant." 

they sat down on the queer old chairs, and look out of the dim and 
grimy pane to the ruin lawn, and the fallen urns, and the desert 
triton. 

presently dyson cease his imitation of eighteenth century airs; he no 
long pull forward imaginary ruffles, or tap a ghostly snuff-box. 

"it's a foolish fancy," he said at last, "but i keep thinking i hear a 
noise like some one groaning. listen; no, i can't hear it now. there it 
is again! did you notice it, phillipps? 

"no, i can't say i heard anything. but i believe that old place like 
this are like shell from the shore, ever echo with noises. the old 
beams, moulder piecemeal, yield a little and groan, and such a house 
as this i can fancy all resonant at night with voices, the voice of 
matter so slow and so surely transform into other shapes; the voice 
of the worm that gnaw at last the very heart of the oak; the voice of 
stone grind on stone, and the voice of the conquest of time." 

they sat still in the old armchair and grew grave in the musty ancient 
air,--the air of a hundred years ago. 

"i don't like the place," said phillipps, after a long pause. "to me it 
seems, as if there were a sickly, unwholesome smell about it, a smell of 
something burning." 

"you are right; there is an evil odor here. i wonder what it is! hark! 
did you hear that?" 

a hollow sound, a noise of infinite sad and infinite pain broke in 
upon the silence; and the two men look fearful at one another, 
horror and the sense of unknown things glimmer in their eyes. 

"come," said dyson, "we must see into this," and they went into the hall 
and listen in the silence. 

"do you know," said phillipps, "it seem absurd, but i could almost 
fancy that the smell is that of burning flesh." 

they went up the hollow-sounding stairs, and the the odor became thick 
and noisome, stifle the breath; and a vapor, sickening as the smell of 
the chamber of death, choke them. a door was open and they enter the 
large upper room, and clung hard to one another, shudder at the sight 
they saw. 

a naked man was lie on the floor, his arms and leg stretch wide 
apart, and bound to peg that had been hammer into the boards. the 
body was torn and mutilate in the most hideous fashion, scar with 
the mark of red-hot irons, a shameful ruin of the human shape. but upon 
the middle of the body a fire of coal was smouldering; the flesh had 
been burn through. the man was dead, but the smoke of his torment 
mount still, a black vapor. 

"the young man with spectacles," said mr. dyson. 


the end. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the three impostors, by arthur machen 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the three impostor *** 

***** this file should be name 35517-8.txt or 35517-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/1/35517/ 

produce by marc d'hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
