the project gutenberg ebook, the lost stradivarius, by john meade falkner 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the lost stradivarius 

author: john meade falkner 

release date: november 21, 2004 [ebook #14107] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the lost stradivarius*** 


e-text prepared by suzanne shell, melissa er-raqabi, and the project 
gutenberg online distribute proofread team 



the lost stradivarius 

by 

j. meade falkner 

1895 

penguin books 
harmondsworth middlesex, england 
245 fifth avenue, new york, u.s.a. 







the author 


john meade falkner was a remarkable character, as he was not only a 
scholar and a writer, but a captain of industry as well. born in 1858, 
the son of a clergyman in wiltshire, he was educated at marlborough and 
hertford college, oxford. on leave the university, he became tutor to 
the son of sir andrew noble, then vice-chairman of the 
armstrong-whitworth company; and his ability so much impress his 
employer that in 1885 he was offer a post in the firm. without 
connection or influence in industrial circles, and solely by his 
intellect, he rose to be a director in 1901, and finally, in 1915, 
chairman of this enormous business. he was actually chairman during the 
important years 1915-1920, and remain a director until 1926. 

his intellectual energy was so great that throughout his life he found 
time for scholarship as well as business. he travelled for his firm in 
europe and south america; and in the interval of negotiate with 
foreign government studied manuscript wherever he found a library. his 
research in the vatican library were of special importance, and in 
connection with them he received a gold medal from the pope; he was also 
decorate by the italian, turkey and japan governments. 

his scholastic interests included archæology, folklore, palæography, 
mediæval history, architecture and church music; and he was a collector 
of missals. towards the end of his life he was made an honorary fellow 
of hertford college, oxford, honorary reader in palæography to durham 
university, and honorary librarian to the chapter library of durham 
cathedral, which he left one of the best cathedral library in europe. 
he die at durham in 1932. 

apart from _the lost stradivarius_, falkner was the author of two other 
novels, _the nebu coat_ (1903--also publish in penguin books) and 
_moonfleet_ (1898). he also wrote a history of oxfordshire, handbook to 
that county and to berkshire, historical short stories, and some 
mediævalist verse. 






the lost stradivarius 





letter from miss sophia maltraver 
to her nephew, sir edward maltravers, 
then a student at christ church, oxford. 

13 pauncefort buildings, bath, 
oct. 21, 1867. 

my dear edward, 

it was your late father's die request that certain event which 
occur in his last years should be communicate to you on your coming 
of age. i have reduce them to writing, partly from my own recollection, 
which is, alas! still too vivid, and partly with the aid of note taken 
at the time of my brother's death. as you are now of full age, i submit 
the narrative to you. much of it has necessarily been exceedingly 
painful to me to write, but at the same time i feel it is better that 
you should hear the truth from me than garble story from other who 
did not love your father as i did. 

your loving aunt, 
sophia maltraver 


to sir edward maltravers, bart. 




"a tale out of season is as music in mourning." 
--ecclesiasticus xxii. 6. 




miss sophia maltravers' story 

chapter i 


your father, john maltravers, was born in 1820 at worth, and succeed 
his father and mine, who die when we were still young children. john 
was sent to eton in due course, and in 1839, when he was nineteen years 
of age, it was determined that he should go to oxford. it was intended 
at first to enter him at christ church; but dr. sarsdell, who visit us 
at worth in the summer of 1839, persuade mr. thoresby, our guardian, to 
send him instead to magdalen hall. dr. sarsdell was himself principal of 
that institution, and represent that john, who then exhibit some 
symptom of delicacy, would meet with more personal attention under his 
care than he could hope to do in so large a college as christ church. 
mr. thoresby, ever solicitous for his ward's welfare, readily waive 
other consideration in favour of an arrangement which he considered 
conducive to john's health, and he was accordingly matriculate at 
magdalen hall in the autumn of 1839. 

dr. sarsdell had not been unmindful of his promise to look after my 
brother, and had secure him an excellent first-floor sitting-room, with 
a bedroom adjoining, have an aspect towards new college lane. 

i shall pass over the first two years of my brother's residence at 
oxford, because they have nothing to do with the present story. they 
were spent, no doubt, in the ordinary routine of work and recreation 
common in oxford at that period. 

from his earliest boyhood he had been passionately devoted to music, 
and had attain a considerable proficient on the violin. in the autumn 
term of 1841 he made the acquaintance of mr. william gaskell, a very 
talented student at new college, and also a more than tolerable 
musician. the practice of music was then very much less common at oxford 
than it has since become, and there were none of those society 
existing which now do so much to promote its study among undergraduates. 
it was therefore a cause of much gratification to the two young men, and 
it afterwards became a strong bond of friendship, to discover that one 
was as devoted to the pianoforte as was the other to the violin. mr. 
gaskell, though in easy circumstances, had not a pianoforte in his 
rooms, and was pleased to use a fine instrument by d'almaine that john 
had that term received as a birthday present from his guardian. 

from that time the two student were thrown much together, and in the 
autumn term of 1841 and easter term of 1842 practised a variety of music 
in john's rooms, he taking the violin part and mr. gaskell that for the 
pianoforte. 

it was, i think, in march 1842 that john purchase for his rooms a piece 
of furniture which was destined afterwards to play no unimportant part 
in the story i am narrating. this was a very large and low wicker chair 
of a form then coming into fashion in oxford, and since, i am told, 
become a familiar object of most college rooms. it was cushion with a 
gaudy pattern of chintz, and bought for new of an upholsterer at the 
bottom of the high street. 

mr. gaskell was taken by his uncle to spend easter in rome, and 
obtain special leave from his college to prolong his travels; did not 
return to oxford till three week of the summer term were pass and may 
was well advanced. so impatient was he to see his friend that he would 
not let even the first evening of his return pass without coming round 
to john's rooms. the two young men sat without lights until the night 
was late; and mr. gaskell had much to narrate of his travels, and spoke 
specially of the beautiful music which he had heard at easter in the 
roman churches. he had also had lesson on the piano from a celebrated 
professor of the italy style, but seem to have been particularly 
delight with the music of the seventeenth-century composers, of whose 
works he had brought back some specimen set for piano and violin. 

it was past eleven o'clock when mr. gaskell left to return to new 
college; but the night was unusually warm, with a moon near the full, 
and john sat for some time in a cushion window-seat before the open 
sash thinking over what he had heard about the music of italy. feeling 
still disinclined for sleep, he lit a single candle and began to turn 
over some of the musical works which mr. gaskell had left on the table. 
his attention was especially attract to an oblong book, bound in 
soil vellum, with a coat of arms stamp in gilt upon the side. it was 
a manuscript copy of some early suite by graziani for violin and 
harpsichord, and was apparently written at naples in the year 1744, many 
years after the death of that composer. though the ink was yellow and 
faded, the transcript had been accurate made, and could be read with 
tolerable comfort by an advanced musician in spite of the antiquated 
notation. 

perhaps by accident, or perhaps by some mysterious direction which our 
mind are incapable of appreciating, his eye was arrest by a suite of 
four movements with a _basso continuo_, or figured bass, for the 
harpsichord. the other suite in the book were only distinguished by 
numbers, but this one the composer had dignified with the name of 
"l'areopagita." almost mechanical john put the book on his 
music-stand, took his violin from its case, and after a moment's tune 
stood up and play the first movement, a lively _coranto_. the light of 
the single candle burning on the table was scarcely sufficient to 
illumine the page; the shadow hung in the crease of the leaves, which 
had grown into those wavy fold sometimes observable in books made of 
thick paper and remain long shut; and it was with difficulty that he 
could read what he was playing. but he felt the strange impulse of the 
old-world music urge him forward, and did not even pause to light the 
candle which stood ready in their sconce on either side of the desk. 
the _coranto_ was follow by a _sarabanda_, and the _sarabanda_ by a 
_gagliarda_. my brother stood playing, with his face turn to the 
window, with the room and the large wicker chair of which i have spoken 
behind him. the _gagliarda_ began with a bold and lively air, and as he 
play the opening bars, he heard behind him a creak of the wicker 
chair. the sound was a perfectly familiar one--as of some person place 
a hand on either arm of the chair preparatory to lower himself into 
it, follow by another as of the same person being leisurely seated. 
but for the tone of the violin, all was silent, and the creak of the 
chair was strange distinct. the illusion was so complete that my 
brother stop play suddenly, and turn round expect that some 
late friend of his had slip in unawares, being attract by the sound 
of the violin, or that mr. gaskell himself had returned. with the 
cessation of the music an absolute still fell upon all; the light of 
the single candle scarcely reach the dark corner of the room, but 
fell directly on the wicker chair and show it to be perfectly empty. 
half amused, half vex with himself at have without reason 
interrupt his music, my brother return to the _gagliarda_; but some 
impulse induce him to light the candle in the sconces, which gave an 
illumination more adequate to the occasion. the _gagliarda_ and the last 
movement, a _minuetto_, were finished, and john closed the book, 
intending, as it was now late, to seek his bed. as he shut the page a 
creak of the wicker chair again attract his attention, and he heard 
distinct sound such as would be made by a person raise himself from 
a sitting posture. this time, being less surprised, he could more apt 
consider the probable cause of such a circumstance, and easily arrive 
at the conclusion that there must be in the wicker chair osier 
responsive to certain note of the violin, as pane of glass in church 
window are observe to vibrate in sympathy with certain tone of the 
organ. but while this argument approve itself to his reason, his 
imagination was but half convinced; and he could not but be impress 
with the fact that the second creak of the chair had been coincident 
with his shut the music-book; and, unconsciously, picture to 
himself some strange visitor wait until the termination of the music, 
and then taking his departure. 

his conjecture did not, however, either rob him of sleep or even 
disturb it with dreams, and he woke the next morning with a cooler mind 
and one less inclined to fantastic imagination. if the strange episode 
of the previous evening had not entire vanish from his mind, it 
seem at least fully account for by the acoustic explanation to which 
i have allude above. although he saw mr. gaskell in the course of the 
morning, he did not think it necessary to mention to him so trivial a 
circumstance, but made with him an appointment to sup together in his 
own rooms that evening, and to amuse themselves afterwards by essay 
some of the italy music. 

it was shortly after nine that night when, supper being finished, mr. 
gaskell seat himself at the piano and john tune his violin. the 
evening was close in; there had been heavy thunder-rain in the 
afternoon, and the moist air hung now heavy and steaming, while across 
it there throb the distant vibration of the tenor bell at christ 
church. it was toll the customary 101 strokes, which are rung every 
night in term-time as a signal for close the college gates. the two 
young men enjoy themselves for some while, play first a suite by 
cesti, and then two early sonata by buononcini. both of them were 
sufficient expert musician to make reading at sight a pleasure rather 
than an effort; and mr. gaskell especially was well versed in the theory 
of music, and in the correct rendering of the _basso continuo_. after 
the buononcini mr. gaskell took up the oblong copy of graziani, and 
turning over its leaves, propose that they should play the same suite 
which john had perform by himself the previous evening. his selection 
was apparently perfectly fortuitous, as my brother had purposely 
refrain from direct his attention in any way to that piece of 
music. they play the _coranto_ and the _sarabanda_, and in the 
singular fascination of the music john had entire forgotten the 
episode of the previous evening, when, as the bold air of the 
_gagliarda_ commenced, he sudden became aware of the same strange 
creak of the wicker chair that he had notice on the first occasion. 
the sound was identical, and so exact was its resemblance to that of a 
person sitting down that he stare at the chair, almost wonder that 
it still appear empty. beyond turning his head sharp for a moment to 
look round, mr. gaskell took no notice of the sound; and my brother, 
ashamed to betray any foolish interest or excitement, continue the 
_gagliarda_, with its repeat. at its conclusion mr. gaskell stop 
before proceeding to the minuet, and turning the stool on which he was 
sitting round towards the room, observed, "how very strange, 
johnnie,"--for these young men were on terms of sufficient intimacy to 
address each other in a familiar style,--"how very strange! i thought i 
heard some one sit down in that chair when we began the _gagliarda_. i 
look round quite expect to see some one had come in. did you hear 
nothing?" 

"it was only the chair creaking," my brother answered, feign an 
indifference which he scarcely felt. "certain parts of the wicker-work 
seem to be in accord with musical note and respond to them; let us 
continue with the _minuetto_." 

thus they finished the suite, mr. gaskell demanding a repetition of the 
_gagliarda_, with the air of which he was much pleased. as the clock 
had already struck eleven, they determined not to play more that night; 
and mr. gaskell rose, blew out the sconces, shut the piano, and put the 
music aside. my brother has often assured me that he was quite prepared 
for what followed, and had been almost expect it; for as the books 
were put away, a creak of the wicker chair was audible, exactly 
similar to that which he had heard when he stop play on the 
previous night. there was a moment's silence; the young men look 
involuntary at one another, and then mr. gaskell said, "i cannot 
understand the creak of that chair; it has never done so before, with 
all the music we have played. i am perhaps imaginative and excited with 
the fine airs we have heard to-night, but i have an impression that i 
cannot dispel that something has been sitting listen to us all this 
time, and that now when the concert is end it has got up and gone." 
there was a spirit of raillery in his words, but his tone was not so 
light as it would ordinarily have been, and he was evidently ill at 
ease. 

"let us try the _gagliarda_ again," said my brother; "it is the 
vibration of the opening note which affect the wicker-work, and we 
shall see if the noise is repeated." but mr. gaskell excuse himself 
from try the experiment, and after some desultory conversation, to 
which it was evident that neither was give any serious attention, he 
took his leave and return to new college. 




chapter ii 


i shall not weary you, my dear edward, by recount similar experience 
which occur on nearly every occasion that the young men met in the 
evenings for music. the repetition of the phenomenon had accustomed them 
to expect it. both professed to be quite satisfy that it was to be 
attribute to acoustic affinity of vibration between the wicker-work 
and certain of the piano wires, and indeed this seem the only 
explanation possible. but, at the same time, the resemblance of the 
noise to those cause by a person sitting down in or rising from a 
chair was so marked, that even their frequent recurrence never fail to 
make a strange impression on them. they felt a reluctance to mention the 
matter to their friends, partly from a fear of being themselves laugh 
at, and partly to spare from ridicule a circumstance to which each 
perhaps, in spite of himself, attach some degree of importance. 
experience soon convinced them that the first noise as of one sitting 
down never occur unless the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita" was 
played, and that this noise being once heard, the second only follow 
it when they cease play for the evening. they met every night, 
sitting later with the lengthen summer evenings, and every night, 
as by some tacit understanding, play the "areopagita" suite before 
parting. at the opening bar of the _gagliarda_ the creak of the 
chair occur spontaneous with the utmost regularity. they seldom 
spoke even to one another of the subject; but one night, when john was 
putt away his violin after a long evening's music without have 
play the "areopagita," mr. gaskell, who had risen from the pianoforte, 
sat down again as by a sudden impulse and said-- 

"johnnie, do not put away your violin yet. it is near twelve o'clock 
and i shall get shut out, but i cannot stop to-night without play the 
_gagliarda_. suppose that all our theory of vibration and affinity are 
wrong, suppose that there really come here night by night some strange 
visitant to hear us, some poor creature whose heart is bound up in that 
tune; would it not be unkind to send him away without the hearing of 
that piece which he seem most to relish? let us not be ill-mannered, 
but humour his whim; let us play the _gagliarda_." 

they play it with more vigour and precision than usual, and the now 
customary sound of one taking his seat at once ensued. it was that night 
that my brother, look steadfast at the chair, saw, or thought he 
saw, there some slight obscuration, some penumbra, mist, or subtle 
vapour which, as he gazed, seem to struggle to take human form. he 
cease play for a moment and rub his eyes, but as he did so all 
dim vanish and he saw the chair perfectly empty. the pianist 
stop also at the cessation of the violin, and ask what ail him. 

"it is only that my eyes were dim," he answered. 

"we have had enough for to-night," said mr. gaskell; "let us stop. 
i shall be lock out." he shut the piano, and as he did so the clock 
in new college tower struck twelve. he left the room running, but was 
late enough at his college door to be reported, admonish with a fine 
against such late hours, and confine for a week to college; for being 
out after midnight was considered, at that time at least, a somewhat 
serious offence. 

thus for some days the musical practice was compulsory intermitted, 
but resume on the first evening after mr. gaskell's term of confinement 
was expired. after they had perform several suite of graziani, and 
finished as usual with the "areopagita," mr. gaskell sat for a time 
silent at the instrument, as though thinking with himself, and then 
said-- 

"i cannot say how deep this old-fashioned music affect me. some would 
try to persuade us that these suites, of which the airs bear the name 
of different dances, were always written rather as a musical essay and 
for purpose of performance than for person to dance to, as their name 
would more naturally imply. but i think these critic are wrong at least 
in some instances. it is to me impossible to believe that such a melody, 
for instance, as the _giga_ of corelli which we have played, was not 
written for actual purpose of dancing. one can almost hear the beat 
of feet upon the floor, and i imagine that in the time of corelli the 
practice of dancing, while not a whit inferior in grace, had more of the 
tripudistic or beating character than is now esteem consistent with a 
correct ball-room performance. the _gagliarda_ too, which we play now so 
constantly, possess a singular power of assist the imagination to 
picture or reproduce such scene as those which it no doubt formerly 
enlivened. i know not why, but it is constant identify in my mind 
with some revel which i have perhaps seen in a picture, where several 
couple are dance a licentious measure in a long room lit by a number 
of silver sconce of the debase model common at the end of the 
seventeenth century. it is probably a reminiscence of my late excursion 
that give to these dance in my fancy the olive skin, dark hair, and 
bright eyes of the italy type; and they wear dress of exceedingly 
rich fabric and elaborate design. imagination is whimsical enough to 
paint for me the character of the room itself, as have an arcade of 
arch running down one side alone, of the fantastic and paganise 
gothic of the renaissance. at the end is a gallery or balcony for the 
musicians, which on its cove front has a florid coat of arms of foreign 
heraldry. the shield bears, on a field _or_, a cherub's head blow on 
three lilies--a blazon i have no doubt seen somewhere in my travels, 
though i cannot recollect where. this scene, i say, is so nearly 
connected in my brain with the _gagliarda_, that scarcely are its first 
note sound ere it presents itself to my eyes with a vivid which 
increase every day. the couple advance, set, and recede, use free 
and licentious gesture which my imagination should be ashamed to 
recall. amongst so many foreigners, fancy pictures, i know not in the 
least why, the presence of a young man of an english type of face, whose 
features, however, always elude my mind's attempt to fix them. i think 
that the opening subject of this _gagliarda_ is a superior composition 
to the rest of it, for it is only during the first sixteen bar that the 
vision of bygone revelry presents itself to me. with the last note of 
the sixteenth bar a veil is drawn sudden across the scene, and with a 
sense almost of some catastrophe it vanishes. this i attribute to the 
fact that the second subject must be inferior in conception to the 
first, and by some sense of incongruity destroy the fabric which the 
fascination of the preceding one built up." 

my brother, though he had listen with interest to what mr. gaskell had 
said, did not reply, and the subject was allow to drop. 




chapter iii 


it was in the same summer of 1842, and near the middle of june, that my 
brother john wrote inviting me to come to oxford for the commemoration 
festivities. i had been spend some week with mrs. temple, a distant 
cousin of ours, at their house of royston in derbyshire, and john was 
desirous that mrs. temple should come up to oxford and chaperone 
her daughter constance and myself at the balls and various other 
entertainment which take place at the close of the summer term. owe 
to royston being some two hundred mile from worth maltravers, our 
family had hitherto seen little of one another, but during my present 
visit i had learned to love mrs. temple, a lady of singular sweet of 
disposition, and had contract a devoted attachment to her daughter 
constance. constance temple was then eighteen years of age, and to great 
beauty united such mental graces and excellent trait of character as 
must ever appear to reasoning person more enduring valuable than even 
the highest personal attractions. she was well read and witty, and had 
been train in those principles of true religion which she afterwards 
follow with devoted consistency in the self-sacrifice and resigned 
piety of her too short life. in person, i may remind you, my dear 
edward, since death remove her ere you were of years to appreciate 
either her appearance or her qualities, she was tall, with a somewhat 
long and oval face, with brown hair and eyes. 

mrs. temple readily accept sir john maltravers' invitation. she had 
never seen oxford herself, and was pleased to afford us the pleasure of 
so delightful an excursion. john had secure convenient rooms for us 
above the shop of a well-known printseller in high street, and we 
arrive in oxford on friday evening, june 18, 1842. i shall not dilate 
to you on the various commemoration festivities, which have probably 
alter little since those days, and with which you are familiar. 
suffice it to say that my brother had secure us admission to every 
entertainment, and that we enjoy our visit as only youth with its keen 
sensibility and uncloyed pleasure can. i could not help observing 
that john was very much struck by the attraction of miss constance 
temple, and that she for her part, while exhibit no unbecome 
forwardness, certainly betray no aversion to him. i was greatly 
pleased both with my own powers of observation which had enable me to 
discover so important a fact, and also with the circumstance itself. 
to a romantic girl of nineteen it appear high time that a brother of 
twenty-two should be at least prepare some matrimonial project; and my 
friend was so good and beautiful that it seem impossible that i should 
ever obtain a more lovable sister or my brother a better wife. mrs. 
temple could not refuse her sanction to such a scheme; for while their 
mental quality seem eminently compatible, john was in his own right 
master of worth maltravers, and her daughter sole heiress of the royston 
estates. 

the commemoration festivity terminate on wednesday night with a grand 
ball at the music-room in holywell street. this was given by a lodge of 
university freemasons, and john was there with mr. gaskell--whose 
acquaintance we had made with much gratification--both wearing blue silk 
scarf and small white aprons. they introduce us to many other of 
their friends similarly adorned, and these important and mysterious 
insignia sat not amiss with their youthful figures and boyish faces. 
after a long and pleasurable programme, it was decided that we should 
prolong our visit till the next evening, leave oxford at half-past 
ten o'clock at night and driving to didcot, there to join the mail for 
the west. we rose late the next morning and spent the day rambling among 
the old college and garden of the most beautiful of english cities. 
at seven o'clock we dine together for the last time at our lodgings 
in high street, and my brother propose that before parting we should 
enjoy the fine evening in the garden of st. john's college. this was 
at once agree to, and we proceed thither, john walking on in front 
with constance and mrs. temple, and i following with mr. gaskell. my 
companion explain that these garden were esteem the most beautiful 
in the university, but that under ordinary circumstances it was not 
permit to stranger to walk there of an evening. here he quote some 
latin about "aurum per medio ire satellites," which i smiling made as 
if i understood, and did indeed gather from it that john had bribe the 
porter to admit us. it was a warm and very still night, without a moon, 
but with enough of fade light to show the outline of the garden 
front. this long low line of building built in charles i's reign look 
so exquisite beautiful that i shall never forget it, though i have not 
since seen its oriel window and creeper-covered walls. there was a very 
heavy dew on the broad lawn, and we walk at first only on the paths. 
no one spoke, for we were oppress by the very beauty of the scene, and 
by the sad which an imminent parting from friends and from so sweet 
a place combine to cause. john had been silent and depressed the whole 
day, nor did mr. gaskell himself seem inclined to conversation. 
constance and my brother fell a little way behind, and mr. gaskell ask 
me to cross the lawn if i was not afraid of the dew, that i might see 
the garden front to better advantage from the corner. mrs. temple wait 
for us on the path, not wish to wet her feet. mr. gaskell pointed out 
the beauty of the perspective as seen from his vantage-point, and we 
were fortunate in hearing the sweet descant of nightingale for which 
this garden has ever been famous. as we stood silent and listening, a 
candle was lit in a small oriel at the end, and the light showing the 
tracery of the window add to the picturesque of the scene. 

within an hour we were in a landau driving through the still warm lane 
to didcot. i had seen that constance's parting with my brother had been 
tender, and i am not sure that she was not in tear during some part at 
least of our drive; but i did not observe her closely, have my 
thought elsewhere. 

though we were thus being carry every moment further from the sleep 
city, where i believe that both our heart were busy, i feel as if i had 
been a personal witness of the incident i am about to narrate, so often 
have i heard them from my brother's lips. the two young men, after 
parting with us in the high street, return to their respective 
colleges. john reach his rooms shortly before eleven o'clock. he was 
at once sad and happy--sad at our departure, but happy in a new-found 
world of delight which his admiration for constance temple open to 
him. he was, in fact, deep in love with her, and the full flood of a 
hitherto unknown passion fill him with an emotion so overwhelming that 
his ordinary life seem transfigured. he moved, as it were, in an ether 
superior to our mortal atmosphere, and a new region of high resolve and 
noble possibility spread itself before his eyes. he slam his heavy 
outside door (called an "oak") to prevent anyone enter and flung 
himself into the window-seat. here he sat for a long time, the sash 
thrown up and his head outside, for he was excited and feverish. his 
mental exaltation was so great and his thought of so absorbing an 
interest that he took no notice of time, and only remember afterwards 
that the scent of a syringa-bush was borne up to him from a little 
garden-patch opposite, and that a bat had circle slow up and down the 
lane, until he heard the clock striking three. at the same time the 
faint light of dawn made itself felt almost imperceptibly; the classic 
statue on the roof of the school began to stand out against the white 
sky, and a faint glimmer to penetrate the darken room. it glisten on 
the varnish top of his violin-case lie on the table, and on a jug of 
toast-and-water placed there by his college servant or scout every night 
before he left. he drank a glass of this mixture, and was moving towards 
his bedroom door when a sudden thought struck him. he turn back, took 
the violin from its case, tune it, and began to play the "areopagita" 
suite. he was conscious of that mental clear and vigour which not 
unfrequent come with the dawn to those who have sat watch or 
reading through the night: and his thought were exalted by the effect 
which the first consciousness of a deep passion cause in imaginative 
minds. he had never play the suite with more power; and the airs, 
even without the piano part, seem fraught with a meaning hitherto 
unrealised. as he began the _gagliarda_ he heard the wicker chair creak; 
but he had his back towards it, and the sound was now too familiar to 
him to cause him even to look round. it was not till he was play 
the repeat that he became aware of a new and overpowering sensation. 
at first it was a vague feeling, so often experienced by us all, of 
not being alone. he did not stop playing, and in a few seconds the 
impression of a presence in the room other than his own became so strong 
that he was actually afraid to look round. but in another moment he felt 
that at all hazard he must see what or who this presence was. without 
stopping he partly turn and partly look over his shoulder. the 
silver light of early morning was filling the room, making the various 
object appear of less bright colour than usual, and give to 
everything a pearl-grey neutral tint. in this cold but clear light he 
saw seat in the wicker chair the figure of a man. 

in the first violent shock of so terrify a discovery, he could not 
appreciate such detail as those of features, dress, or appearance. he 
was merely conscious that with him, in a lock room of which he knew 
himself to be the only human inmate, there sat something which bore a 
human form. he look at it for a moment with a hope, which he felt 
to be vain, that it might vanish and prove a phantom of his excited 
imagination, but still it sat there. then my brother put down his 
violin, and he use to assure me that a horror overwhelm him of an 
intensity which he had previous believe impossible. whether the image 
which he saw was subjective or objective, i cannot pretend to say: you 
will be in a position to judge for yourself when you have finished this 
narrative. our limited experience would lead us to believe that it was a 
phantom conjure up by some unusual condition of his own brain; but we 
are fain to confess that there certainly do exist in nature phenomena 
such as baffle human reason; and it is possible that, for some hidden 
purpose of providence, permission may occasional be grant to those 
who have pass from this life to assume again for a time the form of 
their earthly tabernacle. we must, i say, be content to suspend our 
judgment on such matters; but in this instance the subsequent course of 
event is very difficult to explain, except on the supposition that 
there was then present to my brother's view the actual bodily form of 
one long deceased. the dread which took possession of him was due, he 
has more than once told me when analyse his feelings long afterwards, 
to two predominant causes. firstly, he felt that mental dislocation 
which accompany the sudden subversion of preconceived theories, 
the sudden alteration of long habit, or even the occurrence of any 
circumstance beyond the walk of our daily experience. this i have 
observe myself in the perturb effect which a sudden death, a 
grievous accident, or in recent years the declaration of war, has 
exercise upon all except the most lethargy or the most determined 
minds. secondly, he experienced the profound self-abasement or mental 
annihilate cause by the near conception of a being of a superior 
order. in the presence of an existence wearing, indeed, the human form, 
but of attribute widely different from and superior to his own, he felt 
the combine reverence and revulsion which even the noblest wild animal 
exhibit when brought for the first time face to face with man. the shock 
was so great that i feel persuade it exert an effect on him from 
which he never wholly recovered. 

after an interval which seem to him interminable, though it was only 
of a second's duration, he turn his eyes again to the occupant of the 
wicker chair. his faculty had so far recover from the first shock 
as to enable him to see that the figure was that of a man perhaps 
thirty-five years of age and still youthful in appearance. the face was 
long and oval, the hair brown, and brush straight off an exceptional 
high forehead. his complexion was very pale or bloodless. he was clean 
shaven, and his finely cut mouth, with compress lips, wore something 
of a sneer smile. his general expression was unpleasing, and from the 
first my brother felt as by intuition that there was present some malign 
and wicked influence. his eyes were not visible, as he kept them cast 
down, rest his head on his hand in the attitude of one listening. his 
face and even his dress were impress so vivid upon john's mind, that 
he never had any difficulty in recall them to his imagination; and he 
and i had afterwards an opportunity of verify them in a remarkable 
manner. he wore a long cut-away coat of green cloth with an edge of gold 
embroidery, and a white satin waistcoat figured with rose-sprigs, a 
full cravat of rich lace, knee-breeches of buff silk, and stocking of 
the same. his shoe were of polish black leather with heavy silver 
buckles, and his costume in general recall that worn a century ago. 
as my brother gaze at him, he got up, putt his hand on the arms 
of the chair to raise himself, and cause the creak so often heard 
before. the hand forced themselves on my brother's notice: they were 
very white, with the long delicate finger of a musician. he show a 
considerable height; and still keeping his eyes on the floor, walk 
with an ordinary gait towards the end of the bookcase at the side of the 
room farthest from the window. he reach the bookcase, and then john 
sudden lost sight of him. the figure did not fade gradually, but went 
out, as it were, like the flame of a sudden extinguish candle. 

the room was now fill with the clear light of the summer morning: the 
whole vision had last but a few seconds, but my brother knew that 
there was no possibility of his have been mistaken, that the mystery 
of the creak chair was solved, that he had seen the man who had come 
evening by evening for a month past to listen to the rhythm of the 
_gagliarda_. terribly disturbed, he sat for some time half dread and 
half expect a return of the figure; but all remain unchanged: he 
saw nothing, nor did he dare to challenge its reappear by play 
again the _gagliarda_, which seem to have so strange an attraction for 
it. at last, in the full sunlight of a late june morning at oxford, he 
heard the steps of early pedestrian on the pavement below his windows, 
the cry of a milkman, and other sound which show the world was awake. 
it was after six o'clock, and go to his bedroom he flung himself on 
the outside of the bed for an hour's trouble slumber. 




chapter iv 


when his servant call him about eight o'clock my brother sent a note 
to mr. gaskell at new college, beg him to come round to magdalen 
hall as soon as might be in the course of the morning. his summons was 
at once obeyed, and mr. gaskell was with him before he had finished 
breakfast. my brother was still much agitated, and at once told him what 
had happen the night before, detail the various circumstances with 
minuteness, and not even conceal from him the sentiment which he 
entertain towards miss constance temple. in narrate the appearance 
which he had seen in the chair, his agitation was still so excessive 
that he had difficulty in control his voice. 

mr. gaskell heard him with much attention, and did not at once reply 
when john had finished his narration. at length he said, "i suppose many 
friends would think it right to affect, even if they did not feel, an 
incredulity as to what you have just told me. they might consider it 
more prudent to attempt to allay your distress by persuade you that 
what you have seen has no objective reality, but is merely the phantasm 
of an excited imagination; that if you had not been in love, had not sat 
up all night, and had not thus overtax your physical powers, you would 
have seen no vision. i shall not argue thus, for i am as certainly 
convinced as of the fact that we sit here, that on all the nights when 
we have play this suite call the 'areopagita,' there has been some 
one listen to us, and that you have at length been fortunate or 
unfortunate enough to see him." 

"do not say fortunate," said my brother; "for i feel as though i shall 
never recover from last night's shock." 

"that is likely enough," mr. gaskell answered, coolly; "for as in the 
history of the race or individual, increase culture and a fine mental 
susceptibility necessarily impair the brute courage and powers of 
endurance which we note in savages, so any supernatural vision such 
as you have seen must be purchase at the cost of physical reaction. 
from the first evening that we play this music, and heard the noise 
mimick so close the sitting down and rising up of some person, i 
have felt convinced that cause other than those which we usually call 
natural were at work, and that we were very near the manifestation of 
some extraordinary phenomenon." 

"i do not quite apprehend your meaning." 

"i mean this," he continued, "that this man or spirit of a man has been 
sitting here night after night, and that we have not been able to see 
him, because our mind are dull and obtuse. last night the elevate 
force of a strong passion, such as that which you have confide to me, 
combine with the power of fine music, so exalted your mind that you 
became endowed, as it were, with a sixth sense, and sudden were 
enable to see that which had previous been invisible. to this sixth 
sense music gives, i believe, the key. we are at present only on the 
threshold of such a knowledge of that art as will enable us to use it 
eventually as the greatest of all humanise and educational agents. 
music will prove a ladder to the lofty regions of thought; indeed i 
have long found for myself that i cannot attain to the highest range of 
my intellectual power except when hearing good music. all poets, and 
most writer of prose, will say that their thought is never so exalted, 
their sense of beauty and proportion never so just, as when they are 
listen either to the artificial music made by man, or to some of the 
grand tone of nature, such as the roar of a western ocean, or the 
sigh of wind in a clump of firs. though i have often felt on such 
occasion on the very verge of some high mental discovery, and though 
a hand has been stretch forward as it were to rend the veil, yet it 
has never been vouchsafe me to see behind it. this you no doubt were 
allow in a measure to do last night. you probably play the music 
with a deep intuition than usual, and this, combine with the 
excitement under which you were already labouring, raise you for a 
moment to the require pitch of mental exaltation." 

"it is true," john said, "that i never felt the melody so deep as when 
i play it last night." 

"just so," answer his friend; "and there is probably some link between 
this air and the history of the man whom you saw last night; some fatal 
power in it which enable it to exert an attraction on him even after 
death. for we must remember that the influence of music, though always 
powerful, is not always for good. we can scarcely doubt that as certain 
form of music tend to raise us above the sensuality of the animal, or 
the more degrade passion of material gain, and to transport us into 
the ether of higher thought, so other form are directly calculate to 
awaken in us luxurious emotions, and to whet those sensual appetite 
which it is the business of a philosopher not indeed to annihilate or to 
be ashamed of, but to keep rigid in check. this possibility of music 
to effect evil as well as good i have seen recognised, and very apt 
express in some beautiful verse by mr. keble which i have just 
read:-- 

"'cease, stranger, cease those witching notes, 
the art of syren choirs; 
hush the seductive voice that float 
across the tremble wires. 

"'music's ethereal power was given 
not to dissolve our clay, 
but draw promethean beam from heaven 
to purge the dross away.'" 


"they are fine lines," said my brother, "but i do not see how you apply 
your argument to the present instance." 

"i mean," mr. gaskell answered, "that i have little doubt that the 
melody of this _gagliarda_ has been connected in some manner with the 
life of the man you saw last night. it is not unlikely, either, that it 
was a favourite air of his whilst in the flesh, or even that it was 
play by himself or other at the moment of some crisis in his history. 
it is possible that such connection may be due merely to the innocent 
pleasure the melody gave him in life; but the nature of the music 
itself, and a peculiar effect it has upon my own thoughts, induce me to 
believe that it was associate with some occasion when he either fell 
into great sin or when some evil fate, perhaps even death itself, 
overtook him. you will remember i have told you that this air call up 
to my mind a certain scene of italy revelry in which an englishman 
take part. it is true that i have never been able to fix his features 
in my mind, nor even to say exactly how he was dressed. yet now some 
instinct tell me that it is this very man whom you saw last night. it 
is not for us to attempt to pierce the mystery which veil from our eyes 
the secret of an after-death existence; but i can scarcely suppose that 
a spirit entire at rest would feel so deep the power of a certain 
melody as to be call back by it to his old haunt like a dog by his 
master's whistle. it is more probable that there is some evil history 
connected with the matter, and this, i think, we ought to consider if it 
be possible to unravel." 

my brother assenting, he continued, "when this man left you, johnnie, 
did he walk to the door?" 

"no; he made for the side wall, and when he reach the end of the 
bookcase i lost sight of him." 

mr. gaskell went to the bookcase and look for a moment at the title 
of the books, as though expect to see something in them to assist 
his inquiries; but finding apparently no clue, he said-- 

"this is the last time we shall meet for three month or more; let us 
play the _gagliarda_ and see if there be any response." 

my brother at first would not hear of this, showing a lively dread of 
challenging any reappear of the figure he had seen: indeed he felt 
that such an event would probably fling him into a state of serious 
physical disorder. mr. gaskell, however, continue to press him, 
assure him that the fact of his now being no long alone should 
largely allay any fear on his part, and urge that this would be the 
last opportunity they would have of play together for some months. 

at last, being overborne, my brother took his violin, and mr. gaskell 
seat himself at the pianoforte. john was very agitated, and as he 
commence the _gagliarda_ his hand tremble so that he could scarcely 
play the air. mr. gaskell also exhibit some nervousness, not 
perform with his customary correctness. but for the first time the 
charm failed: no noise accompany the music, nor did anything of an 
unusual character occur. they repeated the whole suite, but with a 
similar result. 

both were surprised, but neither, had any explanation to offer. my 
brother, who at first dread intense a repetition of the vision, was 
now almost disappointed that nothing had occurred; so quick do the 
mood of man change. 

after some further conversation the young men part for the long 
vacation--john return to worth maltraver and mr. gaskell go to 
london, where he was to pass a few days before he proceed to his home 
in westmorland. 




chapter v 


john spent nearly the whole of this summer vacation at worth maltravers. 
he had been anxious to pay a visit to royston; but the continue and 
serious illness of mrs. temple's sister had call her and constance to 
scotland, where they remain until the death of their relative allow 
them to return to derbyshire in the late autumn. john and i had been 
brought up together from childhood. when he was at eton we had always 
spent the holiday at worth, and after my dear mother's death, when we 
were left quite alone, the bonds of our love were naturally drawn still 
closer. even after my brother went to oxford, at a time when most young 
men are anxious to enjoy a new-found liberty, and to travel or to visit 
friends in their vacation, john's ardent affection for me and for worth 
maltraver kept him at home; and he was pleased on most occasion to 
make me the partner of his thought and of his pleasures. this long 
vacation of 1842 was, i think, the happiest of our lives. in my case i 
know it was so, and i think it was happy also for him; for none could 
guess that the small cloud seen in the distance like a man's hand was 
afterwards to rise and darken all his later days. it was a summer of 
brilliant and continue sunshine; many of the old people said that they 
could never recollect so fine a season, and both fruit and crop were 
alike abundant. john hire a small cutter-yacht, the _palestine_, which 
he kept in our little harbour of encombe, and in which he and i made 
many excursions, visiting weymouth, lyme regis, and other place of 
interest on the south coast. 

in this summer my brother confide to me two secrets,--his love 
for constance temple, which indeed was after all no secret, and the 
history of the apparition which he had seen. this last fill me with 
inexpressible dread and distress. it seem cruel and unnatural that any 
influence so dark and mysterious should thus intrude on our bright life, 
and from the first i had an impression which i could not entire shake 
off, that any such appearance or converse of a disembodied spirit must 
portend misfortune, if not worse, to him who saw or heard it. it never 
occur to me to combat or to doubt the reality of the vision; he 
believe that he had seen it, and his conviction was enough to convince 
me. he had meant, he said, to tell no one, and had given a promise to 
mr. gaskell to that effect; but i think that he could not bear to keep 
such a matter in his own breast, and within the first week of his 
return he made me his confidant. i remember, my dear edward, the look 
everything wore on that sad night when he first told me what afterwards 
prove so terrible a secret. we had dine quite alone, and he had been 
moody and depressed all the evening. it was a chilly night, with some 
fret blow up from the sea. the moon show that blunt and deform 
appearance which she assume a day or two past the full, and the 
moisture in the air encircle her with a stormy-looking halo. we had 
step out of the dining-room window on to the little terrace look 
down towards smedmore and encombe. the glaucous shrub that grow in 
between the baluster were wet and dripping with the salt breath of the 
sea, and we could hear the wave coming into the cove from the west. 
after standing a minute i felt chill, and propose that we should go 
back to the billiard-room, where a fire was lit on all except the 
warmest nights. "no," john said, "i want to tell you something, sophy," 
and then we walk on to the old boat summer-house. there he told me 
everything. i cannot describe to you my feelings of anguish and horror 
when he told me of the appearance of the man. the interest of the tale 
was so absorbing to me that i took no note of time, nor of the cold 
night air, and it was only when it was all finished that i felt how 
deadly chill it had become. "let us go in, john," i said; "i am cold and 
feel benumbed." 

but youth is hopeful and strong, and in another week the impression had 
fade from our minds, and we were enjoy the full glory of midsummer 
weather, which i think only those know who have watch the blue sea 
come ripple in at the foot of the white chalk cliff of dorset. 

i had felt a reluctance even so much as to hear the air of the 
_gagliarda_, and though he had spoken to me of the subject on more than 
one occasion, my brother had never offer to play it to me. i knew that 
he had the copy of graziani's suite with him at worth maltravers, 
because he had told me that he had brought it from oxford; but i had 
never seen the book, and fancy that he kept it intentional lock 
up. he did not, however, neglect the violin, and during the summer 
mornings, as i sat reading or working on the terrace, i often heard him 
play to himself in the library. though he had never even given me any 
description of the melody of the _gagliarda_, yet i felt certain that he 
not infrequent play it. i cannot say how it was; but from the moment 
that i heard him one morning in the library perform an air set in a 
curious low key, it forced itself upon my attention, and i knew, as it 
were by instinct, that it must be the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita." 
he was use a _sordino_ and play it very softly; but i was not 
mistaken. one wet afternoon in october, only a week before the time of 
his leave us to return to oxford for the autumn term, he walk into 
the drawing-room where i was sitting, and propose that we should play 
some music together. to this i readily agreed. though but a mediocre 
performer, i have always taken much pleasure in the use of the 
pianoforte, and esteem it an honour whenever he ask me to play with 
him, since my powers as a musician were so very much inferior to his. 
after we had play several pieces, he took up an oblong music-book 
bound in white vellum, placed it upon the desk of the pianoforte, and 
propose that we should play a suite by graziani. i knew that he meant 
the "areopagita," and beg him at once not to ask me to play it. he 
rally me lightly on my fears, and said it would much please him to 
play it, as he had not heard the pianoforte part since he had left 
oxford three month ago. i saw that he was eager to perform it, and 
being loath to disoblige so kind a brother during the last week of his 
stay at home, i at length overcame my scruple and set out to play it. 
but i was so alarm at the possibility of any evil consequence 
ensuing, that when we commence the _gagliarda_ i could scarcely find 
my notes. nothing in any way unusual, however, occurred; and being 
reassure by this, and feeling an irresistible charm in the music, i 
finished the suite with more appearance of ease. my brother, however, 
was, i fear, not satisfy with my performance, and compare it, very 
possibly, with that of mr. gaskell, to which it was necessarily much 
inferior, both through weakness of execution and from my insufficient 
knowledge of the principles of the _basso continuo_. we stop playing, 
and john stood look out of the window across the sea, where the sky 
was clearing low down under the clouds. the sun went down behind 
portland in a fiery glow which cheer us after a long day's rain. i had 
taken the copy of graziani's suite off the desk, and was holding it on 
my lap turning over the old fox and yellow pages. as i closed it a 
streak of evening sunlight fell across the room and light up a coat 
of arms stamp in gilt on the cover. it was much fade and would 
ordinarily have been hard to make out; but the ray of strong light 
illumine it, and in an instant i recognise the same shield which mr. 
gaskell had picture to himself as hanging on the musicians' gallery of 
his phantasmal dancing-room. my brother had often recount to me this 
effort of his friend's imagination, and here i saw before me the same 
florid foreign blazon, a cherub's head blow on three lily on a gold 
field. this discovery was not only of interest, but afford me much 
actual relief; for it account rational for at least one item of the 
strange story. mr. gaskell had no doubt notice at some time this shield 
stamp on the outside of the book, and bearing the impression of it 
unconscious in his mind, had reproduce it in his imagine revels. 
i said as much to my brother, and he was greatly interested, and after 
examine the shield agree that this was certainly a probable solution 
of that part of the mystery. on the 12th of october john return to 
oxford. 




chapter vi 


my brother told me afterwards that more than once during the summer 
vacation he had seriously considered with himself the propriety of 
change his rooms at magdalen hall. he had thought that it might thus 
be possible for him to get rid at once of the memory of the apparition, 
and of the fear of any reappear of it. he could either have move 
into another set of rooms in the hall itself, or else gone into lodgings 
in the town--a usual proceeding, i am told, for gentlemen near the end 
of their course at oxford. would to god that he had indeed done so! but 
with the supine which has, i fear, my dear edward, been too 
frequent a characteristic of our family, he shrank from the trouble 
such a course would involve, and the opening of the autumn term found 
him still in his old rooms. you will forgive me for enter here on a 
very brief description of your father's sitting-room. it is, i think, 
necessary for the proper understanding of the incident that follow. it 
was not a large room, though probably the finest in the small building 
of magdalen hall, and panel from floor to ceiling with oak which 
successive generation had obscure by numerous coat of paint. on one 
side were two window have an aspect on to new college lane, and 
fitted with deep cushion seat in the recesses. outside these window 
there were box of flowers, the bright of which form in the 
summer term a pretty contrast to the grey and crumble stone, and 
afford pleasure at once to the inmate and to passers-by. along nearly 
the whole length of the wall opposite to the windows, some tenant in 
years long past had had mahogany book-shelves placed, reach to a 
height of perhaps five feet from the floor. they were handsome made 
in the style of the eighteenth century and pleased my brother's taste. 
he had always exhibit a partiality for books, and the fine library at 
worth maltraver had no doubt contribute to foster his taste in that 
direction. at the time of which i write he had form a small collection 
for himself at oxford, pay particular attention to the bindings, and 
acquire many excellent specimen of that art, principally i think, 
from messrs. payne & foss, the celebrated london booksellers. 

towards the end of the autumn term, have occasion one cold day to take 
down a volume of plato from its shelf, he found to his surprise that the 
book was quite warm. a close examination easily explain to him the 
reason--namely, that the flue of a chimney, passing behind one end of 
the bookcase, sensible heated not only the wall itself, but also the 
books in the shelves. although he had been in his rooms now near three 
years, he had never before observe this fact; partly, no doubt, because 
the books in these shelves were seldom handled, being more for show as 
specimen of binding than for practical use. he was somewhat annoy 
at this discovery, fear lest such a heat, which in moderation is 
beneficial to books, might through its excess warp the leather or 
otherwise injure the bindings. mr. gaskell was sitting with him at the 
time of the discovery, and indeed it was for his use that my brother had 
taken down the volume of plato. he strong advise that the bookcase 
should be moved, and suggest that it would be better to place it 
across that end of the room where the pianoforte then stood. they 
examine it and found that it would easily admit of removal, being, in 
fact, only the frame of a bookcase, and showing at the back the paint 
panelling of the wall. mr. gaskell noted it as curious that all the 
shelves were fixed and immovable except one at the end, which had been 
fitted with the ordinary arrangement allow its position to be alter 
at will. my brother thought that the change would improve the appearance 
of his rooms, besides being advantageous for the books, and gave 
instruction to the college upholsterer to have the necessary work 
carry out at once. 

the two young men had resume their musical studies, and had often 
play the "areopagita" and other music of graziani since their return 
to oxford in the autumn. they remarked, however, that the chair no 
long creak during the _gagliarda_--and, in fact, that no unusual 
occurrence whatever attend its performance. at times they were almost 
tempt to doubt the accuracy of their own remembrances, and to consider 
as entire mythical the mystery which had so much disturbed them in the 
summer term. my brother had also pointed out to mr. gaskell my discovery 
that the coat of arms on the outside of the music-book was identical 
with that which his fancy portray on the musicians' gallery. he 
readily admitted that he must at some time have notice and afterwards 
forgotten the blazon on the book, and that an unconscious reminiscence 
of it had no doubt inspired his imagination in this instance. he rebuke 
my brother for have agitate me unnecessary by telling me at all of 
so idle a tale; and was pleased to write a few lines to me at worth 
maltravers, felicitate me on my shrewd of perception, but speak 
bantering of the whole matter. 

on the evening of the 14th of november my brother and his friend were 
sitting talk in the former's room. the position of the bookcase had 
been change on the morning of that day, and mr. gaskell had come round 
to see how the books look when placed at the end instead of at the 
side of the room. he had applaud the new arrangement, and the young 
men sat long over the fire, with a bottle of college port and a dish of 
medlar which i had sent my brother from our famous tree in the upper 
croft at worth maltravers. later on they fell to music, and play a 
variety of pieces, perform also the "areopagita" suite. mr. gaskell 
before he left compliment john on the improvement which the alteration 
in the place of the bookcase had made in his room, saying, "not only 
do the books in their present place very much enhance the general 
appearance of the room, but the change seem to me to have affected also 
a marked acoustic improvement. the oak panelling now expose on the 
side of the room has given a resonant property to the wall which is 
peculiarly responsive to the tone of your violin. while you were 
play the _gagliarda_ to-night, i could almost have imagine that 
someone in an adjacent room was play the same air with a _sordino_, 
so distinct was the echo." 

shortly after this he left. 

my brother partly undressed himself in his bedroom, which adjoined, and 
then return to his sitting-room, pull the large wicker chair in 
front of the fire, and sat there look at the glowing coals, and 
thinking perhaps of miss constance temple. the night promise to be very 
cold, and the wind whistle down the chimney, increase the comfortable 
sensation of the clear fire. he sat watch the ruddy reflection of the 
firelight dance on the panel wall, when he notice that a picture 
placed where the end of the bookcase formerly stood was not truly hung, 
and need adjustment. a picture hung askew was particularly offensive 
to his eyes, and he got up at once to alter it. he remember as he went 
up to it that at this precise spot four month ago he had lost sight 
of the man's figure which he saw rise from the wicker chair, and at 
the memory felt an involuntary shudder. this reminiscence probably 
influence his fancy also in another direction; for it seem to him 
that very faintly, as though play far off, and with the _sordino_, 
he could hear the air of the _gagliarda_. he put one hand behind the 
picture to steady it, and as he did so his finger struck a very slight 
projection in the wall. he pull the picture a little to one side, and 
saw that what he had touched was the back of a small hinge sunk in the 
wall, and almost obliterate with many coat of paint. his curiosity 
was excited, and he took a candle from the table and examine the wall 
carefully. inspection soon show him another hinge a little further up, 
and by degree he perceive that one of the panel had been made at some 
time in the past to open, and serve probably as the door of a cupboard. 
at this point he assured me that a feverish anxiety to re-open this 
cupboard door took possession of him, and that the intense excitement 
fill his mind which we experience on the eve of a discovery which 
we fancy may produce important results. he loosen the paint in the 
crack with a penknife, and attempt to press open the door; but his 
instrument was not adequate to such a purpose, and all his effort 
remain ineffective. his excitement had now reach an overmaster 
pitch; for he anticipated, though he knew not why, some strange 
discovery to be made in this seal cupboard. he look round the room 
for some weapon with which to force the door, and at length with his 
penknife cut away sufficient wood at the joint to enable him to insert 
the end of the poker in the hole. the clock in the new college tower 
struck one at the exact moment when with a sharp effort he thus forced 
open the door. it appear never to have had a fastening, but merely to 
have been stuck fast by the accumulation of paint. as he bent it slow 
back upon the rust hinge his heart beat so fast that he could 
scarcely catch his breath, though he was conscious all the while of a 
ludicrous aspect of his position, knowing that it was most probable 
that the cavity within would be found empty. the cupboard was small but 
very deep, and in the obscure light seem at first to contain nothing 
except a small heap of dust and cobwebs. his sense of disappointment was 
keen as he thrust his hand into it, but change again in a moment to 
breathless interest on feeling something solid in what he had imagine 
to be only an accumulation of mould and dirt. he snatch up a candle, 
and holding this in one hand, with the other pull out an object from 
the cupboard and put it on the table, cover as it was with the curious 
drapery of black and clinging cobweb which i have seen adhere to 
bottle of old wine. it lay there between the dish of medlar and the 
decanter, veiled indeed with thick dust as with a mantle, but revealing 
beneath it the shape and contour of a violin. 




chapter vii 

john was excited at his discovery, and felt his thought confuse in a 
manner that i have often experienced myself on the unexpected receipt of 
news interesting me deeply, whether for pleasure or pain. yet at the 
same time he was half amuse at his own excitement, feeling that it 
was childish to be move over an event so simple as the finding of a 
violin in an old cupboard. he soon collected himself and took up the 
instrument, use great care, as he fear lest age should have render 
the wood brittle or rotten. with some vigorous puff of breath and a 
little dust with a handkerchief he remove the heavy outer coating 
of cobwebs, and began to see more clearly the delicate curve of the 
body and of the scroll. a few minutes' more gentle handle left the 
instrument sufficient clean to enable him to appreciate its chief 
points. its seclusion from the outer world, which the heavy accumulation 
of dust prove to have been for many years, did not seem to have damage 
it in the least; and the fact of a chimney-flue passing through the wall 
at no great distance had no doubt conduce to maintain the air in the 
cupboard at an equable temperature. so far as he was able to judge, the 
wood was as sound as when it left the maker's hands; but the strings 
were of course broken, and curl up in little tangle knots. the body 
was of a light-red colour, with a varnish of peculiar lustre and 
softness. the neck seem rather long than ordinary, and the scroll 
was remarkably bold and free. 

the violin which my brother was in the habit of use was a fine 
_pressenda_, given to him on his fifteenth birthday by mr. thoresby, his 
guardian. it was of that maker's later and best period, and a copy of 
the stradivarius model. john took this from its case and laid it side by 
side with his new discovery, meaning to compare them for size and form. 
he perceive at once that while the model of both was identical, the 
superior of the old violin in every detail was so marked as to 
convince him that it was undoubted an instrument of exceptional value. 
the extreme beauty of its varnish impress him vividly, and though he 
had never seen a genuine stradivarius, he felt a conviction gradual 
gain on him that he stood in the presence of a masterpiece of that 
great maker. on look into the interior he found that surprising 
little dust had penetrate into it, and by blow through the 
sound-holes he soon clear it sufficient to enable him to discern a 
label. he put the candle close to him, and held the violin up so that 
a little patch of light fell through the sound-hole on to the label. 
his heart leapt with a violent pulsation as he read the characters, 
"_antonius stradiuariu cremonensi faciebat_, 1704." under ordinary 
circumstances it would naturally be conclude that such a label was 
a forgery, but the conditions were entire alter in the case of a 
violin found in a forgotten cupboard, with proof so evident of its 
have remain there for a very long period. 

he was not at that time as familiar with the history of the fiddle of 
the great maker as he, and indeed i also, afterwards became. thus he 
was unable to decide how far the exact year of its manufacture would 
determine its value as compare with other specimen of stradivarius. 
but although the pressenda he had been use to play on was always 
considered a very fine instrument both in make and varnish, his new 
discovery so far excel it in both points as to assure him that it 
must be one of the cremonese master's greatest productions. 

he examine the violin minutely, scrutinise each separate feature, 
and finding each in turn to be of the utmost perfection, so far as his 
knowledge of the instrument would enable him to judge. he lit more 
candle that he might be able better to see it, and holding it on his 
knees, sat still admire it until the die fire and increase cold 
warn him that the night was now far advanced. at last, carry it to 
his bedroom, he lock it careful into a drawer and retired for the 
night. 

he woke next morning with that pleasurable consciousness of there 
being some reason for gladness, which we feel on waking in season of 
happiness, even before our reason, locate it, remind us what the 
actual source of our joy may be. he was at first afraid lest his 
excitement, working on the imagination, should have led him on the 
previous night to overestimate the fine of the instrument, and he 
took it from the drawer half expect to be disappointed with its 
daylight appearance. but a glance suffice to convince him of the 
unfounded nature of his suspicions. the various beauty which he had 
before observe were enhance a hundredfold by the light of day, and he 
realise more fully than ever that the instrument was one of altogether 
exceptional value. 

and now, my dear edward, i shall ask your forgiveness if in the history 
i have to relate any observation of mine should seem to reflect on the 
character of your late father, sir john maltravers. and i beg you to 
consider that your father was also my dear and only brother, and that it 
is inexpressible painful to me to recount any action of his which may 
not seem becoming to a noble gentleman, as he surely was. i only now 
proceed because, when very near his end, he most strict enjoin me to 
narrate these circumstances to you fully when you should come of age. 
we must humble remember that to god alone belong judgment, and that 
it is not for poor mortal to decide what is right or wrong in certain 
instance for their fellows, but that each should strive most earnest 
to do his own duty. 

your father entire conceal from me the discovery he had made. it 
was not till long afterwards that i had it narrate to me, and i only 
obtain a knowledge of this and many other of the fact which i am now 
telling you at a date much subsequent to their actual occurrence. 

he explain to his servant that he had discover and open an old 
cupboard in the panelling, without mention the fact of his have 
found anything in it, but merely ask him to give instruction for the 
paint to be mend and the cupboard put into a use state. before he 
had finished a very late breakfast mr. gaskell was with him, and it has 
been a source of lasting regret to me that my brother conceal also 
from his most intimate and trust friend the discovery of the previous 
night. he did, indeed, tell him that he had found and open an old 
cupboard in the panelling, but made no mention of there have been 
anything within. i cannot say what prompt him to this action; for the 
two young men had for long been on such intimate terms that the one 
share almost as a matter of course with the other any pleasure or pain 
which might fall to his lot. mr. gaskell look at the cupboard with 
some interest, saying afterwards, "i know now, johnnie, why the one 
shelf of the bookcase which stood there was made movable when all the 
other were fixed. some former occupant use the cupboard, no doubt, 
as a secret receptacle for his treasures, and masked it with the 
book-shelves in front. who know what he kept in here, or who he was! i 
should not be surprise if he were that very man who use to come here 
so often to hear us play the 'areopagita,' and whom you saw that night 
last june. he had the one shelf made, you see, to move so as to give him 
access to this cavity on occasion: then when he left oxford, or perhaps 
died, the mystery was forgotten, and with a few times of painting the 
crack closed up." 

mr. gaskell shortly afterwards took his leave as he had a lecture 
to attend, and my brother was left alone to the contemplation of his 
new-found treasure. after some consideration he determined that he would 
take the instrument to london, and obtain the opinion of an expert as 
to its authenticity and value. he was well acquaint with the late mr. 
george smart, the celebrated london dealer, from whom his guardian, mr. 
thoresby, had purchase the pressenda violin which john commonly used. 
besides being a dealer in valuable instruments, mr. smart was a famous 
collector of stradivarius fiddles, esteem one of the first authority 
in europe in that domain of art, and author of a valuable work of 
reference in connection with it. it was to him, therefore, that my 
brother decided to submit the violin, and he wrote a letter to mr. smart 
saying that he should give himself the pleasure of wait on him the 
next day on a matter of business. he then call on his tutor, and with 
some excuse obtain leave to journey to london the next morning. he 
spent the rest of the day in very careful clean the violin, and 
noon of the next saw him with it, secure packed, in mr. smart's 
establishment in bond street. 

mr. smart received sir john maltraver with deference, demand in what 
way he could serve him; and on hearing that his opinion was require on 
the authenticity of a violin, smile somewhat dubious and led the way 
into a back parlour. 

"my dear sir john," he said, "i hope you have not been led into buy 
any instrument by a faith in its antiquity. so many good copy of 
instrument by famous maker and bearing their label are now afloat, 
that the chance of obtain a genuine fiddle from an unrecognised 
source are quite remote; of hundred of violin submit to me for 
opinion, i find that scarce one in fifty is actually that which it 
represent itself to be. in fact the only safe rule," he add as a 
professional commentary, "is never to buy a violin unless you obtain it 
from a dealer with a reputation to lose, and are prepared to pay a 
reasonable price for it." 

my brother had meanwhile unpack the violin and laid it on the table. 
as he took from it the last leaf of silver paper he saw mr. smart's 
smile of condescension fade, and assume a look of interest and 
excitement, he step forward, took the violin in his hands, and 
scrutinise it minutely. he turn it over in silence for some moments, 
look narrowly at each feature, and even apply the test of a 
magnifying-glass. at last he said with an alter tone, "sir john, i 
have had in my hand nearly all the finest production of stradivarius, 
and thought myself acquaint with every instrument of note that ever 
left his workshop; but i confess myself mistaken, and apologise to you 
for the doubt which i express as to the instrument you had brought me. 
this violin is of the great master's golden period, is incontestable 
genuine, and fine in some respects than any stradivarius that i have 
ever seen, not even excepting the famous _dolphin_ itself. you need be 
under no apprehension as to its authenticity: no connoisseur could hold 
it in his hand for a second and entertain a doubt on the point." 

my brother was greatly pleased at so favourable a verdict, and mr. smart 
continued-- 

"the varnish is of that rich red which stradivarius use in his best 
period after he had abandoned the yellow tint copy by him at first 
from his master amati. i have never seen a varnish thick or more 
lustrous, and it show on the back that peculiar shading to imitate wear 
which we term 'breaking up.' the purfl also is of an unsurpassable 
excellence. its execution is so fine that i should recommend you to use 
a magnifying-glass for its examination." 

so he ran on, finding from moment to moment some new beauty to 
admire. 

my brother was at first anxious lest mr. smart should ask him whence so 
extraordinary an instrument came, but he saw that the expert had already 
jump to a conclusion in the matter. he knew that john had recently 
come of age, and evidently supposed that he had found the violin among 
the heirloom of worth maltravers. john allow mr. smart to continue in 
this misconception, merely saying that he had discover the instrument 
in an old cupboard, where he had reason to think it had remain hidden 
for many years. 

"are there no record attach to so splendid an instrument?" ask mr. 
smart. "i suppose it has been with your family a number of years. do you 
not know how it came into their possession?" 

i believe this was the first occasion on which it had occur to john 
to consider what right he had to the possession of the instrument. he 
had been so excited by its discovery that the question of ownership had 
never hitherto cross his mind. the unwelcome suggestion that it was 
not his after all, that the college might rightful prefer a claim to 
it, present itself to him for a moment; but he set it instantly aside, 
quiet his conscience with the reflection that this at least was not 
the moment to make such a disclosure. 

he fence with mr. smart's inquiry as best he could, saying that he was 
ignorant of the history of the instrument, but not contradict the 
assumption that it had been a long time in his family's possession. 

"it is indeed singular," mr. smart continued, "that so magnificent 
an instrument should have lain bury so long; that even those best 
acquaint with such matter should be in perfect ignorance of its 
existence. i shall have to revise the list of famous instrument in the 
next edition of my 'history of the violin,' and to write," he add 
smiling, "a special paragraph on the 'worth maltraver stradivarius.'" 

after much more, which i need not narrate, mr. smart suggest that 
the violin should be left with him that he might examine it more at 
leisure, and that my brother should return in a week's time, when he 
would have the instrument opened, an operation which would be in any 
case advisable. "the interior," he added, "appears to be in a strict 
original state, and this i shall be able to ascertain when opened. the 
label is perfect, but if i am not mistaken i can see something higher up 
on the back which appear like a second label. this excite my interest, 
as i know of no instance of an instrument bearing two labels." 

to this proposal my brother readily assented, being anxious to enjoy 
alone the pleasure of so gratifying a discovery as that of the undoubted 
authenticity of the instrument. 

as he thought over the matter more at leisure, he grew anxious as to 
what might be the import of the second label in the violin of which mr. 
smart had spoken. i blush to say that he fear lest it might bear some 
owner's name or other inscription prove that the instrument had not 
been so long in the maltraver family as he had allow mr. smart to 
suppose. so within so short a time it was possible that sir john 
maltraver of worth should dread being detected, if not in an absolute 
falsehood, at least in have by his silence assent to one. 

during the ensue week john remain in an excited and anxious 
condition. he did little work, and neglect his friends, have his 
thought continual occupy with the strange discovery he had made. 
i know also that his sense of honour trouble him, and that he was not 
satisfy with the course he was pursuing. the evening of his return 
from london he went to mr. gaskell's rooms at new college, and spent an 
hour converse with him on indifferent subjects. in the course of their 
talk he propose to his friend as a moral problem the question of the 
course of action to be taken were one to find some article of value 
conceal in his room. mr. gaskell answer unhesitating that he 
should feel bound to disclose it to the authorities. he saw that my 
brother was ill at ease, and with a clear of judgment which he 
always exhibited, guess that he had actually made some discovery of 
this sort in the old cupboard in his rooms. he could not divine, of 
course, the exact nature of the object found, and thought it might 
probably relate to a hoard of gold; but insist with much urgent on 
the obligation to at once disclose anything of this kind. my brother, 
however, misled, i fear, by that feeling of inalienable right which the 
treasure-hunter experience over the treasure, paid no more attention to 
the advice of his friend than to the prompt of his own conscience, 
and went his way. 

from that day, my dear edward, he began to exhibit a spirit of 
secretive and reserve entire alien to his own open and honourable 
disposition, and also saw less of mr. gaskell. his friend tried, indeed, 
to win his confidence and affection in every way in his power; but in 
spite of this the rift between them widen insensibly, and my brother 
lost the fellowship and counsel of a true friend at a time when he could 
ill afford to be without them. 

he return to london the ensue week, and met mr. george smart by 
appointment in bond street. if the expert had been enthusiast on a 
former occasion, he was ten times more so on this. he spoke in terms 
almost of rapture about the violin. he had compare it with two 
magnificent instrument in the collection of the late mr. james loding, 
then the finest in europe; and it was admittedly superior to either, 
both in the delicate marking of its wood and singularly fine varnish. 
"of its tone," he said, "we cannot, of course, yet pronounce with 
certainty, but i am very sure that its voice will not belie its splendid 
exterior. it has been careful opened, and is in a strange perfect 
condition. several person eminently qualified to judge unite with me 
in considering that it has been exceedingly little play upon, and 
admit that never has so intact an interior been seen. the scroll is 
exceptional bold and original. although undoubted from the hand of 
the great master, this is of a pattern entire different and distinct 
from any that have ever come under my observation." 

he then pointed out to my brother that the side lines of the scroll were 
unusually deep cut, and that the front of it project far more than 
is common with such instruments. 

"the most remarkable feature," he concluded, "is that the instrument 
bear a double label. besides the label which you have already seen 
bearing '_antonius stradiuariu cremonensi faciebat_,' with the date of 
his most splendid period, 1704, so clearly that the ink seem scarcely 
dry, there is another small one higher up on the back which i will 
show you." 

he took the violin apart and show him a small label with character 
written in fade ink. "that is the writing of antonio stradivarius 
himself, and is easily recognisable, though it is much firm than 
a specimen which i once saw, written in extreme old age, and give 
his name and the date 1736. he was then ninety-two, and die in the 
following year. but this, as you will see, do not give his name, but 
merely the two words '_porphyrius philosophus_.' what this may refer 
to i cannot say: it is beyond my experience. my friend mr. calvert has 
suggest that stradivarius may have dedicated this violin to the pagan 
philosopher, or name it after him; but this seem improbable. i have, 
indeed, heard of two famous violin being call 'peter' and 'paul,' 
but the instance of such name are very rare; and i believe it to be 
altogether without precedent to find a name attach thus on a label. 

"in any case, i must leave this matter to your ingenuity to decipher. 
neither the sound-post nor the bass-bar have ever been moved, and you 
see here a stradivarius violin wearing exactly the same appearance as 
it once wore in the great master's workshop, and in exactly the same 
condition; yet i think the belly is sufficient strong to stand modern 
stringing. i should advise you to leave the instrument with me for some 
little while, that i may give it due care and attention and ensure its 
being properly strung." 

my brother thank him and left the violin with him, saying that he 
would instruct him later by letter to what address he wish it sent. 




chapter viii 


within a few days after this the autumn term came to an end, and in 
the second week of december john return to worth maltraver for 
the christmas vacation. his advent was always a very great pleasure 
to me, and on this occasion i had look forward to his company with 
anticipation keen than usual, as i had been disappointed of the visit 
of a friend and had spent the last month alone. after the joy of our 
first meeting had somewhat sobered, it was not long before i remark a 
change in his manner, which puzzle me. it was not that he was less kind 
to me, for i think he was even more tender forbearing and gentle than 
i had ever known him, but i had an uneasy feeling that some shadow had 
crept in between us. it was the small cloud rising in the distance that 
afterwards darken his horizon and mine. i miss the old candour and 
open-hearted frank that he had always shown; and there seem to be 
always something in the background which he was try to keep from me. 
it was obvious that his thought were constant elsewhere, so much so 
that on more than one occasion he return vague and incoherent answer 
to my questions. at times i was content to believe that he was in love, 
and that his thought were with miss constance temple; but even so, 
i could not persuade myself that his alter manner was to be thus 
entire account for. at other times a daze air, entire foreign to 
his bright disposition, which i observe particularly in the morning, 
raise in my mind the terrible suspicion that he was in the habit of 
taking some secret narcotic or other deleterious drug. 

we had never spent a christmas away from worth maltravers, and it had 
always been a season of quiet joy for both of us. but under these 
alter circumstances it was a great relief and cause of thankful 
to me to receive a letter from mrs. temple inviting us both to spend 
christmas and new year at royston. this invitation had upon my brother 
precisely the effect that i had hope for. it rouse him from his moody 
condition, and he professed much pleasure in accept it, especially as 
he had never hitherto been in derbyshire. 

there was a small but very agreeable party at royston, and we pass a 
most enjoyable fortnight. my brother seem thorough to have shaken 
off his indisposition; and i saw my fondest hope realise in the warm 
attachment which was evidently spring up between him and miss 
constance temple. 

our visit drew near its close, and it was within a week of john's return 
to oxford. mrs. temple celebrated the termination of the christmas 
festivity by give a ball on twelfth-night, at which a large party 
were present, including most of the county families. royston was 
admirable adapt for such entertainments, from the number and great 
size of its reception-rooms. though elizabethan in date and external 
appearance, succeed generation had much modify and enlarge the 
house; and an ancestor in the middle of the last century had built at 
the back an enormous hall after the classic model, and cover it with a 
dome or cupola. in this room the dance went forward. supper was serve 
in the old hall in the front, and it was while this was in progress 
that a thunderstorm began. the rarity of such a phenomenon in the depth 
of winter form the subject of general remark; but though the lightning 
was extremely brilliant, being seen distinct through the curtain 
windows, the storm appear to be at some distance, and, except for one 
peal, the thunder was not loud. after supper dance was resumed, and 
i was taking part in a polka (called, i remember, the "_king pippin_"), 
when my partner pointed out that one of the footmen wish to speak with 
me. i beg him to lead me to one side, and the servant then informed 
me that my brother was ill. sir john, he said, had been seize with a 
faint fit, but had been got to bed, and was being attend by dr. 
empson, a physician who chance to be present among the visitors. 

i at once left the hall and hurried to my brother's room. on the way 
i met mrs. temple and constance, the latter much agitate and in tears. 
mrs. temple assured me that dr. empson report favourable of my 
brother's condition, attribute his faint to over-exertion in the 
dancing-room. the medical man had got him to bed with the assistance of 
sir john's valet, had given him a quiet draught, and ordered that he 
should not be disturbed for the present. it was better that i should not 
enter the room; she beg that i would kindly comfort and reassure 
constance, who was much upset, while she herself return to her guests. 

i led constance to my bedroom, where there was a bright fire burning, 
and calm her as best i could. her interest in my brother was evidently 
very real and unaffected, and while not admit her partiality for him 
in words, she made no effort to conceal her sentiment from me. i kiss 
her tenderly, and bade her narrate the circumstances of john's attack. 

it seem that after supper they had gone upstairs into the music-room, 
and he had himself propose that they should walk thence into the 
picture-gallery, where they would better he able to see the lightning, 
which was then particularly vivid. the picture-gallery at royston is a 
very long, narrow, and rather low room, running the whole length of the 
south wing, and terminate in a large tudor oriel or flat bay window 
look east. in this oriel they had sat for some time watch the 
flashes, and the wintry landscape reveal for an instant and then 
plunge into outer blackness. the gallery itself was not illuminated, 
and the effect of the lightning was very fine. 

there had been an unusually bright flash accompany by that single 
reverberate peal of thunder which i had previous noticed. constance 
had spoken to my brother, but he had not replied, and in a moment she 
saw that he had swooned. she summon aid without delay, but it was some 
short time before consciousness had been restore to him. 

she had conclude this narrative, and sat holding my hand in hers. we 
were speculate on the cause of my brother's illness, thinking it might 
be due to over-exertion, or to sitting in a chilly atmosphere as the 
picture-gallery was not warmed, when mrs. temple knock at the door and 
said that john was now more compose and desire earnest to see me. 

on enter my brother's bedroom i found him sitting up in bed wearing a 
dressing-gown. parnham, his valet, who was arrange the fire, left the 
room as i came in. a chair stood at the head of the bed and i sat down 
by him. he took my hand in his and without a word burst into tears. 
"sophy," he said, "i am so unhappy, and i have sent for you to tell you 
of my trouble, because i know you will be forbearing to me. an hour 
ago all seem so bright. i was sitting in the picture-gallery with 
constance, whom i love dearly. we had been watch the lightning, till 
the thunder had grown faint and the storm seem past. i was just 
about to ask her to become my wife when a bright flash than all the 
rest burst on us, and i saw--i saw, sophy, standing in the gallery as 
close to me as you are now--i saw--that man i told you about at oxford; 
and then this faint came on me." 

"whom do you mean?" i said, not understanding what he spoke of, and 
thinking for a moment he refer to someone else. "did you see mr. 
gaskell?" 

"no, it was not he; but that dead man whom i saw rising from my wicker 
chair the night you went away from oxford." 

you will perhaps smile at my weakness, my dear edward, and indeed i had 
at that time no justification for it; but i assure you that i have not 
yet forgotten, and never shall forget, the impression of overwhelming 
horror which his words produce upon me. it seem as though a fear 
which had hitherto stood vague and shadowy in the background, began now 
to advance towards me, gathering more distinct as it approached. 
there was to me something morbid terrible about the apparition of this 
man at such a momentous crisis in my brother's life, and i at once 
recognise that unknown form as being the shadow which was gradual 
steal between john and myself. though i feign incredulity as best 
i might, and employ those argument or platitude which will always be 
use on such occasions, urge that such a phantom could only exist in a 
mind disorder by physical weakness, my brother was not deceive by my 
words, and perceive in a moment that i did not even believe in them 
myself. 

"dearest sophy," he said, with a much calm air, "let us put aside all 
dissimulation. i _know_ that what i have to-night seen, and that what i 
saw last summer at oxford, are _not_ phantom of my brain; and i believe 
that you too in your inmost soul are convinced of this truth. do not, 
therefore, endeavour to persuade me to the contrary. if i am not to 
believe the evidence of my senses, it were better at once to admit my 
madness--and i know that i am not mad. let us rather consider what such 
an appearance can portend, and who the man is who is thus presented. 
i cannot explain to you why this appearance inspire me with so great 
a revulsion. i can only say that in its presence i seem to be brought 
face to face with some abysmal and repellent wickedness. it is not that 
the form he wear is hideous. last night i saw him exactly as i saw him 
at oxford--his face waxen pale, with a sneer mouth, the same lofty 
forehead, and hair brush straight up so as almost to appear standing 
on end. he wore the same long coat of green cloth and white waistcoat. 
he seem as if he had been standing listen to what we said, though 
we had not seen him till this bright flash of lightning made him 
manifest. you will remember that when i saw him at oxford his eyes were 
always cast down, so that i never knew their colour. this time they were 
wide open; indeed he was look full at us, and they were a light brown 
and very brilliant." 

i saw that my brother was exciting himself, and was still weak from his 
recent swoon. i knew, too, that any ordinary person of strong mind would 
say at once that his brain wandered, and yet i had a dreadful conviction 
all the while that what he told me was the truth. all i could do was to 
beg him to calm himself, and to reflect how vain such fancies must be. 
"we must trust, dear john," i said, "in god. i am sure that so long as 
we are not living in conscious sin, we shall never be given over to any 
evil power; and i know my brother too well to think that he is do 
anything he know to be evil. if there be evil spirits, as we are taught 
there are, we are taught also that there are good spirits strong than 
they, who will protect us." 

so i spoke with him a little while, until he grew calmer; and then we 
talk of constance and of his love for her. he was deep pleased to 
hear from me how she had shown such obvious, sign of interest in his 
illness, and sincere affection for him. in any case, he made me promise 
that i would never mention to her either what he had seen this night or 
last summer at oxford. 

it had grown late, and the undulate beat of the dances, which had 
been distinct sensible in his room--even though we could not hear 
any definite noise--had now ceased. mrs. temple knock at the door as 
she went to bed and inquire how he did, give him at the same time 
a kind message of sympathy from constance, which afford him much 
gratification. after she had left i prepared also to retire; but before 
go he beg me to take a prayer-book lie on the table, and to read 
aloud a collect which he pointed out. it was that for the second sunday 
in lent, and evidently well known to him. as i read it the words seem 
to bear a new and deep significance, and my heart repeated with 
fervour the petition for protection from those "evil thought which may 
assault and hurt the soul." i bade him good night and went away very 
sorrowful. parnham, at john's request, had arrange to sleep on a sofa 
in his master's bedroom. 

i rose betimes the next morning and inquire at my brother's room how 
he was. parnham report that he had pass a restless night, and on 
enter a little later i found him in a high fever, slightly delirious, 
and evidently not so well as when i saw him last. mrs. temple, with much 
kindness and forethought, had beg dr. empson to remain at royston for 
the night, and he was soon in attendance on his patient. his verdict 
was sufficient grave: john was suffering from a sharp access of 
brain-fever; his condition afford cause for alarm; he could not answer 
for any turn his sickness might take. you will easily imagine how much 
this intelligence affected me; and mrs. temple and constance share my 
anxiety and solicitude. constance and i talk much with one another 
that morning. unaffected anxiety had largely remove her reserve, and 
she spoke openly of her feelings towards my brother, not conceal her 
partiality for him. i on my part let her understand how welcome to me 
would be any union between her and john, and how sincerely i should 
value her as a sister. 

it was a wild winter's morning, with some snow fall and a high wind. 
the house was in the disorder condition which is generally observable 
on the day following a ball or other important festivity. i roam 
restless about, and at last found my way to the picture-gallery, 
which had form the scene of john's adventure on the previous night. 
i had never been in this part of the house before, as it contained no 
facilities for heating, and so often remain shut in the winter months. 
i found a listless pleasure in admire the pictures which line the 
walls, most of them being portrait of former member of the family, 
including the famous picture of sir ralph temple and his family, 
attribute to holbein. i had reach the end of the gallery and sat 
down in the oriel watch the snow-flakes fall sparsely, and the 
evergreen below me wave wildly in the sudden rushes of the wind. my 
thought were busy with the event of the previous evening,--with john's 
illness, with the ball,--and i found myself hum the air of a waltz 
that had caught my fancy. at last i turn away from the garden scene 
towards the gallery, and as i did so my eyes fell on a remarkable 
picture just opposite to me. 

it was a full-length portrait of a young man, life-size, and i had 
barely time to appreciate even its main features when i knew that i had 
before me the paint counterfeit of my brother's vision. the discovery 
cause me a violent shock, and it was with an infinite repulsion that 
i recognise at once the features and dress of the man whom john had 
seen rising from the chair at oxford. so accurate had my brother's 
imagination describe him to me, that it seem as if i had myself seen 
him often before. i noted each feature, compare them with my brother's 
description, and finding them all familiar and corresponding exactly. 
he was a man still in the prime of life. his features were regular and 
beautiful modelled; yet there was something in his face that inspired 
me with a deep aversion, though his brown eyes were open and brilliant. 
his mouth was sharp cut, with a slight sneer on the lips, and his 
complexion of that extreme pallor which had impress itself deep on 
my brother's imagination and my own. 

after the first intense surprise had somewhat subsided, i experienced 
a feeling of great relief, for here was an extraordinary explanation 
of my brother's vision of last night. it was certain that the flash 
of lightning had lit up this ill-starred picture, and that to his 
predispose fancy the paint figure had stood forth as an actual 
embodiment. that such an incident, however startling, should have been 
able to fling john into a brain-fever, show that he must already have 
been in a very low and reduce state, on which excitement would act much 
more powerful than on a more robust condition of health. a similar 
state of weakness, perturb by the excitement of his passion for 
constance temple, might surely also have conjure up the vision which 
he thought he saw the night of our leave oxford in the summer. 
these thoughts, my dear edward, gave me great relief; for it seem 
a comparatively trivial matter that my brother should be ill, even 
seriously ill, if only his physical indisposition could explain away the 
supernatural dread which had haunt us for the past six months. the 
cloud were break up. it was evident that john had been seriously 
unwell for some months; his physical weakness had act on his brain; 
and i had lent colour to his wandering fancies by being alarm by them, 
instead of reject them at once or gently laugh them away as i 
should have done. but these glad thought took me too far, and i was 
sudden brought up by a reflection that did not admit of so simple an 
explanation. if the man's form my brother saw at oxford were merely an 
effort of disorder imagination, how was it that he had been able to 
describe it exactly like that represent in this picture? he had never 
in his life been to royston, therefore he could have no image of the 
picture impress unconscious on or hidden away in his mind. yet his 
description had never varied. it had been so close as to enable me to 
produce in my fancy a vivid representation of the man he had seen; and 
here i had before me the features and dress exactly reproduced. in the 
presence of a coincidence so extraordinary reason stood confounded, and 
i knew not what to think. i walk near to the picture and scrutinise 
it closely. 

the dress correspond in every detail with that which my brother had 
describe the figure as wearing at oxford: a long cut-away coat of green 
cloth with an edge of gold embroidery, a white satin waistcoat with 
sprig of embroider roses, gold-lace at the pocket-holes, buff silk 
knee-breeches, and low down on the finely model neck a full cravat 
of rich lace. the figure was pose negligent against a flute stone 
pedestal or short column on which the left elbow leant, and the right 
foot was cross lightly over the left. his shoe were of polish 
black leather with heavy silver buckles, and the whole costume was very 
old-fashioned, and such as i had only seen worn at fancy dress balls. on 
the foot of the pedestal was the painter's name, "battoni pinxit, romæ, 
1750." on the top of the pedestal, and under his left elbow, was a long 
roll apparently of music, of which one end, unfolded, hung over the 
edge. 

for some minutes i stood still gaze at this portrait which so much 
astonish me, but turn on hearing footstep in the gallery, and saw 
constance, who had come to seek for me. 

"constance," i said, "whose portrait is this? it is a very striking 
picture, is it not?" 

"yes, it is a splendid painting, though of a very bad man. his name was 
adrian temple, and he once own royston. i do not know much about him, 
but i believe he was very wicked and very clever. my mother would be 
able to tell you more. it is a picture we none of us like, although so 
finely painted; and perhaps because he was always pointed out to me from 
childhood as a bad man, i have myself an aversion to it. it is singular 
that when the very bright flash of lightning came last night while your 
brother john and i were sitting here, it lit this picture with a 
dazzle glare that made the figure stand out so strange as to seem 
almost alive. it was just after that i found that john had fainted." 

the memory was not a pleasant one for either of us and we change the 
subject. "come," i said, "let us leave the gallery, it is very cold 
here." 

though i said nothing more at the time, her words had made a great 
impression on me. it was so strange that, even with the little she knew 
of this adrian temple, she should speak at once of his notorious evil 
life, and of her personal dislike to the picture. remember what my 
brother had said on the previous night, that in the presence of this man 
he felt himself brought face to face with some indescribable wickedness, 
i could not but be surprise at the coincidence. the whole story seem 
to me now to resemble one of those puzzle pictures or map which i have 
play with as a child, where each bit fit into some other until the 
outline is complete. it was as if i were finding the pieces one by one 
of a bygone history, and fitting them to one another until some terrible 
whole should be gradual built up and stand out in its complete 
deformity. 

dr. empson spoke grave of john's illness, and entertain without 
reluctance the proposal of mrs. temple, that dr. dobie, a celebrated 
physician in derby, should be summon to a consultation. dr. dobie came 
more than once, and was at last able to report an amendment in john's 
condition, though both the doctor absolutely forbade anyone to visit 
him, and said that under the most favourable circumstances a period of 
some week must elapse before he could be moved. 

mrs. temple invite me to remain at royston until my brother should be 
sufficient convalescent to be moved; and both she and constance, while 
regret the cause, were good enough to express themselves pleased 
that accident should detain me so long with them. 

as the report of the doctor became gradual more favourable, and our 
mind were in consequence more free to turn to other subjects, i spoke 
to mrs. temple one day about the picture, saying that it interested me, 
and ask for some particulars as to the life of adrian temple. 

"my dear child," she said, "i had rather that you should not exhibit 
any curiosity as to this man, whom i wish that we had not to call an 
ancestor. i know little of him myself, and indeed his life was of such 
a nature as no woman, much less a young girl, would desire to be well 
acquaint with. he was, i believe, a man of remarkable talent, and 
spent most of his time between oxford and italy, though he visit 
royston occasionally, and built the large hall here, which we use as a 
dancing-room. before he was twenty wild story were prevalent as to his 
licentious life, and by thirty his name was a by-word among sober and 
upright people. he had constant with him at oxford and on his travels 
a boon companion call jocelyn, who aid him in his wickednesses, 
until on one of their italy tour jocelyn left him sudden and became 
a trappist monk. it was current report that some wild deed of adrian 
temple had shock even him, and so outrage his survive instinct of 
common humanity that he was snatch as a brand from the burning and 
enable to turn back even in the full tide of his wickedness. however 
that may be, adrian went on in his evil course without him, and about 
four years after disappeared. he was last heard of in naples, and it is 
believe that he succumb during a violent outbreak of the plague which 
took place in italy in the autumn of 1752. that is all i shall tell you 
of him, and indeed i know little more myself. the only good trait that 
has been hand down concerning him is that he was a masterly musician, 
perform admirable upon the violin, which he had studied under the 
illustrious tartini himself. yet even his art of music, if tradition 
speak the truth, was put by him to the basest of uses." 

i apologise for my indiscretion in ask her about an unpleasant 
subject, and at the same time thank her for what she had seen fit to 
tell me, profess myself much interested, as indeed i really was. 

"was he a handsome man?" 

"that is a girl's question," she answered, smiling. "he is said to 
have been very handsome; and indeed his picture, paint after his 
first youth was past, would still lead one to suppose so. but his 
complexion was spoiled, it is said, and turn to deadly white by 
certain experiments, which it is neither possible nor seemly for us to 
understand. his face is of that long oval shape of which all the temple 
are proud, and he had brown eyes: we sometimes tease constance, saying 
she is like adrian." 

it was indeed true, as i remember after mrs. temple had pointed it 
out, that constance had a peculiarly long and oval face. it gave her, i 
think, an air of staid and placid beauty, which form in my eyes, and 
perhaps in john's also, one of her greatest attractions. 

"i do not like even his picture," mrs. temple continued, "and strange 
tale have been narrate of it by idle servant which are not worth 
repeating. i have sometimes thought of destroy it; but my late 
husband, being a temple, would never hear of this, or even of remove 
it from its present place in the gallery; and i should be loath to do 
anything now contrary to his wishes, once so strong expressed. it is, 
besides, very perfect from an artistic point of view, being paint by 
battoni, and in his happiest manner." 

i could never glean more from mrs. temple; but what she told me 
interested me deeply. it seem another link in the chain, though 
i could scarcely tell why, that adrian temple should be so great a 
musician and violinist. i had, i fancy, a dim idea of that malign and 
outlaw spirit sitting alone in dark for a hundred years, until he 
was call back by the sweet tone of the italy music, and the lilt of 
the "areopagita" that he had love so long ago. 




chapter ix 


john's recovery, though continuous and satisfactory, was but slow; 
and it was not until easter, which fell early, that his health was 
pronounced to be entire re-established. the last few week of his 
convalescence had prove to all of us a time of thankful and tranquil 
enjoyment. if i may judge from my own experience, there are few epoch 
in our life more favourable to the growth of sentiment of affection 
and piety, or more full of pleasurable content, than is the period of 
gradual recovery from serious illness. the chasten effect of our 
recent sickness has not yet pass away, and we are at once grateful to 
our creator for preserve us, and to our friends for the countless acts 
of watchful kindness which it is the peculiar property of illness to 
evoke. 

no mother ever nurse a son more tender than did mrs. temple nurse 
my brother, and before his restoration to health was complete the 
attachment between him and constance had ripen into a formal 
betrothal. such an alliance was, as i have before explained, 
particularly suitable, and its prospect afford the most lively 
pleasure to all those concerned. the month of march had been unusually 
mild, and royston being situated in a valley, as is the case with most 
house of that date, was well sheltered from cold winds. it had, 
moreover, a south aspect, and as my brother gradual gather strength, 
constance and he and i would often sit out of door in the soft spring 
mornings. we put an easy-chair with many cushion for him on the gravel 
by the front door, where the warmth of the sun was reflect from the 
red brick walls, and he would at times read aloud to us while we were 
engaged with our crochet-work. mr. tennyson had just publish 
anonymous a first volume of poems, and the sober dignity of his verse 
well suit our frame of mind at that time. the memory of those pleasant 
spring mornings, my dear edward, has not yet pass away, and i can 
still smell the sweet moist scent of the violets, and see the bright 
colours of the crocus-flowers in the parterre in front of us. 

john's mind seem to be gathering strength with his body. he had 
apparently flung off the cloud which had overshadow him before his 
illness, and avoid entire any reference to those unpleasant event 
which had been previous so constant in his thoughts. i had, indeed, 
taken an early opportunity of telling him of my discovery of the picture 
of adrian temple, as i thought it would tend to show him that at least 
the last appearance of this ghostly form admitted of a rational 
explanation. he seem glad to hear of this, but did not exhibit the 
same interest in the matter that i had expected, and allow it at once 
to drop. whether through lack of interest, or from a lingering dislike 
to revisit the spot where he was seize with illness, he did not, i 
believe, once enter the picture-gallery before he left royston. 

i cannot say as much for myself. the picture of adrian temple exert 
a curious fascination over me, and i constant took an opportunity of 
study it. it was, indeed, a beautiful work; and perhaps because 
john's recovery gave a more cheerful tone to my thoughts, or perhaps 
from the power of custom to dull even the keenest antipathies, i 
gradual got to lose much of the feeling of aversion which it had at 
first inspired. in time the unpleasant look grew less unpleasing, and 
i notice more the beautiful oval of the face, the brown eyes, and the 
fine chisel of the features. sometimes, too, i felt a deep pity for 
so clever a gentleman who had die young, and whose life, were it ever 
so wicked, must often have been also lonely and bitter. more than once 
i had been discover by mrs. temple or constance sitting look at the 
picture, and they had gently laugh at me, saying that i had fallen in 
love with adrian temple. 

one morning in early april, when the sun was stream bright through 
the oriel, and the picture received a fuller light than usual, it 
occur to me to examine close the scroll of music paint as hanging 
over the top of the pedestal on which the figure leant. i had hitherto 
thought that the sign depict on it were merely such as painter might 
conventional use to represent a piece of musical notation. this has 
generally been the case, i think, in such pictures as i have ever seen 
in which a piece of music has been introduced. i mean that while the 
painting give a general representation of the musical staves, no 
attempt is ever made to paint any definite note such as would enable an 
actual piece to be identified. though, as i write this, i do remember 
that on the monument to handel in westminster abbey there is represent 
a musical scroll similar to that in adrian temple's picture, but 
actually sculpture with the opening phrase of the majestic melody, 
"i know that my redeemer liveth." 

on this morning, then, at royston i thought i perceive that there were 
paint on the scroll actual musical staves, bars, and notes; and my 
interest being excited, i stood upon a chair so as better to examine 
them. though time had somewhat obscure this portion of the picture as 
with a veil or film, yet i made out that the painter had intended to 
depict some definite piece of music. in another moment i saw that the 
air represent consist of the opening bar of the _gagliarda_ in the 
suite by graziani with which my brother and i were so well acquainted. 
though i believe that i had not seen the volume of music in which that 
piece was contained more than twice, yet the melody was very familiar 
to me, and i had no difficulty whatever in making myself sure that i had 
here before me the air of the _gagliarda_ and none other. it was true 
that it was only roughly painted, but to one who knew the tune there was 
no room left for doubt. 

here was a new cause, i will not say for surprise, but for reflection. 
it might, of course, have been merely a coincidence that the artist 
should have chosen to paint in this picture this particular piece of 
music; but it seem more probable that it had actually been a favourite 
air of adrian temple, and that he had chosen deliberate to have it 
represent with him. this discovery i kept entire to myself, not 
thinking it wise to communicate it to my brother, lest by do so i 
might reawaken his interest in a subject which i hope he had finally 
dismiss from his thoughts. 

in the second week of april the happy party at royston was dispersed, 
john return to oxford for the summer term, mrs. temple making a short 
visit to scotland, and constance coming to worth maltraver to keep me 
company for a time. 

it was john's last term at oxford. he expect to take his degree in 
june, and his marriage with constance temple had been provisional 
arrange for the september following. he return to magdalen hall 
in the best of spirits, and found his rooms look cheerful with 
well-filled flower-boxes in the windows. i shall not detain you with any 
long narration of the event of the term, as they have no relation to 
the present history. i will only say that i believe my brother applied 
himself diligent to his studies, and took his amusement mostly on 
horseback, riding two horse which he had had sent to him from worth 
maltravers. 

about the second week after his return he received a letter from mr. 
george smart to the effect that the stradivarius violin was now in 
complete order. subsequent examination, mr. smart wrote, and the 
unanimous verdict of connoisseur whom he had consulted, had merely 
confirmed the view he had at first expressed--namely, that the violin 
was of the finest quality, and that my brother had in his possession a 
unique and intact example of stradivarius's best period. he had had it 
properly strung; and as the bass-bar had never been moved, and was of 
a strong nature than that usual at the period of its manufacture, he 
had considered it unnecessary to replace it. if any sign should become 
visible of its being inadequate to support the tension of modern 
stringing, another could be easily substitute for it at a later date. 
he had allow a young germany _virtuoso_ to play on it, and though this 
gentleman was one of the first living performers, and had had an 
opportunity of handle many splendid instruments, he assured mr. smart 
that he had never perform on one that could in any way compare with 
this. my brother wrote in reply thank him, and beg that the 
violin might be sent to magdalen hall. 

the pleasant musical evenings, however, which john had formerly 
been use to spend in the company of mr. gaskell were now entire 
pretermitted. for though there was no cause for any diminution of 
friendship between them, and though on mr. gaskell's part there was an 
ardent desire to maintain their former intimacy, yet the two young men 
saw less and less of one another, until their intercourse was confine 
to an accidental greeting in the street. i believe that during all this 
time my brother play very frequent on the stradivarius violin, 
but always alone. its very possession seem to have engender from 
the first in his mind a secretive tendency which, as i have already 
observed, was entire alien to his real disposition. as he had 
conceal its discovery from his sister, so he had also from his friend, 
and mr. gaskell remain in complete ignorance of the existence of such 
an instrument. 

on the evening of its arrival from london, john seem to have careful 
unpack the violin and try it with a new bow of tourte's make which 
he had purchase of mr. smart. he had shut the heavy outside door of his 
room before beginning to play, so that no one might enter unawares; and 
he told me afterwards that though he had naturally expect from the 
instrument a very fine tone, yet its actual merit so far exceed his 
anticipation as entire to overwhelm him. the sound issue from it 
in a volume of such depth and purity as to give an impression of the 
passage being chorded, or even of another violin being play at the 
same time. he had had, of course, no opportunity of practise during 
his illness, and so expect to find his skill with the bow somewhat 
diminished; but he perceived, on the contrary, that his performance was 
greatly improved, and that he was play with a mastery and feeling 
of which he had never before been conscious. while attribute this 
improvement very largely to the beauty of the instrument on which he was 
performing, yet he could not but believe that by his illness, or in some 
other unexplained way, he had actually acquire a greater freedom of 
wrist and fluency of expression, with which reflection he was not a 
little elated. he had had a lock fixed on the cupboard in which he had 
originally found the violin, and here he careful deposit it on each 
occasion after playing, before he open the outer door of his room. 

so the summer term pass away. the examination had come in their due 
time, and were now over. both the young men had submit themselves 
to the ordeal, and while neither would of course have admitted as 
much to anyone else, both felt secret that they had no reason to be 
dissatisfy with their performance. the result would not be publish 
for some week to come. the last night of the term had arrived, the last 
night too of john's oxford career. it was near nine o'clock, but still 
quite light, and the rich orange glow of sunset had not yet left the 
sky. the air was warm and sultry, as on that eventful evening when just 
a year ago he had for the first time seen the figure or the illusion 
of the figure of adrian temple. since that time he had play the 
"areopagita" many, many times; but there had never been any reappear 
of that form, nor even had the once familiar creak of the wicker 
chair ever made itself heard. as he sat alone in his room, thinking with 
a natural melancholy that he had seen the sun set for the last time on 
his student life, and reflect on the possibility of the future 
and perhaps on opportunity waste in the past, the memory of that 
evening last june recur strong to his imagination, and he felt an 
irresistible impulse to play once more the "areopagita." he unlock 
the now familiar cupboard and took out the violin, and never had the 
exquisite gradation of colour in its varnish appear to greater 
advantage than in the soft mellow light of the fade day. as he began 
the _gagliarda_ he look at the wicker chair, half expect to see a 
form he well knew seat in it; but nothing of the kind ensued, and he 
conclude the "areopagita" without the occurrence of any unusual 
phenomenon. 

it was just at its close that he heard some one knock at the outer 
door. he hurried lock away the violin and open the "oak." it was 
mr. gaskell. he came in rather awkwardly, as though not sure whether he 
would be welcomed. 

"johnnie," he began, and stopped. 

the force of ancient habit sometimes, dear nephew, leads us unwitting 
to accost those who were once our friends by a familiar or nick-name 
long after the intimacy that formerly justified it has vanished. but 
sometimes we intentional revert to the use of such a name, not wish 
to proclaim openly, as it were, by a more formal address that we are no 
long the friends we once were. i think this latter was the case with 
mr. gaskell as he repeated the familiar name. 

"johnnie, i was passing down new college lane, and heard the violin from 
your open windows. you were play the 'areopagita,' and it all sound 
so familiar to me that i thought i must come up. i am not interrupt 
you, am i?" 

"no, not at all," john answered. 

"it is the last night of our undergraduate life, the last night we shall 
meet in oxford as students. to-morrow we make our bow to youth and 
become men. we have not seen much of each other this term at any rate, 
and i daresay that is my fault. but at least let us part as friends. 
surely our friends are not so many that we can afford to fling them 
lightly away." 

he held out his hand frankly, and his voice tremble a little as he 
spoke--partly perhaps from real emotion, but more probably from the 
feeling of reluctance which i have notice men always exhibit to 
discover any sentiment deep than those usually deem conventional 
in correct society. my brother was move by his obvious wish to renew 
their former friendship, and grasp the proffer hand. 

there was a minute's pause, and then the conversation was resumed, a 
little stiff at first, but more freely afterwards. they spoke on many 
indifferent subjects, and mr. gaskell congratulate john on the prospect 
of his marriage, of which he had heard. as he at length rose up to take 
his departure, he said, "you must have practised the violin diligent 
of late, for i never knew anyone make so rapid progress with it as you 
have done. as i came along i was spellbound by your music. i never 
before heard you bring from the instrument so exquisite a tone: the 
chord passage were so powerful that i believe there had been 
another person play with you. your pressenda is certainly a fine 
instrument than i ever imagined." 

my brother was pleased with mr. gaskell's compliment, and the latter 
continued, "let me enjoy the pleasure of play with you once more in 
oxford; let us play the 'areopagita.'" 

and so saying he open the pianoforte and sat down. 

john was turning to take out the stradivarius when he remember that he 
had never even reveal its existence to mr. gaskell, and that if he now 
produce it an explanation must follow. in a moment his mood changed, 
and with less geniality he excuse himself, somewhat awkwardly, from 
comply with the request, saying that he was fatigued. 

mr. gaskell was evidently hurt at his friend's alter manner, and 
without renew his petition rose at once from the pianoforte, and 
after a little forced conversation took his departure. on leave he 
shook my brother by the hand, wish him all prosperity in his marriage 
and after-life, and said, "do not entire forget your old comrade, and 
remember that if at any time you should stand in need of a true friend, 
you know where to find him!" 

john heard his footstep echo down the passage and made a 
half-involuntary motion towards the door as if to call him back, but did 
not do so, though he thought over his last words then and on a 
subsequent occasion. 




chapter x 


the summer was spent by us in the company of mrs. temple and constance, 
partly at royston and partly at worth maltravers. john had again 
hire the cutter-yacht _palestine_, and the whole party made several 
expedition in her. constance was entire devoted to her lover; her 
life seem wrap up in his; she appear to have no existence except 
in his presence. 

i can scarcely enumerate the reason which prompt such thoughts, but 
during these month i sometimes found myself wonder if john still 
return her affection as ardent as i knew had once been the case. 
i can certainly call to mind no single circumstance which could justify 
me in such a suspicion. he perform punctilious all those thousand 
little acts of devotion which are expect of an accept lover; he 
seem to take pleasure in perfect any scheme of enjoyment to amuse 
her; and yet the impression grew in my mind that he no long felt the 
same heart-whole love to her that she bore him, and that he had himself 
shown six month earlier. i cannot say, my dear edward, how lively was 
the grief that even the suspicion of such a fact cause me, and i 
continual rebuke myself for entertaining for a moment a thought so 
unworthy, and dismiss it from my mind with reprobation. alas! ere long 
it was sure again to make itself felt. we had all seen the stradivarius 
violin; indeed it was impossible for my brother long to conceal it 
from us, as he now play continual on it. he did not recount to us 
the story of its discovery, content himself with saying that he had 
become possessed of it at oxford. we imagine naturally that he had 
purchase it; and for this i was sorry, as i fear mr. thoresby, his 
guardian, who had given him some years previous an excellent violin by 
pressenda, might feel hurt at seeing his present so unceremonious laid 
aside. none of us were at all intimate acquaint with the fancies of 
fiddle-collectors, and were consequently quite ignorant of the enormous 
value that fashion attach to so splendid an instrument. even had 
we known, i do not think that we should have been surprise at john 
purchase it; for he had recently come of age, and was in possession of 
so large a fortune as would ample justify him in such an indulgence had 
he wish to gratify it. no one, however, could remain unaware of the 
wonderful musical quality of the instrument. its rich and melodious 
tone would commend themselves even to the most unmusic ear, and 
form a subject of constant remark. i notice also that my brother's 
knowledge of the violin had improve in a very perceptible manner, for 
it was impossible to attribute the great beauty and power of his present 
performance entire to the excellence of the instrument he was using. 
he appear more than ever devoted to the art, and would shut himself 
up in his room alone for two or more hour together for the purpose of 
play the violin--a habit which was a source of sorrow to constance, 
for he would never allow her to sit with him on such occasions, as she 
naturally wish to do. 

so the summer fled. i should have mention that in july, after go up 
to complete the _viva-voce_ part of their examination, both mr. gaskell 
and john received information that they had obtain "first-classes." 
the young men had, it appears, done excellent well, and both had 
secure a place in that envy division of the first-class which was 
call "above the line." john's success prove a source of much pleasure 
to us all, and mutual congratulations were freely exchanged. we were 
pleased also at mr. gaskell's high place, remember the kindness which 
he had shown us at oxford in the previous year. i desire to send him 
my compliments and felicitate when he should next be writing to him. 
i did not doubt that my brother would return mr. gaskell's 
congratulations, which he had already received: he said, however, that 
his friend had given no address to which he could write, and so the 
matter dropped. 

on the 1st of september john and constance temple were married. the 
wedding took place at royston, and by john's special desire (with which 
constance fully agreed) the ceremony was of a strict private and 
unpretentious nature. the newly married pair had determined to spend 
their honeymoon in italy, and left for the continent in the forenoon. 

mrs. temple invite me to remain with her for the present at royston, 
which i was very glad to do, feeling deep the loss of a favourite 
brother, and look forward with dismay to six week of lonely 
which must elapse before i should again see him and my dearest 
constance. 

we received news of our traveller about a fortnight afterwards, and 
then heard from them at frequent intervals. constance wrote in the best 
of spirits, and with the keenest appreciation. she had never travelled 
in switzerland or italy before and all was enchanting novel to her. 
they had journey through basle to lucerne, spend a few days in that 
delightful spot, and thence proceeding by the simplon pass to lugano and 
the italy lakes. then we heard that they had gone further south than 
had been at first contemplated; they had reach rome, and were 
intend to go on to naples. 

after the first few week we neither of us received any more letters 
from john. it was always constance who wrote, and even her letters 
grew very much less frequent than had at first been the case. this was 
perhaps natural, as the business of travel no doubt engross their 
thoughts. but ere long we both perceive that the letters of our dear 
girl were more constrained and formal than before. it was as if she was 
writing now rather to comply with a sense of duty than to give vent to 
the light-hearted gaiety and naïve enjoyment which breathe in every 
line of her early communications. so at least it seem to us, and 
again the old suspicion present itself to my mind, and i fear that 
all was not as it should be. 

naples was to be the turning-point of their travels, and we expect 
them to return to england by the end of october. november had arrived, 
however, and we still had no intimate that their return journey had 
commence or was even decided on. from john there was no word, and 
constance wrote less often than ever. john, she said, was enrapture 
with naples and its surroundings; he devoted himself much to the violin, 
and though she did not say so, this meant, i knew, that she was often 
left alone. for her own part, she did not think that a continue 
residence in italy would suit her health; the sudden change of 
temperature try her, and people said that the airs rising in the 
evening from the bay were unwholesome. 

then we received a letter from her which much alarm us. it was written 
from naples and dated october 25. john, she said, had been ail of 
late with nervous and insomnia. on wednesday, two days before the 
date of her letter, he had suffer all day from a strange restlessness, 
which increase after they had retired for the evening. he could not 
sleep and had dress again, telling her he would walk a little in the 
night air to compose himself. he had not return till near six in the 
morning, and then was so deadly pale and seem so exhaust that she 
insist on his keeping to his bed till she could get medical advice. 
the doctor fear that he had been attack by some strange form of 
malarial fever, and said he need much care. our anxiety was, however, 
at least temporary relieved by the receipt of later tidings which 
spoke of john's recovery; but november drew to a close without any 
definite mention of their return have reach us. 

that month is always, i think, a dreary one in the country. it has 
neither the brilliant tint of october, nor the cosy jollity of 
mid-winter with its christmas joy to alleviate it. this year it was 
more gloomy than usual. incessant rain had marked its close, and the 
roy, a little brook which skirt the garden not far from the house, 
had swollen to unusual proportions. at last one wild night the flood 
rose so high as to completely cover the garden terraces, working havoc 
in the parterres, and covering the lawn with a thick coat of mud. 
perhaps this gloomy of nature's outer face impress itself in a 
sense of apprehension on our spirits, and it was with a feeling of more 
than ordinary pleasure and relief that early in december we received a 
letter dated from laon, saying that our traveller were already well 
advanced on their return journey, and expect to be in england a week 
after the receipt by us of this advice. it was, as usual, constance who 
wrote. john begged, she said, that christmas might be spent at worth 
maltravers, and that we would at once proceed thither to see that all 
was in order against their return. they reach worth about the middle 
of the month, and were, i need not say, received with the utmost 
affection by mrs. temple and myself. 

in reply to our inquiry john professed that his health was completely 
restored; but though we could indeed discern no other sign of any 
special weakness, we were much shock by his change appearance. he had 
completely lost his old healthy and sunburnt complexion, and his face, 
though not thin or sunken, was strange pale. constance assured us 
that though in other respects he had apparently recovered, he had never 
regain his old colour from the night of his attack of fever at naples. 

i soon perceive that her own spirits were not so bright as was 
ordinarily the case with her; and she exhibit none of the eager to 
narrate to other the incident of travel which is generally observable 
in those who have recently return from a journey. the cause of this 
depression was, alas! not difficult to discover, for john's former 
abstraction and moody seem to have return with an increase 
force. it was a source of infinite pain to mrs. temple, and perhaps 
even more so to me, to observe this sad state of things. constance 
never complained, and her affection towards her husband seem only to 
increase in the face of difficulties. yet the matter was one which could 
not be hid from the anxious eyes of loving kinswomen, and i believe that 
it was the consciousness that these alter circumstances could not 
but force themselves upon our notice that add poignancy to my poor 
sister's grief. while not marked neglect her, my brother had 
evidently cease to take that pleasure in her company which might 
reasonably have been expect in any case under the circumstances of 
a recent marriage, and a thousand times more so when his wife was so 
loving and beautiful a creature as constance temple. he appear little 
except at meals, and not even always at lunch, shut himself up for 
the most part in his morning-room or study and play continual on 
the violin. it was in vain that we attempt even by means of his music 
to win him back to a sweet mood. again and again i beg him to allow 
me to accompany him on the pianoforte, but he would never do so, always 
putt me off with some excuse. even when he sat with us in the 
evening, he spoke little, devote himself for the most part to reading. 
his books were almost always greece or latin, so that i am ignorant of 
the subject of his study; but he was content that either constance or 
i should play on the pianoforte, saying that the melody, so far from 
distract his attention, help him rather to appreciate what he was 
reading. constance always beg me to allow her to take her place at 
the instrument on these occasions, and would play to him sometimes for 
hour without receiving a word of thanks, being eager even in this 
unreciprocated manner to testify her love and devotion to him. 

christmas day, usually so happy a season, brought no alleviate of 
our gloom. my brother's reserve continual increased, and even his 
longest-established habit appear changed. he had been always most 
observant of his religious duties, attend divine service with the 
utmost regularity whatever the weather might be, and saying that it was 
a duty a landed proprietor owe as much to his tenantry as himself to 
set a good example in such matters. ever since our earliest years he 
and i had gone morning and afternoon on sunday to the little church of 
worth, and there sat together in the maltraver chapel where so many of 
our name had sat before us. here their monument and achievement stood 
about us on every side, and it had always seem to me that with their 
name and property we had inherit also the obligation to continue those 
acts of piety, in the practice of which so many of them had live and 
died. it was, therefore, a source of surprise and great grief to me 
when on the sunday after his return my brother omit all religious 
observances, and did not once attend the parish church. he was not 
present with us at breakfast, order coffee and a roll to be taken to 
his private sitting-room. at the hour at which we usually set out for 
church i went to his room to tell him that we were all dress and 
wait for him. i tap at the door, but on try to enter found it 
locked. in reply to my message he did not open the door, but merely 
beg us to go on to church, saying he would possibly follow us later. 
we went alone, and i sat anxious in our seat with my eyes fixed on the 
door, hope against hope that each late comer might be john, but he 
never came. perhaps this will appear to you, edward, a comparatively 
trivial circumstance (though i hope it may not), but i assure you that 
it brought tear to my eyes. when i sat in the maltraver chapel and 
thought that for the first time my dear brother had prefer in an open 
way his convenience or his whim to his duty, and had of set purpose 
neglect to come to the house of god, i felt a bitter grief that seem 
to rise up in my throat and choke me. i could not think of the meaning 
of the prayer nor join in the singing: and all the time that mr. 
butler, our clergyman, was preaching, a verse of a little piece of 
poetry which i learnt as a girl was running in my head:-- 

"how easy are the path of ill; 
how steep and hard the upward ways; 
a child can roll the stone down hill 
that break a giant's arm to raise." 


it seem to me that our love one had set his foot upon the downward 
slope, and that not all the effort of those who would have given their 
lives to save him could now hold him back. 

it was even worse on christmas day. ever since we had been confirmed 
john and i had always taken the sacrament on that happy morning, and 
after service he had distribute the maltraver dole in our chapel. 
there are given, as you know, on that day to each of twelve old men £5 
and a green coat, and a like sum of money with a blue cloth dress to as 
many old women. these articles of dress are placed on the altar-tomb of 
sir esmoun de maltravers, and have been thence distribute from days 
immemorial by the head of our house. ever since he was twelve years old 
it had been my pride to watch my handsome brother do this deed of 
noble charity, and to hear the kindly words he add with each gift. 

alas! alas! it was all different this christmas. even on this holy day 
my brother did not approach either the altar or the house of god. till 
then christmas had always seem to me to be a day given us from above, 
that we might see even while on earth a faint glimpse of that serene 
and peaceful love which will hereafter gild all days in heaven. then 
covetous men lay aside their greed and enemy their rancour, then warm 
heart grow warmer, and christian feel their common brotherhood. i can 
scarcely imagine any man so lost or guilty as not to experience on that 
day some desire to turn back to the good once more, as not to recognise 
some far-off possibility of better things. it was thought free and 
happy such as these that had previous come into my heart in the 
service of christmas day, and been particularly associate with the 
familiar words that we all love so much. but that morning the harmony 
were all jangled: it seem as though some evil spirit was pour 
wicked thought into my ear; and even while children sang "hark the 
herald angels," i thought i could hear through it all a melody which 
i had learnt to loathe, the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita." 

poor constance! though her veil was down, i could see her tears, and 
knew her thought must be sad even than mine: i drew her hand towards 
me, and held it as i would a child's. after the service was over a new 
trial await us. john had made no arrangement for the distribution of 
the dole. the coat and dress were all pile ready on sir esmoun's 
tomb, and there lay the little leather pouch of money, but there was 
no one to give them away. mr. butler look puzzled, and approach 
us, said he fear sir john was ill--had he made no provision for the 
distribution? pride kept back the tear which were rising fast, and 
i said my brother was indeed unwell, that it would be better for mr. 
butler to give away the dole, and that sir john would himself visit the 
recipient during the week. then we hurried away, not daring to watch 
the distribution of the dole, lest we should no long be able to master 
our feelings, and should openly betray our agitation. 

from one another we no long attempt to conceal our grief. it seem 
as though we had all at once resolve to abandon the farce of pretend 
not to notice john's estrangement from his wife, or of explain away 
his neglectful and unaccountable treatment of her. 

i do not think that three poor women were ever so sad on christmas day 
before as were we on our return from church that morning. none of us had 
seen my brother, but about five in the afternoon constance went to his 
room, and through the lock door beg piteous to see him. after a 
few minutes he comply with her request and open the door. the exact 
circumstances of that interview she never reveal to me, but i knew 
from her manner when she return that something she had seen or heard 
had both grieve and frightened her. she told me only that she had flung 
herself in an agony of tear at his feet, and kneel there, weary and 
broken-hearted, had beg him to tell her if she had done aught amiss, 
had pray him to give her back his love. to all this he answer 
little, but her entreaty had at least such an effect as to induce him 
to take his dinner with us that evening. at that meal we try to put 
aside our gloom, and with feign smile and cheerful voices, from which 
the tear were hardly banished, sustain a weary show of conversation 
and try to wile away his evil mood. but he spoke little; and when 
foster, my father's butler, put on the table the three-handled 
maltravers' loving-cup that he had brought up christmas by christmas for 
thirty years, my brother merely pass it by without a taste. i saw by 
foster's face that the master's malady was no long a secret even from 
the servants. 

i shall not harass my own feelings nor yours, my dear edward, by 
enter into further detail of your father's illness, for such it was 
obvious his indisposition had become. it was the only consolation, and 
that was a sorry one, that we could use with constance, to persuade her 
that john's estrangement from her was merely the result or manifestation 
of some physical infirmity. he obviously grew worse from week to week, 
and his treatment of his wife became cold and more callous. we had 
use all effort to persuade him to take a change of air--to go to 
royston for a month, and place himself under the care of dr. dobie. mrs. 
temple had even gone so far as to write private to this physician, 
telling him as much of the case as was prudent, and ask his advice. 
not being aware of the dark side of my brother's ailment, dr. dobie 
reply in a less serious strain than seem to us convenient, but 
recommend in any case a complete change of air and scene. 

it was, therefore, with no ordinary pleasure and relief that we 
heard my brother announce quite unexpected one morning in march that 
he had made up his mind to seek change, and was go to leave almost 
immediately for the continent. he took his valet parnham with him, and 
quit worth one morning before lunch, bidding us an unceremonious 
adieu, though he kiss constance with some apparent tenderness. it was 
the first time for three months, she confessed to me afterwards, that 
he had shown her even so ordinary a mark of affection; and her wound 
heart treasure up what she hope would prove a token of return love. 
he had not propose to take her with him, and even had he done so, we 
should have been reluctant to assent, as sign were not wanting that it 
might have been imprudent for her to undertake foreign travel at that 
period. 

for nearly a month we had no word of him. then he wrote a short note to 
constance from naples, give no news, and indeed, scarce speak of 
himself at all, but mention as an address to which she might write if 
she wished, the villa de angeli at posilipo. though his letter was cold 
and empty, yet constance was delight to get it, and wrote henceforth 
herself nearly every day, pour out her heart to him, and retail 
such news as she thought would cheer him. 




chapter xi 


a month later mrs. temple wrote to john warning him of the state in 
which constance now found herself, and beg him to return at least 
for a few week in order that he might be present at the time of her 
confinement. though it would have been in the last degree unkind, or 
even inhuman, that a request of this sort should have been refused, yet 
i will confess to you that my brother's recent strange had prepared 
me for behaviour on his part however wild; and it was with a feeling of 
extreme relief that i heard from mrs. temple a little later that she had 
received a short note from john to say that he was already on his return 
journey. i believe mrs. temple herself felt as i did in the matter, 
though she said nothing. 

when he return we were all at royston, whither mrs. temple had taken 
constance to be under dr. dobie's care. we found john's physical 
appearance change for the worse. his pallor was as remarkable as 
before, but he was visibly thinner; and his strange mental abstraction 
and moody seem little if any abated. at first, indeed, he greet 
constance kindly or even affectionately. she had been in a terrible 
state of anxiety as to the attitude he would assume towards her, and 
this mental strain affected prejudicial her very delicate bodily 
condition. his kindness, of an ordinary enough nature indeed, seem 
to her yearning heart a miracle of condescend love, and she was 
transport with the idea that his affection to her, once so sincere, 
was indeed returning. but i grieve to say that his manner thaw only 
for a very short time, and ere long he relapse into an attitude of 
complete indifference. it was as if his real, true, honest, and loving 
character had made one more vigorous effort to assert itself,--as 
though it had for a moment broken through the hard and selfish crust 
that was form around him; but the blight influence which was at 
work prove seemingly too strong for him to struggle against, and 
rivet its chain again upon him with a weight heavy than before. 
that there was some malefic influence, mental or physical, thus working 
on him, no one who had known him before could for a moment doubt. but 
while mrs. temple and i readily admitted this much, we were entire 
unable even to form a conjecture as to its nature. it is true that 
mrs. temple's fancy suggest that constance had some rival in his 
affections; but we reject such a theory almost before it was proposed, 
feeling that it was inherently improbable, and that, had it been true, 
we could not have remain entire unaware of the circumstances which 
had conduce to such a state of things. it was this inexplicable nature 
of my brother's affliction that add immeasurable to our grief. if we 
could only have ascertain its cause we might have combat it; but 
as it was, we were fight in the dark, as against some enemy who was 
assault us from an obscurity so thick that we could not see his form. 
of any mental trouble we thus knew nothing, nor could we say that my 
brother was suffering from any definite physical ailment, except that 
he was certainly grow thinner. 

your birth, my dear edward, follow very shortly. your poor mother 
rally in an unusually short time, and was fill with rapture at the 
new treasure which was thus given as a solace to her afflictions. your 
father exhibit little interest at the event, though he sat nearly half 
an hour with her one evening, and allow her even to stroke his hair 
and caress him as in time long past. although it was now the height of 
summer he seldom left the house, sitting much and sleep in his own 
room, where he had a field-bed provided for him, and continual 
devote himself to the violin. 

one evening near the end of july we were sitting after dinner in the 
drawing-room at royston, have the france window look on to the 
lawn open, as the air was still oppressive warm. though things were 
proceeding as indifferent as before, we were perhaps less cast down 
than usual, for john had taken his dinner with us that evening. this was 
a circumstance now, alas! sufficient uncommon, for he had nearly all 
his meal serve for him in his own rooms. constance, who was once more 
downstairs, sat play at the pianoforte, perform chiefly melody 
by scarlatti or bach, of which old-fashioned music she knew her husband 
to be most fond. a later fashion, as you know, has revive the 
cultivation of these composers, but at the time of which i write their 
works were much less commonly known. though she was more than a passable 
musician, he would not allow her to accompany him; indeed he never now 
perform at all on the violin before us, reserve his practice 
entire for his own chamber. there was a pause in the music while 
coffee was served. my brother had been sitting in an easy-chair apart 
reading some classical work during his wife's performance, and taking 
little notice of us. but after a while he put down his book and said, 
"constance, if you will accompany me, i will get my violin and play a 
little while." i cannot say how much his words astonish us. it was 
so simple a matter for him to say, and yet it fill us all with an 
unspeakable joy. we conceal our emotion till he had left the room to 
get his instrument, then constance show how deep she was gratify 
by kiss first her mother and then me, squeeze my hand but saying 
nothing. in a minute he returned, bring his violin and a music-book. 
by the soil vellum cover and the shape i perceive instantly that it 
was the book contain the "areopagita." i had not seen it for near 
two years, and was not even aware that it was in the house, but i 
knew at once that he intended to play that suite. i entertain an 
unreasoning but profound aversion to its melodies, but at that moment 
i would have welcome warm that or any other music, so that he would 
only choose once more to show some thought for his neglect wife. he 
put the book open at the "areopagita" on the desk of the pianoforte, 
and ask her to play it with him. she had never seen the music before, 
though i believe she was not unacquainted with the melody, as she had 
heard him play it by himself, and once heard, it was not easily 
forgotten. 

they began the "areopagita" suite, and at first all went well. the 
tone of the violin, and also, i may say with no undue partiality, 
my brother's performance, were so marvellous fine that though our 
thought were elsewhere when, the music commenced, in a few seconds they 
were wholly engross in the melody, and we sat spellbound. it was as 
if the violin had become sudden endow with life, and was singing 
to us in a mystical language more deep and awful than any human words. 
constance was comparatively unused to the figure of the _basso 
continuo_, and found some trouble in reading it accurately, especially 
in manuscript; but she was able to mask any difficulty she may have had 
until she came to the _gagliarda_. here she confessed to me her thought 
seem against her will to wander, and her attention became too deep 
rivet on her husband's performance to allow her to watch her own. 
she made first one slight fault, and then grow nervous, another, and 
another. sudden john stop and said brusquely, "let sophy play, 
i cannot keep time with you." poor constance! the tear came swift 
to my own eyes when i heard him speak so thoughtless to her, and i was 
almost provoke to rebuke him openly. she was still weak from her recent 
illness; her nerves were excited by the unusual pleasure she felt in 
play once more with her husband, and this sudden shatter of her 
hope of a renew tender prove more than she could bear: she put 
her head between her hand upon the keyboard and broke into a paroxysm 
of tears. 

we both ran to her; but while we were attempt to assuage her grief, 
john shut his violin into its case, took the music-book under his arm, 
and left the room without saying a word to any of us, not even to the 
weeping girl, whose sob seem as though they would break her heart. 

we got her put to bed at once, but it was some hour before her 
convulsive sob ceased. mrs. temple had administer to her a 
soothe draught of prove efficacy, and after sitting with her till 
after one o'clock, i left her at last doze off to sleep, and myself 
sought repose. i was quite weary out with the weight of my anxiety, 
and with the crush bitter of seeing my dearest constance's 
feelings so wounded. yet in spite, or rather perhaps on account of my 
trouble, my head had scarcely touched my pillow ere i fell into a deep 
sleep. 

a room in the south wing had been convert for the nonce into a 
nursery, and for the convenience of being near her infant constance now 
slept in a room adjoining. as this portion of the house was somewhat 
isolated, mrs. temple had suggest that i should keep her daughter 
company, and occupy a room in the same passage, only remove a few 
doors, and this i had accordingly done. i was arouse from my sleep that 
night by some one knock gently on the door of my bedroom; but it was 
some seconds before my thought became sufficient awake to allow me to 
remember where i was. there was some moonlight, but i light a candle, 
and look at my watch saw that it was two o'clock. i conclude that 
either constance or her baby was unwell, and that the nurse need my 
assistance. so i left my bed, and moving to the door, ask soft who 
was there. it was, to my surprise, the voice of constance that replied, 
"o sophy, let me in." 

in a second i had open the door, and found my poor sister wearing only 
her night-dress, and standing in the moonlight before me. 

she look frightened and unusually pale in her white dress and with the 
cold gleam of the moon upon her. at first i thought she was walking in 
her sleep, and perhaps rehearse again in her dream the trouble which 
dogged her waking footsteps. i took her gently by the arm, saying, 
"dearest constance, come back at once to bed; you will take cold." 

she was not asleep, however, but made a motion of silence, and said in 
a terrify whisper, "hush; do you hear nothing?" there was something 
so vague and yet so mysterious in the question and in her evident 
perturbation that i was infect too by her alarm. i felt myself shiver, 
as i strained my ear to catch if possible the slightest sound. but a 
complete silence pervade everything: i could hear nothing. 

"can you hear it?" she said again. all sort of image of ill present 
themselves to my imagination: i thought the baby must be ill with croup, 
and that she was listen for some stertorous breath of anguish; and 
then the dread came over me that perhaps her sorrow had been too much 
for her, and that reason had left her seat. at that thought the marrow 
froze in my bones. 

"hush," she said again; and just at that moment, as i strained my ears, 
i thought i caught upon the sleep air a distant and very faint 
murmur. 

"oh, what is it, constance?" i said. "you will drive me mad;" and while 
i spoke the murmur seem to resolve itself into the vibration, felt 
almost rather than heard, of some distant musical instrument. i step 
past her into the passage. all was deadly still, but i could perceive 
that music was being play somewhere far away; and almost at the same 
minute my ear recognise faint but unmistakable the _gagliarda_ of 
the "areopagita." 

i have already mention that for some reason which i can scarcely 
explain, this melody was very repugnant to me. it seem associate in 
some strange and intimate way with my brother's indisposition and moral 
decline. almost at the moment that i had heard it first two years ago, 
peace seem to have risen up and left our house, gathering her skirt 
about her, as we read that the angel left the temple at the siege of 
jerusalem. and now it was even more detest to my ears, recall as 
it did too vivid the cruel event of the preceding evening. 

"john must be sitting up playing," i said. 

"yes," she answered; "but why is he in this part of the house, and why 
do he always play _that_ tune?" 

it was if some irresistible attraction drew us towards the music. 
constance took my hand in hers and we move together slow down the 
passage. the wind had risen, and though there was a bright moon, her 
beam were constant eclipse by driving clouds. still there was light 
enough to guide us, and i extinguish the candle. as we reach the end 
of the passage the air of the _gagliarda_ grew more and more distinct. 

our passage open on to a broad landing with a balustrade, and from one 
side of it ran out the picture-gallery which you know. 

i look at constance significantly. it was evident that john was 
play in this gallery. we cross the landing, tread careful and 
making no noise with our naked feet, for both of us had been too excited 
even to think of putt on shoes. 

we could now see the whole length of the gallery. my poor brother sat in 
the oriel window of which i have before spoken. he was sitting so as to 
face the picture of adrian temple, and the great window of the oriel 
flung a strong light on him. at times a cloud hid the moon, and all was 
plunge in darkness; but in a moment the cold light fell full on him, 
and we could trace every feature as in a picture. he had evidently not 
been to bed, for he was fully dressed, exactly as he had left us in the 
drawing-room five hour early when constance was weeping over his 
thoughtless words. he was play the violin, play with a passion and 
reckless energy which i had never seen, and hope never to see again. 
perhaps he remember that this spot was far remove from the rest 
of the house, or perhaps he was careless whether any were awake and 
listen to him or not; but it seem to me that he was play with 
a sonorous strength greater than i had thought possible for a single 
violin. there came from his instrument such a volume and torrent of 
melody as to fill the gallery so full, as it were, of sound that it 
throb and vibrate again. he kept his eyes fixed on something at the 
opposite side of the gallery; we could not indeed see on what, but i 
have no doubt at all that it was the portrait of adrian temple. his gaze 
was eager and expectant, as though he were wait for something to 
occur which did not. 

i knew that he had been grow thin of late, but this was the first 
time i had realise how sunk were the hollow of his eyes and how 
haggard his features had become. it may have been some effect of 
moonlight which i do not well understand, but his fine-cut face, once so 
handsome, look on this night worn and thin like that of an old man. 
he never for a moment cease playing. it was always one same dreadful 
melody, the _gagliarda_ of the "areopagita," and he repeated it time 
after time with the perseverance and apparent aimless of an 
automaton. 

he did not see us, and we made no sign, standing afar off in silent 
horror at that nocturnal sight. constance clutch me by the arm: she 
was so pale that i perceive it even in the moonlight. "sophy," she 
said, "he is sitting in the same place as on the first night when he 
told me how he love me." i could answer nothing, my voice was frozen 
in me. i could only stare at my brother's poor wither face, realise 
then for the first time that he must be mad, and that it was the 
haunting of the _gagliarda_ that had made him so. 

we stood there i believe for half an hour without speech or motion, and 
all the time that sad figure at the end of the gallery continue its 
performance. sudden he stopped, and an expression of frantic despair 
came over his face as he laid down the violin and bury his head in his 
hands. i could bear it no longer. "constance," i said, "come back to 
bed. we can do nothing," so we turn and crept away silent as we had 
come. only as we cross the landing constance stopped, and look back 
for a minute with a heart-broken yearning at the man she loved. he had 
taken his hand from his head, and she saw the profile of his face clear 
cut and hard in the white moonlight. 

it was the last time her eyes ever look upon it. 

she made for a moment as if she would turn back and go to him, but her 
courage fail her, and we went on. before we reach her room we heard 
in the distance, faint but distinctly, the burden of the _gagliarda_. 




chapter xii 


the next morning, my maid brought me a hurried note written in pencil by 
my brother. it contained only a few lines, saying that he found that his 
continue sojourn at royston was not beneficial to his health, and had 
determined to return to italy. if we wish to write, letters would 
reach him at the villa de angelis: his valet parnham was to follow him 
thither with his baggage as soon as it could be got together. this was 
all; there was no word of adieu even to his wife. 

we found that he had never gone to bed that night. but in the early 
morning he had himself saddle his horse _sentinel_ and ridden in to 
derby, taking the early mail thence to london. his resolve to leave 
royston had apparently been arrive at very suddenly, for so far as we 
could discover, he had carry no luggage of any kind. i could not help 
look somewhat careful round his room to see if he had taken the 
stradivarius violin. no trace of it or even of its case was to be seen, 
though it was difficult to imagine how he could have carry it with him 
on horseback. there was, indeed, a lock travelling-trunk which parnham 
was to bring with him later, and the instrument might, of course, have 
been in that; but i felt convinced that he had actually taken it with 
him in some way or other, and this prove afterwards to have been the 
case. 

i shall draw a veil, my dear edward, over the event which immediately 
follow your father's departure. even at this distance of time the 
memory is too inexpressible bitter to allow me to do more than brief 
allude to them. 

a fortnight after john's departure, we left royston and remove to 
worth, wish to get some sea-air, and to enjoy the late summer of the 
south coast. your mother seem entire to have recover from her 
confinement, and to be enjoy as good health as could be reasonably 
expect under the circumstances of her husband's indisposition. but 
sudden one of those insidious malady which are incidental to women 
in her condition seize upon her. we had hope and believe that all 
such period of danger was already happily past; but, alas! it was not 
so, and within a few hour of her first seizure all realise how serious 
was her case. everything that human skill can do under such conditions 
was done, but without avail. symptom of blood-poisoning show 
themselves, accompany with high fever, and within a week she was in 
her coffin. 

though her delirium was terrible to watch, yet i thank god to this 
day, that if she was to die, it pleased him to take her while in an 
unconscious condition. for two days before her death she recognise 
no one, and was thus spare at least the sad of passing from life 
without one word of kindness or even of reconciliation from her unhappy 
husband. 

the communication with a place so distant as naples was not then to be 
made under fifteen or twenty days, and all was over before we could hope 
that the intelligence even of his wife's illness had reach john. both 
mrs. temple and i remain at worth in a state of complete prostration, 
await his return. when more than a month had pass without his 
arrival, or even a letter to say that he was on his way, our anxiety 
took a new turn, as we fear that some accident had befallen him, or 
that the news of his wife's death, which would then be in his hands, 
had so seriously affected him as to render him incapable of taking any 
action. to repeated subsequent communications we received no answer; 
but at last, to a letter which i wrote to parnham, the servant replied, 
state that his master was still at the villa de angelis, and in a 
condition of health little differ from that in which he left royston, 
except that he was now slightly pale if possible and thinner. it was 
not till the end of november that any word came from him, and then he 
wrote only one page of a sheet of note-paper to me in pencil, making no 
reference whatever to his wife's death, but saying that he should not 
return for christmas, and instruct me to draw on his banker for any 
moneys that i might require for household purpose at worth. 

i need not tell you the effect that such conduct produce on mrs. 
temple and myself; you can easily imagine what would have been your own 
feelings in such a case. nor will i relate any other circumstances which 
occur at this period, as they would have no direct bearing upon my 
narrative. though i still wrote to my brother at frequent intervals, as 
not wish to neglect a duty, no word from him ever came in reply. 

about the end of march, indeed, parnham return to worth maltravers, 
saying that his master had paid him a half-year's wages in advance, 
and then dispense with his services. he had always been an excellent 
servant, and attach to the family, and i was glad to be able to offer 
him a suitable position with us at worth until his master should return. 
he brought disquiet report of john's health, saying that he was 
grow visibly weaker. though i was sorely tempt to ask him many 
question as to his master's habit and way of life, my pride forbade me 
to do so. but i heard incidentally from my maid that parnham had told 
her sir john was spend money freely in alteration at the villa de 
angelis, and had engaged italy to attend him, with which his english 
valet was naturally much dissatisfied. 

so the spring pass and the summer was well advanced. 

on the last morning of july i found wait for me on the 
breakfast-table an envelope address in my brother's hand. i open 
it hastily. it only contained a few words, which i have before me as i 
write now. the ink is a little fade and yellow, but the impression it 
made is yet vivid as on that summer morning. 

"my dearest sophy," it began,--"come to me here at once, if possible, 
or it may be too late. i want to see you. they say that i am ill, and 
too weak to travel to england. 

"your loving brother, 

"john." 


there was a great change in the style, from the cold and conventional 
note that he had hitherto sent at such long intervals; from the stiff 
"dear sophia" and "sincerely yours" to which, i grieve to say, i had 
grown accustomed. even the writing itself was altered. it was more the 
bold boyish hand he wrote when first he went to oxford, than the small 
cramped and classic character of his later years. though it was a little 
matter enough, god knows, in comparison with his grievous conduct, yet 
it touched me much that he should use again the once familiar "dearest 
sophy," and sign himself "my loving brother." i felt my heart go out 
towards him; and so strong is woman's affection for her own kin, that i 
had already forgotten any resentment and reprobate in my great pity 
for the poor wanderer, lie sick perhaps unto death and alone in a 
foreign land. 

i took his note at once to mrs. temple. she read it twice or thrice, 
try to take in the meaning of it. then she drew me to her and, 
kiss me, said, "go to him at once, sophy. bring him back to worth; 
try to bring him back to the right way." 

i ordered my things to be packed, determine to drive to southampton 
and take train thence to london; and at the same time mrs. temple gave 
instruction that all should be prepared for her own return to royston 
within a few days. i knew she did not dare to see john after her 
daughter's death. 

i took my maid with me, and parnham to act as courier. at london we 
hire a carriage for the whole journey, and from calais post direct to 
naples. we took the short route by marseille and genoa, and travelled 
for seventeen days without intermission, as my brother's note made me 
desirous of lose no time on the way. i had never been in italy before; 
but my anxiety was such that my mind was unable to appreciate either 
the beauty of the scenery or the incident of travel. i can, in fact, 
remember nothing of our journey now, except the wearisome and 
interminable jolt over bad road and the insufferable heat. it was 
the middle of august in an exceptional warm summer, and after passing 
genoa the heat became almost tropical. there was no relief even at 
night, for the warm air hung stagnant and suffocating, and the inside of 
my travel coach was often like a furnace. 

we were at last approach the conclusion of our journey, and had left 
rome behind us. the day that we set out from aversa was the hottest that 
i have ever felt, the sun beating down with an astonish power even 
in the early hours, and the road being thick with a white and blind 
dust. it was soon after midnight that our carriage began rattling over 
the great stone block with which the street of naples are paved. the 
suburbs that we at first pass through were, i remember, in dark 
and perfect quiet; but after traverse the heart of the city and 
reach the western side, we sudden found ourselves in the midst 
of an enormous and very dense crowd. there were lantern everywhere, 
and interminable lane of booths, whose proprietor were praise 
their wares with loud shouts; and here acrobats, jugglers, minstrels, 
black-vested priests, and blue-coated soldier mingle with a vast crowd 
whose numbers at once arrest the progress of the carriage. though it 
was so late of a sunday night, all seem here awake and busy as at 
noonday. oil-lamps with reek fumes of black smoke flung a glare over 
the scene, and the discordant cries and chatter conversation united 
in so deafen a noise as to make me turn faint and giddy, weary as i 
already was with long travelling. though i felt that intense eager 
and expectation which the approach termination of a tedious journey 
inspires, and was desirous of push forward with all imaginable 
despatch, yet here our course was sadly delayed. the horse could only 
proceed at the slowest of foot-paces, and we were constant brought 
to a complete stop for some minutes before the post-boy could force 
a passage through the unwill crowd. this produce a feeling of 
irritation, and despair of ever reach my destination; and the mirth 
and careless hilarity of the people round us chafe with bitter contrast 
on my depressed spirits. i inquire from the post-boy what was the 
origin of so great a commotion, and understood him to say in reply that 
it was a religious festival held annual in honour of "our lady of 
the grotto." i cannot, however, conceive of any truly religious person 
countenance such a gathering, which seem to me rather like the 
unclean orgy of a heathen deity than an act of faith of christian 
people. this disturbance occasion us so serious a delay, that as we 
were climb the steep slope leading up to posilipo it was already 
three in the morning and the dawn was at hand. 

after mount steady for a long time we began to rapid descend, and 
just as the sun came up over the sea we arrive at the villa de angelis. 
i sprang from the carriage, and passing through a trellis of vines, 
reach the house. a man-servant was in waiting, and held the door open 
for me; but he was an italian, and did not understand me when i ask 
in english where sir john maltraver was. he had evidently, however, 
received instruction to take me at once to my brother, and led the way 
to an inner part of the house. as we proceed i heard the sound of a 
rich alto voice singing very sweet to a mandoline some soothe or 
religious melody. the servant pull aside a heavy curtain and i found 
myself in my brother's room. an italy youth sat on a stool near the 
door, and it was he who had been singing. at a few words from john, 
address to him in his own language, he set down his mandoline and left 
the room, pull to the curtain and shut a door behind it. 

the room look directly on to the sea: the villa was, in fact, built 
upon rocks at the foot of which the wave lapped. through two fold 
window which open on to a balcony the early light of the summer 
morning stream in with a rosy flush. my brother sat on a low couch 
or sofa, prop up against a heap of pillows, with a rug of brilliant 
colours flung across his feet and legs. he held out his arms to me, and 
i ran to him; but even in so brief an interval i had perceive that he 
was terribly weak and wasted. 

all my memory of his past fault had vanish and were dead in that 
sad aspect of his worn features, and in the conviction which i felt, 
even from the first moment, that he had but little time long to remain 
with us. i knelt by him on the floor, and with my arms round his neck, 
embrace him tenderly, not finding any place for words, but only sob 
in great anguish. neither of us spoke, and my weary from long travel 
and the strange of the situation cause me to feel that paralyse 
sensation of doubt as to the reality of the scene, and even of my own 
existence, which all, i believe, have experienced at times of severe 
mental tension. that i, a plain english girl, should be kneel here 
beside my brother in the italy dawn; that i should read, as i 
believed, on his young face the unmistakable image and superscription 
of death; and reflect that within so few month he had married, had 
wreck his home, that my poor constance was no more;--these things 
seem so unrealisable that for a minute i felt that it must all be a 
nightmare, that i should immediately wake with the fresh salt air of 
the channel blow through my bedroom window at worth, and find i had 
been dreaming. but it was not so; the light of day grew strong and 
brighter, and even in my sorrow the panorama of the most beautiful spot 
on earth, the bay of naples, with vesuviu lie on the far side, as 
seen then from these windows, stamp itself for ever on my mind. it was 
unreal as a scene in some brilliant dramatic spectacle, but, alas! no 
unreal was here. the flame of the candle in their silver sconce 
wax pale and paler, the lines and shadow on my brother's face grew 
darker, and the pallor of his waste features show more striking in 
the bright ray of the morning sun. 




chapter xiii 


i had spent near a week at the villa de angelis. john's manner to me 
was most tender and affectionate; but he show no wish to refer to the 
tragedy of his wife's death and the sad event which had precede it, or 
to attempt to explain in any way his own conduct in the past. nor did 
i ever lead the conversation to these topics; for i felt that even if 
there were no other reason, his great weakness render it inadvisable 
to introduce such subject at present, or even to lead him to speak at 
all more than was actually necessary. i was content to minister to him 
in quiet, and infinite happy in his restore affection. he seem 
desirous of banish from his mind all thought of the last few months, 
but spoke much of the years before he had gone to oxford, and of happy 
days which we had spent together in our childhood at worth maltravers. 
his weakness was extreme, but he complain of no particular malady 
except a short cough which trouble him at night. 

i had spoken to him of his health, for i could see that his state was 
such as to inspire anxiety, and beg that he would allow me to see if 
there was an english doctor at naples who could visit him. this he would 
not assent to, saying that he was quite content with the care of an 
italy doctor who visit him almost daily, and that he hope to be 
able, under my escort, to return within a very short time to england. 

"i shall never be much better, dear sophy," he said one day. "the doctor 
tell me that i am suffering from some sort of consumption, and that i 
must not expect to live long. yet i yearn to see worth once more, and to 
feel again the west wind blow in the evening across from portland, 
and smell the thyme on the dorset downs. in a few days i hope perhaps to 
be a little stronger, and i then wish to show you a discovery which i 
have made in naples. after that you may order them to harness the 
horses, and carry me back to worth maltravers." 

i endeavour to ascertain from signor baravelli, the doctor, something 
as to the actual state of his patient; but my knowledge of italy was 
so slight that i could neither make him understand what i would be at, 
nor comprehend in turn what he replied, so that this attempt was 
relinquished. from my brother himself i gather that he had begun to 
feel his health much impair as far back as the early spring, but 
though his strength had since then gradual fail him, he had not been 
confine to the house until a month past. he spent the day and often 
the night recline on his sofa and speak little. he had apparently 
lost the taste for the violin which had once absorb so much of his 
attention; indeed i think the bodily strength necessary for its 
performance had probably now fail him. the stradivarius instrument 
lay near his couch in its case; but i only saw the latter open on one 
occasion, i think, and was deep thankful that john no long took 
the same delight as heretofore in the practice of this art,--not only 
because the mere sound of his violin was now fraught to me with such 
bitter memories, but also because i felt sure that its performance had 
in some way which i could not explain a deleterious effect upon himself. 
he exhibit that absence of vitality which is so often noticeable in 
those who have not long to live, and on some days lay in a state of 
semi-lethargy from which it was difficult to rouse him. but at other 
times he suffer from a distressing restless which forbade him to 
sit still even for a few minutes, and which was more painful to watch 
than his lethargy stupor. the italy boy, of whom i have already 
spoken, exhibit an untiring devotion to his master which won my heart. 
his name was raffaelle carotenuto, and he often sang to us in the 
evening, accompany himself on the mandoline. at nights, too, when 
john could not sleep, raffaelle would read for hour till at last 
his master doze off. he was well educated, and though i could not 
understand the subject he read, i often sat by and listened, being 
charm with his evident attachment to my brother and with the melodious 
intonation of a sweet voice. 

my brother was nervous apparently in some respects, and would never be 
left alone even for a few minutes; but in the interval while raffaelle 
was with him i had ample opportunity to examine and appreciate the 
beauty of the villa de angelis. it was built, as i have said, on some 
rocks jut into the sea, just before coming to the capo di posilipo 
as you proceed from naples. the early foundations were, i believe, 
originally roman, and upon them a modern villa had been construct 
in the eighteenth century, and to this again john had made important 
addition in the past two years. look down upon the sea from the 
window of the villa, one could on calm days easily discern the remains 
of roman pier and mole lie below the surface of the transparent 
water; and the tufa-rock on which the house was built was burrow with 
those unintelligible excavation of a classic date so common in the 
neighbourhood. these subterraneous rooms and passages, while they 
arouse my curiosity, seem at the same time so gloomy and repellent 
that i never explore them. but on one sunny morning, as i walk at 
the foot of the rocks by the sea, i venture into one of the large of 
these chambers, and saw that it had at the far end an opening leading 
apparently to an inner room. i had walking with me an old italy female 
servant who took a motherly interest in my proceedings, and who, rely 
principally upon a very slight knowledge of english, had constitute 
herself my body-guard. encourage by her presence, i penetrate this 
inner room and found that it again open in turn into another, and so 
on until we had pass through no less than four chambers. 

they were all light after a fashion through vent-holes which somewhere 
or other reach the outer air, but the fourth room open into a fifth 
which was unlighted. my companion, who had been showing sign of alarm 
and an evident reluctance to proceed further, now stop abrupt and 
beg me to return. it may have been that her fear communicate itself 
to me also, for on attempt to cross the threshold and explore the 
dark of the fifth cell, i was seize by an unreasoning panic and by 
the feeling of undefined horror experienced in a nightmare. i hesitate 
for an instant, but my fear became sudden more intense, and spring 
back, i follow my companion, who had set out to run back to the outer 
air. we never pause until we stood pant in the full sunlight by the 
sea. as soon as the maid had found her breath, she beg me never to go 
there again, explain in broken english that the cave were known in 
the neighbourhood as the "cells of isis," and were reputed to be haunt 
by demons. this episode, trifling as it may appear, had so great an 
effect upon me that i never again venture on to the lower walk which 
ran at the foot of the rocks by the sea. 

in the house above, my brother had built a large hall after the ancient 
roman style, and this, with a dining-room and many other chambers, were 
decorate in the fashion of those discover at pompeii. they had been 
furnish with the utmost luxury, and the beauty of the paintings, 
furniture, carpets, and hangings was enhance by statue in bronze and 
marble. the villa, indeed, and its fitting were of a kind to which 
i was little used, and at the same time of such beauty that i never 
cease to regard all as a creation of an enchanter's wand, or as the 
drop-scene to some drama which might sudden be raise and disappear 
from my sight. the house, in short, together with its furniture, was, 
i believe, intended to be a reproduction of an ancient roman villa, 
and had something about it repellent to my rustic and insular ideas. 
in the contemplation of its perfection i experienced a curious mental 
sensation, which i can only compare to the physical oppression produce 
on some person by the heavy and cloy perfume of a bouquet of 
gardenia or other too highly scent exotics. 

in my brother's room was a medieval reproduction in mellow alabaster of 
a classic group of a dolphin encircle a cupid. it was, i think, the 
fairest work of art i ever saw, but it jar upon my sense of propriety 
that close by it should hang an ivory crucifix. i would rather, i think, 
have seen all things material and pagan entirely, with every view of 
the future life shut out, than have found a medley of things sacred and 
profane, where the emblem of our highest hope and aspiration were 
placed in insult indifference side by side with the embody form of 
sensuality. here, in this scene of magical beauty, it seem to me for 
a moment that the years had roll back, that christianity had still to 
fight with a _living_ paganism, and that the battle was not yet won. it 
was the same all through the house; and there were many other matter 
which fill me with regret, mingle with vague and apprehensive 
surmise which i shall not here repeat. 

at one end of the house was a small library, but it contained few works 
except latin and greece classics. i had gone thither one day to look for 
a book that john had ask for, when in turning out some drawers i found 
a number of letters written from worth by my lost constance to her 
husband. the shock of being brought sudden face to face with a 
handwriting that evoke memory at once so dear and sad was in itself 
a sharp one; but its bitter was immeasurable increase by the 
discovery that not one of these envelope had ever been opened. while 
that dear heart, now at rest, was pour forth her love and sorrow to 
the ear that should have been above all other ready to receive them, 
her letters, as they arrived, were flung uncared for, unread, even 
unopened, into any haphazard receptacle. 

the days pass one by one at the villa de angeli with but little 
incident, nor did my brother's health either visibly improve or decline. 
though the weather was still more than usually warm, a grateful breeze 
came morning and evening from the sea and temper the heat so much as 
to render it always supportable. john would sometimes in the evening sit 
prop up with cushion on the trellis balcony look towards baia, 
and watch the fishermen setting their nets. we could hear the melody 
of their deep-voiced song carry up on the night air. "it was here, 
sophy," my brother said, as we sat one evening look on a scene like 
this,--"it was here that the great epicure pollio built himself a famous 
house, and call it by two greece words meaning a 'truce to care,' from 
which our name of posilipo is derived. it was his _sans-souci_, and here 
he cast aside his vexations; but they were lighter than mine. posilipo 
has brought no cessation of care to me. i do not think i shall find any 
truce this side the grave; and beyond, who knows?" 

this was the first time john had spoken in this strain, and he seem 
stir to an unusual activity, as though his own words had sudden 
remind him how frail was his state. he call raffaelle to him and 
despatch him on an errand to naples. the next morning he sent for me 
early than usual, and beg that a carriage might be ready by six in 
the evening, as he desire to drive into the city. i try at first to 
dissuade him from his project, urge him to consider his weak state of 
health. he reply that he felt somewhat stronger, and had something 
that he particularly wish me to see in naples. this done, it would be 
better to return at once to england: he could, he thought, bear the 
journey if we travelled by very short stages. 




chapter xiv 


shortly after six o'clock in the evening we left the villa de angelis. 
the day had been as usual cloudless serene; but a gentle sea-breeze, 
of which i have spoken, rose in the afternoon and brought with it a 
refreshing coolness. we had arrange a sort of couch in the landau with 
many cushion for my brother, and he mount into the carriage with more 
ease than i had expected. i sat beside him, with raffaelle facing me 
on the opposite seat. we drove down the hill of posilipo through the 
ilex-trees and tamarisk-bushes that then skirt the sea, and so into 
the town. john spoke little except to remark that the carriage was an 
easy one. as we were passing through one of the principal street he 
bent over to me and said, "you must not be alarm if i show you to-day 
a strange sight. some women might perhaps be frightened at what we are 
go to see; but my poor sister has known already so much of trouble 
that a light thing like this will not affect her." in spite of his 
encomium upon my supposed courage, i felt alarm and agitate by his 
words. there was a vague in them which frightened me, and bred that 
indefinite apprehension which is often infinite more terrify than 
the actual object which inspire it. to my inquiry he would give no 
further response than to say that he had whilst at posilipo made some 
investigate in naples leading to a strange discovery, which he was 
anxious to communicate to me. after traverse a considerable distance, 
we had penetrate apparently into the heart of the town. the street 
grew narrow and more dense thronged; the house were more dirty and 
tumbledown, and the appearance of the people themselves suggest that 
we had reach some of the lower quarters of the city. here we pass 
through a further network of small street of the name of which i took 
no note, and found ourselves at last in a very dark and narrow lane 
call the _via del giardino_. although my brother had, so far as i had 
observed, given no orders to the coachman, the latter seem to have 
no difficulty in finding his way, driving rapid in the neapolitan 
fashion, and proceeding direct as to a place with which he was already 
familiar. 

in the via del giardino the house were of great height, and overhung 
the street so as nearly to touch one another. it seem that this 
quarter had been formerly inhabited, if not by the aristocracy, at least 
by a class very much superior to that which now live there; and many 
of the house were large and dignified, though long since parcel 
out into small tenements. it was before such a house that we at last 
brought up. here must have been at one time a house or palace of some 
person of distinction, have a long and fine façade adorn with 
delicate pilasters, and much florid ornamentation of the renaissance 
period. the ground-floor was divide into a series of small shops, and 
its upper storey were evidently people by sordid family of the 
lowest class. before one of these little shops, now closed and have 
its window careful block with boards, our carriage stopped. 
raffaelle alighted, and taking a key from his pocket unlock the door, 
and assist john to leave the carriage. i followed, and directly we had 
cross the threshold, the boy lock the door behind us, and i heard 
the carriage drive away. 

we found ourselves in a narrow and dark passage, and as soon as my eyes 
grew accustomed to the gloom i perceive there was at the end of it a 
low staircase leading to some upper room, and on the right a door which 
open into the closed shop. my brother move slow along the passage, 
and began to ascend the stairs. he leant with one hand on raffaelle's 
arm, taking hold of the baluster with the other. but i could see 
that to mount the stairs cost him considerable effort, and he pause 
frequent to cough and get his breath again. so we reach a landing 
at the top, and found ourselves in a small chamber or magazine directly 
over the shop. it was quite empty except for a few broken chairs, and 
appear to be a small loft form by divide what had once been a 
high room into two storeys, of which the shop form the lower. a long 
window, which had no doubt once form one of several in the wall of 
this large room, was now divide across its width by the flooring, and 
with its upper part serve to light the loft, while its lower pane 
open into the shop. the ceiling was, in consequence of these 
alterations, comparatively low, but though much mutilated, retain 
evident trace of have been at one time richly decorated, with the 
raise moulding and pendant common in the sixteenth century. at one 
end of the loft was a species of cove and elaborate carve dado, of 
which the former use was not obvious; but the large original room had 
without doubt been divide in length as well as in height, as the 
lath-and-plaster wall at either end of the loft had evidently been no 
part of the ancient structure. 

my brother sat down in one of the old chairs, and seem to be 
collect his strength before speaking. my anxiety was momentarily 
increasing, and it was a great relief when he began, talk in a low 
voice as one that had much to say and wish to husband his strength. 

"i do not know whether you will recollect my have told you of 
something mr. gaskell once said about the music of graziani's 
'areopagita' suite. it had always, he use to say, a curious effect upon 
his imagination, and the melody of the _gagliarda_ especially call up 
to his thought in some strange way a picture of a certain hall where 
people were dancing. he even went so far as to describe the general 
appearance of the room itself, and of the person who were dance 
there." 

"yes," i answered, "i remember your telling me of this;" and indeed my 
memory had in times past so often rehearse mr. gaskell's description 
that, although i had not recently thought of it, its chief features 
immediately return to my mind. 

"he describe it," my brother continued, "as a long hall with an arcade 
of arch running down one side, of the fantastic gothic of the 
renaissance. at the end was a gallery or balcony for the musicians, 
which on its front carry a coat of arms." 

i remember this perfectly and told john so, add that the shield 
bore a cherub's head fan three lily on a golden field. 

"it is strange," john went on, "that the description of a scene which 
our friend thought a mere effort of his own imagination has impress 
itself so deep on both our minds. but the picture which he drew was 
more than a fancy, for we are at this minute in the very hall of his 
dream." 

i could not gather what my brother meant, and thought his reason was 
failing him; but he continued, "this miserable floor on which we stand 
has of course been afterwards built in; but you see above you the old 
ceiling, and here at the end was the musicians' gallery with the shield 
upon its front." 

he pointed to the carve and whitewash dado which had hitherto so 
puzzle me. i step up to it, and although the lath-and-plaster 
partition wall was now built around it, it was clear that its curve 
outline might very easily, as john said, have form part of the front 
of a cove gallery. i look close at the relief-work which had adorn 
it. though the edge were all rub off, and the moulding in some 
case entire removed, i could trace without difficulty a shield 
in the midst; and a more narrow inspection reveal underneath the 
whitewash, which had partly peel away, enough remnant of colour to 
show that it had certainly been once paint gold and borne a cherub's 
head with three lilies. 

"that is the shield of the old neapolitan house of doma-cavalli," my 
brother continued; "they bore a cherub's head fan three lily on a 
shield or. it was in the balcony behind this shield, long since block 
up as you see, that the musician sat on that ball night of which 
gaskell dreamt. from it they look down on the hall below where dance 
was go forward, and i will now take you downstairs that you may see 
if the description tallies." 

so saying, he raise himself, and descend the stairs with much less 
difficulty than he had shown in mount them, flung open the door 
which i had seen in the passage and usher us into the shop on the 
ground-floor. the evening light had now fade so much that we could 
scarcely see even in the passage, and the shop have its window 
barricade with shutters, was in complete darkness. raffaelle, however, 
struck a match and lit three half-burnt candle in a tarnish sconce 
upon the wall. 

the shop had evidently been lately in the occupation of a wine-seller, 
and there were still several empty wooden wine-butts, and some broken 
flask on shelves. in one corner i notice that the earth which form 
the floor had been turn up with spades. there was a small heap of 
mould, and a large flat stone was thus expose below the surface. this 
stone had an iron ring attach to it, and seem to cover the aperture 
of a well, or perhaps a vault. at the back of the shop, and furthest 
from the street, were two lofty arch separate by a column in the 
middle, from which the outside casing had been stripped. 

to these arch john pointed and said, "that is a part of the arcade 
which once ran down the whole length of the hall. only these two arch 
are now left, and the fine marbles which doubtless coat the outside of 
this divide pillar have been strip off. on a summer's night about 
one hundred years ago dance was go on in this hall. there were a 
dozen couple dance a wild step such as is never seen now. the tune 
that the musician were play in the gallery above was taken from the 
'areopagita' suite of graziani. gaskell has often told me that when 
he play it the music brought with it to his mind a sense of some 
impending catastrophe, which culminate at the end of the first movement 
of the _gagliarda_. it was just at that moment, sophy, that an 
englishman who was dance here was stab in the back and foul 
murdered." 

i had scarcely heard all that john had said, and had certainly not been 
able to take in its import; but without wait to hear if i should say 
anything, he move across to the uncover stone with the ring in it. 
exert a strength which i should have believe entire impossible in 
his weak condition, he applied to the stone a lever which lay ready at 
hand. raffaelle at the same time seize the ring, and so they were able 
between them to move the covering to one side sufficient to allow 
access to a small staircase which thus appear to view. the stair 
was a winding one, and once led no doubt to some vault below the 
ground-floor. raffaelle descended first, taking in his hand the sconce 
of three candles, which he held above his head so as to fling a light 
down the steps. john went next, and then i followed, try to support 
my brother if possible with my hand. the stairs were very dry, and 
on the wall there was none of the damp or mould which fancy usually 
associate with a subterraneous vault. i do not know what it was i 
expect to see, but i had an uneasy feeling that i was on the brink of 
some evil and distressing discovery. after we had descended about twenty 
steps we could see the entry to some vault or underground room, and it 
was just at the foot of the stairs that i saw something lying, as the 
light from the candle fell on it from above. at first i thought it was 
a heap of dust or refuse, but on look close it seem rather a 
bundle of rags. as my eyes penetrate the gloom, i saw there was about 
it some tattered cloth of a fade green tint, and almost at the same 
minute i seem to trace under the clothes the lines or dimensions of a 
human figure. for a moment i imagine it was some poor man lie face 
downwards and bent up against the wall. the idea of a man or of a dead 
body being there shock me violently, and i cry to my brother, "tell 
me, what is it?" at that instant the light from. raffaelle's candle 
fell in a somewhat different direction. it light up the white bowl 
of a human skull, and i saw that what i had taken for a man's form was 
instead that of a clothe skeleton. i turn faint and sick for an 
instant, and should have fallen had it not been for john, who put his 
arm about me and sustain me with an unexpected strength. 

"god help us!" i exclaimed, "let us go. i cannot bear this; there are 
foul vapours here; let us get back to the outer air." 

he took me by the arm, and point at the huddle heap, said, "do you 
know whose bone those are? that is adrian temple. after it was all 
over, they flung his body down the steps, dress in the clothes he 
wore." 

at that name, utter in so ill-omened a place, i felt a fresh access of 
terror. it seem as though the soul of that wicked man must be still 
hover over his unbury remains, and boding evil to us all. a chill 
crept over me, the light, the walls, my brother, and raffaelle all swam 
round, and i sank swoon on the stairs. 

when i return fully to my senses we were in the landau again making 
our way back to the villa de angelis. 




chapter xv 


the next morning my health and strength were entire restore to me, 
but my brother, on the contrary, seem weak and exhaust from his 
effort of the previous night. our return journey to the villa de 
angeli had pass in complete silence. i had been too much perturb 
to question him on the many points relate to the strange event as to 
which i was still completely in the dark, and he on his side had shown 
no desire to afford me any further information. when i saw him the next 
morning he exhibit sign of great weakness, and in response to an 
effort on my part to obtain some explanation of the discovery of adrian 
temple's body, avoid an immediate reply, promising to tell me all he 
knew after our return to worth maltravers. 

i ponder over the last terrify episode very frequent in my own 
mind, and as i thought more deep of it all, it seem to me that the 
outline of some evil history were piece by piece develop themselves, 
that i had almost within my grasp the clue that would make all plain, 
and that had elude me so long. in that dim story adrian temple, the 
music of the _gagliarda_, my brother's fatal passion for the violin, 
all seem to have some mysterious connection, and to have conspire in 
working john's mental and physical ruin. even the stradivarius violin 
bore a part in the tragedy, becoming, as it were, an active malignant 
spirit, though i could not explain how, and was yet entire unaware of 
the manner in which it had come into my brother's possession. 

i found that john was still resolve on an immediate return to england. 
his weakness, it is true, led me to entertain doubt as to how he would 
support so long a journey; but at the same time i did not feel justified 
in use any strong effort to dissuade him from his purpose. i 
reflect that the more wholesome air and association of england would 
certainly re-invigorate both body and mind, and that any extra strain 
brought about by the journey would soon be repair by the comfort and 
watchful care with which we could surround him at worth maltravers. 

so the first week in october saw us once more with our face set towards 
england. a very comfortable swinging-bed or hammock had been arrange 
for john in the travel carriage, and we determined to avoid fatigue 
as much as possible by divide our journey into very short stages. my 
brother seem to have no intention of give up the villa de angelis. 
it was left complete with its luxurious furniture, and with all his 
servants, under the care of an italy _maggior-duomo_. i felt that as 
john's state of health forbade his entertaining any hope of an immediate 
return thither, it would have been much better to close entire his 
italy house. but his great weakness made it impossible for him to 
undertake the effort such a course would involve, and even if my own 
ignorance of the italy tongue had not stood in the way, i was far too 
eager to get my invalid back to worth to feel inclined to import any 
further delay, while i should myself adjust matter which were after all 
comparatively trifling. as parnham was now ready to discharge his usual 
duty of valet, and as my brother seem quite content that he should 
do so, raffaelle was of course to be left behind. the boy had quite won 
my heart by his sweet manners, combine with his evident affection to 
his master, and in making him understand that he was now to leave us, 
i offer him a present of a few pound as a token of my esteem. he 
refused, however, to touch this money, and shed tear when he learnt 
that he was to be left in italy, and beg with many protestation of 
devotion that he might be allow to accompany us to england. my heart 
was not proof against his entreaties, support by so many sign of 
attachment, and it was agreed, therefore, that he should at least attend 
us as far as worth maltravers. john show no surprise at the boy being 
with us; indeed i never thought it necessary to explain that i had 
originally purpose to leave him behind. 

our journey, though necessarily prolonged by the short of its 
stages, was safe accomplished. john bore it as well as i could have 
hoped, and though his body show no sign of increase vigour, his 
mind, i think, improve in tone, at any rate for a time. from the 
evening on which he had shown me the terrible discovery in the via 
del giardino he seem to have laid aside something of his care and 
depression. he now exhibit little trace of the morose and 
selfish which had of late so mar his character; and though he 
naturally felt severe at times the fatigue of travel, yet we had no 
long to dread any relapse into that state of lethargy or stupor which 
had so often baffle every effort to counteract it at posilipo. some 
feeling of superstitious aversion had prompt me to give orders that 
the stradivarius violin should be left behind at posilipo. but before 
parting my brother ask for it, and insist that it should be brought 
with him, though i had never heard him play a note on it for many weeks. 
he took an interest in all the petty episode of travel, and certainly 
appear to derive more entertainment from the journey than was to have 
been anticipate in his feeble state of health. 

to the incident of the evening spent in the via del giardino he made no 
allusion of any kind, nor did i for my part wish to renew memory of 
so unpleasant a nature. his only reference occur one sunday evening 
as we were passing a small graveyard near genoa. the scene apparently 
turn his thought to that subject, and he told me that he had taken 
measure before leave naples to ensure that the remains of adrian 
temple should be decent inter in the cemetery of santa bibiana. 
his words set me thinking again, and unsatisfy curiosity prompt 
me strong to inquire of him how he had convinced himself that the 
skeleton at the foot of the stairs was indeed that of adrian temple. but 
i restrained myself, partly from a reliance on his promise that he would 
one day explain the whole story to me, and partly being very reluctant 
to mar the enjoyment of the peaceful scene through which we were 
passing, by the introduction of any subject so jar and painful as 
those to which i have alluded. 

we reach london at last, and here we stop a few days to make some 
necessary arrangement before go down to worth maltravers. i had 
urge upon john during the journey that immediately on his arrival in 
london he should obtain the best english medical advice as to his own 
health. though he at first demurred, saying that nothing more was to be 
done, and that he was perfectly satisfy with the medicine given him by 
dr. baravelli, which he continue to take, yet by constant entreaty i 
prevail upon him to accede to so reasonable a request. dr. frobisher, 
considered at that time the first living authority on disease of the 
brain and nerves, saw him on the morning after our arrival. he was good 
enough to speak with me at some length after seeing my brother, and to 
give me many hint and recipe whereby i might be better enable to 
nurse the invalid. 

sir john's condition, he said, was such as to excite serious anxiety. 
there was, indeed, no brain mischief of any kind to be discovered, but 
his lung were in a state of advanced disease, and there were sign of 
grave heart affection. yet he did not bid me to despair, but said that 
with careful nursing life might certainly be prolonged, and even some 
measure of health in time restored. he ask me more than once if i knew 
of any trouble or worry that prey upon sir john's mind. were there 
financial difficulties; had he been subject to any mental shock; had 
he received any severe fright? to all this i could only reply in the 
negative. at the same time i told dr. frobisher as much of john's 
history as i considered pertinent to the question. he shook his head 
gravely, and recommend that sir john should remain for the present in 
london, under his own constant supervision. to this course my brother 
would by no means consent. he was eager to proceed at once to his own 
house, saying that if necessary we could return again to london for 
christmas. it was therefore agree that we should go down to worth 
maltraver at the end of the week. 

parnham had already left us for worth in order that he might have 
everything ready against his master's return, and when we arrive we 
found all in perfect order for our reception. a small morning-room next 
to the library, with a pleasant south aspect and opening on to the 
terrace, had been prepared for my brother's use, so that he might avoid 
the fatigue of mount stairs, which dr. frobisher considered very 
prejudicial in his present condition. we had also purchase in london a 
chair fitted with wheels, which enable him to be moved, or, if he were 
feeling equal to the exertion, to move himself, without difficulty, from 
room to room. 

his health, i think, improved; very gradually, it is true, but still 
sufficient to inspire me with hope that he might yet be spare to us. 
of the state of his mind or thought i knew little, but i could see that 
he was at times a prey to nervous anxiety. this show itself in the 
harass look which his pale face often wore, and in his marked dislike 
to being left alone. he derived, i think, a certain pleasure from the 
quietude and monotony of his life at worth, and perhaps also from the 
consciousness that he had about him loving and devoted hearts. i say 
hearts, for every servant at worth was attach to him, remember the 
great consideration and courtesy of his early years, and grieve to 
see his youthful and once vigorous frame reduce to so sad a strait. 
books he never read himself, and even the charm of raffaelle's reading 
seem to have lost its power; though he never tired of hearing the boy 
sing, and like to have him sit by his chair even when his eyes were 
shut and he was apparently asleep. his general health seem to me to 
change but little either for better or worse. dr. frobisher had led me 
to expect some such a sequel. i had not conceal from him that i had 
at times entertain suspicion as to my brother's sanity; but he had 
assured me that they were total unfounded, that sir john's brain was 
as clear as his own. at the same time he confessed that he could not 
account for the exhaust vitality of his patient,--a condition which he 
would under ordinary circumstances have attribute to excessive study or 
severe trouble. he had urge upon me the pressing necessity for complete 
rest, and for much sleep. my brother never even incidentally refer to 
his wife, his child, or to mrs. temple, who constant wrote to me from 
royston, send kind message to john, and ask how he did. these 
message i never dare to give him, fear to agitate him, or retard 
his recovery by divert his thought into channel which must 
necessarily be of a painful character. that he should never even mention 
her name, or that of lady maltravers, led me to wonder sometimes if one 
of those curious freak of memory which occasional accompany a severe 
illness had not entire blot out from his mind the recollection of 
his marriage and of his wife's death. he was unable to consider any 
affair of business, and the management of the estate remain as it 
had done for the last two years in the hand of our excellent agent, 
mr. baker. 

but one evening in the early part of december he sent raffaelle about 
nine o'clock, saying he wish to speak to me. i went to his room, and 
without any warning he began at once, "you never show me my boy now, 
sophy; he must be grown a big child, and i should like to see him." 
much startle by so unexpected a remark, i reply that the child was 
at royston under the care of mrs. temple, but that i knew that if it 
pleased him to see edward she would be glad to bring him down to worth. 
he seem gratify with this idea, and beg me to ask her to do so, 
desire that his respects should be at the same time convey to her. i 
almost venture at that moment to recall his lost wife to his thoughts, 
by saying that his child resemble her strongly; for your likeness at 
that time, and even now, my dear edward, to your poor mother was very 
marked. but my courage fail me, and his talk soon revert to an 
early period, compare the mild of the month to that of the first 
winter which he spent at eton. his thoughts, however, must, i fancy, 
have return for a moment to the days when he first met your mother, 
for he sudden asked, "where is gaskell? why do he never come to see 
me?" this brought quite a new idea to my mind. i fancy it might do my 
brother much good to have by him so sensible and true a friend as i knew 
mr. gaskell to be. the latter's address had fortunately not slip from 
my memory, and i put all scruple aside and wrote by the next mail to 
him, setting forth my brother's sad condition, saying that i had heard 
john mention his name, and beg him on my own account to be so good 
as to help us if possible and come to us in this hour of trial. though 
he was so far off as westmorland, mr. gaskell's generous brought 
him at once to our aid, and within a week he was install at worth 
maltravers, sleeping, in the library, where we had arrange a bed at 
his own desire, so that he might be near his sick friend. 

his presence was of the utmost assistance to us all. he treat john 
at once with the tender of a woman and the firm of a clever 
and strong man. they sat constant together in the mornings, and mr. 
gaskell told me john had not shown with him the same reluctance to talk 
freely of his married life as he had discover with me. the tenor of 
his communications i cannot guess, nor did i ever ask; but i knew that 
mr. gaskell was much affected by them. 

john even amuse himself now at times by have mr. baker into his rooms 
of a morning, that the management of the estate might be discuss with 
his friend; and he also express his wish to see the family solicitor, 
as he desire to draw his will. thinking that any diversion of this 
nature could not but be beneficial to him, we sent to dorchester for our 
solicitor, mr. jeffreys, who together with his clerk spent three nights 
at worth, and drew up a testament for my brother. 

so time went on, and the year was drawing to a close. 

it was christmas eve, and i had gone to bed shortly after twelve 
o'clock, have an hour early bid good night to john and mr. gaskell. 
the long habit of watch with, or being in charge of an invalid at 
night, had made my ear extraordinarily quick to apprehend even the 
slightest murmur. it must have been, i think, near three in the morning 
when i found myself awake and conscious of some unusual sound. it was 
low and far off, but i knew instantly what it was, and felt a choke 
sensation of fear and horror, as if an icy hand had grip my throat, 
on recognise the air of the _gagliarda_. it was being play on the 
violin, and a long way off, but i knew that tune too well to permit of 
my have any doubt on the subject. 

any trouble or fear becomes, as you will some day learn, my dear nephew, 
immensely intensify and exaggerate at night. it is so, i suppose, 
because our nerves are in an excited condition, and our brain not 
sufficient awake to give a due account of our foolish imaginations. i 
have myself many times lain awake wrestle in thought with difficulty 
which in the hour of dark seem insurmountable, but with the dawn 
resolve themselves into merely trivial inconveniences. so on this 
night, as i sat up in bed look into the dark, with the sound of that 
melody in my ears, it seem as if something too terrible for words had 
happened; as though the evil spirit, which we had hope was exorcised, 
had return with other sevenfold more wicked than himself, and taken 
up his abode again with my lost brother. the memory of another night 
rush to my mind when constance had call me from my bed at royston, 
and we had stolen together down the moonlit passage with the lilt of 
that wicked music vibrate on the still summer air. poor constance! she 
was in her grave now; yet _her_ trouble at least were over, but here, 
as by some bitter irony, instead of carol or sweet symphony, it was the 
_gagliarda_ that woke me from my sleep on christmas morning. 

i flung my dressing-gown about me, and hurried through the corridor and 
down the stairs which led to the lower storey and my brother's room. 
as i open my bedroom door the violin cease sudden in the middle 
of a bar. its last sound was not a musical note, but rather a horrible 
scream, such as i pray i may never hear again. it was a sound such as a 
wound beast might utter. there is a picture i have seen of blake's, 
showing the soul of a strong wicked man leave his body at death. the 
spirit is flying out through the window with awful staring eyes, aghast 
at the desolate into which it is going. if in the agony of dissolution 
such a lost soul could utter a cry, it would, i think, sound like the 
wail which i heard from the violin that night. 

instantly all was in absolute stillness. the passage were silent and 
ghostly in the faint light of my candle; but as i reach the bottom 
of the stairs i heard the sound of other footsteps, and mr. gaskell met 
me. he was fully dressed, and had evidently not been to bed. he took me 
kindly by the hand and said, "i fear you might be alarm by the sound 
of music. john has been walking in his sleep; he had taken out his 
violin and was play on it in a trance. just as i reach him 
something in it gave way, and the discord cause by the slacken 
strings rouse him at once. he is awake now and has return to bed. 
control your alarm for his sake and your own. it is better that he 
should not know you have been awakened." 

he pressed my hand and spoke a few more reassure words, and i went 
back to my room still much agitated, and yet feeling half ashamed for 
have shown so much anxiety with so little reason. 

that christmas morning was one of the most beautiful that i ever 
remember. it seem as though summer was so loath to leave our sunny 
dorset coast that she came back on this day to bid us adieu before her 
final departure. i had risen early and had partaken of the sacrament 
at our little church. dr. butler had recently introduce this early 
service, and though any alteration of time-honoured customs in such 
matter might not otherwise have met with my approval, i was glad to 
avail myself of the privilege on this occasion, as i wish in any case 
to spend the later morning with my brother. the singular beauty of the 
early hours, and the tranquillise effect of the solemn service brought 
back serene to my mind, and effectually banish from it all memory 
of the preceding night. mr. gaskell met me in the hall on my return, and 
after greeting me kindly with the establish compliments of the day, 
inquire after my health, and hope that the disturbance of my slumber 
on the previous night had not affected me injuriously. he had good news 
for me: john seem decidedly better, was already dressed, and desired, 
as it was christmas morning, that we would take our breakfast with him 
in his room. 

to this, as you may imagine, i readily assented. our breakfast party 
pass off with much content, and even with some quiet humour, john 
sitting in his easy-chair at the head of the table and wish us the 
compliments of the season. i found laid in my place a letter from mrs. 
temple greeting us all (for she knew mr. gaskell was at worth), and 
saying that she hope to bring little edward to us at the new year. 
my brother seem much pleased at the prospect of seeing his son, and 
though perhaps it was only imagination, i fancy he was particularly 
gratify that mrs. temple herself was to pay us a visit. she had not 
been to worth since the death of lady maltravers. 

before we had finished breakfast the sun beat on the pane with an 
unusual strength and brightness. his ray cheer us all, and it was so 
warm that john first open the windows, and then wheel his chair on 
to the walk outside. mr. gaskell brought him a hat and mufflers, and we 
sat with him on the terrace bask in the sun. the sea was still and 
glassy as a mirror, and the channel lay stretch before us like a floor 
of moving gold. a rose or two still hung against the house, and the 
sun's ray reflect from the red sandstone gave us a december morning 
more mild and genial than many june days that i have known in the north. 
we sat for some minutes without speaking, immerse in our own 
reflection and in the exquisite beauty of the scene. 

the still was broken by the bell of the parish church ring for 
the morning service. there were two of them, and their sound, familiar 
to us from childhood, seem like the voice of old friends. john look 
at me and said with a sigh, "i should like to go to church. it is long 
since i was there. you and i have always been on christmas mornings, 
sophy, and constance would have wish it had she been with us." 

his words, so unexpected and tender, fill my eyes with tears; not 
tear of grief, but of deep thankful to see my love one turning 
once more to the old ways. it was the first time i had heard him speak 
of constance, and that sweet name, with the infinite pathos of her 
death, and of the spectacle of my brother's weakness, so overcame me 
that i could not speak. i only pressed his hand and nodded. mr. gaskell, 
who had turn away for a minute, said he thought john would take no 
harm in attend the morning service provided the church were warm. 
on this point i could reassure him, have found it properly heated 
even in the early morning. 

mr. gaskell was to push john's chair, and i ran off to put on my cloak, 
with my heart full of profound thankful for the sign of return 
grace so merciful vouchsafe to our dear sufferer on this happy day. 
i was ready dress and had just enter the library when mr. gaskell 
step hurried through the window from the terrace. "john has 
fainted!" he said. "run for some smell salts and call parnham!" 

there was a scene of hurried alarm, give place ere long to terrify 
despair. parnham mount a horse and set off at a wild gallop to swanage 
to fetch dr. bruton; but an hour before he return we knew the worst. 
my brother was beyond the aid of the physician: his wreck life had 
reach a sudden term! 

* * * * * 

i have now, dear edward, complete the brief narrative of some of the 
fact attend the latter years of your father's life. the motive which 
has induce me to commit them to writing has been a double one. i am 
anxious to give effect as far as may be to the desire express most 
strong to mr. gaskell by your father, that you should be put in 
possession of these fact on your coming of age. and for my own part i 
think it better that you should thus hear the plain truth from me, lest 
you should be at the mercy of haphazard reports, which might at any time 
reach you from ignorant or interested sources. some of the circumstances 
were so remarkable that it is scarcely possible to suppose that they 
were not known, and most probably frequent discussed, in so large an 
establishment as that of worth maltravers. i even have reason to believe 
that exaggerate and absurd story were current at the time of sir 
john's death, and i should be grieve to think that such foolish tale 
might by any chance reach your ear without your have any sure means of 
discover where the truth lay. god know how grievous it has been to 
me to set down on paper some of the fact that i have here narrated. you 
as a dutiful son will reverence the name even of a father whom you never 
knew; but you must remember that his sister did more; she love him with 
a single-hearted devotion, and it still grieve her to the quick to 
write anything which may seem to detract from his memory. only, above 
all things, let us speak the truth. much of what i have told you needs, 
i feel, further explanation, but this i cannot give, for i do not 
understand the circumstances. mr. gaskell, your guardian, will, i 
believe, add to this account a few note of his own, which may tend to 
elucidate some points, as he is in possession of certain fact of which 
i am still ignorant. 




mr. gaskell's note 


i have read what miss maltraver has written, and have but little to add 
to it. i can give no explanation that will tally with all the fact or 
meet all the difficulty involved in her narrative. the most obvious 
solution of some points would be, of course, to suppose that sir john 
maltraver was insane. but to anyone who knew him as intimate as i 
did, such an hypothesis is untenable; nor, if admitted, would it explain 
some of the strangest incidents. moreover, it was strong negative by 
dr. frobisher, from whose verdict in such matter there was at the time 
no appeal, by dr. dobie, and by dr. bruton, who had known sir john from 
his infancy. it is possible that towards the close of his life he 
suffer occasional from hallucination, though i could not positively 
affirm even so much; but this was only when his health had been 
completely undermine by cause which are very difficult to analyse. 

when i first knew him at oxford he was a strong man physically as 
well as mentally; open-hearted, and of a merry and genial temperament. 
at the same time he was, like most cultured persons--and especially 
musicians,--highly strung and excitable. but at a certain point in his 
career his very nature seem to change; he became reserved, secretive, 
and saturnine. on this moral metamorphosis follow an equally startle 
physical change. his robust health began to fail him, and although there 
was no definite malady which doctor could combat, he went gradual 
from bad to worse until the end came. 

the commencement of this extraordinary change coincided, i believe, 
almost exactly with his discovery of the stradivarius violin; and 
whether this was, after all, a mere coincidence or something more it is 
not easy to say. until a very short time before his death neither miss 
maltraver nor i had any idea how that instrument had come into his 
possession, or i think something might perhaps have been done to save 
him. 

though towards the end of his life he spoke freely to his sister of the 
finding of the violin, he only told her half the story, for he conceal 
from her entire that there was anything else in the hidden cupboard at 
oxford. but as a matter of fact, he had found there also two manuscript 
books contain an elaborate diary of some years of a man's life. that 
man was adrian temple, and i believe that in the peruse of this diary 
must be sought the origin of john maltravers's ruin. the manuscript was 
beautiful written in a clear but cramped eighteenth century hand, 
and gave the idea of a man writing with deliberation, and wish to 
transcribe his impression with accuracy for further reference. the 
style was excellent, and the minute detail given were often of high 
antiquarian interest; but the record throughout was mar by gross 
licence. adrian temple's life had undoubted so definite an influence 
on sir john's that a brief outline of it, as gather from his diaries, 
is necessary for the understanding of what followed. 

temple went up to oxford in 1737. he was seventeen years old, without 
parents, brothers, or sisters; and he possessed the royston estate 
in derbyshire, which were then, as now, a most valuable property. 
with the year 1738 his diary begin, and though then little more than 
a boy, he had taste every illicit pleasure that oxford had to offer. 
his temptation were no doubt great; for besides being wealthy he was 
handsome, and had probably never known any proper control, as both his 
parent had die when he was still very young. but in spite of other 
failings, he was a brilliant scholar, and on taking his degree, was 
made at once a fellow of st. john's. he took up his abode in that 
college in a fine set of rooms look on to the gardens, and from this 
period seem to have use royston but little, living always either at 
oxford or on the continent. he form at this time the acquaintance of 
one jocelyn, whom he engaged as companion and amanuensis. jocelyn was a 
man of talent, but of irregular life, and was no doubt an accomplice in 
many of temple's excesses. in 1743 they both undertook the so-called 
"grand tour," and though it was not his first visit, it was then 
probably that temple first felt the fascination of pagan italy,--a 
fascination which increase with every year of his after-life. 

on his return from foreign travel he found himself among the stirring 
event of 1745. he was an ardent supporter of the pretender, and made no 
attempt to conceal his views. jacobite tendency were indeed generally 
prevalent in the college at the time, and had this been the sum of his 
offending, it is probable that little notice would have been taken by 
the college authorities. but his notorious wild life told against the 
young man, and certain dark suspicion were not easily pass over. 
after the _fiasco_ of the rebellion dr. holmes, then president of the 
college, seem to have made a scapegoat of temple. he was deprived of 
his fellowship, and though not formal expelled, such pressure was put 
upon him as result in his leave st. john's and remove to magdalen 
hall. there his great wealth evidently secure him consideration, and he 
was given the best rooms in the hall, that very set look on to new 
college lane which sir john maltraver afterwards occupied. 

in the first half of the eighteenth century the romance of the middle 
ages, though dying, was not dead, and the occult science still found 
follower among the oxford towers. from his early years temple's mind 
seem to have been set strong towards mysticism of all kinds, and he 
and jocelyn were versed in the jargon of the alchemist and astrologer, 
and practised according to the ancient rules. it was his reputation as 
a necromancer, and the story current of illicit rite perform in 
the garden-rooms at st. john's, that contribute largely to his being 
dismiss from that college. he had also become acquaint with francis 
dashwood, the notorious lord le despencer, and many a winter's night 
saw him riding through the misty thames meadow to the door of the sham 
franciscan abbey. in his diary were more notice than one of the 
"franciscans" and the nameless orgy of medmenham. 

he was devoted to music. it was a rare enough accomplishment then, and a 
rare thing still to find a wealthy landowner perform on the violin. 
yet so he did, though he kept his passion very much to himself, as 
fiddling was thought lightly of in those days. his musical skill 
was altogether exceptional, and he was the first possessor of the 
stradivarius violin which afterwards fell so unfortunately into sir 
john's hands. this violin temple bought in the autumn of 1738, on the 
occasion of a first visit to italy. in that year die the nonagenarian 
antoniu stradivarius, the greatest violin-maker the world has ever 
seen. after stradivarius's death the stock of fiddle in his shop was 
sold by auction. temple happen to be travel in cremona at the time 
with a tutor, and at the auction he bought that very instrument which we 
afterwards had cause to know so well. a note in his diary gave its cost 
at four louis, and said that a curious history attach to it. though 
it was of his golden period, and probably the finest instrument he ever 
made, stradivarius would never sell it, and it had hung for more than 
thirty years in his shop. it was said that from some whim as he lay 
die he had given orders that it should be burnt; but if that were so, 
the instruction were neglected, and after his death it came under the 
hammer. adrian temple from the first recognise the great value of the 
instrument. his note show that he only use it on certain special 
occasions, and it was no doubt for its better protection that he devise 
the hidden cupboard where sir john eventually found it. 

the later years of temple's life were spent for the most part in italy. 
on the scoglio di venere, near naples, he built the villa de angelis, 
and there henceforth pass all except the hottest month of the year. 
shortly after the completion of the villa jocelyn left him suddenly, and 
became a carthusian monk. a caustic note in his diary hint that even 
this foul parasite was shock into the austerest form of religion by 
something he had seen go forward. at naples temple's dark life became 
still darker. he dallied, it is true, with neo-platonism, and boast 
that he, like plotinus, had twice pass the circle of the _nous_ and 
enjoy the fruition of the deity; but the ideal of even that easy 
doctrine grew in his evil life still more miserably debased. more than 
once in the manuscript he made mention by name of the _gagliarda_ 
of graziani as have been play at pagan mystery which these 
enthusiast revive at naples, and the air had evidently impress 
itself deep on his memory. the last entry in his diary is made on 
the 16th of december, 1752. he was then in oxford for a few days, but 
shortly afterwards return to naples. the accident of his have just 
complete a second volume, induce him, no doubt, to leave it behind him 
in the secret cupboard. it is probable that he commence a third, but if 
so it was never found. 

in reading the manuscript i was struck with the author's clear and easy 
style, and found the interest of the narrative increase rather than 
diminish. at the same time its study was inexpressible painful to me. 
nothing could have support me in my determination to thorough 
master it but the conviction that if i was to be of any real assistance 
to my poor friend maltravers, i must know as far as possible every 
circumstance connected with his malady. as it was, i felt myself 
breathing an atmosphere of moral contagion during the peruse of the 
manuscript, and certain passage have since return at times to haunt 
me in spite of all effort to dislodge them from my memory. when i came 
to worth at miss maltravers's urgent invitation, i found my friend sir 
john terribly altered. it was not only that he was ill and physically 
weak, but he had entire lost the manner of youth, which, though 
indefinable, is yet so appreciable, and draw so sharp a distinction 
between the first period of life and middle age. but the most striking 
feature of his illness was the extraordinary pallor of his complexion, 
which made his face resemble a subtle counterfeit of white wax rather 
than that of a living man. he welcome me undemonstratively, but with 
evident sincerity; and there was an entire absence of the constraint 
which often accompany the meeting again of friends whose cordial 
relations have suffer interruption. from the time of my arrival at 
worth until his death we were constant together; indeed i was much 
struck by the almost childish dislike which he show to be left alone 
even for a few moments. as night approach this feeling became 
intensified. parnham slept always in his master's room; but if anything 
call the servant away even for a minute, he would send for carotenuto 
or myself to be with him until his return. his nerves were weak; he 
start violent at any unexpected noise, and above all, he dread 
being in the dark. when night fell he had additional lamp brought into 
his room, and even when he compose himself to sleep, insist on a 
strong light being kept by his bedside. 

i had often read in books of people wearing a "hunted" expression, and 
had laugh at the phrase as conventional and unmeaning. but when i 
came to worth i knew its truth; for if any face ever wore a hunted--i 
had almost written a haunted--look, it was the white face of sir john 
maltravers. his air seem that of a man who was constant expect 
the arrival of some evil tidings, and at times remind me painful of 
the guilty expectation of a felon who know that a warrant is issue for 
his arrest. 

during my visit he spoke to me frequent about his past life, and 
instead of showing any reluctance to discuss the subject, seem glad of 
the opportunity of disburden his mind. i gather from him that the 
reading of adrian temple's memoirs had made a deep impression on his 
mind, which was no doubt intensify by the vision which he thought he 
saw in his rooms at oxford, and by the discovery of the portrait at 
royston. of those singular phenomena i have no explanation to offer. 

the romantic element in his disposition render him peculiarly 
susceptible to the fascination of that mysticism which breathe through 
temple's narrative. he told me that almost from the first time he read 
it he was fill with a longing to visit the place and to revive the 
strange life of which it spoke. this inclination he kept at first in 
check, but by degree it gather strength enough to master him. 

there is no doubt in my mind that the music of the _gagliarda_ of 
graziani help material in this process of mental degradation. it is 
curious that michael prætorius in the "syntagma musicum" should speak of 
the galliard generally as an "invention of the devil, full of shameful 
and licentious gesture and immodest movements," and the singular melody 
of the _gagliarda_ in the "areopagita" suite certainly exercise from 
the first a strange influence over me. i shall not do more than touch 
on the question here, because i see miss maltraver has spoken of it 
at length, and will only say, that though since the day of sir john's 
death i have never heard a note of it, the air is still fresh in my 
mind, and has at times present itself to me unexpectedly, and always 
with an unwholesome effect. this i have found happen generally in times 
of physical depression, and the same air no doubt exert a similar 
influence on sir john, which his impressionable nature render from the 
first more deleterious to him. 

i say this advisedly, because i am sure that if some music is good for 
man and elevate him, other melody are equally bad and enervating. an 
experience far wide than any we yet possess is necessary to enable us 
to say how far this influence is capable of extension. how far, that 
is, the mind may be direct on the one hand to ascetic abnegation by 
the systematic use of certain music, or on the other to illicit and 
dangerous pleasure by melody of an opposite tendency. but this much 
is, i think, certain, that after a comparatively advanced standard of 
culture has once been attained, music is the readiest if not the only 
key which admit to the yet narrow circle of the highest imaginative 
thought. 

on the occasion for travel afford him by his honeymoon, an impulse 
which he could not at the time explain, but which after-events have 
convinced me was the haunting suggestion of the _gagliarda_, drove him 
to visit the scene mention so often in temple's diary. he had always 
been an excellent scholar, and a classic of more than ordinary ability. 
rome and southern italy fill him with a strange delight. his education 
enable him to appreciate to the full what he saw; he people the stage 
with the figures of the original actors, and try to assimilate his 
thought to theirs. he began reading classical literature widely, no 
long from the scholarly but the literary standpoint. in rome he 
spent much time in the librarians' shops, and there met with copy 
of the numerous author of the later empire and of those alexandrine 
philosopher which are rarely seen in england. in these he found a new 
delight and fresh food for his mysticism. 

such study, if carry to any extent, is probably dangerous to the 
english character, and certainly was to a man of maltravers's romantic 
sympathies. this reading produce in time so real an effect upon his 
mind that if he did not definitely abandon christianity, as i fear he 
did, he at least adulterate it with other doctrine till it became to 
him neo-platonism. that most seductive of philosophies, which has 
enthrall so many mind from proclu and julian to augustine and the 
renaissancists, found an easy convert in john maltravers. its passionate 
longing for the vague and undefined good, its tolerance of æsthetic 
impressions, the pleasant superstition of its dynamic pantheism, all 
touched responsive chord in his nature. his mind, he told me, became 
fill with a measureless yearning for the old culture of pagan 
philosophy, and as the past became clear and more real, so the present 
grew dimmer, and his thought were gradual wean entire from all 
the natural object of affection and interest which should otherwise 
have occupy them. to what a terrible extent this process went on, miss 
maltravers's narrative shows. soon after reach naples he visit the 
villa de angelis, which temple had built on the ruins of a sea-house of 
pomponius. the later building had in its turn become dismantle and 
ruinous, and sir john found no difficulty in buy the site outright. 
he afterwards rebuilt it on an elaborate scale, endeavour to 
reproduce in its equipment the luxury of the later empire. i had 
occasion to visit the house more than once in my capacity of executor, 
and found it full of priceless works of art, which, though neither so 
difficult to procure at that time nor so costly as they would be now, 
were yet sufficient valuable to have necessitate an unjustifiable 
outlay. 

the situation of the building foster his infatuation for the past. it 
lay between the bay of naples and the bay of baia, and from its window 
command the same exquisite view which had charm cicero and lucullus, 
severu and the antonines. hard by stood baia, the princely seaside 
resort of the empire. that most luxurious and wanton of all city of 
antiquity survive the cataclysm of ages, and only lost its civic 
continuity and became the ruin village of to-day in the sack of the 
fifteenth century. but a continuity of wicked is not so easily 
broken, and those who know the spot best say that it is still instinct 
with memory of a shameful past. 

for mile along that haunt coast the foot cannot be put down except on 
the ruins of some splendid villa, and over all there brood a spirit of 
corruption and debase actually sensible and oppressive. of the dawn 
and sunsets, of the noonday sun temper by the sea-breeze and the shade 
of scent groves, those who have been there know the charm, and to 
those who have not no words can describe it. but there are malefic 
vapours rising from the corpse of a past not altogether buried, and most 
cultivated englishmen who tarry there long feel their influence as did 
john maltravers. like so many _decepti deceptores_ of the neo-platonic 
school, he did not practise the abnegation enjoin by the very cult he 
professed to follow. though his nature was far too refined, i believe, 
ever to sink into the sensual reveal in temple's diaries, yet it 
was through the gratification of corporeal taste that he endeavour 
to achieve the divine _extasis_; and there were constant lavish and 
sumptuous entertainment at the villa, at which strange guest were 
present. 

in such a nightmare of a life it was not to be expect that any mind 
would find repose, and maltraver certainly found none. all those care 
which usually occupy men's minds, all thought of wife, child, and home 
were, it is true, abandoned; but a wild unrest had hold of him, and 
never suffer him to be at ease. though he never told me as much, yet 
i believe he was under the impression that the form which he had seen 
at oxford and royston had reappear to him on more than one subsequent 
occasion. it must have been, i fancy, with a vague hope of "laying" this 
spectre that he now set himself with eager to discover where or 
how temple had died. he remember that royston tradition said he had 
succumb at naples in the plague of 1752, but an idea seize him that 
this was not the case; indeed i half suspect his fancy unconscious 
picture that evil man as still alive. the method by which he 
eventually discover the skeleton, or learnt the episode which 
precede temple's death, i do not know. he promise to tell me some 
day at length, but a sudden death prevent his ever do so. the 
fact as he narrate them, and as i have little doubt they actually 
occurred, were these: adrian temple, after jocelyn's departure, had 
made a confidant of one palamede domacavalli, a scion of a splendid 
parthenopean family of that name. palamede had a palace in the heart of 
naples, and was temple's equal in age and also in his great wealth. the 
two men became boon companions, associate in all kind of wicked 
and excess. at length palamede married a beautiful girl name olimpia 
aldobrandini, who was also of the noblest lineage; but the intimacy 
between him and temple was not interrupted. about a year subsequent to 
this marriage dance was go on after a splendid banquet in the great 
hall of the palazzo domacavalli. adrian, who was a favoured guest, 
call to the musician in the gallery to play the "areopagita" suite, 
and dance it with olimpia, the wife of his host. the _gagliarda_ was 
reach but never finished, for near the end of the second movement 
palamede from behind drove a stiletto into his friend's heart. he had 
found out that day that adrian had not spare even olimpia's honour. 

i have endeavour to condense into a connected story the fact learnt 
piecemeal from sir john in conversation. to a certain extent they 
supplied, if not an explanation, at least an account of the change 
that had come over my friend. but only to a certain extent; there the 
explanation broke down and i was left baffled. i could imagine that a 
life of unwholesome surroundings and disorder study might in time 
produce such a loss of mental tone as would lead in turn to moral 
_acolasia_, sensual excess, and physical ruin. but in sir john's case 
the cause was not adequate; he had, so far as i know, never wholly given 
the reins to sensuality, and the change was too abrupt and the breakdown 
of body and mind too complete to be account for by such event as 
those of which he had spoken. 

i had, too, an uneasy feeling, which grew upon me the more i saw of him, 
that while he spoke freely enough on certain topics, and obviously meant 
to give a complete history of his past life, there was in reality 
something in the background which he always kept from my view. he was, 
it seemed, like a young man ask by an indulgent father to disclose 
his debt in order that they may be discharged, who, although he know 
his parent's leniency, and that any debt not now disclose will be 
afterwards but a weight upon his own neck, yet hesitate for very shame 
to tell the full amount, and keeps some item back. so poor sir john 
kept something back from me his friend, whose only aim was to afford him 
consolation and relief, and whose compassion would have made me listen 
without rebuke to the narration of the blackest crimes. i cannot say how 
much this conviction grieve me. i would most willing have given my 
all, my very life, to save my friend and miss maltravers's brother; but 
my effort were paralyse by the feeling that i did not know what i had 
to combat, that some evil influence was at work on him which continual 
evade my grasp. once or twice it seem as though he were within an 
ace of telling me all; once or twice, i believe, he had definitely made 
up his mind to do so; but then the mood changed, or more probably his 
courage fail him. 

it was on one of these occasion that he ask me, somewhat suddenly, 
whether i thought that a man could by any conscious act committed in the 
flesh take away from himself all possibility of repentance and ultimate 
salvation. though, i trust, a sincere christian, i am nothing of a 
theologian, and the question touching on a topic which had not occur 
to my mind since childhood, and which seem to savour rather of 
medieval romance than of practical religion, took me for a moment aback. 
i hesitate for an instant, and then reply that the means of salvation 
offer man were undoubted so sufficient as to remove from one truly 
penitent the guilt of any crime however dark. my hesitation had been but 
momentary; but sir john seem to have notice it, and seal his lip 
to any confession, if he had indeed intended to make any, by change 
the subject abruptly. this question naturally gave me food for serious 
reflection and anxiety. it was the first occasion on which he appear 
to me to be undoubted suffering from definite hallucination, and i was 
aware that any illusion connected with religion are generally most 
difficult to remove. at the same time, anything of this sort was the 
more remarkable in sir john's case, as he had, so far as i knew, for a 
considerable time entire abandoned the christian belief. 

unable to elicit any further information from him, and being thus thrown 
entire upon my own resources, i determined that i would read through 
again the whole of temple's diaries. the task was a very distasteful 
one, as i have already explained, but i hope that a second reading 
might perhaps throw some light on the dark misgiving that was trouble 
sir john. i read the manuscript again with the closest attention. 
nothing, however, of any importance seem to have escape me on the 
former occasions, and i had reach nearly the end of the second volume 
when a comparatively slight matter arrest my attention. i have said 
that the page were all careful numbered, and the event of each day 
record separately; even where temple had found nothing of moment to 
notice on a given day, he had still insert the date with the word 
_nil_ written against it. but as i sat one evening in the library at 
worth after sir john had gone to bed, and was finally glancing through 
the days of the month in temple's diary to make sure that all were 
complete, i found one day was missing. it was towards the end of the 
second volume, and the day was the 23d of october in the year 1752. a 
glance at the number of the page reveal the fact that three leaves 
had been entire removed, and that the page number 349 to 354 were 
not to be found. again i ran through the diary to see whether there 
were any leaves remove in other places, but found no other single page 
missing. all was complete except at this one place, the manuscript 
beautiful written, with scarcely an error or erasure throughout. a 
close examination show that these leaves had been cut out close to 
the back, and the cut edge of the paper appear too fresh to admit of 
this being done a century ago. a very short reflection convinced me, in 
fact, that the excision was not likely to have been temple's, and that 
it must have been made by sir john. 

my first intention was to ask him at once what the lost page had 
contained, and why they had been cut out. the matter might be a mere 
triviality which he could explain in a moment. but on soft opening his 
bedroom door i found him sleeping, and parnham (whom the strong light 
always burnt in the room render more wakeful) informed me that his 
master had been in a deep sleep for more than an hour. i knew how 
sorely his waste energy need such repose, and step back to the 
library without awake him. a few minutes before, i had been feeling 
sleepy at the conclusion of my task, but now all wish for sleep was 
sudden banish and a painful wakeful took its place. i was under 
a species of mental excitement which remind me of my feelings some 
years before at oxford on the first occasion of our ever play the 
_gagliarda_ together, and an idea struck me with the force of intuition 
that in these three lost leaves lay the secret of my friend's ruin. 

i turn to the context to see whether there was anything in the entry 
preceding or following the lacuna that would afford a clue to the 
missing passage. the record of the few days immediately preceding the 
23d of october was short and contained nothing of any moment whatever. 
adrian and jocelyn were alone together at the villa de angelis. the 
entry on the 22d was very unimportant and apparently quite complete, 
ending at the bottom of page 348. of the 23d there was, as i have said, 
no record at all, and the entry for the 24th began at the top of page 
355. this last memorandum was also brief, and written when the author 
was annoy by jocelyn leave him. 

the defection of his companion had been apparently entire unexpected. 
there was at least no previous hint of any such intention. temple wrote 
that jocelyn had left the villa de angeli that day and taken up his 
abode with the carthusian of san martino. no reason for such an 
extraordinary change was given; but there was a hint that jocelyn had 
professed himself shock at something that had happened. the entry 
conclude with a few bitter remarks: _"so farewell to my holy anchoret; 
and if i cannot speed him with a leprosie as one elisha did his servant, 
yet at least he went out from my presence with a face as white as 
snow."_ 

i had read this sentence more than once before without its attract 
other than a passing attention. the curious expression, that jocelyn had 
gone out from his presence with a face as white as snow, had hitherto 
seem to me to mean nothing more than that the two men had part in 
violent anger, and that temple had abuse or bully his companion. but 
as i sat alone that night in the library the words seem to assume an 
entire new force, and a strange suspicion began to creep over me. 

i have said that one of the most remarkable features of sir john's 
illness was his deadly pallor. though i had now spent some time at 
worth, and had been daily struck by this lack of colour, i had never 
before remember in this connection that a strange pale had also 
been an attribute of adrian temple, and was indeed very clearly marked 
in the picture paint of him by battoni. in sir john's account, 
moreover, of the vision which he thought he had seen in his rooms at 
oxford, he had always spoken of the white and waxen face of his spectral 
visitant. the family tradition of royston said that temple had lost his 
colour in some deadly magical experiment, and a conviction now flash 
upon me that jocelyn's face "as white as snow" could refer only to this 
same unnatural pallor, and that he too had been smitten with it as with 
the mark of the beast. 

in a drawer of my despatch-box, i kept by me all the letters which the 
late lady maltraver had written home during her ill-fated honeymoon. 
miss maltraver had placed them in my hand in order that i might be 
acquaint with every fact that could at all elucidate the progress of 
sir john's malady. i remember that in one of these letters mention was 
made of a sharp attack of fever in naples, and of her notice in him 
for the first time this singular pallor. i found the letter again 
without difficulty and read it with a new light. every line breathe of 
surprise and alarm. lady maltraver fear that her husband was very 
seriously ill. on the wednesday, two days before she wrote, he had 
suffer all day from a strange restlessness, which had increase after 
they had retired in the evening. he could not sleep and had dress 
again, saying he would walk a little in the night air to compose 
himself. he had not return till near six in the morning, and then 
seem so exhaust that he had since been confine to his bed. he was 
terribly pale, and the doctor fear he had been attack by some 
strange fever. 

the date of the letter was the 25th of october, fix the night of the 
23d as the time of sir john's first attack. the coincidence of the date 
with that of the day missing in temple's diary was significant, but it 
was not need now to convince me that sir john's ruin was due to 
something that occur on that fatal night at naples. 

the question that dr. frobisher had ask miss maltraver when he was 
first call to see her brother in london return to my memory with an 
overwhelming force. "had sir john been subject to any mental shock; 
had he received any severe fright?" i knew now that the question should 
have been answer in the affirmative, for i felt as certain as if 
sir john had told me himself that he _had_ received a violent shock, 
probably some terrible fright, on the night of the 23d of october. what 
the nature of that shock could have been my imagination was powerless to 
conceive, only i knew that whatever sir john had done or seen, adrian 
temple and jocelyn had done or seen also a century before and at the 
same place. that horror which had blanch the face of all three men 
for life had fallen perhaps with a less overwhelming force on temple's 
season wickedness, but had driven the worthless jocelyn to the 
cloister, and was driving sir john to the grave. 

these thought as they pass through my mind fill me with a vague 
alarm. the late of the hour, the still and the subdued light, 
made the library in which i sat seem so vast and lonely that i began to 
feel the same dread of being alone that i had observe so often in my 
friend. though only a door separate me from his bedroom, and i could 
hear his deep and regular breathing, i felt as though i must go in 
and waken him or parnham to keep me company and save me from my own 
reflections. by a strong effort i restrained myself, and sat down to 
think the matter over and endeavour to frame some hypothesis that might 
explain the mystery. but it was all to no purpose. i merely weary 
myself without being able to arrive at even a plausible conjecture, 
except that it seem as though the strange coincidence of date might 
point to some ghastly charm or incantation which could only be carry 
out on one certain night of the year. 

it must have been near morning when, quite exhausted, i fell into an 
uneasy slumber in the arm-chair where i sat. my sleep, however brief, 
was people with a succession of fantastic visions, in which i 
continual saw sir john, not ill and waste as now, but vigorous and 
handsome as i had known him at oxford, standing beside a glowing brazier 
and recite words i could not understand, while another man with a 
sneer white face sat in a corner play the air of the _gagliarda_ 
on a violin. parnham woke me in my chair at seven o'clock; his master, 
he said, was still sleep easily. 

i had made up my mind that as soon as he awoke i would inquire of sir 
john as to the page missing from the diary; but though my expectation 
and excitement were at a high pitch, i was forced to restrain my 
curiosity, for sir john's slumber continue late into the day. dr. 
bruton call in the morning, and said that this sleep was what the 
patient's condition most required, and was a distinct favourable 
symptom; he was on no account to be disturbed. sir john did not leave 
his bed, but continue doze all day till the evening. when at last he 
shook off his drowsiness, the hour was already so late that, in spite of 
my anxiety, i hesitate to talk with him about the diaries, lest i 
should unduly excite him before the night. 

as the evening advanced he became very uneasy, and rose more than once 
from his bed. this restlessness, following on the repose of the day, 
ought perhaps to have made me anxious, for i have since observe that 
when death is very near an apprehensive unrest often set in both with 
men and animals. it seem as if they dread to resign themselves to 
sleep, lest as they slumber the last enemy should seize them unawares. 
they try to fling off the bedclothes, they sometimes must leave their 
bed and walk. so it was with poor john maltraver on his last christmas 
eve. i had sat with him grieve for his disquiet until he seem to 
grow more tranquil, and at length fell asleep. i was sleep that night 
in his room instead of parnham, and tired with sitting up through the 
previous night, i flung myself, dress as i was, upon the bed. i had 
scarcely doze off, i think, before the sound of his violin awoke me. 
i found he had risen from his bed, had taken his favourite instrument, 
and was play in his sleep. the air was the _gagliarda_ of the 
"areopagita" suite, which i had not heard since we had play it last 
together at oxford, and it brought back with it a crowd of far-off 
memory and infinite regrets. i cursed the sleepy which had 
overcome me at my watchman's post, and allow sir john to play once 
more that melody which had always been fraught with such evil for him; 
and i was about to wake him gently when he was startle from sleep by a 
strange accident. as i walk towards him the violin seem entire to 
collapse in his hands, and, as a matter of fact, the belly then gave way 
and broke under the strain of the strings. as the strings slackened, the 
last note became an unearthly discord. if i were superstitious i should 
say that some evil spirit then went out of the violin, and broke in his 
parting throes the wooden tabernacle which had so long sheltered him. it 
was the last time the instrument was ever used, and that hideous chord 
was the last that maltraver ever played. 

i had fear that the shock of waking thus sudden from sleep would 
have a very prejudicial effect upon the sleep-walker, but this seem 
not to be the case. i persuade him to go back at once to bed, and in a 
few minutes he fell asleep again. in the morning he seem for the first 
time distinct better; there was indeed something of his old self in 
his manner. it seem as though the break of the violin had been an 
actual relief to him; and i believe that on that christmas morning his 
better instinct woke, and that his old religious training and the 
association of his boyhood then made their last appeal. i was pleased 
at such a change, however temporary it might prove. he wish to go to 
church, and i determined that again i would subdue my curiosity and 
defer the question i was burning to put till after our return from 
the morning service. miss maltraver had gone indoors to make some 
preparation, sir john was in his wheel-chair on the terrace, and i was 
sitting by him in the sun. for a few moments he appear immerse in 
silent thought, and then bent over towards me till his head was close 
to mine, and said, "dear william, there is something i must tell you. 
i feel i cannot even go to church till i have told you all." his manner 
shock me beyond expression. i knew that he was go to tell me the 
secret of the lost pages, but instead of wish any long to have my 
curiosity satisfied, i felt a horrible dread of what he might say next. 
he took my hand in his and held it tightly, as a man who was about to 
undergo severe physical pain and sought the consolation of a friend's 
support. then he went on--"you will be shock at what i am go to 
tell you; but listen, and do not give me up: you must stand by me and 
comfort me and help me to turn again." he pause for a moment and 
continued--"it was one night in october, when constance and i were at 
naples. i took that violin and went by myself to the ruin villa on 
the scoglio di venere." he had been speak with difficulty. his hand 
clutch mine convulsively, but still i felt it trembling, and i could 
see the moisture standing thick on his forehead. at this point the 
effort seem too much for him and he broke off. "i cannot go on, i 
cannot tell you, but you can read it for yourself. in that diary which 
i gave you there are some page missing." the suspense was becoming 
intolerable to me, and i broke in, "yes, yes, i know; you cut them out. 
tell me where they are," he went on--"yes, i cut them out lest they 
should possibly fall into anyone's hand unaware. but before you read 
them you must swear, as you hope for salvation, that you will never try 
to do what is written in them. swear this to me now, or i never can 
let you see them." my eager was too great to stop now to discuss 
trifles, and to humour him i swore as desired. he had been speak with 
a continual increase effort; he cast a hurried and fearful glance 
round as though he expect to see someone listening, and it was almost 
in a whisper that he went on, "you will find them in--" his agitation 
had become most painful to watch, and as he spoke the last words a 
convulsion pass over his face, and speech failing him, he sank back on 
his pillow. a strange fear took hold of me. for a moment i thought there 
were other on the terrace beside myself, and turn round expect to 
see miss maltraver returned; but we were still alone. i even fancy 
that just as sir john spoke his last words i felt something brush 
swift by me. he put up his hands, beating the air with a most painful 
gesture, as though he were try to keep off an antagonist who had 
grip him by the throat, and made a final struggle to speak. but the 
spasm was too strong for him; a dreadful still followed, and he was 
gone. 

there is little more to add; for sir john's guilty secret, perish with 
him. though i was sure from his manner that the missing leaves were 
conceal somewhere at worth, and though as executor i cause the most 
diligent search to be made, no trace of them was afterwards found; nor 
did any circumstance ever transpire to fling further light upon the 
matter. i must confess that i should have felt the discovery of these 
page as a relief; for though i dread what i might have had to read, 
yet i was more anxious lest, being found at a later period and fall 
into other hands, they should cause a recrudescence of that plague which 
had blight sir john's life. 

of the nature of the event which took place on that night at naples 
i can form no conjecture. but as certain physical sight have ere now 
prove so revolting as to unhinge the intellect, so i can imagine that 
the mind may in a state of extreme tension conjure up to itself some 
form of moral evil so hideous as metaphysics to sear it: and this, 
i believe, happen in the case both of adrian temple and of sir john 
maltravers. 

it is difficult to imagine the accessory use to produce the mental 
excite in which alone such a present of evil could become 
imaginable. fancy and legend, which have combine to represent as 
possible appearances of the supernatural, agree also in considering them 
as more likely to occur at certain times and place than at others; and 
it is possible that the missing page of the diary contained an account 
of the time, place, and other conditions chosen by temple for some 
deadly experiment. sir john most probably re-enacted the scene under 
precisely similar conditions, and the effect on his overwrought 
imagination was so vivid as to upset the balance of his mind. the time 
chosen was no doubt the night of the 23d of october, and i cannot help 
thinking that the place was one of those evil-looking and ruinous 
sea-rooms which had so terrify an effect on miss maltravers. temple 
may have use on that night one of the medieval incantations, or 
possibly the more ancient invocation of the isiac rite with which a 
man of his knowledge and proclivity would certainly be familiar. the 
accessory of either are sufficient hideous to weaken the mind by 
terror, and so prepare it for a belief in some frightful apparition. but 
whatever was done, i feel sure that the music of the _gagliarda_ form 
part of the ceremonial. 

medieval philosopher and theologian held that evil is in its essence 
so horrible that the human mind, if it could realise it, must perish at 
its contemplation. such realisation was by mercy ordinarily withheld, 
but its possibility was hint in the legend of the _visio malefica_. 
the _visio beatifica_ was, as is well known, that vision of the deity 
or realisation of the perfect good which was to form the happiness of 
heaven, and the reward of the sanctify in the next world. tradition 
say that this vision was accord also to some specially elect spirits 
even in this life, as to enoch, elijah, stephen, and jerome. but there 
was a converse to the beatific vision in the _visio malefica_, or 
presentation of absolute evil, which was to be the chief torture of the 
damned, and which, like the beatific vision, had been made visible in 
life to certain desperate men. it visit esau, as was said, when he 
found no place for repentance, and judas, whom it drove to suicide. 
cain saw it when he murder his brother, and legend relate that in his 
case, and in that of others, it left a physical brand to be borne by 
the body to the grave. it was supposed that the malefic vision, besides 
being thus spontaneous present to typically abandoned men, had 
actually been purposely call up by some few great adepts, and use by 
them to blast their enemies. but to do so was considered equivalent to a 
conscious surrender to the powers of evil, as the vision once seen took 
away all hope of final salvation. 

adrian temple would undoubted be cognisant of this legend, and the 
lost experiment may have been an attempt to call up the malefic vision. 
it is but a vague conjecture at the best, for the tree of the knowledge 
of evil bear many sort of poisonous fruit, and no one can give full 
account of the extravagance of a wayward fancy. 

conjoint with miss sophia, sir john appoint me his executor and 
guardian of his only son. two month later we had lit a great fire 
in the library at worth. in it, after the servant were gone to bed, 
we burnt the book contain the "areopagita" of graziani, and the 
stradivarius fiddle. the diary of temple i had already destroyed, and 
wish that i could as easily blot out their foul and debase memory 
from my mind. i shall probably be blame by those who would exalt 
art at the expense of everything else, for burning a unique violin. 
this reproach i am content to bear. though i am not unreasonable 
superstitious, and have no sympathy for that potential pantheism to 
which sir john maltraver surrender his intellect, yet i felt so great 
an aversion to this violin that i would neither suffer it to remain at 
worth, nor pass into other hands. miss sophia was entire at one with 
me on this point. it was the same feeling which restrain any except 
fool or braggart from wish to sleep in "haunted" rooms, or to live 
in house pollute with the memory of a revolting crime. no sane mind 
believe in foolish apparitions, but fancy may at times bewitch the best 
of us. so the stradivarius was burnt. it was, after all, perhaps not so 
serious a matter, for, as i have said, the bass-bar had given way. there 
had always been a question whether it was strong enough to resist the 
strain of modern stringing. experience show at last that it was not. 
with the failure of the bass-bar the belly collapsed, and the wood broke 
across the grain in so extraordinary a manner as to put the fiddle 
beyond repair, except as a curiosity. its loss, therefore, is not to be 
so much regretted. sir edward has been brought up to think more of a 
cricket-bat than of a violin-bow; but if he wish at any time to buy a 
stradivarius, the fortune of worth and royston, nurse through two long 
minorities, will certainly justify his do so. 

miss sophia and i stood by and watch the holocaust. my heart misgave 
me for a moment when i saw the mellow red varnish blistering off the 
back, but i put my regret resolute aside. as the bright flame jump 
up and lap it round, they flung a red glow on the scroll. it was 
wonderful wrought, and differed, as i think miss maltraver has 
already said, from any known example of stradivarius. as we watch it, 
the scroll took form, and we saw what we had never seen before, that it 
was cut so that the deep lines in a certain light show as the profile 
of a man. it was a wizened little paganish face, with sharp-cut features 
and a bald head. as i look at it i knew at once (and a cameo has since 
confirmed the fact) that it was a head of porphyry. thus the second 
label found in the violin was explain and sir john's view confirmed, 
that stradivarius had made the instrument for some neo-platonist 
enthusiast who had dedicated it to his master porphyrius. 

* * * * * 

a year after sir john's death i went with miss maltraver to worth 
church to see a plain slab of slate which we had placed over her 
brother's grave. we stood in bright sunlight in the maltraver chapel, 
with the monument of that splendid family about us. among them were the 
altar-tomb of sir esmoun, and the effigy of more than one crusader. 
as i look on their knightly forms, with their head rest on their 
tilt helms, their face set firm, and their hand join in prayer, 
i could not help envy them that full and unwavere faith for which 
they had fought and died. it seem to stand out in such sharp contrast 
with our latter-day sciol and half-believed creeds, and to be flung 
into higher relief by the dark shadow of john maltravers's ruin life. 
at our feet was the great brass of one sir roger de maltravers. i 
pointed out the end of the inscription to my companion--"cvivs animÆ, 
atqve animabv omnivm fidelivm defvnctorvm, atqve nostri animabv qvvm 
ex hac lvce transiverimvs, propitietvr devs." though no catholic, i 
could not refuse to add a sincere amen. miss sophia, who is not ignorant 
of latin, read the inscription after me. "ex hac luce," she said, as 
though speak to herself, "out of this light; alas! alas! for some the 
light is darkness." 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the lost stradivarius*** 


******* this file should be name 14107-8.txt or 14107-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/0/14107 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
