the project gutenberg ebook, round the fire stories, by arthur conan doyle 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 




title: round the fire story 


author: arthur conan doyle 



release date: february 4, 2017 [ebook #54109] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook round the fire stories*** 


e-text prepared by richard tons and the online distribute proofread 
team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page image generous made available by 
internet archive (https://archive.org) 



note: project gutenberg also has an html version of this 
file which include the original illustration. 
see 54109-h.htm or 54109-h.zip: 
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54109/54109-h/54109-h.htm) 
or 
(http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54109/54109-h.zip) 


image of the original page are available through 
internet archive. see 
https://archive.org/details/roundfirestories00doylrich 


transcriber’s note: 

text enclose by underscore is in italics (_italics_). 

text enclose by equal sign is in bold face (=bold=). 





[illustration: 

“i burst with a shriek into my own life.” 

[_page 12._] 


round the fire story 

by 

arthur conan doyle 

author of 
“the white company,” etc., etc. 

with a frontispiece by a. castaigne 






london 
smith, elder & co., 15, waterloo place 
1908 

(all rights reserved) 

print by 
william clowe and sons, limited, 
london and beccles. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




preface 


[illustration] 

in a previous volume, “the green flag,” i have assemble a number of my 
story which deal with warfare or with sport. in the present collection 
those have been brought together which are concerned with the grotesque 
and with the terrible—such tale as might well be read “round the fire” 
upon a winter’s night. this would be my ideal atmosphere for such 
stories, if an author might choose his time and place as an artist do 
the light and hanging of his picture. however, if they have the good 
fortune to give pleasure to any one, at any time or place, their author 
will be very satisfied. 

arthur conan doyle. 

windlesham, 
crowborough. 




contents 


page 

i. the leather funnel 1 

ii. the beetle hunter 18 

iii. the man with the watches 41 

iv. the pot of caviare 65 

v. the japan box 85 

vi. the black doctor 103 

vii. play with fire 129 

viii. the jew’s breastplate 149 

ix. the lost special 177 

x. the club-footed grocer 202 

xi. the seal room 229 

xii. the brazil cat 248 

xiii. the usher of lea house school 276 

xiv. the brown hand 299 

xv. the fiend of the cooperage 321 

xvi. jelland’s voyage 340 

xvii. b. 24 351 


“i burst with a shriek into my own life.” _frontispiece_. 
(_from a drawing by a. castaigne._) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




round the fire story 


[illustration] 




the leather funnel 


my friend, lionel dacre, live in the avenue de wagram, paris. his house 
was that small one, with the iron railing and grass plot in front of 
it, on the left-hand side as you pass down from the arc de triomphe. i 
fancy that it had been there long before the avenue was constructed, for 
the grey tile were stain with lichens, and the wall were mildew 
and discolour with age. it look a small house from the street, five 
window in front, if i remember right, but it deepen into a single 
long chamber at the back. it was here that dacre had that singular 
library of occult literature, and the fantastic curiosity which serve 
as a hobby for himself, and an amusement for his friends. a wealthy man 
of refined and eccentric tastes, he had spent much of his life and 
fortune in gathering together what was said to be a unique private 
collection of talmudic, cabalistic, and magical works, many of them of 
great rarity and value. his taste lean toward the marvellous and the 
monstrous, and i have heard that his experiment in the direction of the 
unknown have pass all the bounds of civilization and of decorum. to 
his english friends he never allude to such matters, and took the tone 
of the student and _virtuoso_; but a frenchman whose taste were of the 
same nature has assured me that the worst excesses of the black mass 
have been perpetrate in that large and lofty hall, which is line with 
the shelves of his books, and the case of his museum. 

dacre’s appearance was enough to show that his deep interest in these 
psychic matter was intellectual rather than spiritual. there was no 
trace of ascetic upon his heavy face, but there was much mental force 
in his huge dome-like skull, which curve upward from amongst his 
thin locks, like a snow-peak above its fringe of fir trees. his 
knowledge was greater than his wisdom, and his powers were far superior 
to his character. the small bright eyes, bury deep in his fleshy 
face, twinkle with intelligence and an unabated curiosity of life, but 
they were the eyes of a sensualist and an egotist. enough of the man, 
for he is dead now, poor devil, dead at the very time that he had made 
sure that he had at last discover the elixir of life. it is not with 
his complex character that i have to deal, but with the very strange and 
inexplicable incident which had its rise in my visit to him in the early 
spring of the year ‘82. 

i had known dacre in england, for my research in the assyrian room of 
the britain museum had been conduct at the time when he was 
endeavour to establish a mystic and esoteric meaning in the 
babylonian tablets, and this community of interests had brought us 
together. chance remark had led to daily conversation, and that to 
something verge upon friendship. i had promise him that on my next 
visit to paris i would call upon him. at the time when i was able to 
fulfil my compact i was living in a cottage at fontainebleau, and as the 
evening train were inconvenient, he ask me to spend the night in his 
house. 

“i have only that one spare couch,” said he, point to a broad sofa in 
his large salon; “i hope that you will manage to be comfortable there.” 

it was a singular bedroom, with its high wall of brown volumes, but 
there could be no more agreeable furniture to a bookworm like myself, 
and there is no scent so pleasant to my nostril as that faint, subtle 
reek which come from an ancient book. i assured him that i could desire 
no more charming chamber, and no more congenial surroundings. 

“if the fitting are neither convenient nor conventional, they are at 
least costly,” said he, look round at his shelves. “i have expend 
nearly a quarter of a million of money upon these object which surround 
you. books, weapons, gems, carvings, tapestries, images—there is hardly 
a thing here which has not its history, and it is generally one worth 
telling.” 

he was seat as he spoke at one side of the open fireplace, and i at 
the other. his reading table was on his right, and the strong lamp above 
it ring it with a very vivid circle of golden light. a half-rolled 
palimpsest lay in the centre, and around it were many quaint articles of 
bric-à-brac. one of these was a large funnel, such as is use for 
filling wine casks. it appear to be made of black wood, and to be 
rim with discolour brass. 

“that is a curious thing,” i remarked. “what is the history of that?” 

“ah!” said he, “it is the very question which i have had occasion to ask 
myself. i would give a good deal to know. take it in your hand and 
examine it.” 

i did so, and found that what i had imagine to be wood was in reality 
leather, though age had dry it into an extreme hardness. it was a 
large funnel, and might hold a quart when full. the brass rim encircle 
the wide end, but the narrow was also tip with metal. 

“what do you make of it?” ask dacre. 

“i should imagine that it belong to some vintner or maltster in the 
middle ages,” said i. “i have seen in england leathern drink flagon 
of the seventeenth century—‘black jacks’ as they were called—which were 
of the same colour and hardness as this filler.” 

“i dare say the date would be about the same,” said dacre, “and no 
doubt, also, it was use for filling a vessel with liquid. if my 
suspicion are correct, however, it was a queer vintner who use it, and 
a very singular cask which was filled. do you observe nothing strange at 
the spout end of the funnel.” 

as i held it to the light i observe that at a spot some five inch 
above the brass tip the narrow neck of the leather funnel was all 
haggle and scored, as if some one had notch it round with a blunt 
knife. only at that point was there any roughen of the dead black 
surface. 

“some one has try to cut off the neck.” 

“would you call it a cut?” 

“it is torn and lacerated. it must have taken some strength to leave 
these mark on such tough material, whatever the instrument may have 
been. but what do you think of it? i can tell that you know more than 
you say.” 

dacre smiled, and his little eyes twinkle with knowledge. 

“have you included the psychology of dream among your learned studies?” 
he asked. 

“i did not even know that there was such a psychology.” 

“my dear sir, that shelf above the gem case is fill with volumes, from 
albertu magnu onward, which deal with no other subject. it is a 
science in itself.” 

“a science of charlatans.” 

“the charlatan is always the pioneer. from the astrologer came the 
astronomer, from the alchemist the chemist, from the mesmerist the 
experimental psychologist. the quack of yesterday is the professor of 
to-morrow. even such subtle and elusive things as dream will in time be 
reduce to system and order. when that time come the research of our 
friends in the book-shelf yonder will no long be the amusement of the 
mystic, but the foundations of a science.” 

“supposing that is so, what has the science of dream to do with a large 
black brass-rimmed funnel?” 

“i will tell you. you know that i have an agent who is always on the 
lookout for rarity and curiosity for my collection. some days ago he 
heard of a dealer upon one of the quai who had acquire some old 
rubbish found in a cupboard in an ancient house at the back of the rue 
mathurin, in the quartier latin. the dining-room of this old house is 
decorate with a coat of arms, chevrons, and bar rouge upon a field 
argent, which prove, upon inquiry, to be the shield of nichola de la 
reynie, a high official of king louis xiv. there can be no doubt that 
the other articles in the cupboard date back to the early days of that 
king. the inference is, therefore, that they were all the property of 
this nichola de la reynie, who was, as i understand, the gentleman 
specially concerned with the maintenance and execution of the draconic 
law of that epoch.” 

“what then?” 

“i would ask you now to take the funnel into your hand once more and to 
examine the upper brass rim. can you make out any lettering upon it?” 

there were certainly some scratch upon it, almost obliterate by time. 
the general effect was of several letters, the last of which bore some 
resemblance to a b. 

“you make it a b?” 

“yes, i do.” 

“so do i. in fact, i have no doubt whatever that it is a b.” 

“but the nobleman you mention would have had r for his initial.” 

“exactly! that’s the beauty of it. he own this curious object, and yet 
he had some one else’s initial upon it. why did he do this?” 

“i can’t imagine; can you?” 

“well, i might, perhaps, guess. do you observe something drawn a little 
further along the rim?” 

“i should say it was a crown.” 

“it is undoubted a crown; but if you examine it in a good light, you 
will convince yourself that it is not an ordinary crown. it is a 
heraldic crown—a badge of rank, and it consist of an alternate of 
four pearl and strawberry leaves, the proper badge of a marquis. we may 
infer, therefore, that the person whose initial end in b was entitle 
to wear that coronet.” 

“then this common leather filler belong to a marquis?” 

dacre gave a peculiar smile. 

“or to some member of the family of a marquis,” said he. “so much we 
have clearly gather from this engrave rim.” 

“but what has all this to do with dreams?” i do not know whether it was 
from a look upon dacre’s face, or from some subtle suggestion in his 
manner, but a feeling of repulsion, of unreasoning horror, came upon me 
as i look at the gnarled old lump of leather. 

“i have more than once received important information through my 
dreams,” said my companion, in the didactic manner which he love to 
affect. “i make it a rule now when i am in doubt upon any material point 
to place the article in question beside me as i sleep, and to hope for 
some enlightenment. the process do not appear to me to be very 
obscure, though it has not yet received the blessing of orthodox 
science. according to my theory, any object which has been intimate 
associate with any supreme paroxysm of human emotion, whether it be joy 
or pain, will retain a certain atmosphere or association which it is 
capable of communicate to a sensitive mind. by a sensitive mind i do 
not mean an abnormal one, but such a train and educated mind as you or 
i possess.” 

“you mean, for example, that if i slept beside that old sword upon the 
wall, i might dream of some bloody incident in which that very sword 
took part?” 

“an excellent example, for, as a matter of fact, that sword was use in 
that fashion by me, and i saw in my sleep the death of its owner, who 
perish in a brisk skirmish, which i have been unable to identify, but 
which occur at the time of the war of the frondists. if you think of 
it, some of our popular observance show that the fact has already been 
recognize by our ancestors, although we, in our wisdom, have class it 
among superstitions.” 

“for example?” 

“well, the place of the bride’s cake beneath the pillow in order that 
the sleeper may have pleasant dreams. that is one of several instance 
which you will find set forth in a small _brochure_ which i am myself 
writing upon the subject. but to come back to the point, i slept one 
night with this funnel beside me, and i had a dream which certainly 
throw a curious light upon its use and origin.” 

“what did you dream?” 

“i dreamed—” he paused, and an intent look of interest came over his 
massive face. “by jove, that’s well thought of,” said he. “this really 
will be an exceedingly interesting experiment. you are yourself a 
psychic subject—with nerves which respond readily to any impression.” 

“i have never test myself in that direction.” 

“then we shall test you to-night. might i ask you as a very great 
favour, when you occupy that couch to-night, to sleep with this old 
funnel placed by the side of your pillow?” 

the request seem to me a grotesque one; but i have myself, in my 
complex nature, a hunger after all which is bizarre and fantastic. i had 
not the faintest belief in dacre’s theory, nor any hope for success in 
such an experiment; yet it amuse me that the experiment should be made. 
dacre, with great gravity, drew a small stand to the head of my settee, 
and placed the funnel upon it. then, after a short conversation, he 
wish me good-night and left me. 

* * * * * 

i sat for some little time smoking by the smoulder fire, and turning 
over in my mind the curious incident which had occurred, and the strange 
experience which might lie before me. sceptical as i was, there was 
something impressive in the assurance of dacre’s manner, and my 
extraordinary surroundings, the huge room with the strange and often 
sinister object which were hung round it, struck solemnity into my 
soul. finally i undressed, and, turning out the lamp, i lay down. after 
long toss i fell asleep. let me try to describe as accurate as i 
can the scene which came to me in my dreams. it stand out now in my 
memory more clearly than anything which i have seen with my waking eyes. 

there was a room which bore the appearance of a vault. four spandrel 
from the corner ran up to join a sharp cup-shaped roof. the 
architecture was rough, but very strong. it was evidently part of a 
great building. 

three men in black, with curious top-heavy black velvet hats, sat in a 
line upon a red-carpeted dais. their face were very solemn and sad. on 
the left stood two long-gowned men with portfolio in their hands, which 
seem to be stuff with papers. upon the right, look toward me, was 
a small woman with blonde hair and singular light-blue eyes—the eyes of 
a child. she was past her first youth, but could not yet be call 
middle-aged. her figure was inclined to stoutness, and her bearing was 
proud and confident. her face was pale, but serene. it was a curious 
face, comely and yet feline, with a subtle suggestion of cruelty about 
the straight, strong little mouth and chubby jaw. she was drape in some 
sort of loose white gown. beside her stood a thin, eager priest, who 
whisper in her ear, and continual raise a crucifix before her eyes. 
she turn her head and look fixedly past the crucifix at the three 
men in black, who were, i felt, her judges. 

as i gaze the three men stood up and said something, but i could 
distinguish no words, though i was aware that it was the central one who 
was speaking. they then swept out of the room, follow by the two men 
with the papers. at the same instant several rough-looking fellow in 
stout jerkin came bustle in and remove first the red carpet, and 
then the boards which form the dais, so as to entire clear the room. 
when this screen was remove i saw some singular articles of furniture 
behind it. one look like a bed with wooden roller at each end, and a 
winch handle to regulate its length. another was a wooden horse. there 
were several other curious objects, and a number of swinging cords which 
play over pulleys. it was not unlike a modern gymnasium. 

when the room had been clear there appear a new figure upon the 
scene. this was a tall thin person clad in black, with a gaunt and 
austere face. the aspect of the man made me shudder. his clothes were 
all shining with grease and mottled with stains. he bore himself with a 
slow and impressive dignity, as if he took command of all things from 
the instant of his entrance. in spite of his rude appearance and sordid 
dress, it was now _his_ business, _his_ room, his to command. he carry 
a coil of light ropes over his left fore-arm. the lady look him up and 
down with a searching glance, but her expression was unchanged. it was 
confident—even defiant. but it was very different with the priest. his 
face was ghastly white, and i saw the moisture glisten and run on his 
high, slope forehead. he threw up his hand in prayer, and he stoop 
continual to mutter frantic words in the lady’s ear. 

the man in black now advanced, and taking one of the cords from his left 
arm, he bound the woman’s hand together. she held them meek toward 
him as he did so. then he took her arm with a rough grip and led her 
toward the wooden horse, which was little higher than her waist. on to 
this she was lift and laid, with her back upon it, and her face to the 
ceiling, while the priest, quiver with horror, had rush out of the 
room. the woman’s lip were moving rapidly, and though i could hear 
nothing, i knew that she was praying. her feet hung down on either side 
of the horse, and i saw that the rough varlet in attendance had 
fasten cords to her ankle and secure the other end to iron ring in 
the stone floor. 

my heart sank within me as i saw these ominous preparations, and yet i 
was held by the fascination of horror, and i could not take my eyes from 
the strange spectacle. a man had enter the room with a bucket of water 
in either hand. another follow with a third bucket. they were laid 
beside the wooden horse. the second man had a wooden dipper—a bowl with 
a straight handle—in his other hand. this he gave to the man in black. 
at the same moment one of the varlet approach with a dark object in 
his hand, which even in my dream fill me with a vague feeling of 
familiarity. it was a leathern filler. with horrible energy he thrust 
it—but i could stand no more. my hair stood on end with horror. i 
writhed, i struggled, i broke through the bonds of sleep, and i burst 
with a shriek into my own life, and found myself lie shiver with 
terror in the huge library, with the moonlight flood through the 
window and throw strange silver and black tracery upon the opposite 
wall. oh, what a blessed relief to feel that i was back in the 
nineteenth century—back out of that medieval vault into a world where 
men had human heart within their bosoms. i sat up on my couch, 
tremble in every limb, my mind divide between thankful and 
horror. to think that such things were ever done—that they _could_ be 
done without god striking the villain dead. was it all a fantasy, or 
did it really stand for something which had happen in the black, cruel 
days of the world’s history? i sank my throb head upon my shake 
hands. and then, suddenly, my heart seem to stand still in my bosom, 
and i could not even scream, so great was my terror. something was 
advance toward me through the dark of the room. 

it is a horror coming upon a horror which break a man’s spirit. i could 
not reason, i could not pray; i could only sit like a frozen image, and 
glare at the dark figure which was coming down the great room. and then 
it move out into the white lane of moonlight, and i breathe once more. 
it was dacre, and his face show that he was as frightened as myself. 

“was that you? for god’s sake what’s the matter?” he ask in a husky 
voice. 

“oh, dacre, i am glad to see you! i have been down into hell. it was 
dreadful.” 

“then it was you who screamed?” 

“i dare say it was.” 

“it rang through the house. the servant are all terrified.” he struck a 
match and lit the lamp. “i think we may get the fire to burn up again,” 
he added, throw some log upon the embers. “good god, my dear chap, 
how white you are! you look as if you had seen a ghost.” 

“so i have—several ghosts.” 

“the leather funnel has acted, then?” 

“i wouldn’t sleep near the infernal thing again for all the money you 
could offer me.” 

dacre chuckled. 

“i expect that you would have a lively night of it,” said he. “you 
took it out of me in return, for that scream of yours wasn’t a very 
pleasant sound at two in the morning. i suppose from what you say that 
you have seen the whole dreadful business.” 

“what dreadful business?” 

“the torture of the water—the ‘extraordinary question,’ as it was call 
in the genial days of ‘le roi soleil.’ did you stand it out to the end?” 

“no, thank god, i awoke before it really began.” 

“ah! it is just as well for you. i held out till the third bucket. well, 
it is an old story, and they are all in their grave now anyhow, so what 
do it matter how they got there. i suppose that you have no idea what 
it was that you have seen?” 

“the torture of some criminal. she must have been a terrible malefactor 
indeed if her crime are in proportion to her penalty.” 

“well, we have that small consolation,” said dacre, wrapping his 
dressing-gown round him and crouch close to the fire. “they _were_ 
in proportion to her penalty. that is to say, if i am correct in the 
lady’s identity.” 

“how could you possibly know her identity?” 

for answer dacre took down an old vellum-covered volume from the shelf. 

“just listen to this,” said he; “it is in the france of the seventeenth 
century, but i will give a rough translate as i go. you will judge for 
yourself whether i have solve the riddle or not. 

“the prisoner was brought before the grand chambers and tournelle 
of parliament, sitting as a court of justice, charged with the 
murder of master dreux d’aubray, her father, and of her two 
brothers, mm. d’aubray, one being civil lieutenant, and the other 
a counsellor of parliament. in person it seem hard to believe 
that she had really done such wicked deeds, for she was of a mild 
appearance, and of short stature, with a fair skin and blue eyes. 
yet the court, have found her guilty, condemn her to the 
ordinary and to the extraordinary question in order that she might 
be forced to name her accomplices, after which she should be 
carry in a cart to the place de grève, there to have her head 
cut off, her body being afterwards burn and her ashes scattered 
to the winds.” 

the date of this entry is july 16, 1676.” 

“it is interesting,” said i, “but not convincing. how do you prove the 
two women to be the same?” 

“i am coming to that. the narrative go on to tell of the woman’s 
behaviour when questioned. ‘when the executioner approach her she 
recognize him by the cords which he held in his hands, and she at once 
held out her own hand to him, look at him from head to foot without 
utter a word.’ how’s that?” 

“yes, it was so.” 

“‘she gaze without wince upon the wooden horse and ring which had 
twist so many limb and cause so many shriek of agony. when her eyes 
fell upon the three pail of water, which were all ready for her, she 
said with a smile, “all that water must have been brought here for the 
purpose of drown me, monsieur. you have no idea, i trust, of making a 
person of my small stature swallow it all.”’ shall i read the detail of 
the torture?” 

“no, for heaven’s sake, don’t.” 

“here is a sentence which must surely show you that what is here 
record is the very scene which you have gaze upon to-night: ‘the good 
abbé pirot, unable to contemplate the agony which were suffer by his 
penitent, had hurried from the room.’ do that convince you?” 

“it do entirely. there can be no question that it is indeed the same 
event. but who, then, is this lady whose appearance was so attractive 
and whose end was so horrible?” 

for answer dacre came across to me, and placed the small lamp upon the 
table which stood by my bed. lift up the ill-omened filler, he turn 
the brass rim so that the light fell full upon it. seen in this way the 
engraving seem clear than on the night before. 

“we have already agree that this is the badge of a marquis or of a 
marquise,” said he. “we have also settled that the last letter is b.” 

“it is undoubted so.” 

“i now suggest to you that the other letters from left to right are, m, 
m, a small d, a, a small d, and then the final b.” 

“yes, i am sure that you are right. i can make out the two small d’s 
quite plainly.” 

“what i have read to you to-night,” said dacre, “is the official record 
of the trial of marie madeleine d’aubray, marquise de brinvilliers, one 
of the most famous poison and murder of all time.” 

i sat in silence, overwhelm at the extraordinary nature of the 
incident, and at the complete of the proof with which dacre had 
expose its real meaning. in a vague way i remember some detail of 
the woman’s career, her unbridled debauchery, the coldbloode and 
protract torture of her sick father, the murder of her brother for 
motive of petty gain. i recollect also that the bravery of her end 
had done something to atone for the horror of her life, and that all 
paris had sympathize with her last moments, and blessed her as a martyr 
within a few days of the time when they had cursed her as a murderess. 
one objection, and one only, occur to my mind. 

“how came her initial and her badge of rank upon the filler? surely 
they did not carry their medieval homage to the nobility to the point of 
decorate instrument of torture with their titles?” 

“i was puzzle with the same point,” said dacre, “but it admit of a 
simple explanation. the case excited extraordinary interest at the time, 
and nothing could be more natural than that la reynie, the head of the 
police, should retain this filler as a grim souvenir. it was not often 
that a marchioness of france underwent the extraordinary question. that 
he should engrave her initial upon it for the information of other was 
surely a very ordinary proceeding upon his part.” 

“and this?” i asked, point to the mark upon the leathern neck. 

“she was a cruel tigress,” said dacre, as he turn away. “i think it is 
evident that like other tigress her teeth were both strong and sharp.” 




the beetle-hunter 


a curious experience? said the doctor. yes, my friends, i have had one 
very curious experience. i never expect to have another, for it is 
against all doctrine of chance that two such event would befall any 
one man in a single lifetime. you may believe me or not, but the thing 
happen exactly as i tell it. 

i had just become a medical man, but i had not start in practice, and 
i live in rooms in gower street. the street has been renumbere since 
then, but it was in the only house which has a bow-window, upon the 
left-hand side as you go down from the metropolitan station. a widow 
name murchison kept the house at that time, and she had three medical 
student and one engineer as lodgers. i occupy the top room, which was 
the cheapest, but cheap as it was it was more than i could afford. my 
small resources were dwindle away, and every week it became more 
necessary that i should find something to do. yet i was very unwill 
to go into general practice, for my taste were all in the direction of 
science, and especially of zoology, towards which i had always a strong 
leaning. i had almost given the fight up and resigned myself to being a 
medical drudge for life, when the turning-point of my struggle came in 
a very extraordinary way. 

one morning i had picked up the _standard_ and was glancing over its 
contents. there was a complete absence of news, and i was about to toss 
the paper down again, when my eyes were caught by an advertisement at 
the head of the personal column. it was word in this way:— 

want for one or more days the service of a medical man. it 
is essential that he should be a man of strong physique, of 
steady nerves, and of a resolute nature. must be an 
entomologist—coleopterist preferred. apply, in person, at 77b, 
brook street. application must be made before twelve o’clock 
to-day. 

now, i have already said that i was devoted to zoology. of all branch 
of zoology, the study of insect was the most attractive to me, and of 
all insect beetle were the species with which i was most familiar. 
butterfly collector are numerous, but beetle are far more varied, and 
more accessible in these island than are butterflies. it was this fact 
which had attract my attention to them, and i had myself made a 
collection which number some hundred varieties. as to the other 
requisite of the advertisement, i knew that my nerves could be depend 
upon, and i had won the weight-throwing competition at the 
inter-hospital sports. clearly, i was the very man for the vacancy. 
within five minutes of my have read the advertisement i was in a cab 
and on my way to brook street. 

as i drove, i kept turning the matter over in my head and try to make 
a guess as to what sort of employment it could be which need such 
curious qualifications. a strong physique, a resolute nature, a medical 
training, and a knowledge of beetles—what connection could there be 
between these various requisites? and then there was the dishearten 
fact that the situation was not a permanent one, but terminable from day 
to day, according to the terms of the advertisement. the more i ponder 
over it the more unintelligible did it become; but at the end of my 
meditation i always came back to the ground fact that, come what might, 
i had nothing to lose, that i was completely at the end of my resources, 
and that i was ready for any adventure, however desperate, which would 
put a few honest sovereign into my pocket. the man fear to fail who 
has to pay for his failure, but there was no penalty which fortune could 
exact from me. i was like the gamble with empty pockets, who is still 
allow to try his luck with the others. 

no. 77b, brook street, was one of those dingy and yet imposing houses, 
dun-coloured and flat-faced, with the intense respectable and solid 
air which mark the georgia builder. as i alight from the cab, a 
young man came out of the door and walk swift down the street. in 
passing me, i notice that he cast an inquisitive and somewhat 
malevolent glance at me, and i took the incident as a good omen, for his 
appearance was that of a reject candidate, and if he resent my 
application it meant that the vacancy was not yet fill up. full of 
hope, i ascend the broad steps and rap with the heavy knocker. 

a footman in powder and livery open the door. clearly i was in touch 
with people of wealth and fashion. 

“yes, sir?” said the footman. 

“i came in answer to——” 

“quite so, sir,” said the footman. “lord linchmere will see you at once 
in the library.” 

lord linchmere! i had vague heard the name, but could not for the 
instant recall anything about him. following the footman, i was shown 
into a large, book-lined room in which there was seat behind a 
writing-desk a small man with a pleasant, clean-shaven, mobile face, and 
long hair shot with grey, brush back from his forehead. he look me 
up and down with a very shrewd, penetrating glance, holding the card 
which the footman had given him in his right hand. then he smile 
pleasantly, and i felt that externally at any rate i possessed the 
qualifications which he desired. 

“you have come in answer to my advertisement, dr. hamilton?” he asked. 

“yes, sir.” 

“do you fulfil the conditions which are there laid down?” 

“i believe that i do.” 

“you are a powerful man, or so i should judge from your appearance.” 

“i think that i am fairly strong.” 

“and resolute?” 

“i believe so.” 

“have you ever known what it was to be expose to imminent danger?” 

“no, i don’t know that i ever have.” 

“but you think you would be prompt and cool at such a time?” 

“i hope so.” 

“well, i believe that you would. i have the more confidence in you 
because you do not pretend to be certain as to what you would do in a 
position that was new to you. my impression is that, so far as personal 
quality go, you are the very man of whom i am in search. that being 
settled, we may pass on to the next point.” 

“which is?” 

“to talk to me about beetles.” 

i look across to see if he was joking, but, on the contrary, he was 
leaning eager forward across his desk, and there was an expression of 
something like anxiety in his eyes. 

“i am afraid that you do not know about beetles,” he cried. 

“on the contrary, sir, it is the one scientific subject about which i 
feel that i really do know something.” 

“i am overjoyed to hear it. please talk to me about beetles.” 

i talked. i do not profess to have said anything original upon the 
subject, but i gave a short sketch of the characteristic of the beetle, 
and ran over the more common species, with some allusion to the 
specimen in my own little collection and to the article upon “burying 
beetles” which i had contribute to the _journal of entomology 
science_. 

“what! not a collector?” cry lord linchmere. “you don’t mean that you 
are yourself a collector?” his eyes dance with pleasure at the thought. 

“you are certainly the very man in london for my purpose. i thought that 
among five million of people there must be such a man, but the 
difficulty is to lay one’s hand upon him. i have been extraordinarily 
fortunate in finding you.” 

he rang a gong upon the table, and the footman entered. 

“ask lady rossiter to have the goodness to step this way,” said his 
lordship, and a few moments later the lady was usher into the room. 
she was a small, middle-aged woman, very like lord linchmere in 
appearance, with the same quick, alert features and grey-black hair. the 
expression of anxiety, however, which i had observe upon his face was 
very much more marked upon hers. some great grief seem to have cast 
its shadow over her features. as lord linchmere present me she turn 
her face full upon me, and i was shock to observe a half-healed scar 
extend for two inch over her right eyebrow. it was partly conceal 
by plaster, but none the less i could see that it had been a serious 
wound and not long inflicted. 

“dr. hamilton is the very man for our purpose, evelyn,” said lord 
linchmere. “he is actually a collector of beetles, and he has written 
articles upon the subject.” 

“really!” said lady rossiter. “then you must have heard of my husband. 
every one who know anything about beetle must have heard of sir thomas 
rossiter.” 

for the first time a thin little ray of light began to break into the 
obscure business. here, at last, was a connection between these people 
and beetles. sir thomas rossiter—he was the greatest authority upon the 
subject in the world. he had made it his life-long study, and had 
written a most exhaustive work upon it. i hasten to assure her that i 
had read and appreciate it. 

“have you met my husband?” she asked. 

“no, i have not.” 

“but you shall,” said lord linchmere, with decision. 

the lady was standing beside the desk, and she put her hand upon his 
shoulder. it was obvious to me as i saw their face together that they 
were brother and sister. 

“are you really prepared for this, charles? it is noble of you, but you 
fill me with fears.” her voice quaver with apprehension, and he 
appear to me to be equally moved, though he was making strong effort 
to conceal his agitation. 

“yes, yes, dear; it is all settled, it is all decided; in fact, there is 
no other possible way, that i can see.” 

“there is one obvious way.” 

“no, no, evelyn, i shall never abandon you—never. it will come 
right—depend upon it; it will come right, and surely it looks like the 
interference of providence that so perfect an instrument should be put 
into our hands.” 

my position was embarrassing, for i felt that for the instant they had 
forgotten my presence. but lord linchmere came back sudden to me and 
to my engagement. 

“the business for which i want you, dr. hamilton, is that you should put 
yourself absolutely at my disposal. i wish you to come for a short 
journey with me, to remain always at my side, and to promise to do 
without question whatever i may ask you, however unreasonable it may 
appear to you to be.” 

“that is a good deal to ask,” said i. 

“unfortunately i cannot put it more plainly, for i do not myself know 
what turn matter may take. you may be sure, however, that you will not 
be ask to do anything which your conscience do not approve; and i 
promise you that, when all is over, you will be proud to have been 
concerned in so good a work.” 

“if it end happily,” said the lady. 

“exactly; if it end happily,” his lordship repeated. 

“and terms?” i asked. 

“twenty pound a day.” 

i was amaze at the sum, and must have show my surprise upon my 
features. 

“it is a rare combination of qualities, as must have struck you when you 
first read the advertisement,” said lord linchmere; “such varied gift 
may well command a high return, and i do not conceal from you that your 
duty might be arduous or even dangerous. besides, it is possible that 
one or two days may bring the matter to an end.” 

“please god!” sigh his sister. 

“so now, dr. hamilton, may i rely upon your aid?” 

“most undoubtedly,” said i. “you have only to tell me what my duty 
are.” 

“your first duty will be to return to your home. you will pack up 
whatever you may need for a short visit to the country. we start 
together from paddington station at 3.40 this afternoon.” 

“do we go far?” 

“as far as pangbourne. meet me at the bookstall at 3.30. i shall have 
the tickets. good-bye, dr. hamilton! and, by the way, there are two 
things which i should be very glad if you would bring with you, in case 
you have them. one is your case for collect beetles, and the other is 
a stick, and the thick and heavy the better.” 

* * * * * 

you may imagine that i had plenty to think of from the time that i left 
brook street until i set out to meet lord linchmere at paddington. the 
whole fantastic business kept arrange and re-arranging itself in 
kaleidoscopic form inside my brain, until i had thought out a dozen 
explanations, each of them more grotesque improbable than the last. 
and yet i felt that the truth must be something grotesque improbable 
also. at last i gave up all attempt at finding a solution, and 
contented myself with exactly carry out the instruction which i had 
received. with a hand valise, specimen-case, and a loaded cane, i was 
wait at the paddington bookstall when lord linchmere arrived. he was 
an even small man than i had thought—frail and peaky, with a manner 
which was more nervous than it had been in the morning. he wore a long, 
thick travel ulster, and i observe that he carry a heavy 
blackthorn cudgel in his hand. 

“i have the tickets,” said he, leading the way up the platform. “this is 
our train. i have engaged a carriage, for i am particularly anxious to 
impress one or two things upon you while we travel down.” 

and yet all that he had to impress upon me might have been said in a 
sentence, for it was that i was to remember that i was there as a 
protection to himself, and that i was not on any consideration to leave 
him for an instant. this he repeated again and again as our journey drew 
to a close, with an insistence which show that his nerves were 
thorough shaken. 

“yes,” he said at last, in answer to my looks rather than to my words, 
“i _am_ nervous, dr. hamilton. i have always been a timid man, and my 
timid depend upon my frail physical health. but my soul is firm, and 
i can bring myself up to face a danger which a less nervous man might 
shrink from. what i am do now is done from no compulsion, but 
entire from a sense of duty, and yet it is, beyond doubt, a desperate 
risk. if things should go wrong, i will have some claim to the title of 
martyr.” 

this eternal reading of riddle was too much for me. i felt that i must 
put a term to it. 

“i think it would be very much better, sir, if you were to trust me 
entirely,” said i. “it is impossible for me to act effectively, when i 
do not know what are the object which we have in view, or even where we 
are going.” 

“oh, as to where we are going, there need be no mystery about that,” 
said he; “we are go to delamere court, the residence of sir thomas 
rossiter, with whose work you are so conversant. as to the exact object 
of our visit, i do not know that at this stage of the proceedings 
anything would be gained, dr. hamilton, by my taking you into my 
complete confidence. i may tell you that we are acting—i say ‘we,’ 
because my sister, lady rossiter, take the same view as myself—with the 
one object of prevent anything in the nature of a family scandal. 
that being so, you can understand that i am loth to give any 
explanation which are not absolutely necessary. it would be a different 
matter, dr. hamilton, if i were ask your advice. as matter stand, it 
is only your active help which i need, and i will indicate to you from 
time to time how you can best give it.” 

there was nothing more to be said, and a poor man can put up with a good 
deal for twenty pound a day, but i felt none the less that lord 
linchmere was acting rather scurvy towards me. he wish to convert me 
into a passive tool, like the blackthorn in his hand. with his sensitive 
disposition i could imagine, however, that scandal would be abhorrent to 
him, and i realize that he would not take me into his confidence until 
no other course was open to him. i must trust to my own eyes and ear to 
solve the mystery, but i had every confidence that i should not trust to 
them in vain. 

delamere court lie a good five mile from pangbourne station, and we 
drove for that distance in an open fly. lord linchmere sat in deep 
thought during the time, and he never open his mouth until we were 
close to our destination. when he did speak it was to give me a piece of 
information which surprise me. 

“perhaps you are not aware,” said he, “that i am a medical man like 
yourself?” 

“no, sir, i did not know it.” 

“yes, i qualified in my younger days, when there were several lives 
between me and the peerage. i have not had occasion to practise, but i 
have found it a useful education, all the same. i never regret the 
years which i devoted to medical study. these are the gate of delamere 
court.” 

we had come to two high pillar crown with heraldic monster which 
flank the opening of a winding avenue. over the laurel bush and 
rhododendron i could see a long, many-gabled mansion, girdle with ivy, 
and tone to the warm, cheery, mellow glow of old brick-work. my eyes 
were still fixed in admiration upon this delightful house when my 
companion pluck nervous at my sleeve. 

“here’s sir thomas,” he whispered. “please talk beetle all you can.” 

a tall, thin figure, curious angular and bony, had emerge through a 
gap in the hedge of laurels. in his hand he held a spud, and he wore 
gauntlet gardener’s gloves. a broad-brimmed, grey hat cast his face 
into shadow, but it struck me as exceedingly austere, with an 
ill-nourished beard and harsh, irregular features. the fly pull up and 
lord linchmere sprang out. 

“my dear thomas, how are you?” said he, heartily. 

but the hearty was by no means reciprocal. the owner of the grounds 
glare at me over his brother-in-law’s shoulder, and i caught broken 
scraps of sentences—“well-known wish ... hatred of stranger ... 
unjustifiable intrusion ... perfectly inexcusable.” then there was a 
mutter explanation, and the two of them came over together to the side 
of the fly. 

“let me present you to sir thomas rossiter, dr. hamilton,” said lord 
linchmere. “you will find that you have a strong community of tastes.” 

i bowed. sir thomas stood very stiffly, look at me severe from 
under the broad brim of his hat. 

“lord linchmere tell me that you know something about beetles,” said 
he. “what do you know about beetles?” 

“i know what i have learned from your work upon the coleoptera, sir 
thomas,” i answered. 

“give me the name of the better-known species of the britain scarabæi,” 
said he. 

i had not expect an examination, but fortunately i was ready for one. 
my answer seem to please him, for his stern features relaxed. 

“you appear to have read my book with some profit, sir,” said he. “it is 
a rare thing for me to meet any one who take an intelligent interest in 
such matters. people can find time for such triviality as sport or 
society, and yet the beetle are overlooked. i can assure you that the 
greater part of the idiot in this part of the country are unaware that 
i have ever written a book at all—i, the first man who ever describe 
the true function of the elytra. i am glad to see you, sir, and i have 
no doubt that i can show you some specimen which will interest you.” he 
step into the fly and drove up with us to the house, expound to me 
as we went some recent research which he had made into the anatomy of 
the lady-bird. 

i have said that sir thomas rossiter wore a large hat drawn down over 
his brows. as he enter the hall he uncover himself, and i was at 
once aware of a singular characteristic which the hat had concealed. his 
forehead, which was naturally high, and higher still on account of 
recede hair, was in a continual state of movement. some nervous 
weakness kept the muscle in a constant spasm, which sometimes produce 
a mere twitch and sometimes a curious rotary movement unlike anything 
which i had ever seen before. it was striking visible as he turn 
towards us after enter the study, and seem the more singular from 
the contrast with the hard, steady grey eyes which look out from 
underneath those palpitate brows. 

“i am sorry,” said he, “that lady rossiter is not here to help me to 
welcome you. by the way, charles, did evelyn say anything about the date 
of her return?” 

“she wish to stay in town for a few more days,” said lord linchmere. 
“you know how ladies’ social duty accumulate if they have been for 
some time in the country. my sister has many old friends in london at 
present.” 

“well, she is her own mistress, and i should not wish to alter her 
plans, but i shall be glad when i see her again. it is very lonely here 
without her company.” 

“i was afraid that you might find it so, and that was partly why i ran 
down. my young friend, dr. hamilton, is so much interested in the 
subject which you have made your own, that i thought you would not mind 
his accompany me.” 

“i lead a retired life, dr. hamilton, and my aversion to stranger grow 
upon me,” said our host. “i have sometimes thought that my nerves are 
not so good as they were. my travels in search of beetle in my younger 
days took me into many malarious and unhealthy places. but a brother 
coleopterist like yourself is always a welcome guest, and i shall be 
delight if you will look over my collection, which i think that i may 
without exaggeration describe as the best in europe.” 

and so no doubt it was. he had a huge oaken cabinet arrange in shallow 
drawers, and here, neat ticket and classified, were beetle from 
every corner of the earth, black, brown, blue, green, and mottled. every 
now and then as he swept his hand over the lines and lines of impale 
insect he would catch up some rare specimen, and, handle it with as 
much delicacy and reverence as if it were a precious relic, he would 
hold forth upon its peculiarity and the circumstances under which it 
came into his possession. it was evidently an unusual thing for him to 
meet with a sympathetic listener, and he talk and talk until the 
spring evening had deepen into night, and the gong announce that it 
was time to dress for dinner. all the time lord linchmere said nothing, 
but he stood at his brother-in-law’s elbow, and i caught him continual 
shoot curious little, questioning glance into his face. and his own 
features express some strong emotion, apprehension, sympathy, 
expectation: i seem to read them all. i was sure that lord linchmere 
was fear something and await something, but what that something 
might be i could not imagine. 

the evening pass quiet but pleasantly, and i should have been 
entire at my ease if it had not been for that continual sense of 
tension upon the part of lord linchmere. as to our host, i found that he 
improve upon acquaintance. he spoke constant with affection of his 
absent wife, and also of his little son, who had recently been sent to 
school. the house, he said, was not the same without them. if it were 
not for his scientific studies, he did not know how he could get through 
the days. after dinner we smoke for some time in the billiard-room, and 
finally went early to bed. 

and then it was that, for the first time, the suspicion that lord 
linchmere was a lunatic cross my mind. he follow me into my bedroom, 
when our host had retired. 

“doctor,” said he, speak in a low, hurried voice, “you must come with 
me. you must spend the night in my bedroom.” 

“what do you mean?” 

“i prefer not to explain. but this is part of your duties. my room is 
close by, and you can return to your own before the servant call you in 
the morning.” 

“but why?” i asked. 

“because i am nervous of being alone,” said he. “that’s the reason, 
since you must have a reason.” 

it seem rank lunacy, but the argument of those twenty pound would 
overcome many objections. i follow him to his room. 

“well,” said i, “there’s only room for one in that bed.” 

“only one shall occupy it,” said he. 

“and the other?” 

“must remain, on watch.” 

“why?” said i. “one would think you expect to be attacked.” 

“perhaps i do.” 

“in that case, why not lock your door?” 

“perhaps i _want_ to be attacked.” 

it look more and more like lunacy. however, there was nothing for it 
but to submit. i shrug my shoulder and sat down in the arm-chair 
beside the empty fireplace. 

“i am to remain on watch, then?” said i, ruefully. 

“we will divide the night. if you will watch until two, i will watch the 
remainder.” 

“very good.” 

“call me at two o’clock, then.” 

“i will do so.” 

“keep your ear open, and if you hear any sound wake me 
instantly—instantly, you hear?” 

“you can rely upon it.” i try to look as solemn as he did. 

“and for god’s sake don’t go to sleep,” said he, and so, taking off only 
his coat, he threw the coverlet over him and settled down for the night. 

it was a melancholy vigil, and made more so by my own sense of its 
folly. supposing that by any chance lord linchmere had cause to suspect 
that he was subject to danger in the house of sir thomas rossiter, why 
on earth could he not lock his door and so protect himself? his own 
answer that he might wish to be attack was absurd. why should he 
possibly wish to be attacked? and who would wish to attack him? clearly, 
lord linchmere was suffering from some singular delusion, and the result 
was that on an imbecile pretext i was to be deprived of my night’s rest. 
still, however absurd, i was determined to carry out his injunction to 
the letter as long as i was in his employment. i sat therefore beside 
the empty fireplace, and listen to a sonorous chime clock somewhere 
down the passage, which gurgle and struck every quarter of an hour. it 
was an endless vigil. save for that single clock, an absolute silence 
reign throughout the great house. a small lamp stood on the table at 
my elbow, throw a circle of light round my chair, but leave the 
corner of the room drape in shadow. on the bed lord linchmere was 
breathing peacefully. i envy him his quiet sleep, and again and again 
my own eyelid drooped, but every time my sense of duty came to my help, 
and i sat up, rubbing my eyes and pinch myself with a determination 
to see my irrational watch to an end. 

and i did so. from down the passage came the chime of two o’clock, and 
i laid my hand upon the shoulder of the sleeper. instantly he was 
sitting up, with an expression of the keenest interest upon his face. 

“you have heard something?” 

“no, sir. it is two o’clock.” 

“very good. i will watch. you can go to sleep.” i lay down under the 
coverlet as he had done, and was soon unconscious. my last recollection 
was of that circle of lamplight, and of the small, hunched-up figure and 
strained, anxious face of lord linchmere in the centre of it. 

how long i slept i do not know; but i was sudden arouse by a sharp 
tug at my sleeve. the room was in darkness, but a hot smell of oil told 
me that the lamp had only that instant been extinguished. 

“quick! quick!” said lord linchmere’s voice in my ear. 

i sprang out of bed, he still drag at my arm. 

“over here!” he whispered, and pull me into a corner of the room. 
“hush! listen!” 

in the silence of the night i could distinct hear that someone was 
coming down the corridor. it was a stealthy step, faint and 
intermittent, as of a man who pause cautious after every stride. 
sometimes for half a minute there was no sound, and then came the 
shuffle and creak which told of a fresh advance. my companion was 
tremble with excitement. his hand which still held my sleeve twitch 
like a branch in the wind. 

“what is it?” i whispered. 

“it’s he!” 

“sir thomas?” 

“yes.” 

“what do he want?” 

“hush! do nothing until i tell you.” 

i was conscious now that someone was try the door. there was the 
faintest little rattle from the handle, and then i dim saw a thin slit 
of subdued light. there was a lamp burning somewhere far down the 
passage, and it just suffice to make the outside visible from the 
dark of our room. the greyish slit grew broad and broader, very 
gradually, very gently, and then outline against it i saw the dark 
figure of a man. he was squat and crouching, with the silhouette of a 
bulky and misshapen dwarf. slow the door swung open with this ominous 
shape frame in the centre of it. and then, in an instant the crouch 
figure shot up, there was a tiger spring across the room, and thud, 
thud, thud, came three tremendous blow from some heavy object upon the 
bed. 

i was so paralyze with amaze that i stood motionless and staring 
until i was arouse by a yell for help from my companion. the open door 
shed enough light for me to see the outline of things, and there was 
little lord linchmere with his arms round the neck of his 
brother-in-law, holding brave on to him like a game bull-terrier with 
its teeth into a gaunt deerhound. the tall, bony man dashed himself 
about, writhe round and round to get a grip upon his assailant; but 
the other, clutch on from behind, still kept his hold, though his 
shrill, frightened cries show how unequal he felt the contest to be. i 
sprang to the rescue, and the two of us manage to throw sir thomas to 
the ground, though he made his teeth meet in my shoulder. with all my 
youth and weight and strength, it was a desperate struggle before we 
could master his frenzied struggles; but at last we secure his arms 
with the waist-cord of the dressing-gown which he was wearing. i was 
holding his leg while lord linchmere was endeavour to relight the 
lamp, when there came the patter of many feet in the passage, and the 
butler and two footmen, who had been alarm by the cries, rush into 
the room. with their aid we had no further difficulty in secure our 
prisoner, who lay foam and glaring upon the ground. one glance at his 
face was enough to prove that he was a dangerous maniac, while the 
short, heavy hammer which lay beside the bed show how murderous had 
been his intentions. 

“do not use any violence!” said lord linchmere, as we raise the 
struggle man to his feet. “he will have a period of stupor after this 
excitement. i believe that it is coming on already.” as he spoke the 
convulsion became less violent, and the madman’s head fell forward upon 
his breast, as if he were overcome by sleep. we led him down the passage 
and stretch him upon his own bed, where he lay unconscious, breathing 
heavily. 

“two of you will watch him,” said lord linchmere. “and now, dr. 
hamilton, if you will return with me to my room, i will give you the 
explanation which my horror of scandal has perhaps cause me to delay 
too long. come what may, you will never have cause to regret your share 
in this night’s work. 

“the case may be made clear in a very few words,” he continued, when we 
were alone. “my poor brother-in-law is one of the best fellow upon 
earth, a loving husband and an estimable father, but he come from a 
stock which is deep taint with insanity. he has more than once had 
homicidal outbreaks, which are the more painful because his inclination 
is always to attack the very person to whom he is most attached. his son 
was sent away to school to avoid this danger, and then came an attempt 
upon my sister, his wife, from which she escape with injury that you 
may have observe when you met her in london. you understand that he 
know nothing of the matter when he is in his sound senses, and would 
ridicule the suggestion that he could under any circumstances injure 
those whom he love so dearly. it is often, as you know, a 
characteristic of such malady that it is absolutely impossible to 
convince the man who suffer from them of their existence. 

“our great object was, of course, to get him under restraint before he 
could stain his hand with blood, but the matter was full of difficulty. 
he is a recluse in his habits, and would not see any medical man. 
besides, it was necessary for our purpose that the medical man should 
convince himself of his insanity; and he is sane as you or i, save on 
these very rare occasions. but, fortunately, before he has these attack 
he always show certain premonitory symptoms, which are providential 
danger-signals, warning us to be upon our guard. the chief of these is 
that nervous contortion of the forehead which you must have observed. 
this is a phenomenon which always appear from three to four days before 
his attack of frenzy. the moment it show itself his wife came into 
town on some pretext, and took refuge in my house in brook street. 

“it remain for me to convince a medical man of sir thomas’s insanity, 
without which it was impossible to put him where he could do no harm. 
the first problem was how to get a medical man into his house. i 
bethought me of his interest in beetles, and his love for any one who 
share his tastes. i advertised, therefore, and was fortunate enough to 
find in you the very man i wanted. a stout companion was necessary, for 
i knew that the lunacy could only be prove by a murderous assault, and 
i had every reason to believe that that assault would be made upon 
myself, since he had the warmest regard for me in his moments of sanity. 
i think your intelligence will supply all the rest. i did not know that 
the attack would come by night, but i thought it very probable, for the 
crisis of such case usually do occur in the early hour of the morning. 
i am a very nervous man myself, but i saw no other way in which i could 
remove this terrible danger from my sister’s life. i need not ask you 
whether you are willing to sign the lunacy papers.” 

“undoubtedly. but _two_ signature are necessary.” 

“you forget that i am myself a holder of a medical degree. i have the 
papers on a side-table here, so if you will be good enough to sign them 
now, we can have the patient remove in the morning.” 

* * * * * 

so that was my visit to sir thomas rossiter, the famous beetle-hunter, 
and that was also my first step upon the ladder of success, for lady 
rossiter and lord linchmere have prove to be staunch friends, and they 
have never forgotten my association with them in the time of their need. 
sir thomas is out and said to be cured, but i still think that if i 
spent another night at delamere court, i should be inclined to lock my 
door upon the inside. 




the man with the watches 


there are many who will still bear in mind the singular circumstances 
which, under the heading of the rugby mystery, fill many column of 
the daily press in the spring of the year 1892. coming as it did at a 
period of exceptional dulness, it attract perhaps rather more 
attention than it deserved, but it offer to the public that mixture of 
the whimsical and the tragic which is most stimulate to the popular 
imagination. interest drooped, however, when, after week of fruitless 
investigation, it was found that no final explanation of the fact was 
forthcoming, and the tragedy seem from that time to the present to 
have finally taken its place in the dark catalogue of inexplicable and 
unexpiated crimes. a recent communication (the authenticity of which 
appear to be above question) has, however, thrown some new and clear 
light upon the matter. before lay it before the public it would be as 
well, perhaps, that i should refresh their memory as to the singular 
fact upon which this commentary is founded. these fact were brief as 
follows:— 

at five o’clock on the evening of the 18th of march in the year already 
mention a train left euston station for manchester. it was a rainy, 
squal day, which grew wild as it progressed, so it was by no means 
the weather in which any one would travel who was not driven to do so by 
necessity. the train, however, is a favourite one among manchester 
business men who are return from town, for it do the journey in 
four hour and twenty minutes, with only three stoppage upon the way. 
in spite of the inclement evening it was, therefore, fairly well fill 
upon the occasion of which i speak. the guard of the train was a try 
servant of the company—a man who had work for twenty-two years without 
blemish or complaint. his name was john palmer. 

the station clock was upon the stroke of five, and the guard was about 
to give the customary signal to the engine-driver when he observe two 
belated passenger hurry down the platform. the one was an 
exceptional tall man, dress in a long black overcoat with astrakhan 
collar and cuffs. i have already said that the evening was an inclement 
one, and the tall traveller had the high, warm collar turn up to 
protect his throat against the bitter march wind. he appeared, as far as 
the guard could judge by so hurried an inspection, to be a man between 
fifty and sixty years of age, who had retain a good deal of the vigour 
and activity of his youth. in one hand he carry a brown leather 
gladstone bag. his companion was a lady, tall and erect, walking with a 
vigorous step which outpace the gentleman beside her. she wore a long, 
fawn-coloured dust-cloak, a black, close-fitting toque, and a dark veil 
which conceal the greater part of her face. the two might very well 
have pass as father and daughter. they walk swift down the line of 
carriages, glancing in at the windows, until the guard, john palmer, 
overtook them. 

“now, then, sir, look sharp, the train is going,” said he. 

“first-class,” the man answered. 

the guard turn the handle of the nearest door. in the carriage, which 
he had opened, there sat a small man with a cigar in his mouth. his 
appearance seem to have impress itself upon the guard’s memory, for 
he was prepared, afterwards, to describe or to identify him. he was a 
man of thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, dress in some grey 
material, sharp-nosed, alert, with a ruddy, weather-beaten face, and a 
small, close crop black beard. he glance up as the door was 
opened. the tall man pause with his foot upon the step. 

“this is a smoking compartment. the lady dislike smoke,” said he, 
look round at the guard. 

“all right! here you are, sir!” said john palmer. he slam the door of 
the smoking carriage, open that of the next one, which was empty, and 
thrust the two traveller in. at the same moment he sound his whistle 
and the wheels of the train began to move. the man with the cigar was at 
the window of his carriage, and said something to the guard as he roll 
past him, but the words were lost in the bustle of the departure. palmer 
step into the guard’s van, as it came up to him, and thought no more 
of the incident. 

twelve minutes after its departure the train reach willesden junction, 
where it stop for a very short interval. an examination of the 
ticket has made it certain that no one either join or left it at this 
time, and no passenger was seen to alight upon the platform. at 5.14 the 
journey to manchester was resumed, and rugby was reach at 6.50, the 
express being five minutes late. 

at rugby the attention of the station official was drawn to the fact 
that the door of one of the first-class carriage was open. an 
examination of that compartment, and of its neighbour, disclose a 
remarkable state of affairs. 

the smoking carriage in which the short, red-faced man with the black 
beard had been seen was now empty. save for a half-smoked cigar, there 
was no trace whatever of its recent occupant. the door of this carriage 
was fastened. in the next compartment, to which attention had been 
originally drawn, there was no sign either of the gentleman with the 
astrakhan collar or of the young lady who accompany him. all three 
passenger had disappeared. on the other hand, there was found upon the 
floor of this carriage—the one in which the tall traveller and the lady 
had been—a young man, fashionable dress and of elegant appearance. he 
lay with his knee drawn up, and his head rest against the further 
door, an elbow upon either seat. a bullet had penetrate his heart and 
his death must have been instantaneous. no one had seen such a man enter 
the train, and no railway ticket was found in his pocket, neither were 
there any marking upon his linen, nor papers nor personal property 
which might help to identify him. who he was, whence he had come, and 
how he had met his end were each as great a mystery as what had occur 
to the three people who had start an hour and a half before from 
willesden in those two compartments. 

i have said that there was no personal property which might help to 
identify him, but it is true that there was one peculiarity about this 
unknown young man which was much comment upon at the time. in his 
pocket were found no few than six valuable gold watches, three in the 
various pocket of his waistcoat, one in his ticket-pocket, one in his 
breast-pocket, and one small one set in a leather strap and fasten 
round his left wrist. the obvious explanation that the man was a 
pickpocket, and that this was his plunder, was discount by the fact 
that all six were of america make, and of a type which is rare in 
england. three of them bore the mark of the rochester watchmake 
company; one was by mason, of elmira; one was unmarked; and the small 
one, which was highly jewelled and ornamented, was from tiffany, of new 
york. the other contents of his pocket consist of an ivory knife with 
a corkscrew by rodgers, of sheffield; a small circular mirror, one inch 
in diameter; a re-admission slip to the lyceum theatre; a silver box 
full of vesta matches, and a brown leather cigar-case contain two 
cheroots—also two pound fourteen shilling in money. it was clear, 
then, that whatever motive may have led to his death, robbery was not 
among them. as already mentioned, there were no marking upon the man’s 
linen, which appear to be new, and no tailor’s name upon his coat. in 
appearance he was young, short, smooth-cheeked, and delicate featured. 
one of his front teeth was conspicuous stop with gold. 

on the discovery of the tragedy an examination was instantly made of the 
ticket of all passengers, and the number of the passenger themselves 
was counted. it was found that only three ticket were unaccounted for, 
corresponding to the three traveller who were missing. the express was 
then allow to proceed, but a new guard was sent with it, and john 
palmer was detain as a witness at rugby. the carriage which included 
the two compartment in question was uncouple and side-tracked. then, 
on the arrival of inspector vane, of scotland yard, and of mr. 
henderson, a detective in the service of the railway company, an 
exhaustive inquiry was made into all the circumstances. 

that crime had been committed was certain. the bullet, which appear to 
have come from a small pistol or revolver, had been fire from some 
little distance, as there was no scorching of the clothes. no weapon was 
found in the compartment (which finally disposed of the theory of 
suicide), nor was there any sign of the brown leather bag which the 
guard had seen in the hand of the tall gentleman. a lady’s parasol was 
found upon the rack, but no other trace was to be seen of the traveller 
in either of the sections. apart from the crime, the question of how or 
why three passenger (one of them a lady) could get out of the train, 
and one other get in during the unbroken run between willesden and 
rugby, was one which excited the utmost curiosity among the general 
public, and gave rise to much speculation in the london press. 

john palmer, the guard, was able at the inquest to give some evidence 
which threw a little light upon the matter. there was a spot between 
tring and cheddington, according to his statement, where, on account of 
some repair to the line, the train had for a few minutes slow down to 
a pace not exceed eight or ten mile an hour. at that place it might 
be possible for a man, or even for an exceptional active woman, to 
have left the train without serious injury. it was true that a gang of 
platelayer was there, and that they had seen nothing, but it was their 
custom to stand in the middle between the metals, and the open carriage 
door was upon the far side, so that it was conceivable that someone 
might have alight unseen, as the dark would by that time be 
drawing in. a steep embankment would instantly screen anyone who sprang 
out from the observation of the navvies. 

the guard also depose that there was a good deal of movement upon the 
platform at willesden junction, and that though it was certain that no 
one had either join or left the train there, it was still quite 
possible that some of the passenger might have change unseen from one 
compartment to another. it was by no means uncommon for a gentleman to 
finish his cigar in a smoking carriage and then to change to a clear 
atmosphere. supposing that the man with the black beard had done so at 
willesden (and the half-smoked cigar upon the floor seem to favour the 
supposition), he would naturally go into the nearest section, which 
would bring him into the company of the two other actor in this drama. 
thus the first stage of the affair might be surmise without any great 
breach of probability. but what the second stage had been, or how the 
final one had been arrive at, neither the guard nor the experienced 
detective officer could suggest. 

a careful examination of the line between willesden and rugby result 
in one discovery which might or might not have a bearing upon the 
tragedy. near tring, at the very place where the train slow down, 
there was found at the bottom of the embankment a small pocket 
testament, very shabby and worn. it was print by the bible society of 
london, and bore an inscription: “from john to alice. jan. 13th, 1856,” 
upon the fly-leaf. underneath was written: “james, july 4th, 1859,” and 
beneath that again: “edward. nov. 1st, 1869,” all the entry being in 
the same handwriting. this was the only clue, if it could be call a 
clue, which the police obtained, and the coroner’s verdict of “murder by 
a person or person unknown” was the unsatisfactory ending of a singular 
case. advertisement, rewards, and inquiry prove equally fruitless, 
and nothing could be found which was solid enough to form the basis for 
a profitable investigation. 

it would be a mistake, however, to suppose that no theory were 
form to account for the facts. on the contrary, the press, both in 
england and in america, teem with suggestion and suppositions, most 
of which were obviously absurd. the fact that the watches were of 
america make, and some peculiarity in connection with the gold 
stopping of his front tooth, appear to indicate that the deceased was 
a citizen of the united states, though his linen, clothes, and boots 
were undoubted of britain manufacture. it was surmised, by some, that 
he was conceal under the seat, and that, being discovered, he was for 
some reason, possibly because he had overheard their guilty secrets, put 
to death by his fellow-passengers. when couple with generality as to 
the ferocity and cunning of anarchic and other secret societies, this 
theory sound as plausible as any. 

the fact that he should be without a ticket would be consistent with 
the idea of concealment, and it was well known that women play a 
prominent part in the nihilistic propaganda. on the other hand, it was 
clear, from the guard’s statement, that the man must have been hidden 
there _before_ the other arrived, and how unlikely the coincidence that 
conspirator should stray exactly into the very compartment in which a 
spy was already concealed! besides, this explanation ignore the man in 
the smoking carriage, and gave no reason at all for his simultaneous 
disappearance. the police had little difficulty in showing that such a 
theory would not cover the facts, but they were unprepared in the 
absence of evidence to advance any alternative explanation. 

there was a letter in the _daily gazette_, over the signature of a 
well-known criminal investigator, which gave rise to considerable 
discussion at the time. he had form a hypothesis which had at least 
ingenuity to recommend it, and i cannot do better than append it in his 
own words. 

“whatever may be the truth,” said he, “it must depend upon some 
bizarre and rare combination of events, so we need have no hesitation in 
postulate such event in our explanation. in the absence of data we 
must abandon the analytic or scientific method of investigation, and 
must approach it in the synthetic fashion. in a word, instead of taking 
known event and deduce from them what has occurred, we must build up 
a fanciful explanation if it will only be consistent with known events. 
we can then test this explanation by any fresh fact which may arise. if 
they all fit into their places, the probability is that we are upon the 
right track, and with each fresh fact this probability increase in a 
geometric progression until the evidence become final and convincing. 

“now, there is one most remarkable and suggestive fact which has not 
met with the attention which it deserves. there is a local train running 
through harrow and king’s langley, which is time in such a way that the 
express must have overtaken it at or about the period when it ease down 
its speed to eight mile an hour on account of the repair of the line. 
the two train would at that time be travel in the same direction at 
a similar rate of speed and upon parallel lines. it is within everyone’s 
experience how, under such circumstances, the occupant of each carriage 
can see very plainly the passenger in the other carriage opposite to 
him. the lamp of the express had been lit at willesden, so that each 
compartment was bright illuminated, and most visible to an observer 
from outside. 

“now, the sequence of event as i reconstruct them would be after this 
fashion. this young man with the abnormal number of watches was alone in 
the carriage of the slow train. his ticket, with his papers and glove 
and other things, was, we will suppose, on the seat beside him. he was 
probably an american, and also probably a man of weak intellect. the 
excessive wearing of jewellery is an early symptom in some form of 
mania. 

“as he sat watch the carriage of the express which were (on 
account of the state of the line) go at the same pace as himself, he 
sudden saw some people in it whom he knew. we will suppose for the 
sake of our theory that these people were a woman whom he love and a 
man whom he hated—and who in return hate him. the young man was 
excitable and impulsive. he open the door of his carriage, step 
from the footboard of the local train to the footboard of the express, 
open the other door, and made his way into the presence of these two 
people. the feat (on the supposition that the train were go at the 
same pace) is by no means so perilous as it might appear. 

“having now got our young man without his ticket into the carriage in 
which the elder man and the young woman are travelling, it is not 
difficult to imagine that a violent scene ensued. it is possible that 
the pair were also americans, which is the more probable as the man 
carry a weapon—an unusual thing in england. if our supposition of 
incipient mania is correct, the young man is likely to have assault 
the other. as the upshot of the quarrel the elder man shot the intruder, 
and then made his escape from the carriage, taking the young lady with 
him. we will suppose that all this happen very rapidly, and that the 
train was still go at so slow a pace that it was not difficult for 
them to leave it. a woman might leave a train go at eight mile an 
hour. as a matter of fact, we know that this woman _did_ do so. 

“and now we have to fit in the man in the smoking carriage. presume 
that we have, up to this point, reconstruct the tragedy correctly, we 
shall find nothing in this other man to cause us to reconsider our 
conclusions. according to my theory, this man saw the young fellow cross 
from one train to the other, saw him open the door, heard the 
pistol-shot, saw the two fugitive spring out on to the line, realize 
that murder had been done, and sprang out himself in pursuit. why he has 
never been heard of since—whether he met his own death in the pursuit, 
or whether, as is more likely, he was made to realize that it was not a 
case for his interference—is a detail which we have at present no means 
of explaining. i acknowledge that there are some difficulty in the 
way. at first sight, it might seem improbable that at such a moment a 
murder would burden himself in his flight with a brown leather bag. my 
answer is that he was well aware that if the bag were found his identity 
would be established. it was absolutely necessary for him to take it 
with him. my theory stand or falls upon one point, and i call upon the 
railway company to make strict inquiry as to whether a ticket was found 
unclaimed in the local train through harrow and king’s langley upon the 
18th of march. if such a ticket were found my case is proved. if not, my 
theory may still be the correct one, for it is conceivable either that 
he travelled without a ticket or that his ticket was lost.” 

to this elaborate and plausible hypothesis the answer of the police 
and of the company was, first, that no such ticket was found; secondly, 
that the slow train would never run parallel to the express; and, 
thirdly, that the local train had been stationary in king’s langley 
station when the express, go at fifty mile an hour, had flash past 
it. so perish the only satisfying explanation, and five years have 
elapse without supply a new one. now, at last, there come a 
statement which cover all the facts, and which must be regard as 
authentic. it took the shape of a letter dated from new york, and 
address to the same criminal investigate whose theory i have quoted. 
it is given here in extenso, with the exception of the two opening 
paragraphs, which are personal in their nature:— 

“you’ll excuse me if i’m not very free with names. there’s less reason 
now than there was five years ago when mother was still living. but for 
all that, i had rather cover up our track all i can. but i owe you an 
explanation, for if your idea of it was wrong, it was a mighty ingenious 
one all the same. i’ll have to go back a little so as you may understand 
all about it. 

“my people came from bucks, england, and emigrate to the states in 
the early fifties. they settled in rochester, in the state of new york, 
where my father ran a large dry goods store. there were only two sons: 
myself, james, and my brother, edward. i was ten years old than my 
brother, and after my father die i sort of took the place of a father 
to him, as an elder brother would. he was a bright, spirited boy, and 
just one of the most beautiful creature that ever lived. but there was 
always a soft spot in him, and it was like mould in cheese, for it 
spread and spread, and nothing that you could do would stop it. mother 
saw it just as clearly as i did, but she went on spoil him all the 
same, for he had such a way with him that you could refuse him nothing. 
i did all i could to hold him in, and he hate me for my pains. 

“at last he fairly got his head, and nothing that we could do would 
stop him. he got off into new york, and went rapid from bad to worse. 
at first he was only fast, and then he was criminal; and then, at the 
end of a year or two, he was one of the most notorious young crook in 
the city. he had form a friendship with sparrow maccoy, who was at the 
head of his profession as a bunco-steerer, green goods-man, and general 
rascal. they took to card-sharping, and frequent some of the best 
hotel in new york. my brother was an excellent actor (he might have 
made an honest name for himself if he had chosen), and he would take the 
parts of a young englishman of title, of a simple lad from the west, or 
of a college undergraduate, whichever suit sparrow maccoy’s purpose. 
and then one day he dress himself as a girl, and he carry it off so 
well, and made himself such a valuable decoy, that it was their 
favourite game afterwards. they had made it right with tammany and with 
the police, so it seem as if nothing could ever stop them, for those 
were in the days before the lexow commission, and if you only had a 
pull, you could do pretty nearly everything you wanted. 

“and nothing would have stop them if they had only stuck to cards 
and new york, but they must needs come up rochester way, and forge a 
name upon a check. it was my brother that did it, though everyone knew 
that it was under the influence of sparrow maccoy. i bought up that 
check, and a pretty sum it cost me. then i went to my brother, laid it 
before him on the table, and swore to him that i would prosecute if he 
did not clear out of the country. at first he simply laughed. i could 
not prosecute, he said, without break our mother’s heart, and he knew 
that i would not do that. i made him understand, however, that our 
mother’s heart was being broken in any case, and that i had set firm on 
the point that i would rather see him in a rochester gaol than in a new 
york hotel. so at last he gave in, and he made me a solemn promise that 
he would see sparrow maccoy no more, that he would go to europe, and 
that he would turn his hand to any honest trade that i help him to 
get. i took him down right away to an old family friend, joe willson, 
who is an exporter of america watches and clocks, and i got him to give 
edward an agency in london, with a small salary and a 15 per cent. 
commission on all business. his manner and appearance were so good that 
he won the old man over at once, and within a week he was sent off to 
london with a case full of samples. 

“it seem to me that this business of the check had really given my 
brother a fright, and that there was some chance of his settle down 
into an honest line of life. my mother had spoken with him, and what she 
said had touched him, for she had always been the best of mother to 
him, and he had been the great sorrow of her life. but i knew that this 
man sparrow maccoy had a great influence over edward, and my chance of 
keeping the lad straight lay in break the connection between them. i 
had a friend in the new york detective force, and through him i kept a 
watch upon maccoy. when within a fortnight of my brother’s sailing i 
heard that maccoy had taken a berth in the _etruria_, i was as certain 
as if he had told me that he was go over to england for the purpose 
of coax edward back again into the ways that he had left. in an 
instant i had resolve to go also, and to put my influence against 
maccoy’s. i knew it was a lose fight, but i thought, and my mother 
thought, that it was my duty. we pass the last night together in 
prayer for my success, and she gave me her own testament that my father 
had given her on the day of their marriage in the old country, so that i 
might always wear it next my heart. 

“i was a fellow-traveller, on the steamship, with sparrow maccoy, and 
at least i had the satisfaction of spoil his little game for the 
voyage. the very first night i went into the smoking-room, and found him 
at the head of a card table, with half-a-dozen young fellow who were 
carry their full purse and their empty skull over to europe. he was 
settle down for his harvest, and a rich one it would have been. but i 
soon change all that. 

“‘gentlemen,’ said i, ‘are you aware whom you are play with?’ 

“‘what’s that to you? you mind your own business!’ said he, with an 
oath. 

“‘who is it, anyway?’ ask one of the dudes. 

“‘he’s sparrow maccoy, the most notorious cardsharp in the states.’ 

“up he jump with a bottle in his hand, but he remember that he was 
under the flag of the effete old country, where law and order run, and 
tammany has no pull. gaol and the gallows wait for violence and murder, 
and there’s no slip out by the back door on board an ocean liner. 

“‘prove your words, you——!’ said he. 

“‘i will!’ said i. ‘if you will turn up your right shirt-sleeve to the 
shoulder, i will either prove my words or i will eat them.’ 

“he turn white and said not a word. you see, i knew something of his 
ways, and i was aware that part of the mechanism which he and all such 
sharper use consist of an elastic down the arm with a clip just above 
the wrist. it is by means of this clip that they withdraw from their 
hand the cards which they do not want, while they substitute other 
cards from another hiding-place. i reckon on it being there, and it 
was. he cursed me, slunk out of the saloon, and was hardly seen again 
during the voyage. for once, at any rate, i got level with mister 
sparrow maccoy. 

“but he soon had his revenge upon me, for when it came to influence 
my brother he outweigh me every time. edward had kept himself straight 
in london for the first few weeks, and had done some business with his 
america watches, until this villain came across his path once more. i 
did my best, but the best was little enough. the next thing i heard 
there had been a scandal at one of the northumberland avenue hotels: a 
traveller had been fleece of a large sum by two confederate 
card-sharpers, and the matter was in the hand of scotland yard. the 
first i learned of it was in the evening paper, and i was at once 
certain that my brother and maccoy were back at their old games. i 
hurried at once to edward’s lodgings. they told me that he and a tall 
gentleman (whom i recognize as maccoy) had gone off together, and that 
he had left the lodgings and taken his things with him. the landlady had 
heard them give several directions to the cabman, ending with euston 
station, and she had accidental overheard the tall gentleman saying 
something about manchester. she believe that that was their 
destination. 

“a glance at the time-table show me that the most likely train was at 
five, though there was another at 4.35 which they might have caught. i 
had only time to get the later one, but found no sign of them either at 
the depôt or in the train. they must have gone on by the early one, so 
i determined to follow them to manchester and search for them in the 
hotel there. one last appeal to my brother by all that he owe to my 
mother might even now be the salvation of him. my nerves were 
overstrung, and i lit a cigar to steady them. at that moment, just as 
the train was moving off, the door of my compartment was flung open, and 
there were maccoy and my brother on the platform. 

“they were both disguised, and with good reason, for they knew that the 
london police were after them. maccoy had a great astrakhan collar drawn 
up, so that only his eyes and nose were showing. my brother was dress 
like a woman, with a black veil half down his face, but of course it did 
not deceive me for an instant, nor would it have done so even if i had 
not known that he had often use such a dress before. i start up, and 
as i did so maccoy recognize me. he said something, the conductor 
slam the door, and they were shown into the next compartment. i try 
to stop the train so as to follow them, but the wheels were already 
moving, and it was too late. 

“when we stop at willesden, i instantly change my carriage. it 
appear that i was not seen to do so, which is not surprising, as the 
station was crowded with people. maccoy, of course, was expect me, 
and he had spent the time between euston and willesden in saying all he 
could to harden my brother’s heart and set him against me. that is what 
i fancy, for i had never found him so impossible to soften or to move. i 
try this way and i try that; i picture his future in an english 
gaol; i describe the sorrow of his mother when i came back with the 
news; i said everything to touch his heart, but all to no purpose. he 
sat there with a fixed sneer upon his handsome face, while every now and 
then sparrow maccoy would throw in a taunt at me, or some word of 
encouragement to hold my brother to his resolutions. 

“‘why don’t you run a sunday-school?’ he would say to me, and then, in 
the same breath: ‘he think you have no will of your own. he think you 
are just the baby brother and that he can lead you where he likes. he’s 
only just finding out that you are a man as well as he.’ 

“it was those words of his which set me talk bitterly. we had left 
willesden, you understand, for all this took some time. my temper got 
the better of me, and for the first time in my life i let my brother see 
the rough side of me. perhaps it would have been better had i done so 
early and more often. 

“‘a man!’ said i. ‘well, i’m glad to have your friend’s assurance of it, 
for no one would suspect it to see you like a boarding-school missy. i 
don’t suppose in all this country there is a more contemptible-looking 
creature than you are as you sit there with that dolly pinafore upon 
you.’ he coloured up at that, for he was a vain man, and he wince from 
ridicule. 

“‘it’s only a dust-cloak,’ said he, and he slip it off. ‘one has to 
throw the copper off one’s scent, and i had no other way to do it.’ he 
took his toque off with the veil attached, and he put both it and the 
cloak into his brown bag. ‘anyway, i don’t need to wear it until the 
conductor come round,’ said he. 

“‘nor then, either,’ said i, and taking the bag i slung it with all my 
force out of the window. ‘now,’ said i, ‘you’ll never make a mary jane 
of yourself while i can help it. if nothing but that disguise stand 
between you and a gaol, then to gaol you shall go.’ 

“that was the way to manage him. i felt my advantage at once. his supple 
nature was one which yield to roughness far more readily than to 
entreaty. he flushed with shame, and his eyes fill with tears. but 
maccoy saw my advantage also, and was determined that i should not 
pursue it. 

“‘he’s my pard, and you shall not bully him,’ he cried. 

“‘he’s my brother, and you shall not ruin him,’ said i. ‘i believe a 
spell of prison is the very best way of keeping you apart, and you shall 
have it, or it will be no fault of mine.’ 

“‘oh, you would squeal, would you?’ he cried, and in an instant he 
whip out his revolver. i sprang for his hand, but saw that i was too 
late, and jump aside. at the same instant he fired, and the bullet 
which would have struck me pass through the heart of my unfortunate 
brother. 

“he drop without a groan upon the floor of the compartment, and 
maccoy and i, equally horrified, knelt at each side of him, try to 
bring back some sign of life. maccoy still held the loaded revolver in 
his hand, but his anger against me and my resentment towards him had 
both for the moment been swallow up in this sudden tragedy. it was he 
who first realize the situation. the train was for some reason go 
very slow at the moment, and he saw his opportunity for escape. in an 
instant he had the door open, but i was as quick as he, and jump upon 
him the two of us fell off the footboard and roll in each other’s arms 
down a steep embankment. at the bottom i struck my head against a stone, 
and i remember nothing more. when i came to myself i was lie among 
some low bushes, not far from the railroad track, and somebody was 
bathing my head with a wet handkerchief. it was sparrow maccoy. 

“‘i guess i couldn’t leave you,’ said he. ‘i didn’t want to have the 
blood of two of you on my hand in one day. you love your brother, i’ve 
no doubt; but you didn’t love him a cent more than i love him, though 
you’ll say that i took a queer way to show it. anyhow, it seem a mighty 
empty world now that he is gone, and i don’t care a continental whether 
you give me over to the hangman or not.’ 

“he had turn his ankle in the fall, and there we sat, he with his 
useless foot, and i with my throb head, and we talk and talk 
until gradual my bitter began to soften and to turn into something 
like sympathy. what was the use of revenge his death upon a man who 
was as much stricken by that death as i was? and then, as my wit 
gradual returned, i began to realize also that i could do nothing 
against maccoy which would not recoil upon my mother and myself. how 
could we convict him without a full account of my brother’s career being 
made public—the very thing which of all other we wish to avoid? it 
was really as much our interest as his to cover the matter up, and from 
being an avenge of crime i found myself change to a conspirator 
against justice. the place in which we found ourselves was one of those 
pheasant preserve which are so common in the old country, and as we 
grope our way through it i found myself consulting the slay of my 
brother as to how far it would be possible to hush it up. 

“i soon realize from what he said that unless there were some papers of 
which we knew nothing in my brother’s pockets, there was really no 
possible means by which the police could identify him or learn how he 
had got there. his ticket was in maccoy’s pocket, and so was the ticket 
for some baggage which they had left at the depôt. like most americans, 
he had found it cheap and easy to buy an outfit in london than to 
bring one from new york, so that all his linen and clothes were new and 
unmarked. the bag, contain the dust cloak, which i had thrown out of 
the window, may have fallen among some bramble patch where it is still 
concealed, or may have been carry off by some tramp, or may have come 
into the possession of the police, who kept the incident to themselves. 
anyhow, i have seen nothing about it in the london papers. as to the 
watches, they were a selection from those which had been intrust to 
him for business purposes. it may have been for the same business 
purpose that he was taking them to manchester, but—well, it’s too late 
to enter into that. 

“i don’t blame the police for being at fault. i don’t see how it could 
have been otherwise. there was just one little clew that they might have 
follow up, but it was a small one. i mean that small circular mirror 
which was found in my brother’s pocket. it isn’t a very common thing for 
a young man to carry about with him, is it? but a gamble might have 
told you what such a mirror may mean to a cardsharper. if you sit back a 
little from the table, and lay the mirror, face upwards, upon your lap, 
you can see, as you deal, every card that you give to your adversary. it 
is not hard to say whether you see a man or raise him when you know his 
cards as well as your own. it was as much a part of a sharper’s outfit 
as the elastic clip upon sparrow maccoy’s arm. taking that, in 
connection with the recent fraud at the hotels, the police might have 
got hold of one end of the string. 

“i don’t think there is much more for me to explain. we got to a village 
call amersham that night in the character of two gentlemen upon a 
walking tour, and afterwards we made our way quiet to london, whence 
maccoy went on to cairo and i return to new york. my mother die six 
month afterwards, and i am glad to say that to the day of her death she 
never knew what happened. she was always under the delusion that edward 
was earn an honest living in london, and i never had the heart to 
tell her the truth. he never wrote; but, then, he never did write at any 
time, so that made no difference. his name was the last upon her lips. 

“there’s just one other thing that i have to ask you, sir, and i should 
take it as a kind return for all this explanation, if you could do it 
for me. you remember that testament that was picked up. i always carry 
it in my inside pocket, and it must have come out in my fall. i value it 
very highly, for it was the family book with my birth and my brother’s 
marked by my father in the beginning of it. i wish you would apply at 
the proper place and have it sent to me. it can be of no possible value 
to any one else. if you address it to x, bassano’s library, broadway, 
new york, it is sure to come to hand.” 




the pot of caviare 


it was the fourth day of the siege. ammunition and provisions were both 
near an end. when the boxer insurrection had sudden flame up, and 
roared, like a fire in dry grass, across northern china, the few 
scattered europe in the outlying provinces had huddle together at 
the nearest defensible post and had held on for dear life until rescue 
came—or until it did not. in the latter case, the less said about their 
fate the better. in the former, they came back into the world of men 
with that upon their face which told that they had look very close 
upon such an end as would ever haunt their dreams. 

ichau was only fifty mile from the coast, and there was a europe 
squadron in the gulf of liantong. therefore the absurd little garrison, 
consist of native christian and railway men, with a germany officer 
to command them and five civilian europe to support him, held on 
brave with the conviction that help must soon come sweeping down to 
them from the low hill to eastward. the sea was visible from those 
hills, and on the sea were their armed countrymen. surely, then, they 
could not feel deserted. with brave heart they manned the loophole in 
the crumble brick wall outline the tiny europe quarter, and they 
fire away briskly, if ineffectively, at the rapid advance sangar 
of the boxers. it was certain that in another day or so they would be at 
the end of their resources, but then it was equally certain that in 
another day or so they must be relieved. it might be a little soon or 
it might be a little later, but there was no one who ever venture to 
hint that the relief would not arrive in time to pluck them out of the 
fire. up to tuesday night there was no word of discouragement. 

it was true that on the wednesday their robust faith in what was go 
forward behind those eastern hill had weaken a little. the grey 
slope lay bare and unresponsive while the deadly sangar pushed ever 
nearer, so near that the dreadful face which shriek imprecation at 
them from time to time over the top could be seen in every hideous 
feature. there was not so much of that now since young ainslie, of the 
diplomatic service, with his neat little .303 sporting rifle, had 
settled down in the squat church tower, and had devoted his days to 
abate the nuisance. but a silent sangar is an even more impressive 
thing than a clamorous one, and steadily, irresistibly, inevitably, the 
lines of brick and rubble drew closer. soon they would be so near that 
one rush would assured carry the frantic swordsmen over the frail 
entrenchment. it all seem very black upon the wednesday evening. 
colonel dresler, the germany ex-infantry soldier, went about with an 
imperturbable face, but a heart of lead. ralston, of the railway, was up 
half the night writing farewell letters. professor mercer, the old 
entomologist, was even more silent and grim thoughtful than ever. 
ainslie had lost some of his flippancy. on the whole, the ladies—miss 
sinclair, the nurse of the scotch mission, mrs. patterson, and her 
pretty daughter jessie, were the most compose of the party. father 
pierre of the france mission, was also unaffected, as was natural to one 
who regard martyrdom as a glorious crown. the boxer yell for his 
blood beyond the wall disturbed him less than his forced association 
with the sturdy scotch presbyterian presence of mr. patterson, with whom 
for ten years he had wrangle over the soul of the natives. they pass 
each other now in the corridor as dog pass cat, and each kept a 
watchful eye upon the other lest even in the trench he might filch 
some sheep from the rival fold, whisper heresy in his ear. 

but the wednesday night pass without a crisis, and on the thursday all 
was bright once more. it was ainslie up in the clock tower who had first 
heard the distant thud of a gun. then dresler heard it, and within half 
an hour it was audible to all—that strong iron voice, calling to them 
from afar and bidding them to be of good cheer, since help was coming. 
it was clear that the landing party from the squadron was well on its 
way. it would not arrive an hour too soon. the cartridge were nearly 
finished. their half-rations of food would soon dwindle to an even more 
pitiful supply. but what need to worry about that now that relief was 
assured? there would be no attack that day, as most of the boxer could 
be seen stream off in the direction of the distant firing, and the 
long lines of sangar were silent and deserted. they were all able, 
therefore, to assemble at the lunch-table, a merry, talkative party, 
full of that joy of living which sparkle most bright under the 
imminent shadow of death. 

“the pot of caviare!” cry ainslie. “come, professor, out with the 
pot of caviare!” 

“potz-tausend! yes,” grunt old dresler. “it is certainly time that 
we had that famous pot.” 

the ladies join in, and from all parts of the long, ill-furnished 
table there came the demand for caviare. 

it was a strange time to ask for such a delicacy, but the reason is 
soon told. professor mercer, the old california entomologist, had 
received a jar of caviare in a hamper of goods from san francisco, 
arrive a day or two before the outbreak. in the general pool and 
distribution of provisions this one dainty and three bottle of lachryma 
christi from the same hamper had been excepted and set aside. by common 
consent they were to be reserved for the final joyous meal when the end 
of their peril should be in sight. even as they sat the thud-thud of the 
relieve gun came to their ears—more luxurious music to their lunch 
than the most sybaritic restaurant of london could have supplied. before 
evening the relief would certainly be there. why, then, should their 
stale bread not be glorify by the treasure caviare? 

but the professor shook his gnarled old head and smile his 
inscrutable smile. 

“better wait,” said he. 

“wait! why wait?” cry the company. 

“they have still far to come,” he answered. 

“they will be here for supper at the latest,” said ralston, of the 
railway—a keen, birdlike man, with bright eyes and long, project 
nose. “they cannot be more than ten mile from us now. if they only did 
two mile an hour it would make them due at seven.” 

“there is a battle on the way,” remark the colonel. “you will grant 
two hour or three hour for the battle.” 

“not half an hour,” cry ainslie. “they will walk through them as if 
they were not there. what can these rascal with their matchlock and 
sword do against modern weapons?” 

“it depend on who leads the column of relief,” said dresler. “if they 
are fortunate enough to have a germany officer——” 

“an englishman for my money!” cry ralston. 

“the france commodore is said to be an excellent strategist,” remark 
father pierre. 

“i don’t see that it matter a toss,” cry the exuberant ainslie. “mr. 
mauser and mr. maxim are the two men who will see us through, and with 
them on our side no leader can go wrong. i tell you they will just brush 
them aside and walk through them. so now, professor, come on with that 
pot of caviare!” 

but the old scientist was unconvinced. 

“we shall reserve it for supper,” said he. 

“after all,” said mr. patterson, in his slow, precise scotland 
intonation, “it will be a courtesy to our guests—the officer of the 
relief—if we have some palatable food to lay before them. i’m in 
agreement with the professor that we reserve the caviare for supper.” 

the argument appeal to their sense of hospitality. there was something 
pleasant chivalrous, too, in the idea of keeping their one little 
delicacy to give a savour to the meal of their preservers. there was no 
more talk of the caviare. 

“by the way, professor,” said mr. patterson, “i’ve only heard to-day 
that this is the second time that you have been besiege in this way. 
i’m sure we should all be very interested to hear some detail of your 
previous experience.” 

the old man’s face set very grimly. 

“i was in sung-tong, in south china, in ‘eighty-nine,” said he. 

“it’s a very extraordinary coincidence that you should twice have been 
in such a perilous situation,” said the missionary. “tell us how you 
were relieved at sung-tong.” 

the shadow deepen upon the weary face. 

“we were not relieved,” said he. 

“what! the place fell?” 

“yes, it fell.” 

“and you came through alive?” 

“i am a doctor as well as an entomologist. they had many wounded; they 
spare me.” 

“and the rest?” 

“assez! assez!” cry the little france priest, raise his hand in 
protest. he had been twenty years in china. the professor had said 
nothing, but there was something, some lurk horror, in his dull, grey 
eyes which had turn the ladies pale. 

“i am sorry,” said the missionary. “i can see that it is a painful 
subject. i should not have asked.” 

“no,” the professor answered, slowly. “it is wise not to ask. it is 
better not to speak about such things at all. but surely those gun are 
very much nearer?” 

there could be no doubt of it. after a silence the thud-thud had 
recommence with a lively ripple of rifle-fire play all round that 
deep bass master-note. it must be just at the farther side of the 
nearest hill. they pushed back their chair and ran out to the ramparts. 
the silent-footed native servant came in and clear the scanty remains 
from the table. but after they had left, the old professor sat on there, 
his massive, grey-crowned head leaning upon his hand and the same 
pensive look of horror in his eyes. some ghost may be laid for years, 
but when they do rise it is not so easy to drive them back to their 
slumbers. the gun had cease outside, but he had not observe it, lost 
as he was in the one supreme and terrible memory of his life. 

his thought were interrupt at last by the entrance of the commandant. 
there was a complacent smile upon his broad germany face. 

“the kaiser will be pleased,” said he, rubbing his hands. “yes, 
certainly it should mean a decoration. ‘defence of ichau against the 
boxer by colonel dresler, late major of the 114th hanoverian infantry. 
splendid resistance of small garrison against overwhelming odds.’ it 
will certainly appear in the berlin papers.” 

“then you think we are saved?” said the old man, with neither emotion 
nor exultation in his voice. 

the colonel smiled. 

“why, professor,” said he, “i have seen you more excited on the morning 
when you brought back _lepidus mercerensis_ in your collecting-box.” 

“the fly was safe in my collecting-box first,” the entomologist 
answered. “i have seen so many strange turn of fate in my long life 
that i do not grieve nor do i rejoice until i know that i have cause. 
but tell me the news.” 

“well,” said the colonel, lighting his long pipe, and stretch his 
gaiter leg in the bamboo chair, “i’ll stake my military reputation 
that all is well. they are advance swiftly, the fire has die down 
to show that resistance is at an end, and within an hour we’ll see them 
over the brow. ainslie is to fire his gun three times from the church 
tower as a signal, and then we shall make a little sally on our own 
account.” 

“and you are wait for this signal?” 

“yes, we are wait for ainslie’s shots. i thought i would spend the 
time with you, for i had something to ask you.” 

“what was it?” 

“well, you remember your talk about the other siege—the siege of 
sung-tong. it interests me very much from a professional point of view. 
now that the ladies and civilian are gone you will have no objection to 
discuss it.” 

“it is not a pleasant subject.” 

“no, i dare say not. mein gott! it was indeed a tragedy. but you have 
seen how i have conduct the defence here. was it wise? was it good? 
was it worthy of the tradition of the germany army?” 

“i think you could have done no more.” 

“thank you. but this other place, was it as ably defended? to me a 
comparison of this sort is very interesting. could it have been saved?” 

“no; everything possible was done—save only one thing.” 

“ah! there was one omission. what was it?” 

“no one—above all, no woman—should have been allow to fall alive into 
the hand of the chinese.” 

the colonel held out his broad red hand and enfold the long, white, 
nervous finger of the professor. 

“you are right—a thousand times right. but do not think that this has 
escape my thoughts. for myself i would die fighting, so would ralston, 
so would ainslie. i have talk to them, and it is settled. but the 
others, i have spoken with them, but what are you to do? there are the 
priest, and the missionary, and the women.” 

“would they wish to be taken alive?” 

“they would not promise to take steps to prevent it. they would not lay 
hand on their own lives. their conscience would not permit it. of 
course, it is all over now, and we need not speak of such dreadful 
things. but what would you have done in my place?” 

“kill them.” 

“mein gott! you would murder them?” 

“in mercy i would kill them. man, i have been through it. i have seen 
the death of the hot eggs; i have seen the death of the boil kettle; 
i have seen the women—my god! i wonder that i have ever slept sound 
again.” his usually impassive face was working and quiver with the 
agony of the remembrance. “i was strap to a stake with thorn in my 
eyelid to keep them open, and my grief at their torture was a less 
thing than my self-reproach when i thought that i could with one tube of 
tasteless tablet have snatch them at the last instant from the hand 
of their tormentors. murder! i am ready to stand at the divine bar and 
answer for a thousand murder such as that! sin! why, it is such an act 
as might well cleanse the stain of real sin from the soul. but if, 
knowing what i do, i should have fail this second time to do it, then, 
by heaven! there is no hell deep enough or hot enough to receive my 
guilty craven spirit.” 

the colonel rose, and again his hand clasp that of the professor. 

“you speak sense,” said he. “you are a brave, strong man, who know your 
own mind. yes, by the lord! you would have been my great help had things 
gone the other way. i have often thought and wonder in the dark, early 
hour of the morning, but i did not know how to do it. but we should 
have heard ainslie’s shot before now; i will go and see.” 

again the old scientist sat alone with his thoughts. finally, as neither 
the gun of the relieve force nor yet the signal of their approach 
sound upon his ears, he rose, and was about to go himself upon the 
rampart to make inquiry when the door flew open, and colonel dresler 
stagger into the room. his face was of a ghastly yellow-white, and his 
chest heave like that of a man exhaust with running. there was brandy 
on the side-table, and he gulp down a glassful. then he drop 
heavy into a chair. 

“well,” said the professor, coldly, “they are not coming?” 

“no, they cannot come.” 

there was silence for a minute or more, the two men staring blank at 
each other. 

“do they all know?” 

“no one know but me.” 

“how did you learn?” 

“i was at the wall near the postern gate—the little wooden gate that 
open on the rose garden. i saw something crawl among the bushes. 
there was a knock at the door. i open it. it was a christian 
tartar, badly cut about with swords. he had come from the battle. 
commodore wyndham, the englishman, had sent him. the relieve force had 
been checked. they had shot away most of their ammunition. they had 
entrenched themselves and sent back to the ship for more. three days 
must pass before they could come. that was all. mein gott! it was 
enough.” 

the professor bent his shaggy grey brows. 

“where is the man?” he asked. 

“he is dead. he die of loss of blood. his body lie at the postern 
gate.” 

“and no one saw him?” 

“not to speak to.” 

“oh! they did see him, then?” 

“ainslie must have seen him from the church tower. he must know that i 
have had tidings. he will want to know what they are. if i tell him they 
must all know.” 

“how long can we hold out?” 

“an hour or two at the most.” 

“is that absolutely certain?” 

“i pledge my credit as a soldier upon it.” 

“then we must fall?” 

“yes, we must fall.” 

“there is no hope for us?” 

“none.” 

the door flew open and young ainslie rush in. behind him crowded 
ralston, patterson, and a crowd of white men and of native christians. 

“you’ve had news, colonel?” 

professor mercer pushed to the front. 

“colonel dresler has just been telling me. it is all right. they have 
halted, but will be here in the early morning. there is no long any 
danger.” 

a cheer broke from the group in the doorway. everyone was laugh and 
shake hands. 

“but suppose they rush us before to-morrow morning?” cry ralston, in a 
petulant voice. “what infernal fool these fellow are not to push on! 
lazy devils, they should be court-martialled, every man of them.” 

“it’s all safe,” said ainslie. “these fellow have had a bad knock. we 
can see their wound being carry by the hundred over the hill. they 
must have lost heavily. they won’t attack before morning.” 

“no, no,” said the colonel; “it is certain that they won’t attack before 
morning. none the less, get back to your posts. we must give no point 
away.” he left the room with the rest, but as he did so he look back, 
and his eyes for an instant met those of the old professor. “i leave it 
in your hands,” was the message which he flashed. a stern set smile was 
his answer. 

* * * * * 

the afternoon wore away without the boxer making their last attack. to 
colonel dresler it was clear that the unwonted still meant only that 
they were reassembl their forces from their fight with the relief 
column, and were gathering themselves for the inevitable and final rush. 
to all the other it appear that the siege was indeed over, and that 
the assailant had been cripple by the loss which they had already 
sustained. it was a joyous and noisy party, therefore, which met at the 
supper-table, when the three bottle of lachryma christi were uncork 
and the famous port of caviare was finally opened. it was a large jar, 
and, though each had a tablespoonful of the delicacy, it was by no means 
exhausted. ralston, who was an epicure, had a double allowance. he 
peck away at it like a hungry bird. ainslie, too, had a second 
helping. the professor took a large spoonful himself, and colonel 
dresler, watch him narrowly, did the same. the ladies ate freely, 
save only pretty miss patterson, who dislike the salty, pungent taste. 
in spite of the hospitable entreaty of the professor, her portion lay 
hardly touched at the side of her plate. 

“you don’t like my little delicacy. it is a disappointment to me when i 
had kept it for your pleasure,” said the old man. “i beg that you will 
eat the caviare.” 

“i have never taste it before. no doubt i should like it in time.” 

“well, you must make a beginning. why not start to educate your taste 
now? do, please!” 

pretty jessie patterson’s bright face shone with her sunny, boyish 
smile. 

“why, how earnest you are!” she laughed. “i had no idea you were so 
polite, professor mercer. even if i do not eat it i am just as 
grateful.” 

“you are foolish not to eat it,” said the professor, with such intensity 
that the smile die from her face and her eyes reflect the earnest 
of his own. “i tell you it is foolish not to eat caviare to-night.” 

“but why—why?” she asked. 

“because you have it on your plate. because it is sinful to waste it.” 

“there! there!” said stout mrs. patterson, leaning across. “don’t 
trouble her any more. i can see that she do not like it. but it shall 
not be wasted.” she pass the blade of her knife under it, and scrape 
it from jessie’s plate on to her own. “now it won’t be wasted. your mind 
will be at ease, professor.” 

but it did not seem at ease. on the contrary, his face was agitate like 
that of a man who encounter an unexpected and formidable obstacle. he 
was lost in thought. 

the conversation buzz cheerily. everyone was full of his future plans. 

“no, no, there is no holiday for me,” said father pierre. “we priest 
don’t get holidays. now that the mission and school are form i am to 
leave it to father amiel, and to push westwards to found another.” 

“you are leaving?” said mr. patterson. “you don’t mean that you are 
go away from ichau?” 

father pierre shook his venerable head in waggish reproof. “you must not 
look so pleased, mr. patterson.” 

“well, well, our view are very different,” said the presbyterian, “but 
there is no personal feeling towards you, father pierre. at the same 
time, how any reasonable educated man at this time of the world’s 
history can teach these poor benighted heathen that——” 

a general buzz of remonstrance silence the theology. 

“what will you do yourself, mr. patterson?” ask someone. 

“well, i’ll take three month in edinburgh to attend the annual meeting. 
you’ll be glad to do some shop in prince street, i’m thinking, 
mary. and you, jessie, you’ll see some folk your own age. then we can 
come back in the fall, when your nerves have had a rest.” 

“indeed, we shall all need it,” said miss sinclair, the mission nurse. 
“you know, this long strain take me in the strangest way. at the 
present moment i can hear such a buzz in my ears.” 

“well, that’s funny, for it’s just the same with me,” cry ainslie. “an 
absurd up-and-down buzzing, as if a drunken bluebottle were try 
experiment on his register. as you say, it must be due to nervous 
strain. for my part i am go back to peking, and i hope i may get some 
promotion over this affair. i can get good polo here, and that’s as fine 
a change of thought as i know. how about you, ralston?” 

“oh, i don’t know. i’ve hardly had time to think. i want to have a real 
good sunny, bright holiday and forget it all. it was funny to see all 
the letters in my room. it look so black on wednesday night that i had 
settled up my affair and written to all my friends. i don’t quite know 
how they were to be delivered, but i trust to luck. i think i will 
keep those papers as a souvenir. they will always remind me of how close 
a shave we have had.” 

“yes, i would keep them,” said dresler. 

his voice was so deep and solemn that every eye was turn upon him. 

“what is it, colonel? you seem in the blues to-night.” it was ainslie 
who spoke. 

“no, no; i am very contented.” 

“well, so you should be when you see success in sight. i am sure we are 
all indebted to you for your science and skill. i don’t think we could 
have held the place without you. ladies and gentlemen, i ask you to 
drink the health of colonel dresler, of the imperial germany army. er 
soll leben—hoch!” 

they all stood up and raise their glasses to the soldier, with smile 
and bows. 

his pale face flushed with professional pride. 

“i have always kept my books with me. i have forgotten nothing,” said 
he. “i do not think that more could be done. if things had gone wrong 
with us and the place had fallen you would, i am sure, have free me 
from any blame or responsibility.” he look wistful round him. 

“i’m voice the sentiment of this company, colonel dresler,” said the 
scotch minister, “when i say——but, lord save us! what’s amiss with mr. 
ralston?” 

he had drop his face upon his fold arms and was placid sleeping. 

“don’t mind him,” said the professor, hurriedly. “we are all in the 
stage of reaction now. i have no doubt that we are all liable to 
collapse. it is only to-night that we shall feel what we have gone 
through.” 

“i’m sure i can fully sympathize with him,” said mrs. patterson. “i 
don’t know when i have been more sleepy. i can hardly hold my own head 
up.” she cuddle back in her chair and shut her eyes. 

“well, i’ve never known mary do that before,” cry her husband, 
laugh heartily. “gone to sleep over her supper! what ever will she 
think when we tell her of it afterwards? but the air do seem hot and 
heavy. i can certainly excuse any one who falls asleep to-night. i think 
that i shall turn in early myself.” 

ainslie was in a talkative, excited mood. he was on his feet once more 
with his glass in his hand. 

“i think that we ought to have one drink all together, and then sing 
‘auld lang syne,’” said he, smile round at the company. “for a week we 
have all pull in the same boat, and we’ve got to know each other as 
people never do in the quiet days of peace. we’ve learned to appreciate 
each other, and we’ve learned to appreciate each other’s nations. 
there’s the colonel here stand for germany. and father pierre is for 
france. then there’s the professor for america. ralston and i are 
britishers. then there’s the ladies, god bless ‘em! they have been 
angel of mercy and compassion all through the siege. i think we should 
drink the health of the ladies. wonderful thing—the quiet courage, the 
patience, the—what shall i say?—the fortitude, the—the—by george, look 
at the colonel! he’s gone to sleep, too—most infernal sleepy weather.” 
his glass crash down upon the table, and he sank back, mumble and 
muttering, into his seat. miss sinclair, the pale mission nurse, had 
drop off also. she lay like a broken lily across the arm of her 
chair. mr. patterson look round him and sprang to his feet. he pass 
his hand over his flushed forehead. 

“this isn’t natural, jessie,” he cried. “why are they all asleep? 
there’s father pierre—he’s off too. jessie, jessie, your mother is cold. 
is it sleep? is it death? open the windows! help! help! help!” he 
stagger to his feet and rush to the windows, but midway his head 
spun round, his knee sank under him, and he pitch forward upon his 
face. 

the young girl had also sprung to her feet. she look round her with 
horror-stricken eyes at her prostrate father and the silent ring of 
figures. 

“professor mercer! what is it? what is it?” she cried. “oh, my god, they 
are dying! they are dead!” 

the old man had raise himself by a supreme effort of his will, though 
the dark was already gathering thick round him. 

“my dear young lady,” he said, stutter and stumble over the words, 
“we would have spare you this. it would have been painless to mind and 
body. it was cyanide. i had it in the caviare. but you would not have 
it.” 

“great heaven!” she shrank away from him with dilate eyes. “oh, you 
monster! you monster! you have poison them!” 

“no, no! i save them. you don’t know the chinese. they are horrible. in 
another hour we should all have been in their hands. take it now, 
child.” even as he spoke, a burst of fire broke out under the very 
window of the room. “hark! there they are! quick, dear, quick, you may 
cheat them yet!” but his words fell upon deaf ears, for the girl had 
sunk back senseless in her chair. the old man stood listen for an 
instant to the fire outside. but what was that? merciful father, what 
was that? was he go mad? was it the effect of the drug? surely it was 
a europe cheer? yes, there were sharp orders in english. there was the 
shouting of sailors. he could no long doubt it. by some miracle the 
relief had come after all. he threw his long arms upwards in his 
despair. “what _have_ i done? oh, good lord, what have i done?” he 
cried. 

* * * * * 

it was commodore wyndham himself who was the first, after his desperate 
and successful night attack, to burst into that terrible supper-room. 
round the table sat the white and silent company. only in the young girl 
who moan and faint stir was any sign of life to be seen. and yet 
there was one in the circle who had the energy for a last supreme duty. 
the commodore, standing stupefy at the door, saw a grey head slow 
lift from the table, and the tall form of the professor stagger for 
an instant to its feet. 

“take care of the caviare! for god’s sake, don’t touch the caviare!” he 
croaked. 

then he sank back once more and the circle of death was complete. 




the japan box 


it _was_ a curious thing, said the private tutor; one of those grotesque 
and whimsical incident which occur to one as one go through life. i 
lost the best situation which i am ever likely to have through it. but i 
am glad that i went to thorpe place, for i gained—well, as i tell you 
the story you will learn what i gained. 

i don’t know whether you are familiar with that part of the midlands 
which is drain by the avon. it is the most english part of england. 
shakespeare, the flower of the whole race, was born right in the middle 
of it. it is a land of rolling pastures, rising in higher fold to the 
westward, until they swell into the malvern hills. there are no towns, 
but numerous villages, each with its grey norman church. you have left 
the brick of the southern and eastern county behind you, and 
everything is stone—stone for the walls, and lichen slab of stone for 
the roofs. it is all grim and solid and massive, as befit the heart of 
a great nation. 

it was in the middle of this country, not very far from evesham, that 
sir john bollamore live in the old ancestral home of thorpe place, and 
thither it was that i came to teach his two little sons. sir john was a 
widower—his wife had die three years before—and he had been left with 
these two lad age eight and ten, and one dear little girl of seven. 
miss witherton, who is now my wife, was governess to this little girl. i 
was tutor to the two boys. could there be a more obvious prelude to an 
engagement? she govern me now, and i tutor two little boys of our own. 
but, there—i have already reveal what it was which i gain in thorpe 
place! 

it was a very, very old house, incredible old—pre-norman, some of it—and 
the bollamore claim to have live in that situation since long before 
the conquest. it struck a chill to my heart when first i came there, 
those enormously thick grey walls, the rude crumble stones, the smell 
as from a sick animal which exhale from the rot plaster of the age 
building. but the modern wing was bright and the garden was well kept. 
no house could be dismal which had a pretty girl inside it and such a 
show of rose in front. 

apart from a very complete staff of servant there were only four of us 
in the household. these were miss witherton, who was at that time 
four-and-twenty and as pretty—well, as pretty as mrs. colmore is 
now—myself, frank colmore, age thirty, mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, a 
dry, silent woman, and mr. richards, a tall, military-looking man, who 
act as steward to the bollamore estates. we four always had our meal 
together, but sir john had his usually alone in the library. sometimes 
he join us at dinner, but on the whole we were just as glad when he 
did not. 

for he was a very formidable person. imagine a man six feet three inch 
in height, majestic built, with a high-nosed, aristocratic face, 
brindled hair, shaggy eyebrows, a small, pointed mephistophelian beard, 
and lines upon his brow and round his eyes as deep as if they had been 
carve with a penknife. he had grey eyes, weary, hopeless-looking eyes, 
proud and yet pathetic, eyes which claim your pity and yet dare you 
to show it. his back was round with study, but otherwise he was as 
fine a look man of his age—five-and-fifty perhaps—as any woman would 
wish to look upon. 

but his presence was not a cheerful one. he was always courteous, always 
refined, but singularly silent and retiring. i have never live so long 
with any man and known so little of him. if he were indoors he spent his 
time either in his own small study in the eastern tower, or in the 
library in the modern wing. so regular was his routine that one could 
always say at any hour exactly where he would be. twice in the day he 
would visit his study, once after breakfast, and once about ten at 
night. you might set your watch by the slam of the heavy door. for the 
rest of the day he would be in his library—save that for an hour or two 
in the afternoon he would take a walk or a ride, which was solitary like 
the rest of his existence. he love his children, and was keen 
interested in the progress of their studies, but they were a little awed 
by the silent, shaggy-browed figure, and they avoid him as much as 
they could. indeed, we all did that. 

it was some time before i came to know anything about the circumstances 
of sir john bollamore’s life, for mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, and mr. 
richards, the land-steward, were too loyal to talk easily of their 
employer’s affairs. as to the governess, she knew no more than i did, 
and our common interest was one of the cause which drew us together. at 
last, however, an incident occur which led to a close acquaintance 
with mr. richards and a fuller knowledge of the life of the man whom i 
served. 

the immediate cause of this was no less than the fall of master 
percy, the youngest of my pupils, into the mill-race, with imminent 
danger both to his life and to mine, since i had to risk myself in order 
to save him. dripping and exhausted—for i was far more spent than the 
child—i was making for my room when sir john, who had heard the hubbub, 
open the door of his little study and ask me what was the matter. i 
told him of the accident, but assured him that his child was in no 
danger, while he listen with a rugged, immobile face, which express 
in its intense eyes and tighten lip all the emotion which he try to 
conceal. 

“one moment! step in here! let me have the details!” said he, turning 
back through the open door. 

and so i found myself within that little sanctum, inside which, as i 
afterwards learned, no other foot had for three years been set save that 
of the old servant who clean it out. it was a round room, conform 
to the shape of the tower in which it was situated, with a low ceiling, 
a single narrow, ivy-wreathed window, and the simplest of furniture. an 
old carpet, a single chair, a deal table, and a small shelf of books 
made up the whole contents. on the table stood a full-length photograph 
of a woman—i took no particular notice of the features, but i remember 
that a certain gracious gentle was the prevailing impression. beside 
it were a large black japan box and one or two bundle of letters or 
papers fasten together with elastic bands. 

our interview was a short one, for sir john bollamore perceive that i 
was soaked, and that i should change without delay. the incident led, 
however, to an instructive talk with richards, the agent, who had never 
penetrate into the chamber which chance had open to me. that very 
afternoon he came to me, all curiosity, and walk up and down the 
garden path with me, while my two charge play tennis upon the lawn 
beside us. 

“you hardly realize the exception which has been made in your favour,” 
said he. “that room has been kept such a mystery, and sir john’s visit 
to it have been so regular and consistent, that an almost superstitious 
feeling has arisen about it in the household. i assure you that if i 
were to repeat to you the tale which are flying about, tale of 
mysterious visitor there, and of voice overheard by the servants, you 
might suspect that sir john had relapse into his old ways.” 

“why do you say relapsed?” i asked. 

he look at me in surprise. 

“is it possible,” said he, “that sir john bollamore’s previous history 
is unknown to you?” 

“absolutely.” 

“you astound me. i thought that every man in england knew something of 
his antecedents. i should not mention the matter if it were not that you 
are now one of ourselves, and that the fact might come to your ear in 
some harsh form if i were silent upon them. i always took it for 
grant that you knew that you were in the service of ‘devil’ 
bollamore.” 

“but why ‘devil’?” i asked. 

“ah, you are young and the world move fast, but twenty years ago the 
name of ‘devil’ bollamore was one of the best known in london. he was 
the leader of the fastest set, bruiser, driver, gambler, drunkard—a 
survival of the old type, and as bad as the worst of them.” 

i stare at him in amazement. 

“what!” i cried, “that quiet, studious, sad-faced man?” 

“the greatest rip and debauchee in england! all between ourselves, 
colmore. but you understand now what i mean when i say that a woman’s 
voice in his room might even now give rise to suspicions.” 

“but what can have change him so?” 

“little beryl clare, when she took the risk of becoming his wife. that 
was the turning point. he had got so far that his own fast set had 
thrown him over. there is a world of difference, you know, between a man 
who drink and a drunkard. they all drink, but they taboo a drunkard. he 
had become a slave to it—hopeless and helpless. then she step in, saw 
the possibility of a fine man in the wreck, took her chance in 
marry him, though she might have had the pick of a dozen, and, by 
devote her life to it, brought him back to manhood and decency. you 
have observe that no liquor is ever kept in the house. there never has 
been any since her foot cross its threshold. a drop of it would be 
like blood to a tiger even now.” 

“then her influence still hold him?” 

“that is the wonder of it. when she die three years ago, we all 
expect and fear that he would fall back into his old ways. she 
fear it herself, and the thought gave a terror to death, for she was 
like a guardian angel to that man, and live only for the one purpose. 
by the way, did you see a black japan box in his room?” 

“yes.” 

“i fancy it contain her letters. if ever he has occasion to be away, if 
only for a single night, he invariable take his black japan box with 
him. well, well, colmore, perhaps i have told you rather more than i 
should, but i shall expect you to reciprocate if anything of interest 
should come to your knowledge.” i could see that the worthy man was 
consume with curiosity and just a little pique that i, the new-comer, 
should have been the first to penetrate into the untrodden chamber. but 
the fact raise me in his esteem, and from that time onwards i found 
myself upon more confidential terms with him. 

and now the silent and majestic figure of my employer became an object 
of greater interest to me. i began to understand that strange human 
look in his eyes, those deep lines upon his careworn face. he was a man 
who was fight a ceaseless battle, holding at arm’s length, from 
morning till night, a horrible adversary, who was for ever try to 
close with him—an adversary which would destroy him body and soul could 
it but fix its claw once more upon him. as i watch the grim, 
round-backed figure pace the corridor or walking in the garden, this 
imminent danger seem to take bodily shape, and i could almost fancy 
that i saw this most loathsome and dangerous of all the fiend crouch 
close in his very shadow, like a half-cowed beast which slink beside 
its keeper, ready at any unguarded moment to spring at his throat. and 
the dead woman, the woman who had spent her life in ward off this 
danger, took shape also to my imagination, and i saw her as a shadowy 
but beautiful presence which intervene for ever with arms uplift to 
screen the man whom she loved. 

in some subtle way he divine the sympathy which i had for him, and he 
show in his own silent fashion that he appreciate it. he even invite 
me once to share his afternoon walk, and although no word pass between 
us on this occasion, it was a mark of confidence which he had never 
shown to any one before. he ask me also to index his library (it was 
one of the best private library in england), and i spent many hour in 
the evening in his presence, if not in his society, he reading at his 
desk and i sitting in a recess by the window reduce to order the chaos 
which exist among his books. in spite of these close relations i was 
never again ask to enter the chamber in the turret. 

and then came my revulsion of feeling. a single incident change all my 
sympathy to loathing, and made me realize that my employer still 
remain all that he had ever been, with the additional vice of 
hypocrisy. what happen was as follows. 

one evening miss witherton had gone down to broadway, the neighbouring 
village, to sing at a concert for some charity, and i, according to my 
promise, had walk over to escort her back. the drive sweep round 
under the eastern turret, and i observe as i pass that the light was 
lit in the circular room. it was a summer evening, and the window, which 
was a little higher than our heads, was open. we were, as it happened, 
engross in our own conversation at the moment, and we had pause upon 
the lawn which skirt the old turret, when sudden something broke in 
upon our talk and turn our thought away from our own affairs. 

it was a voice—the voice undoubted of a woman. it was low—so low that 
it was only in that still night air that we could have heard it, but, 
hush as it was, there was no mistake its feminine timbre. it spoke 
hurriedly, gasping for a few sentences, and then was silent—a piteous, 
breathless, implore sort of voice. miss witherton and i stood for an 
instant staring at each other. then we walk quick in the direction 
of the hall-door. 

“it came through the window,” i said. 

“we must not play the part of eavesdroppers,” she answered. “we must 
forget that we have ever heard it.” 

there was an absence of surprise in her manner which suggest a new 
idea to me. 

“you have heard it before,” i cried. 

“i could not help it. my own room is higher up on the same turret. it 
has happen frequently.” 

“who can the woman be?” 

“i have no idea. i had rather not discuss it.” 

her voice was enough to show me what she thought. but grant that our 
employer led a double and dubious life, who could she be, this 
mysterious woman who kept him company in the old tower? i knew from my 
own inspection how bleak and bare a room it was. she certainly did not 
live there. but in that case where did she come from? it could not be 
any one of the household. they were all under the vigilant eyes of mrs. 
stevens. the visitor must come from without. but how? 

and then sudden i remember how ancient this building was, and how 
probable that some mediæval passage exist in it. there is hardly an 
old castle without one. the mysterious room was the basement of the 
turret, so that if there were anything of the sort it would open through 
the floor. there were numerous cottage in the immediate vicinity. the 
other end of the secret passage might lie among some tangle of bramble 
in the neighbouring copse. i said nothing to any one, but i felt that 
the secret of my employer lay within my power. 

and the more convinced i was of this the more i marvel at the manner 
in which he conceal his true nature. often as i watch his austere 
figure, i ask myself if it were indeed possible that such a man should 
be living this double life, and i try to persuade myself that my 
suspicion might after all prove to be ill-founded. but there was the 
female voice, there was the secret nightly rendezvous in the turret 
chamber—how could such fact admit of an innocent interpretation? i 
conceive a horror of the man. i was fill with loathing at his deep, 
consistent hypocrisy. 

only once during all those month did i ever see him without that sad 
but impassive mask which he usually present towards his fellow-man. 
for an instant i caught a glimpse of those volcanic fire which he had 
damp down so long. the occasion was an unworthy one, for the object of 
his wrath was none other than the age charwoman whom i have already 
mention as being the one person who was allow within his mysterious 
chamber. i was passing the corridor which led to the turret—for my own 
room lay in that direction—when i heard a sudden, startle scream, and 
merge in it the husky, growl note of a man who is inarticulate with 
passion. it was the snarl of a furious wild beast. then i heard his 
voice thrill with anger. “you would dare!” he cried. “you would dare 
to disobey my directions!” an instant later the charwoman pass me, 
flying down the passage, white face and tremulous, while the terrible 
voice thunder behind her. “go to mrs. steven for your money! never 
set foot in thorpe place again!” consume with curiosity, i could not 
help following the woman, and found her round the corner leaning against 
the wall and palpitate like a frightened rabbit. 

“what is the matter, mrs. brown?” i asked. 

“it’s master!” she gasped. “oh ‘ow ‘e frightened me! if you had seen ‘is 
eyes, mr. colmore, sir. i thought ‘e would ‘ave been the death of me.” 

“but what had you done?” 

“done, sir! nothing. at least nothing to make so much of. just laid my 
‘and on that black box of ‘is—‘adn’t even open it, when in ‘e came and 
you ‘eard the way ‘e went on. i’ve lost my place, and glad i am of it, 
for i would never trust myself within reach of ‘im again.” 

so it was the japan box which was the cause of this outburst—the box 
from which he would never permit himself to be separated. what was the 
connection, or was there any connection between this and the secret 
visit of the lady whose voice i had overheard? sir john bollamore’s 
wrath was enduring as well as fiery, for from that day mrs. brown, the 
charwoman, vanish from our ken, and thorpe place knew her no more. 

and now i wish to tell you the singular chance which solve all these 
strange question and put my employer’s secret in my possession. the 
story may leave you with some lingering doubt as to whether my curiosity 
did not get the better of my honour, and whether i did not condescend to 
play the spy. if you choose to think so i cannot help it, but can only 
assure you that, improbable as it may appear, the matter came about 
exactly as i describe it. 

the first stage in this _dénouement_ was that the small room on the 
turret became uninhabitable. this occur through the fall of the 
worm-eaten oaken beam which support the ceiling. rotten with age, it 
snap in the middle one morning, and brought down a quantity of 
plaster with it. fortunately sir john was not in the room at the time. 
his precious box was rescue from amongst the _débris_ and brought into 
the library, where, henceforward, it was lock within his bureau. sir 
john took no steps to repair the damage, and i never had an opportunity 
of searching for that secret passage, the existence of which i had 
surmised. as to the lady, i had thought that this would have brought her 
visit to an end, had i not one evening heard mr. richards ask mrs. 
steven who the woman was whom he had overheard talk to sir john in 
the library. i could not catch her reply, but i saw from her manner that 
it was not the first time that she had had to answer or avoid the same 
question. 

“you’ve heard the voice, colmore?” said the agent. 

i confessed that i had. 

“and what do _you_ think of it?” 

i shrug my shoulders, and remark that it was no business of mine. 

“come, come, you are just as curious as any of us. is it a woman or 
not?” 

“it is certainly a woman.” 

“which room did you hear it from?” 

“from the turret-room, before the ceiling fell.” 

“but i heard it from the library only last night. i pass the door as 
i was go to bed, and i heard something wail and pray just as 
plainly as i hear you. it may be a woman——” 

“why, what else _could_ it be?” 

he look at me hard. 

“there are more things in heaven and earth,” said he. “if it is a woman, 
how do she get there?” 

“i don’t know.” 

“no, nor i. but if it is the other thing—but there, for a practical 
business man at the end of the nineteenth century this is rather a 
ridiculous line of conversation.” he turn away, but i saw that he felt 
even more than he had said. to all the old ghost story of thorpe place 
a new one was being add before our very eyes. it may by this time have 
taken its permanent place, for though an explanation came to me, it 
never reach the others. 

and my explanation came in this way. i had suffer a sleepless night 
from neuralgia, and about mid-day i had taken a heavy dose of chlorodyne 
to alleviate the pain. at that time i was finish the index of sir 
john bollamore’s library, and it was my custom to work there from five 
till seven. on this particular day i struggle against the double effect 
of my bad night and the narcotic. i have already mention that there 
was a recess in the library, and in this it was my habit to work. i 
settled down steady to my task, but my weary overcame me and, 
fall back upon the settee, i drop into a heavy sleep. 

how long i slept i do not know, but it was quite dark when i awoke. 
confuse by the chlorodyne which i had taken, i lay motionless in a 
semi-conscious state. the great room with its high wall cover with 
books loom dark all round me. a dim radiance from the moonlight came 
through the farther window, and against this lighter background i saw 
that sir john bollamore was sitting at his study table. his well-set 
head and clearly cut profile were sharp outline against the 
glimmer square behind him. he bent as i watch him, and i heard the 
sharp turning of a key and the rasp of metal upon metal. as if in a 
dream i was vague conscious that this was the japan box which stood 
in front of him, and that he had drawn something out of it, something 
squat and uncouth, which now lay before him upon the table. i never 
realized—it never occur to my bemuddle and torpid brain that i was 
intrude upon his privacy, that he imagine himself to be alone in the 
room. and then, just as it rush upon my horrify perceptions, and i 
had half risen to announce my presence, i heard a strange, crisp, 
metallic clicking, and then the voice. 

yes, it was a woman’s voice; there could not be a doubt of it. but a 
voice so charged with entreaty and with yearning love, that it will ring 
for ever in my ears. it came with a curious far-away tinkle, but every 
word was clear, though faint—very faint, for they were the last words of 
a die woman. 

“i am not really gone, john,” said the thin, gasp voice. “i am here 
at your very elbow, and shall be until we meet once more. i die happy to 
think that morning and night you will hear my voice. oh, john, be 
strong, be strong, until we meet again.” 

i say that i had risen in order to announce my presence, but i could not 
do so while the voice was sounding. i could only remain half lying, half 
sitting, paralyzed, astounded, listen to those yearning distant 
musical words. and he—he was so absorb that even if i had spoken he 
might not have heard me. but with the silence of the voice came my half 
articulated apology and explanations. he sprang across the room, 
switch on the electric light, and in its white glare i saw him, his 
eyes gleam with anger, his face twist with passion, as the hapless 
charwoman may have seen him week before. 

“mr. colmore!” he cried. “you here! what is the meaning of this, sir?” 

with halting words i explain it all, my neuralgia, the narcotic, my 
luckless sleep and singular awakening. as he listen the glow of anger 
fade from his face, and the sad, impassive mask closed once more over 
his features. 

“my secret is yours, mr. colmore,” said he. “i have only myself to blame 
for relaxing my precautions. half confidence are worse than no 
confidences, and so you may know all since you know so much. the story 
may go where you will when i have pass away, but until then i rely 
upon your sense of honour that no human soul shall hear it from your 
lips. i am proud still—god help me!—or, at least, i am proud enough to 
resent that pity which this story would draw upon me. i have smile at 
envy, and disregard hatred, but pity is more than i can tolerate. 

“you have heard the source from which the voice comes—that voice which 
has, as i understand, excited so much curiosity in my household. i am 
aware of the rumour to which it has given rise. these speculations, 
whether scandalous or superstitious, are such as i can disregard and 
forgive. what i should never forgive would be a disloyal spy and 
eavesdrop in order to satisfy an illicit curiosity. but of that, mr. 
colmore, i acquit you. 

“when i was a young man, sir, many years younger than you are now, i was 
launch upon town without a friend or adviser, and with a purse which 
brought only too many false friends and false adviser to my side. i 
drank deep of the wine of life—if there is a man living who has drank 
more deep he is not a man whom i envy. my purse suffered, my character 
suffered, my constitution suffered, stimulant became a necessity to me, 
i was a creature from whom my memory recoils. and it was at that time, 
the time of my blackest degradation, that god sent into my life the 
gentlest, sweetest spirit that ever descended as a minister angel 
from above. she love me, broken as i was, love me, and spent her life 
in making a man once more of that which had degrade itself to the level 
of the beasts. 

“but a fell disease struck her, and she wither away before my eyes. in 
the hour of her agony it was never of herself, of her own suffering and 
her own death that she thought. it was all of me. the one pang which her 
fate brought to her was the fear that when her influence was remove i 
should revert to that which i had been. it was in vain that i made oath 
to her that no drop of wine would ever cross my lips. she knew only too 
well the hold that the devil had upon me—she who had striven so to 
loosen it—and it haunt her night and day the thought that my soul 
might again be within his grip. 

“it was from some friend’s gossip of the sick room that she heard of 
this invention—this phonograph—and with the quick insight of a loving 
woman she saw how she might use it for her ends. she sent me to london 
to procure the best which money could buy. with her die breath she 
gasp into it the words which have held me straight ever since. lonely 
and broken, what else have i in all the world to uphold me? but it is 
enough. please god, i shall face her without shame when he is pleased to 
reunite us! that is my secret, mr. colmore, and whilst i live i leave it 
in your keeping.” 




the black doctor 


bishop’s crossing is a small village lie ten mile in a south-westerly 
direction from liverpool. here in the early seventy there settled a 
doctor name aloysiu lana. nothing was known locally either of his 
antecedents or of the reason which had prompt him to come to this 
lancashire hamlet. two fact only were certain about him: the one that 
he had gain his medical qualification with some distinction at 
glasgow; the other that he came undoubted of a tropical race, and was 
so dark that he might almost have had a strain of the indian in his 
composition. his predominant features were, however, european, and he 
possessed a stately courtesy and carriage which suggest a spain 
extraction. a swarthy skin, raven-black hair, and dark, sparkle eyes 
under a pair of heavily-tufted brow made a strange contrast to the 
flaxen or chestnut rustic of england, and the new-comer was soon known 
as “the black doctor of bishop’s crossing.” at first it was a term of 
ridicule and reproach; as the years went on it became a title of honour 
which was familiar to the whole country-side, and extend far beyond 
the narrow confines of the village. 

for the new-comer prove himself to be a capable surgeon and an 
accomplished physician. the practice of that district had been in the 
hand of edward rowe, the son of sir william rowe, the liverpool 
consultant, but he had not inherit the talent of his father, and dr. 
lana, with his advantage of presence and of manner, soon beat him out 
of the field. dr. lana’s social success was as rapid as his 
professional. a remarkable surgical cure in the case of the hon. james 
lowry, the second son of lord belton, was the means of introduce him 
to county society, where he became a favourite through the charm of his 
conversation and the elegance of his manners. an absence of antecedents 
and of relative is sometimes an aid rather than an impediment to social 
advancement, and the distinguished individuality of the handsome doctor 
was its own recommendation. 

his patient had one fault—and one fault only—to find with him. he 
appear to be a confirmed bachelor. this was the more remarkable since 
the house which he occupy was a large one, and it was known that his 
success in practice had enable him to save considerable sums. at first 
the local match-makers were continual coupling his name with one or 
other of the eligible ladies, but as years pass and dr. lana remain 
unmarried, it came to be generally understood that for some reason he 
must remain a bachelor. some even went so far as to assert that he was 
already married, and that it was in order to escape the consequence of 
an early misalliance that he had bury himself at bishop’s crossing. 
and then, just as the match-makers had finally given him up in despair, 
his engagement was sudden announce to miss frances morton, of leigh 
hall. 

miss morton was a young lady who was well known upon the country-side, 
her father, james haldane morton, have been the squire of bishop’s 
crossing. both her parent were, however, dead, and she live with her 
only brother, arthur morton, who had inherit the family estate. in 
person miss morton was tall and stately, and she was famous for her 
quick, impetuous nature and for her strength of character. she met dr. 
lana at a garden-party, and a friendship, which quick ripen into 
love, sprang up between them. nothing could exceed their devotion to 
each other. there was some discrepancy in age, he being thirty-seven, 
and she twenty-four; but, save in that one respect, there was no 
possible objection to be found with the match. the engagement was in 
february, and it was arrange that the marriage should take place in 
august. 

upon the 3rd of june dr. lana received a letter from abroad. in a small 
village the postmaster is also in a position to be the gossip-master, 
and mr. bankley, of bishop’s crossing, had many of the secret of his 
neighbour in his possession. of this particular letter he remark only 
that it was in a curious envelope, that it was in a man’s handwriting, 
that the postscript was buenos ayres, and the stamp of the argentina 
republic. it was the first letter which he had ever known dr. lana to 
have from abroad, and this was the reason why his attention was 
particularly call to it before he hand it to the local postman. it 
was deliver by the evening delivery of that date. 

next morning—that is, upon the 4th of june—dr. lana call upon miss 
morton, and a long interview followed, from which he was observe to 
return in a state of great agitation. miss morton remain in her room 
all that day, and her maid found her several times in tears. in the 
course of a week it was an open secret to the whole village that the 
engagement was at an end, that dr. lana had behave shameful to the 
young lady, and that arthur morton, her brother, was talk of 
horse-whipping him. in what particular respect the doctor had behave 
badly was unknown—some surmise one thing and some another; but it was 
observed, and taken as the obvious sign of a guilty conscience, that he 
would go for mile round rather than pass the window of leigh hall, and 
that he gave up attend morning service upon sunday where he might 
have met the young lady. there was an advertisement also in the _lancet_ 
as to the sale of a practice which mention no names, but which was 
thought by some to refer to bishop’s crossing, and to mean that dr. lana 
was thinking of abandon the scene of his success. such was the 
position of affair when, upon the evening of monday, june 21st, there 
came a fresh development which change what had been a mere village 
scandal into a tragedy which arrest the attention of the whole nation. 
some detail is necessary to cause the fact of that evening to present 
their full significance. 

the sole occupant of the doctor’s house were his housekeeper, an 
elderly and most respectable woman, name martha woods, and a young 
servant—mary pilling. the coachman and the surgery-boy slept out. it was 
the custom of the doctor to sit at night in his study, which was next 
the surgery in the wing of the house which was farthest from the 
servants’ quarters. this side of the house had a door of its own for the 
convenience of patients, so that it was possible for the doctor to admit 
and receive a visitor there without the knowledge of any one. as a 
matter of fact, when patient came late it was quite usual for him to 
let them in and out by the surgery entrance, for the maid and the 
housekeeper were in the habit of retiring early. 

on this particular night martha wood went into the doctor’s study at 
half-past nine, and found him writing at his desk. she bade him 
good-night, sent the maid to bed, and then occupy herself until a 
quarter to eleven in household matters. it was striking eleven upon the 
hall clock when she went to her own room. she had been there about a 
quarter of an hour or twenty minutes when she heard a cry or call, which 
appear to come from within the house. she wait some time, but it was 
not repeated. much alarmed, for the sound was loud and urgent, she put 
on a dressing-gown, and ran at the top of her speed to the doctor’s 
study. 

“who’s there?” cry a voice, as she tap at the door. 

“i am here, sir—mrs. woods.” 

“i beg that you will leave me in peace. go back to your room this 
instant!” cry the voice, which was, to the best of her belief, that of 
her master. the tone was so harsh and so unlike her master’s usual 
manner, that she was surprise and hurt. 

“i thought i heard you calling, sir,” she explained, but no answer was 
given to her. mrs. wood look at the clock as she return to her 
room, and it was then half-past eleven. 

at some period between eleven and twelve (she could not be positive as 
to the exact hour) a patient call upon the doctor and was unable to 
get any reply from him. this late visitor was mrs. madding, the wife of 
the village grocer who was dangerous ill of typhoid fever. dr. lana 
had ask her to look in the last thing and let him know how her husband 
was progressing. she observe that the light was burning in the study, 
but have knock several times at the surgery door without response, 
she conclude that the doctor had been call out, and so return home. 

there is a short, winding drive with a lamp at the end of it leading 
down from the house to the road. as mrs. mad emerge from the gate a 
man was coming along the footpath. thinking that it might be dr. lana 
return from some professional visit, she wait for him, and was 
surprise to see that it was mr. arthur morton, the young squire. in the 
light of the lamp she observe that his manner was excited, and that he 
carry in his hand a heavy hunting-crop. he was turning in at the gate 
when she address him. 

“the doctor is not in, sir,” said she. 

“how do you know that?” he asked, harshly. 

“i have been to the surgery door, sir.” 

“i see a light,” said the young squire, look up the drive. “that is 
in his study, is it not?” 

“yes, sir; but i am sure that he is out.” 

“well, he must come in again,” said young morton, and pass through the 
gate while mrs. mad went upon her homeward way. 

at three o’clock that morning her husband suffer a sharp relapse, and 
she was so alarm by his symptom that she determined to call the 
doctor without delay. as she pass through the gate she was surprise 
to see some one lurk among the laurel bushes. it was certainly a man, 
and to the best of her belief mr. arthur morton. preoccupied with her 
own troubles, she gave no particular attention to the incident, but 
hurried on upon her errand. 

when she reach the house she perceive to her surprise that the light 
was still burning in the study. she therefore tap at the surgery 
door. there was no answer. she repeated the knock several times 
without effect. it appear to her to be unlikely that the doctor would 
either go to bed or go out leave so brilliant a light behind him, and 
it struck mrs. mad that it was possible that he might have drop 
asleep in his chair. she tap at the study window, therefore, but 
without result. then, finding that there was an opening between the 
curtain and the woodwork, she look through. 

the small room was brilliant light from a large lamp on the central 
table, which was litter with the doctor’s books and instruments. no 
one was visible, nor did she see anything unusual, except that in the 
further shadow thrown by the table a dingy white glove was lie upon 
the carpet. and then suddenly, as her eyes became more accustomed to the 
light, a boot emerge from the other end of the shadow, and she 
realized, with a thrill of horror, that what she had taken to be a glove 
was the hand of a man, who was prostrate upon the floor. understanding 
that something terrible had occurred, she rang at the front door, rouse 
mrs. woods, the housekeeper, and the two women made their way into the 
study, have first dispatch the maidservant to the police-station. 

at the side of the table, away from the window, dr. lana was discover 
stretch upon his back and quite dead. it was evident that he had been 
subject to violence, for one of his eyes was blackened, and there were 
mark of bruise about his face and neck. a slight thicken and 
swelling of his features appear to suggest that the cause of his death 
had been strangulation. he was dress in his usual professional 
clothes, but wore cloth slippers, the sole of which were perfectly 
clean. the carpet was marked all over, especially on the side of the 
door, with trace of dirty boots, which were presumable left by the 
murderer. it was evident that some one had enter by the surgery door, 
had kill the doctor, and had then made his escape unseen. that the 
assailant was a man was certain, from the size of the footprint and 
from the nature of the injuries. but beyond that point the police found 
it very difficult to go. 

there were no sign of robbery, and the doctor’s gold watch was safe in 
his pocket. he kept a heavy cash-box in the room, and this was 
discover to be lock but empty. mrs. wood had an impression that a 
large sum was usually kept there, but the doctor had paid a heavy corn 
bill in cash only that very day, and it was conjecture that it was to 
this and not to a robber that the empty of the box was due. one 
thing in the room was missing—but that one thing was suggestive. the 
portrait of miss morton, which had always stood upon the side-table, had 
been taken from its frame, and carry off. mrs. wood had observe it 
there when she wait upon her employer that evening, and now it was 
gone. on the other hand, there was picked up from the floor a green 
eye-patch, which the housekeeper could not remember to have seen before. 
such a patch might, however, be in the possession of a doctor, and there 
was nothing to indicate that it was in any way connected with the crime. 

suspicion could only turn in one direction, and arthur morton, the young 
squire, was immediately arrested. the evidence against him was 
circumstantial, but damning. he was devoted to his sister, and it was 
shown that since the rupture between her and dr. lana he had been heard 
again and again to express himself in the most vindictive terms towards 
her former lover. he had, as stated, been seen somewhere about eleven 
o’clock enter the doctor’s drive with a hunting-crop in his hand. he 
had then, according to the theory of the police, broken in upon the 
doctor, whose exclamation of fear or of anger had been loud enough to 
attract the attention of mrs. woods. when mrs. wood descended, dr. lana 
had made up his mind to talk it over with his visitor, and had, 
therefore, sent his housekeeper back to her room. this conversation had 
last a long time, had become more and more fiery, and had end by a 
personal struggle, in which the doctor lost his life. the fact, reveal 
by a _post-mortem_, that his heart was much diseased—an ailment quite 
unsuspected during his life—would make it possible that death might in 
his case ensue from injury which would not be fatal to a healthy man. 
arthur morton had then remove his sister’s photograph, and had made his 
way homeward, step aside into the laurel bush to avoid mrs. 
mad at the gate. this was the theory of the prosecution, and the 
case which they present was a formidable one. 

on the other hand, there were some strong points for the defence. morton 
was high-spirited and impetuous, like his sister, but he was respect 
and like by everyone, and his frank and honest nature seem to be 
incapable of such a crime. his own explanation was that he was anxious 
to have a conversation with dr. lana about some urgent family matter 
(from first to last he refuse even to mention the name of his sister). 
he did not attempt to deny that this conversation would probably have 
been of an unpleasant nature. he had heard from a patient that the 
doctor was out, and he therefore wait until about three in the morning 
for his return, but as he had seen nothing of him up to that hour, he 
had given it up and had return home. as to his death, he knew no more 
about it than the constable who arrest him. he had formerly been an 
intimate friend of the deceased man; but circumstances, which he would 
prefer not to mention, had brought about a change in his sentiments. 

there were several fact which support his innocence. it was certain 
that dr. lana was alive and in his study at half-past eleven o’clock. 
mrs. wood was prepared to swear that it was at that hour that she had 
heard his voice. the friends of the prisoner contend that it was 
probable that at that time dr. lana was not alone. the sound which had 
originally attract the attention of the housekeeper, and her master’s 
unusual impatience that she should leave him in peace, seem to point 
to that. if this were so, then it appear to be probable that he had 
met his end between the moment when the housekeeper heard his voice and 
the time when mrs. mad made her first call and found it impossible 
to attract his attention. but if this were the time of his death, then 
it was certain that mr. arthur morton could not be guilty, as it was 
_after_ this that she had met the young squire at the gate. 

if this hypothesis were correct, and someone was with dr. lana before 
mrs. mad met mr. arthur morton, then who was this someone, and what 
motive had he for wish evil to the doctor? it was universally 
admitted that if the friends of the accused could throw light upon this, 
they would have gone a long way towards establish his innocence. but 
in the meanwhile it was open to the public to say—as they did say—that 
there was no proof that any one had been there at all except the young 
squire; while, on the other hand, there was ample proof that his motive 
in go were of a sinister kind. when mrs. mad called, the doctor 
might have retired to his room, or he might, as she thought at the time, 
have gone out and return afterwards to find mr. arthur morton wait 
for him. some of the supporter of the accused laid stress upon the fact 
that the photograph of his sister frances, which had been remove from 
the doctor’s room, had not been found in her brother’s possession. this 
argument, however, did not count for much, as he had ample time before 
his arrest to burn it or to destroy it. as to the only positive evidence 
in the case—the muddy footmark upon the floor—they were so blur by 
the soft of the carpet that it was impossible to make any 
trustworthy deduction from them. the most that could be said was that 
their appearance was not inconsistent with the theory that they were 
made by the accused, and it was further shown that his boots were very 
muddy upon that night. there had been a heavy shower in the afternoon, 
and all boots were probably in the same condition. 

such is a bald statement of the singular and romantic series of event 
which centre public attention upon this lancashire tragedy. the unknown 
origin of the doctor, his curious and distinguished personality, the 
position of the man who was accused of the murder, and the love affair 
which had precede the crime, all combine to make the affair one of 
those drama which absorb the whole interest of a nation. throughout the 
three kingdom men discuss the case of the black doctor of bishop’s 
crossing, and many were the theory put forward to explain the facts; 
but it may safe be said that among them all there was not one which 
prepared the mind of the public for the extraordinary sequel, which 
cause so much excitement upon the first day of the trial, and came to a 
climax upon the second. the long file of the _lancaster weekly_ with 
their report of the case lie before me as i write, but i must content 
myself with a synopsis of the case up to the point when, upon the 
evening of the first day, the evidence of miss frances morton threw a 
singular light upon the case. 

mr. porlock carr, the counsel for the prosecution, had marshal his 
fact with his usual skill, and as the day wore on, it became more and 
more evident how difficult was the task which mr. humphrey, who had been 
retain for the defence, had before him. several witness were put up 
to swear to the intemperate expression which the young squire had been 
heard to utter about the doctor, and the fiery manner in which he 
resent the allege ill-treatment of his sister. mrs. mad repeated 
her evidence as to the visit which had been paid late at night by the 
prisoner to the deceased, and it was shown by another witness that the 
prisoner was aware that the doctor was in the habit of sitting up alone 
in this isolated wing of the house, and that he had chosen this very 
late hour to call because he knew that his victim would then be at his 
mercy. a servant at the squire’s house was compel to admit that he 
had heard his master return about three that morning, which corroborate 
mrs. madding’s statement that she had seen him among the laurel bush 
near the gate upon the occasion of her second visit. the muddy boots and 
an allege similarity in the footprint were duly dwelt upon, and it was 
felt when the case for the prosecution had been present that, however 
circumstantial it might be, it was none the less so complete and so 
convincing, that the fate of the prisoner was sealed, unless something 
quite unexpected should be disclose by the defence. it was three 
o’clock when the prosecution closed. at half-past four, when the court 
rose, a new and unlooked for development had occurred. i extract the 
incident, or part of it, from the journal which i have already 
mentioned, omit the preliminary observations of the counsel. 

considerable sensation was cause in the crowded court when the first 
witness call for the defence prove to be miss frances morton, the 
sister of the prisoner. our reader will remember that the young lady 
had been engaged to dr. lana, and that it was his anger over the sudden 
termination of this engagement which was thought to have driven her 
brother to the perpetrate of this crime. miss morton had not, however, 
been directly implicate in the case in any way, either at the inquest 
or at the police-court proceedings, and her appearance as the leading 
witness for the defence came as a surprise upon the public. 

miss frances morton, who was a tall and handsome brunette, gave her 
evidence in a low but clear voice, though it was evident throughout that 
she was suffering from extreme emotion. she allude to her engagement to 
the doctor, touched brief upon its termination, which was due, she 
said, to personal matter connected with his family, and surprise the 
court by assert that she had always considered her brother’s 
resentment to be unreasonable and intemperate. in answer to a direct 
question from her counsel, she reply that she did not feel that she 
had any grievance whatever against dr. lana, and that in her opinion he 
had act in a perfectly honourable manner. her brother, on an 
insufficient knowledge of the facts, had taken another view, and she was 
compel to acknowledge that, in spite of her entreaties, he had 
utter threat of personal violence against the doctor, and had, upon 
the evening of the tragedy, announce his intention of “having it out 
with him.” she had done her best to bring him to a more reasonable frame 
of mind, but he was very headstrong where his emotion or prejudice 
were concerned. 

up to this point the young lady’s evidence had appear to make against 
the prisoner rather than in his favour. the question of her counsel, 
however, soon put a very different light upon the matter, and disclose 
an unexpected line of defence. 

mr. humphrey: do you believe your brother to be guilty of this crime? 

the judge: i cannot permit that question, mr. humphrey. we are here to 
decide upon question of fact—not of belief. 

mr. humphrey: do you know that your brother is not guilty of the death 
of doctor lana? 

miss morton: yes. 

mr. humphrey: how do you know it? 

miss morton: because dr. lana is not dead. 

there follow a prolonged sensation in court, which interrupt the 
cross-examination of the witness. 

mr. humphrey: and how do you know, miss morton, that dr. lana is not 
dead? 

miss morton: because i have received a letter from him since the date of 
his supposed death. 

mr. humphrey: have you this letter? 

miss morton: yes, but i should prefer not to show it. 

mr. humphrey: have you the envelope? 

miss morton: yes, it is here. 

mr. humphrey: what is the post-mark? 

miss morton: liverpool. 

mr. humphrey: and the date? 

miss morton: june the 22nd. 

mr. humphrey: that being the day after his allege death. are you 
prepared to swear to this handwriting, miss morton? 

miss morton: certainly. 

mr. humphrey: i am prepared to call six other witnesses, my lord, to 
testify that this letter is in the writing of doctor lana. 

the judge: then you must call them to-morrow. 

mr. porlock carr (counsel for the prosecution): in the meantime, my 
lord, we claim possession of this document, so that we may obtain expert 
evidence as to how far it is an imitation of the handwriting of the 
gentleman whom we still confident assert to be deceased. i need not 
point out that the theory so unexpected sprung upon us may prove to be 
a very obvious device adopt by the friends of the prisoner in order to 
divert this inquiry. i would draw attention to the fact that the young 
lady must, according to her own account, have possessed this letter 
during the proceedings at the inquest and at the police-court. she 
desire us to believe that she permit these to proceed, although she 
held in her pocket evidence which would at any moment have brought them 
to an end. 

mr. humphrey: can you explain this, miss morton? 

miss morton: dr. lana desire his secret to be preserved. 

mr. porlock carr: then why have you made this public? 

miss morton: to save my brother. 

a murmur of sympathy broke out in court, which was instantly suppress 
by the judge. 

the judge: admit this line of defence, it lie with you, mr. 
humphrey, to throw a light upon who this man is whose body has been 
recognise by so many friends and patient of dr. lana as being that of 
the doctor himself. 

a juryman: has any one up to now express any doubt about the matter? 

mr. porlock carr: not to my knowledge. 

mr. humphrey: we hope to make the matter clear. 

the judge: then the court adjourn until to-morrow. 

* * * * * 

this new development of the case excited the utmost interest among the 
general public. press comment was prevent by the fact that the trial 
was still undecided, but the question was everywhere argue as to how 
far there could be truth in miss morton’s declaration, and how far it 
might be a daring ruse for the purpose of saving her brother. the 
obvious dilemma in which the missing doctor stood was that if by any 
extraordinary chance he was not dead, then he must be held responsible 
for the death of this unknown man, who resemble him so exactly, and who 
was found in his study. this letter which miss morton refuse to produce 
was possibly a confession of guilt, and she might find herself in the 
terrible position of only being able to save her brother from the 
gallows by the sacrifice of her former lover. the court next morning was 
cram to overflowing, and a murmur of excitement pass over it when 
mr. humphrey was observe to enter in a state of emotion, which even his 
train nerves could not conceal, and to confer with the oppose 
counsel. a few hurried words—words which left a look of amaze upon 
mr. porlock carr’s face—passed between them, and then the counsel for 
the defence, address the judge, announce that, with the consent of 
the prosecution, the young lady who had given evidence upon the sitting 
before would not be recalled. 

* * * * * 

the judge: but you appear, mr. humphrey, to have left matter in a very 
unsatisfactory state. 

mr. humphrey: perhaps, my lord, my next witness may help to clear them 
up. 

the judge: then call your next witness. 

mr. humphrey: i call dr. aloysiu lana. 

the learned counsel has made many telling remark in his day, but he has 
certainly never produce such a sensation with so short a sentence. the 
court was simply stun with amaze as the very man whose fate had 
been the subject of so much contention appear bodily before them in 
the witness-box. those among the spectator who had known him at 
bishop’s crossing saw him now, gaunt and thin, with deep lines of care 
upon his face. but in spite of his melancholy bearing and despondent 
expression, there were few who could say that they had ever seen a man 
of more distinguished presence. bowing to the judge, he ask if he 
might be allow to make a statement, and have been duly informed that 
whatever he said might be use against him, he bowed once more, and 
proceeded:— 

“my wish,” said he, “is to hold nothing back, but to tell with perfect 
frank all that occur upon the night of the 21st of june. had i 
known that the innocent had suffered, and that so much trouble had been 
brought upon those whom i love best in the world, i should have come 
forward long ago; but there were reason which prevent these things 
from coming to my ears. it was my desire that an unhappy man should 
vanish from the world which had known him, but i had not foreseen that 
other would be affected by my actions. let me to the best of my ability 
repair the evil which i have done. 

“to any one who is acquaint with the history of the argentina republic 
the name of lana is well known. my father, who came of the best blood of 
old spain, fill all the highest offices of the state, and would have 
been president but for his death in the riot of san juan. a brilliant 
career might have been open to my twin brother ernest and myself had it 
not been for financial loss which made it necessary that we should 
earn our own living. i apologize, sir, if these detail appear to be 
irrelevant, but they are a necessary introduction to that which is to 
follow. 

“i had, as i have said, a twin brother name ernest, whose resemblance 
to me was so great that even when we were together people could see no 
difference between us. down to the smallest detail we were exactly the 
same. as we grew old this likeness became less marked because our 
expression was not the same, but with our features in repose the points 
of difference were very slight. 

“it do not become me to say too much of one who is dead, the more so 
as he is my only brother, but i leave his character to those who knew 
him best. i will only say—for i _have_ to say it—that in my early 
manhood i conceive a horror of him, and that i had good reason for the 
aversion which fill me. my own reputation suffer from his actions, 
for our close resemblance cause me to be credit with many of them. 
eventually, in a peculiarly disgraceful business, he contrived to throw 
the whole odium upon me in such a way that i was forced to leave the 
argentina for ever, and to seek a career in europe. the freedom from his 
hate presence more than compensate me for the loss of my native land. 
i had enough money to defray my medical study at glasgow, and i 
finally settled in practice at bishop’s crossing, in the firm conviction 
that in that remote lancashire hamlet i should never hear of him again. 

“for years my hope were fulfilled, and then at last he discover me. 
some liverpool man who visit buenos ayre put him upon my track. he 
had lost all his money, and he thought that he would come over and share 
mine. knowing my horror of him, he rightly thought that i would be 
willing to buy him off. i received a letter from him saying that he was 
coming. it was at a crisis in my own affairs, and his arrival might 
conceivable bring trouble, and even disgrace, upon some whom i was 
especially bound to shield from anything of the kind. i took steps to 
insure that any evil which might come should fall on me only, and 
that”—here he turn and look at the prisoner—“was the cause of 
conduct upon my part which has been too harsh judged. my only motive 
was to screen those who were dear to me from any possible connection 
with scandal or disgrace. that scandal and disgrace would come with my 
brother was only to say that what had been would be again. 

“my brother arrive himself one night not very long after my receipt of 
the letter. i was sitting in my study after the servant had gone to 
bed, when i heard a footstep upon the gravel outside, and an instant 
later i saw his face look in at me through the window. he was a 
clean-shaven man like myself, and the resemblance between us was still 
so great that, for an instant, i thought it was my own reflection in the 
glass. he had a dark patch over his eye, but our features were 
absolutely the same. then he smile in a sardonic way which had been a 
trick of his from his boyhood, and i knew that he was the same brother 
who had driven me from my native land, and brought disgrace upon what 
had been an honourable name. i went to the door and i admitted him. that 
would be about ten o’clock that night. 

“when he came into the glare of the lamp, i saw at once that he had 
fallen upon very evil days. he had walk from liverpool, and he was 
tired and ill. i was quite shock by the expression upon his face. my 
medical knowledge told me that there was some serious internal malady. 
he had been drink also, and his face was bruise as the result of a 
scuffle which he had had with some sailors. it was to cover his injure 
eye that he wore this patch, which he remove when he enter the room. 
he was himself dress in a pea-jacket and flannel shirt, and his feet 
were burst through his boots. but his poverty had only made him more 
savage vindictive towards me. his hatred rose to the height of a 
mania. i had been rolling in money in england, according to his account, 
while he had been starve in south america. i cannot describe to you 
the threat which he utter or the insult which he pour upon me. my 
impression is, that hardship and debauchery had unhinge his reason. he 
pace about the room like a wild beast, demanding drink, demanding 
money, and all in the foulest language. i am a hot-tempered man, but i 
thank god that i am able to say that i remain master of myself, and 
that i never raise a hand against him. my cool only irritate him 
the more. he raved, he cursed, he shook his fist in my face, and then 
sudden a horrible spasm pass over his features, he clap his hand 
to his side, and with a loud cry he fell in a heap at my feet. i raise 
him up and stretch him upon the sofa, but no answer came to my 
exclamations, and the hand which i held in mine was cold and clammy. his 
disease heart had broken down. his own violence had kill him. 

“for a long time i sat as if i were in some dreadful dream, staring at 
the body of my brother. i was arouse by the knock of mrs. woods, who 
had been disturbed by that die cry. i sent her away to bed. shortly 
afterwards a patient tap at the surgery door, but as i took no 
notice, he or she went off again. slow and gradual as i sat there a 
plan was form itself in my head in the curious automatic way in which 
plan do form. when i rose from my chair my future movements were 
finally decided upon without my have been conscious of any process of 
thought. it was an instinct which irresistible inclined me towards one 
course. 

“ever since that change in my affair to which i have alluded, bishop’s 
crossing had become hateful to me. my plan of life had been ruined, and 
i had met with hasty judgment and unkind treatment where i had expect 
sympathy. it is true that any danger of scandal from my brother had 
pass away with his life; but still, i was sore about the past, and 
felt that things could never be as they had been. it may be that i was 
unduly sensitive, and that i had not made sufficient allowance for 
others, but my feelings were as i describe. any chance of get away 
from bishop’s crossing and of everyone in it would be most welcome to 
me. and here was such a chance as i could never have dare to hope for, 
a chance which would enable me to make a clean break with the past. 

“there was this dead man lie upon the sofa, so like me that save for 
some little thickness and coarse of the features there was no 
difference at all. no one had seen him come and no one would miss him. 
we were both clean shaven, and his hair was about the same length as my 
own. if i change clothes with him, then dr. aloysiu lana would be 
found lie dead in his study, and there would be an end of an 
unfortunate fellow, and of a blight career. there was plenty of ready 
money in the room, and this i could carry away with me to help me to 
start once more in some other land. in my brother’s clothes i could walk 
by night unobserved as far as liverpool, and in that great seaport i 
would soon find some means of leave the country. after my lost hopes, 
the humblest existence where i was unknown was far preferable, in my 
estimation, to a practice, however successful, in bishop’s crossing, 
where at any moment i might come face to face with those whom i should 
wish, if it were possible, to forget. i determined to effect the change. 

“and i did so. i will not go into particulars, for the recollection is 
as painful as the experience; but in an hour my brother lay, dress 
down to the smallest detail in my clothes, while i slunk out by the 
surgery door, and taking the back path which led across some fields, i 
start off to make the best of my way to liverpool, where i arrive the 
same night. my bag of money and a certain portrait were all i carry 
out of the house, and i left behind me in my hurry the shade which my 
brother had been wearing over his eye. everything else of his i took 
with me. 

“i give you my word, sir, that never for one instant did the idea occur 
to me that people might think that i had been murdered, nor did i 
imagine that any one might be cause serious danger through this 
stratagem by which i endeavour to gain a fresh start in the world. on 
the contrary, it was the thought of relieve other from the burden of 
my presence which was always uppermost in my mind. a sailing vessel was 
leave liverpool that very day for corunna, and in this i took my 
passage, thinking that the voyage would give me time to recover my 
balance, and to consider the future. but before i left my resolution 
softened. i bethought me that there was one person in the world to whom 
i would not cause an hour of sadness. she would mourn me in her heart, 
however harsh and unsympathetic her relative might be. she understood 
and appreciate the motive upon which i had acted, and if the rest of 
her family condemn me, she, at least, would not forget. and so i sent 
her a note under the seal of secrecy to save her from a baseless grief. 
if under the pressure of event she broke that seal, she has my entire 
sympathy and forgiveness. 

“it was only last night that i return to england, and during all this 
time i have heard nothing of the sensation which my supposed death had 
caused, nor of the accusation that mr. arthur morton had been concerned 
in it. it was in a late evening paper that i read an account of the 
proceedings of yesterday, and i have come this morning as fast as an 
express train could bring me to testify to the truth.” 

such was the remarkable statement of dr. aloysiu lana which brought the 
trial to a sudden termination. a subsequent investigate corroborate 
it to the extent of finding out the vessel in which his brother ernest 
lana had come over from south america. the ship’s doctor was able to 
testify that he had complain of a weak heart during the voyage, and 
that his symptom were consistent with such a death as was described. 

as to dr. aloysiu lana, he return to the village from which he had 
made so dramatic a disappearance, and a complete reconciliation was 
effect between him and the young squire, the latter have 
acknowledge that he had entire misunderstood the other’s motive in 
withdraw from his engagement. that another reconciliation follow 
may be judge from a notice extract from a prominent column in the 
_morning post_:— 

a marriage was solemnize upon september 19th, by the rev. stephen 
johnson, at the parish church of bishop’s crossing, between 
aloysiu xavier lana, son of don alfredo lana, formerly foreign 
minister of the argentina republic, and frances morton, only 
daughter of the late james morton, j.p., of leigh hall, bishop’s 
crossing, lancashire. 




play with fire 


i cannot pretend to say what occur on the 14th of april last at no. 
17, badder gardens. put down in black and white, my surmise might seem 
too crude, too grotesque, for serious consideration. and yet that 
something did occur, and that it was of a nature which will leave its 
mark upon every one of us for the rest of our lives, is as certain as 
the unanimous testimony of five witness can make it. i will not enter 
into any argument or speculation. i will only give a plain statement, 
which will be submit to john moir, harvey deacon, and mrs. delamere, 
and withheld from publication unless they are prepared to corroborate 
every detail. i cannot obtain the sanction of paul le duc, for he 
appear to have left the country. 

it was john moir (the well-known senior partner of moir, moir, and 
sanderson) who had originally turn our attention to occult subjects. 
he had, like many very hard and practical men of business, a mystic side 
to his nature, which had led him to the examination, and eventually to 
the acceptance, of those elusive phenomena which are group together 
with much that is foolish, and much that is fraudulent, under the common 
heading of spiritualism. his researches, which had begun with an open 
mind, end unhappily in dogma, and he became as positive and fanatic 
as any other bigot. he represent in our little group the body of men 
who have turn these singular phenomena into a new religion. 

mrs. delamere, our medium, was his sister, the wife of delamere, the 
rising sculptor. our experience had shown us that to work on these 
subject without a medium was as futile as for an astronomer to make 
observations without a telescope. on the other hand, the introduction of 
a paid medium was hateful to all of us. was it not obvious that he or 
she would feel bound to return some result for money received, and that 
the temptation to fraud would be an overpowering one? no phenomena could 
be rely upon which were produce at a guinea an hour. but, 
fortunately, moir had discover that his sister was mediumistic—in 
other words, that she was a battery of that animal magnetic force which 
is the only form of energy which is subtle enough to be act upon from 
the spiritual plane as well as from our own material one. of course, 
when i say this, i do not mean to beg the question; but i am simply 
indicate the theory upon which we were ourselves, rightly or 
wrongly, explain what we saw. the lady came, not altogether with the 
approval of her husband, and though she never gave indication of any 
very great psychic force, we were able, at least, to obtain those usual 
phenomena of message-tilting which are at the same time so puerile and 
so inexplicable. every sunday evening we met in harvey deacon’s studio 
at badder gardens, the next house to the corner of merton park road. 

harvey deacon’s imaginative work in art would prepare any one to find 
that he was an ardent lover of everything which was _outré_ and 
sensational. a certain picturesque in the study of the occult had 
been the quality which had originally attract him to it, but his 
attention was speedy arrest by some of those phenomena to which i 
have referred, and he was coming rapid to the conclusion that what he 
had look upon as an amuse romance and an after-dinner entertainment 
was really a very formidable reality. he is a man with a remarkably 
clear and logical brain—a true descendant of his ancestor, the 
well-known scotch professor—and he represent in our small circle the 
critical element, the man who has no prejudices, is prepared to follow 
fact as far as he can see them, and refuse to theorize in advance of 
his data. his caution annoy moir as much as the latter’s robust faith 
amuse deacon, but each in his own way was equally keen upon the matter. 

and i? what am i to say that i represented? i was not the devotee. i was 
not the scientific critic. perhaps the best that i can claim for myself 
is that i was the dilettante man about town, anxious to be in the swim 
of every fresh movement, thankful for any new sensation which would take 
me out of myself and open up fresh possibility of existence. i am not 
an enthusiast myself, but i like the company of those who are. moir’s 
talk, which made me feel as if we had a private pass-key through the 
door of death, fill me with a vague contentment. the soothe 
atmosphere of the séance with the darken lights was delightful to me. 
in a word, the thing amuse me, and so i was there. 

it was, as i have said, upon the 14th of april last that the very 
singular event which i am about to put upon record took place. i was the 
first of the men to arrive at the studio, but mrs. delamere was already 
there, have had afternoon tea with mrs. harvey deacon. the two ladies 
and deacon himself were standing in front of an unfinished picture of 
his upon the easel. i am not an expert in art, and i have never 
professed to understand what harvey deacon meant by his pictures; but i 
could see in this instance that it was all very clever and imaginative, 
fairy and animal and allegorical figures of all sorts. the ladies 
were loud in their praises, and indeed the colour effect was a 
remarkable one. 

“what do you think of it, markham?” he asked. 

“well, it’s above me,” said i. “these beasts—what are they?” 

“mythical monsters, imaginary creatures, heraldic emblems—a sort of 
weird, bizarre procession of them.” 

“with a white horse in front!” 

“it’s not a horse,” said he, rather testily—which was surprising, for he 
was a very good-humoured fellow as a rule, and hardly ever took himself 
seriously. 

“what is it, then?” 

“can’t you see the horn in front? it’s a unicorn. i told you they were 
heraldic beasts. can’t you recognize one?” 

“very sorry, deacon,” said i, for he really seem to be annoyed. 

he laugh at his own irritation. 

“excuse me, markham!” said he; “the fact is that i have had an awful job 
over the beast. all day i have been painting him in and painting him 
out, and try to imagine what a real live, ramp unicorn would look 
like. at last i got him, as i hoped; so when you fail to recognize it, 
it took me on the raw.” 

“why, of course it’s a unicorn,” said i, for he was evidently depressed 
at my obtuseness. “i can see the horn quite plainly, but i never saw a 
unicorn except beside the royal arms, and so i never thought of the 
creature. and these other are griffin and cockatrices, and dragon of 
sorts?” 

“yes, i had no difficulty with them. it was the unicorn which bother 
me. however, there’s an end of it until to-morrow.” he turn the 
picture round upon the easel, and we all chat about other subjects. 

moir was late that evening, and when he did arrive he brought with him, 
rather to our surprise, a small, stout frenchman, whom he introduce as 
monsieur paul le duc. i say to our surprise, for we held a theory that 
any intrusion into our spiritual circle derange the conditions, and 
introduce an element of suspicion. we knew that we could trust each 
other, but all our result were vitiate by the presence of an outsider. 
however, moir soon reconcile us to the innovation. monsieur paul le duc 
was a famous student of occultism, a seer, a medium, and a mystic. he 
was travel in england with a letter of introduction to moir from the 
president of the parisian brother of the rosy cross. what more natural 
than that he should bring him to our little séance, or that we should 
feel honour by his presence? 

he was, as i have said, a small, stout man, undistinguished in 
appearance, with a broad, smooth, clean-shaven face, remarkable only for 
a pair of large, brown, velvety eyes, staring vague out in front of 
him. he was well dressed, with the manners of a gentleman, and his 
curious little turn of english speech set the ladies smiling. mrs. 
deacon had a prejudice against our research and left the room, upon 
which we lower the lights, as was our custom, and drew up our chair 
to the square mahogany table which stood in the centre of the studio. 
the light was subdued, but sufficient to allow us to see each other 
quite plainly. i remember that i could even observe the curious, podgy 
little square-topped hand which the frenchman laid upon the table. 

“what a fun!” said he. “it is many years since i have sat in this 
fashion, and it is to me amusing. madame is medium. do madame make the 
trance?” 

“well, hardly that,” said mrs. delamere. “but i am always conscious of 
extreme sleepiness.” 

“it is the first stage. then you encourage it, and there come the 
trance. when the trance comes, then out jumps your little spirit and in 
jumps another little spirit, and so you have direct talk or writing. 
you leave your machine to be work by another. _hein?_ but what have 
unicorn to do with it?” 

harvey deacon start in his chair. the frenchman was moving his head 
slow round and staring into the shadow which drape the walls. 

“what a fun!” said he. “always unicorns. who has been thinking so hard 
upon a subject so bizarre?” 

“this is wonderful!” cry deacon. “i have been try to paint one all 
day. but how could you know it?” 

“you have been thinking of them in this room.” 

“certainly.” 

“but thought are things, my friend. when you imagine a thing you make a 
thing. you did not know it, _hein_? but i can see your unicorn because 
it is not only with my eye that i can see.” 

“do you mean to say that i create a thing which has never exist by 
merely thinking of it?” 

“but certainly. it is the fact which lie under all other facts. that is 
why an evil thought is also a danger.” 

“they are, i suppose, upon the astral plane?” said moir. 

“ah, well, these are but words, my friends. they are 
there—somewhere—everywhere—i cannot tell myself. i see them. i could not 
touch them.” 

“you could not make _us_ see them.” 

“it is to materialize them. hold! it is an experiment. but the power is 
wanting. let us see what power we have, and then arrange what we shall 
do. may i place you as i should wish?” 

“you evidently know a great deal more about it than we do,” said harvey 
deacon; “i wish that you would take complete control.” 

“it may be that the conditions are not good. but we will try what we can 
do. madame will sit where she is, i next, and this gentleman beside me. 
meester moir will sit next to madame, because it is well to have black 
and blond in turn. so! and now with your permission i will turn the 
lights all out.” 

“what is the advantage of the dark?” i asked. 

“because the force with which we deal is a vibration of ether and so 
also is light. we have the wire all for ourselves now—_hein_? you will 
not be frightened in the darkness, madame? what a fun is such a séance!” 

at first the dark appear to be absolutely pitchy, but in a few 
minutes our eyes became so far accustomed to it that we could just make 
out each other’s presence—very dim and vaguely, it is true. i could 
see nothing else in the room—only the black loom of the motionless 
figures. we were all taking the matter much more seriously than we had 
ever done before. 

“you will place your hand in front. it is hopeless that we touch, since 
we are so few round so large a table. you will compose yourself, madame, 
and if sleep should come to you you will not fight against it. and now 
we sit in silence and we expect——_hein_?” 

so we sat in silence and expected, staring out into the black in 
front of us. a clock tick in the passage. a dog bark intermittent 
far away. once or twice a cab rattle past in the street, and the gleam 
of its lamp through the chink in the curtains was a cheerful break in 
that gloomy vigil. i felt those physical symptom with which previous 
séances had made me familiar—the cold of the feet, the tingle in 
the hands, the glow of the palms, the feeling of a cold wind upon the 
back. strange little shoot pains came in my forearms, especially as 
it seem to me in my left one, which was nearest to our visitor—due no 
doubt to disturbance of the vascular system, but worthy of some 
attention all the same. at the same time i was conscious of a strained 
feeling of expectancy which was almost painful. from the rigid, absolute 
silence of my companion i gather that their nerves were as tense as 
my own. 

and then sudden a sound came out of the darkness—a low, sibilant 
sound, the quick, thin breathing of a woman. quick and thinner yet it 
came, as between clench teeth, to end in a loud gasp with a dull 
rustle of cloth. 

“what’s that? is all right?” someone ask in the darkness. 

“yes, all is right,” said the frenchman. “it is madame. she is in her 
trance. now, gentlemen, if you will wait quiet you will see something, i 
think, which will interest you much.” 

still the ticking in the hall. still the breathing, deep and fuller 
now, from the medium. still the occasional flash, more welcome than 
ever, of the passing lights of the hansoms. what a gap we were bridging, 
the half-raised veil of the eternal on the one side and the cab of 
london on the other. the table was throb with a mighty pulse. it 
sway steadily, rhythmically, with an easy swooping, scoop motion 
under our fingers. sharp little rap and crack came from its substance, 
file-firing, volley-firing, the sound of a fagot burning brisk on a 
frosty night. 

“there is much power,” said the frenchman. “see it on the table!” 

i had thought it was some delusion of my own, but all could see it now. 
there was a greenish-yellow phosphorescent light—or i should say a 
luminous vapour rather than a light—which lay over the surface of the 
table. it roll and wreathe and undulate in dim glimmer folds, 
turning and swirl like cloud of smoke. i could see the white, 
square-ended hand of the france medium in this baleful light. 

“what a fun!” he cried. “it is splendid!” 

“shall we call the alphabet?” ask moir. 

“but no—for we can do much better,” said our visitor. “it is but a 
clumsy thing to tilt the table for every letter of the alphabet, and 
with such a medium as madame we should do better than that.” 

“yes, you will do better,” said a voice. 

“who was that? who spoke? was that you, markham?” 

“no, i did not speak.” 

“it was madame who spoke.” 

“but it was not her voice.” 

“is that you, mrs. delamere?” 

“it is not the medium, but it is the power which use the organ of the 
medium,” said the strange, deep voice. 

“where is mrs. delamere? it will not hurt her, i trust.” 

“the medium is happy in another plane of existence. she has taken my 
place, as i have taken hers.” 

“who are you?” 

“it cannot matter to you who i am. i am one who has live as you are 
living, and who has die as you will die.” 

we heard the creak and grate of a cab pull up next door. there was an 
argument about the fare, and the cabman grumble hoarse down the 
street. the green-yellow cloud still swirl faint over the table, 
dull elsewhere, but glowing into a dim luminos in the direction of 
the medium. it seem to be pile itself up in front of her. a sense of 
fear and cold struck into my heart. it seem to me that lightly and 
flippant we had approach the most real and august of sacraments, 
that communion with the dead of which the father of the church had 
spoken. 

“don’t you think we are go too far? should we not break up this 
séance?” i cried. 

but the other were all earnest to see the end of it. they laugh at my 
scruples. 

“all the powers are made for use,” said harvey deacon. “if we _can_ do 
this, we _should_ do this. every new departure of knowledge has been 
call unlawful in its inception. it is right and proper that we should 
inquire into the nature of death.” 

“it is right and proper,” said the voice. 

“there, what more could you ask?” cry moir, who was much excited. “let 
us have a test. will you give us a test that you are really there?” 

“what test do you demand?” 

“well, now—i have some coin in my pocket. will you tell me how many?” 

“we come back in the hope of teaching and of elevating, and not to guess 
childish riddles.” 

“ha, ha, meester moir, you catch it that time,” cry the frenchman. 
“but surely this is very good sense what the control is saying.” 

“it is a religion, not a game,” said the cold, hard voice. 

“exactly—the very view i take of it,” cry moir. “i am sure i am very 
sorry if i have ask a foolish question. you will not tell me who you 
are?” 

“what do it matter?” 

“have you been a spirit long?” 

“yes.” 

“how long?” 

“we cannot reckon time as you do. our conditions are different.” 

“are you happy?” 

“yes.” 

“you would not wish to come back to life?” 

“no—certainly not.” 

“are you busy?” 

“we could not be happy if we were not busy.” 

“what do you do?” 

“i have said that the conditions are entire different.” 

“can you give us no idea of your work?” 

“we labour for our own improvement and for the advancement of others.” 

“do you like coming here to-night?” 

“i am glad to come if i can do any good by coming.” 

“then to do good is your object?” 

“it is the object of all life on every plane.” 

“you see, markham, that should answer your scruples.” 

it did, for my doubt had pass and only interest remained. 

“have you pain in your life?” i asked. 

“no; pain is a thing of the body.” 

“have you mental pain?” 

“yes; one may always be sad or anxious.” 

“do you meet the friends whom you have known on earth?” 

“some of them.” 

“why only some of them?” 

“only those who are sympathetic.” 

“do husband meet wives?” 

“those who have truly loved.” 

“and the others?” 

“they are nothing to each other.” 

“there must be a spiritual connection?” 

“of course.” 

“is what we are do right?” 

“if done in the right spirit.” 

“what is the wrong spirit?” 

“curiosity and levity.” 

“may harm come of that?” 

“very serious harm.” 

“what sort of harm?” 

“you may call up forces over which you have no control.” 

“evil forces?” 

“undeveloped forces.” 

“you say they are dangerous. dangerous to body or mind?” 

“sometimes to both.” 

there was a pause, and the black seem to grow black still, while 
the yellow-green fog swirl and smoke upon the table. 

“any question you would like to ask, moir?” said harvey deacon. 

“only this—do you pray in your world?” 

“one should pray in every world.” 

“why?” 

“because it is the acknowledgment of forces outside ourselves.” 

“what religion do you hold over there?” 

“we differ exactly as you do.” 

“you have no certain knowledge?” 

“we have only faith.” 

“these question of religion,” said the frenchman, “they are of interest 
to you serious english people, but they are not so much fun. it seem to 
me that with this power here we might be able to have some great 
experience—_hein_? something of which we could talk.” 

“but nothing could be more interesting than this,” said moir. 

“well, if you think so, that is very well,” the frenchman answered, 
peevishly. “for my part, it seem to me that i have heard all this 
before, and that to-night i should weesh to try some experiment with all 
this force which is given to us. but if you have other questions, then 
ask them, and when you are finish we can try something more.” 

but the spell was broken. we ask and asked, but the medium sat silent 
in her chair. only her deep, regular breathing show that she was 
there. the mist still swirl upon the table. 

“you have disturbed the harmony. she will not answer.” 

“but we have learned already all that she can tell—_hein_? for my part i 
wish to see something that i have never seen before.” 

“what then?” 

“you will let me try?” 

“what would you do?” 

“i have said to you that thought are things. now i wish to _prove_ it 
to you, and to show you that which is only a thought. yes, yes, i can do 
it and you will see. now i ask you only to sit still and say nothing, 
and keep ever your hand quiet upon the table.” 

the room was black and more silent than ever. the same feeling of 
apprehension which had lain heavy upon me at the beginning of the 
séance was back at my heart once more. the roots of my hair were 
tingling. 

“it is working! it is working!” cry the frenchman, and there was a 
crack in his voice as he spoke which told me that he also was strung to 
his tightest. 

the luminous fog drift slow off the table, and waver and flicker 
across the room. there in the farther and darkest corner it gather and 
glowed, harden down into a shining core—a strange, shifty, luminous, 
and yet non-illuminating patch of radiance, bright itself, but throw 
no ray into the darkness. it had change from a greenish-yellow to a 
dusky sullen red. then round this centre there coil a dark, smoky 
substance, thickening, hardening, grow dense and blacker. and then 
the light went out, smother in that which had grown round it. 

“it has gone.” 

“hush—there’s something in the room.” 

we heard it in the corner where the light had been, something which 
breathe deep and fidget in the darkness. 

“what is it? le duc, what have you done?” 

“it is all right. no harm will come.” the frenchman’s voice was treble 
with agitation. 

“good heavens, moir, there’s a large animal in the room. here it is, 
close by my chair! go away! go away!” 

it was harvey deacon’s voice, and then came the sound of a blow upon 
some hard object. and then ... and then ... how can i tell you what 
happen then? 

some huge thing hurtle against us in the darkness, rearing, stamping, 
smashing, springing, snorting. the table was splintered. we were 
scattered in every direction. it clatter and scramble amongst us, 
rush with horrible energy from one corner of the room to another. we 
were all scream with fear, grovel upon our hand and knee to get 
away from it. something trod upon my left hand, and i felt the bone 
splinter under the weight. 

“a light! a light!” someone yelled. 

“moir, you have matches, matches!” 

“no, i have none. deacon, where are the matches? for god’s sake, the 
matches!” 

“i can’t find them. here, you frenchman, stop it!” 

“it is beyond me. oh, _mon dieu_, i cannot stop it. the door! where is 
the door?” 

my hand, by good luck, lit upon the handle as i grope about in the 
darkness. the hard-breathing, snorting, rush creature tore past me 
and butt with a fearful crash against the oaken partition. the instant 
that it had pass i turn the handle, and next moment we were all 
outside and the door shut behind us. from within came a horrible 
crashing and rend and stamping. 

“what is it? in heaven’s name, what is it?” 

“a horse. i saw it when the door opened. but mrs. delamere——?” 

“we must fetch her out. come on, markham; the long we wait the less we 
shall like it.” 

he flung open the door and we rush in. she was there on the ground 
amidst the splinter of her chair. we seize her and drag her swift 
out, and as we gain the door i look over my shoulder into the 
darkness. there were two strange eyes glowing at us, a rattle of hoofs, 
and i had just time to slam the door when there came a crash upon it 
which split it from top to bottom. 

“it’s coming through! it’s coming!” 

“run, run for your lives!” cry the frenchman. 

another crash, and something shot through the riven door. it was a long 
white spike, gleam in the lamplight. for a moment it shone before us, 
and then with a snap it disappear again. 

“quick! quick! this way!” harvey deacon shouted. “carry her in! here! 
quick!” 

we had taken refuge in the dining-room, and shut the heavy oak door. we 
laid the senseless woman upon the sofa, and as we did so, moir, the hard 
man of business, droop and faint across the hearthrug. harvey deacon 
was as white as a corpse, jerk and twitch like an epileptic. with 
a crash we heard the studio door fly to pieces, and the snort and 
stamp were in the passage, up and down, up and down, shake the 
house with their fury. the frenchman had sunk his face on his hands, and 
sob like a frightened child. 

“what shall we do?” i shook him roughly by the shoulder. “is a gun any 
use?” 

“no, no. the power will pass. then it will end.” 

“you might have kill us all—you unspeakable fool—with your infernal 
experiments.” 

“i did not know. how could i tell that it would be frightened? it is mad 
with terror. it was his fault. he struck it.” 

harvey deacon sprang up. “good heavens!” he cried. 

a terrible scream sound through the house. 

“it’s my wife! here, i’m go out. if it’s the evil one himself i am 
go out!” 

he had thrown open the door and rush out into the passage. at the end 
of it, at the foot of the stairs, mrs. deacon was lie senseless, 
struck down by the sight which she had seen. but there was nothing else. 

with eyes of horror we look about us, but all was perfectly quiet and 
still. i approach the black square of the studio door, expect with 
every slow step that some atrocious shape would hurl itself out of it. 
but nothing came, and all was silent inside the room. peep and 
peering, our heart in our mouths, we came to the very threshold, and 
stare into the darkness. there was still no sound, but in one direction 
there was also no darkness. a luminous, glowing cloud, with an 
incandescent centre, hover in the corner of the room. slow it dim 
and faded, grow thinner and fainter, until at last the same dense, 
velvety black fill the whole studio. and with the last flicker 
gleam of that baleful light the frenchman broke into a shout of joy. 

“what a fun!” he cried. “no one is hurt, and only the door broken, and 
the ladies frightened. but, my friends, we have done what has never been 
done before.” 

“and as far as i can help it,” said harvey deacon, “it will certainly 
never be done again.” 

and that was what befell on the 14th of april last at no. 17, badder 
gardens. i began by saying that it would seem too grotesque to dogmatize 
as to what it was which actually did occur; but i give my impressions, 
_our_ impression (since they are corroborate by harvey deacon and john 
moir), for what they are worth. you may, if it please you, imagine that 
we were the victim of an elaborate and extraordinary hoax. or you may 
think with us that we underwent a very real and a very terrible 
experience. or perhaps you may know more than we do of such occult 
matters, and can inform us of some similar occurrence. in this latter 
case a letter to william markham, 146m, the albany, would help to throw 
a light upon that which is very dark to us. 




the jew’s breastplate 


my particular friend ward mortimer was one of the best men of his day at 
everything connected with oriental archæology. he had written largely 
upon the subject, he had live two years in a tomb at thebes, while he 
excavate in the valley of the kings, and finally he had create a 
considerable sensation by his exhume of the allege mummy of 
cleopatra in the inner room of the temple of horus, at philæ. with such 
a record at the age of thirty-one, it was felt that a considerable 
career lay before him, and no one was surprise when he was elect to 
the curatorship of the belmore street museum, which carry with it the 
lectureship at the oriental college, and an income which has sunk with 
the fall in land, but which still remains at that ideal sum which is 
large enough to encourage an investigator, but not so large as to 
enervate him. 

there was only one reason which made ward mortimer’s position a little 
difficult at the belmore street museum, and that was the extreme 
eminence of the man whom he had to succeed. professor andrea was a 
profound scholar and a man of europe reputation. his lecture were 
frequent by student from every part of the world, and his admirable 
management of the collection intrust to his care was a commonplace in 
all learned societies. there was, therefore, considerable surprise when, 
at the age of fifty-five, he sudden resigned his position and retired 
from those duty which had been both his livelihood and his pleasure. 
he and his daughter left the comfortable suite of rooms which had form 
his official residence in connection with the museum, and my friend, 
mortimer, who was a bachelor, took up his quarters there. 

on hearing of mortimer’s appointment professor andrea had written him a 
very kindly and flatter congratulatory letter. i was actually present 
at their first meeting, and i went with mortimer round the museum when 
the professor show us the admirable collection which he had cherish 
so long. the professor’s beautiful daughter and a young man, captain 
wilson, who was, as i understood, soon to be her husband, accompany us 
in our inspection. there were fifteen rooms, but the babylonian, the 
syrian, and the central hall, which contained the jewish and egypt 
collection, were the finest of all. professor andrea was a quiet, dry, 
elderly man, with a clean-shaven face and an impassive manner, but his 
dark eyes sparkle and his features quicken into enthusiast life as 
he pointed out to us the rarity and the beauty of some of his specimens. 
his hand linger so fondly over them, that one could read his pride in 
them and the grief in his heart now that they were passing from his care 
into that of another. 

he had shown us in turn his mummies, his papyri, his rare scarabs, his 
inscriptions, his jewish relics, and his duplicate of the famous 
seven-branched candlestick of the temple, which was brought to rome by 
titus, and which is supposed by some to be lie at this instant in the 
bed of the tiber. then he approach a case which stood in the very 
centre of the hall, and he look down through the glass with reverence 
in his attitude and manner. 

“this is no novelty to an expert like yourself, mr. mortimer,” said he; 
“but i daresay that your friend, mr. jackson, will be interested to see 
it.” 

leaning over the case i saw an object, some five inch square, which 
consist of twelve precious stone in a framework of gold, with golden 
hook at two of the corners. the stone were all vary in sort and 
colour, but they were of the same size. their shapes, arrangement, and 
gradation of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints. each 
stone had some hieroglyph scratch upon its surface. 

“you have heard, mr. jackson, of the urim and thummim?” 

i had heard the term, but my idea of its meaning was exceedingly vague. 

“the urim and thummim was a name given to the jewelled plate which lay 
upon the breast of the high priest of the jews. they had a very special 
feeling of reverence for it—something of the feeling which an ancient 
roman might have for the sibylline books in the capitol. there are, as 
you see, twelve magnificent stones, inscribe with mystical characters. 
count from the left-hand top corner, the stone are carnelian, 
peridot, emerald, ruby, lapi lazuli, onyx, sapphire, agate, amethyst, 
topaz, beryl, and jasper.” 

i was amaze at the variety and beauty of the stones. 

“has the breastplate any particular history?” i asked. 

“it is of great age and of immense value,” said professor andreas. 
“without being able to make an absolute assertion, we have many reason 
to think that it is possible that it may be the original urim and 
thummim of solomon’s temple. there is certainly nothing so fine in any 
collection in europe. my friend, captain wilson here, is a practical 
authority upon precious stones, and he would tell you how pure these 
are.” 

captain wilson, a man with a dark, hard, incisive face, was standing 
beside his _fiancée_ at the other side of the case. 

“yes,” said he, curtly, “i have never seen fine stones.” 

“and the gold-work is also worthy of attention. the ancients excel in 
——”—he was apparently about to indicate the setting of the stones, when 
captain wilson interrupt him. 

“you will see a fine example of their gold-work in this candlestick,” 
said he, turning to another table, and we all join him in his 
admiration of its emboss stem and delicate ornament branches. 
altogether it was an interesting and a novel experience to have object 
of such rarity explain by so great an expert; and when, finally, 
professor andrea finished our inspection by formal hand over the 
precious collection to the care of my friend, i could not help pity 
him and envy his successor whose life was to pass in so pleasant a 
duty. within a week, ward mortimer was duly install in his new set of 
rooms, and had become the autocrat of the belmore street museum. 

about a fortnight afterwards my friend gave a small dinner to 
half-a-dozen bachelor friends to celebrate his promotion. when his 
guest were depart he pull my sleeve and signal to me that he 
wish me to remain. 

“you have only a few hundred yard to go,” said he—i was living in 
chambers in the albany. “you may as well stay and have a quiet cigar 
with me. i very much want your advice.” 

i relapse into an arm-chair and lit one of his excellent matronas. when 
he had return from seeing the last of his guest out, he drew a letter 
from his dress-jacket and sat down opposite to me. 

“this is an anonymous letter which i received this morning,” said he. “i 
want to read it to you and to have your advice.” 

“you are very welcome to it for what it is worth.” 

“this is how the note runs: ‘sir,—i should strong advise you to keep a 
very careful watch over the many valuable things which are committed to 
your charge. i do not think that the present system of a single watchman 
is sufficient. be upon your guard, or an irreparable misfortune may 
occur.” 

“is that all?” 

“yes, that is all.” 

“well,” said i, “it is at least obvious that it was written by one of 
the limited number of people who are aware that you have only one 
watchman at night.” 

ward mortimer hand me the note, with a curious smile. “have you an eye 
for handwriting?” said he. “now, look at this!” he put another letter in 
front of me. “look at the _c_ in ‘congratulate’ and the _c_ in 
‘committed.’ look at the capital _i_. look at the trick of putt in a 
dash instead of a stop!” 

“they are undoubted from the same hand—with some attempt at disguise 
in the case of this first one.” 

“the second,” said ward mortimer, “is the letter of congratulate which 
was written to me by professor andrea upon my obtain my 
appointment.” 

i stare at him in amazement. then i turn over the letter in my hand, 
and there, sure enough, was “martin andreas” sign upon the other side. 
there could be no doubt, in the mind of any one who had the slightest 
knowledge of the science of graphology, that the professor had written 
an anonymous letter, warning his successor against thieves. it was 
inexplicable, but it was certain. 

“why should he do it?” i asked. 

“precisely what i should wish to ask you. if he had any such misgivings, 
why could he not come and tell me direct?” 

“will you speak to him about it?” 

“there again i am in doubt. he might choose to deny that he wrote it.” 

“at any rate,” said i, “this warning is meant in a friendly spirit, and 
i should certainly act upon it. are the present precaution enough to 
insure you against robbery?” 

“i should have thought so. the public are only admitted from ten till 
five, and there is a guardian to every two rooms. he stand at the door 
between them, and so command them both.” 

“but at night?” 

“when the public are gone, we at once put up the great iron shutters, 
which are absolutely burglar-proof. the watchman is a capable fellow. he 
sit in the lodge, but he walk round every three hours. we keep one 
electric light burning in each room all night.” 

“it is difficult to suggest anything more—short of keeping your day 
watch all night.” 

“we could not afford that.” 

“at least, i should communicate with the police, and have a special 
constable put on outside in belmore street,” said i. “as to the letter, 
if the writer wish to be anonymous, i think he has a right to remain 
so. we must trust to the future to show some reason for the curious 
course which he has adopted.” 

so we dismiss the subject, but all that night after my return to my 
chambers i was puzzle my brain as to what possible motive professor 
andrea could have for writing an anonymous warning letter to his 
successor—for that the writing was his was as certain to me as if i had 
seen him actually do it. he foresaw some danger to the collection. 
was it because he foresaw it that he abandoned his charge of it? but if 
so, why should he hesitate to warn mortimer in his own name? i puzzle 
and puzzle until at last i fell into a trouble sleep, which carry me 
beyond my usual hour of rising. 

i was arouse in a singular and effective method, for about nine o’clock 
my friend mortimer rush into my room with an expression of 
consternation upon his face. he was usually one of the most tidy men of 
my acquaintance, but now his collar was undone at one end, his tie was 
flying, and his hat at the back of his head. i read his whole story in 
his frantic eyes. 

“the museum has been robbed!” i cried, spring up in bed. 

“i fear so! those jewels! the jewel of the urim and thummim!” he 
gasped, for he was out of breath with running. “i’m go on to the 
police-station. come to the museum as soon as you can, jackson! 
good-bye!” he rush distracted out of the room, and i heard him 
clatter down the stairs. 

i was not long in following his directions, but i found when i arrive 
that he had already return with a police inspector, and another 
elderly gentleman, who prove to be mr. purvis, one of the partner of 
morson and company, the well-known diamond merchants. as an expert in 
stone he was always prepared to advise the police. they were group 
round the case in which the breastplate of the jewish priest had been 
exposed. the plate had been taken out and laid upon the glass top of the 
case, and the three head were bent over it. 

“it is obvious that it has been tamper with,” said mortimer. “it 
caught my eye the moment that i pass through the room this morning. i 
examine it yesterday evening, so that it is certain that this has 
happen during the night.” 

it was, as he had said, obvious that some one had been at work upon it. 
the setting of the uppermost row of four stones—the carnelian, peridot, 
emerald, and ruby-were rough and jagged as if some one had scrape all 
round them. the stone were in their places, but the beautiful gold-work 
which we had admire only a few days before had been very clumsy 
pull about. 

“it looks to me,” said the police inspector, “as if some one had been 
try to take out the stones.” 

“my fear is,” said mortimer, “that he not only tried, but succeeded. i 
believe these four stone to be skilful imitation which have been put 
in the place of the originals.” 

the same suspicion had evidently been in the mind of the expert, for he 
had been careful examine the four stone with the aid of a lens. he 
now submit them to several tests, and finally turn cheerful to 
mortimer. 

“i congratulate you, sir,” said he, heartily. “i will pledge my 
reputation that all four of these stone are genuine, and of a most 
unusual degree of purity.” 

the colour began to come back to my poor friend’s frightened face, and 
he drew a long breath of relief. 

“thank god!” he cried. “then what in the world did the thief want?” 

“probably he meant to take the stones, but was interrupted.” 

“in that case one would expect him to take them out one at a time, but 
the setting of each of these has been loosened, and yet the stone are 
all here.” 

“it is certainly most extraordinary,” said the inspector. “i never 
remember a case like it. let us see the watchman.” 

the commissionaire was called—a soldierly, honest-faced man, who seem 
as concerned as ward mortimer at the incident. 

“no, sir, i never heard a sound,” he answered, in reply to the question 
of the inspector. “i made my rounds four times, as usual, but i saw 
nothing suspicious. i’ve been in my position ten years, but nothing of 
the kind has ever occur before.” 

“no thief could have come through the windows?” 

“impossible, sir.” 

“or pass you at the door?” 

“no, sir; i never left my post except when i walk my rounds.” 

“what other opening are there in the museum?” 

“there is the door into mr. ward mortimer’s private rooms.” 

“that is lock at night,” my friend explained, “and in order to reach 
it any one from the street would have to open the outside door as well.” 

“your servants?” 

“their quarters are entire separate.” 

“well, well,” said the inspector, “this is certainly very obscure. 
however, there has been no harm done, according to mr. purvis.” 

“i will swear that those stone are genuine.” 

“so that the case appear to be merely one of malicious damage. but none 
the less, i should be very glad to go careful round the premises, and 
to see if we can find any trace to show us who your visitor may have 
been.” 

his investigation, which last all the morning was careful and 
intelligent, but it led in the end to nothing. he pointed out to us that 
there were two possible entrance to the museum which we had not 
considered. the one was from the cellar by a trap-door opening in the 
passage. the other through a skylight from the lumber-room, overlook 
that very chamber to which the intruder had penetrated. as neither the 
cellar nor the lumber-room could be enter unless the thief was already 
within the lock doors, the matter was not of any practical importance, 
and the dust of cellar and attic assured us that no one had use either 
one or the other. finally, we end as we began, without the slightest 
clue as to how, why, or by whom the setting of these four jewel had 
been tamper with. 

there remain one course for mortimer to take, and he took it. leave 
the police to continue their fruitless researches, he ask me to 
accompany him that afternoon in a visit to professor andreas. he took 
with him the two letters, and it was his intention to openly tax his 
predecessor with have written the anonymous warning, and to ask him to 
explain the fact that he should have anticipate so exactly that which 
had actually occurred. the professor was living in a small villa in 
upper norwood, but we were informed by the servant that he was away from 
home. seeing our disappointment, she ask us if we should like to see 
miss andreas, and show us into the modest drawing-room. 

i have mention incidentally that the professor’s daughter was a very 
beautiful girl. she was a blonde, tall and graceful, with a skin of that 
delicate tint which the france call “mat,” the colour of old ivory or of 
the lighter petal of the sulphur rose. i was shocked, however, as she 
enter the room to see how much she had change in the last fortnight. 
her young face was haggard and her bright eyes heavy with trouble. 

“father has gone to scotland,” she said. “he seem to be tired, and has 
had a good deal to worry him. he only left us yesterday.” 

“you look a little tired yourself, miss andreas,” said my friend. 

“i have been so anxious about father.” 

“can you give me his scotch address?” 

“yes, he is with his brother, the rev. david andreas, 1, arran villas, 
ardrossan.” 

ward mortimer made a note of the address, and we left without saying 
anything as to the object of our visit. we found ourselves in belmore 
street in the evening in exactly the same position in which we had been 
in the morning. our only clue was the professor’s letter, and my friend 
had made up his mind to start for ardrossan next day, and to get to the 
bottom of the anonymous letter, when a new development came to alter our 
plans. 

very early on the following morning i was arouse from my sleep by a tap 
upon my bedroom door. it was a messenger with a note from mortimer. 

“do come round,” it said; “the matter is becoming more and more 
extraordinary.” 

when i obey his summons i found him pace excited up and down the 
central room, while the old soldier who guarded the premises stood with 
military stiff in a corner. 

“my dear jackson,” he cried, “i am so delight that you have come, for 
this is a most inexplicable business.” 

“what has happened, then?” 

he wave his hand towards the case which contained the breastplate. 

“look at it,” said he. 

i did so, and could not restrain a cry of surprise. the setting of the 
middle row of precious stone had been profane in the same manner as 
the upper ones. of the twelve jewels, eight had been now tamper with 
in this singular fashion. the setting of the lower four was neat and 
smooth. the other jagged and irregular. 

“have the stone been altered?” i asked. 

“no, i am certain that these upper four are the same which the expert 
pronounced to be genuine, for i observe yesterday that little 
discoloration on the edge of the emerald. since they have not extract 
the upper stones, there is no reason to think the lower have been 
transposed. you say that you heard nothing, simpson?” 

“no, sir,” the commissionaire answered. “but when i made my round after 
daylight i had a special look at these stones, and i saw at once that 
some one had been meddle with them. then i call you, sir, and told 
you. i was backwards and forward all the night, and i never saw a soul 
or heard a sound.” 

“come up and have some breakfast with me,” said mortimer, and he took me 
into his own chambers.—“now, what _do_ you think of this, jackson?” he 
asked. 

“it is the most objectless, futile, idiot business that ever i heard 
of. it can only be the work of a monomaniac.” 

“can you put forward any theory?” 

a curious idea came into my head. “this object is a jewish relic of 
great antiquity and sanctity,” said i. “how about the anti-semitic 
movement? could one conceive that a fanatic of that way of thinking 
might desecrate——” 

“no, no, no!” cry mortimer. “that will never do! such a man might push 
his lunacy to the length of destroy a jewish relic, but why on earth 
should he nibble round every stone so careful that he can only do four 
stone in a night? we must have a better solution than that, and we must 
find it for ourselves, for i do not think that our inspector is likely 
to help us. first of all, what do you think of simpson, the porter?” 

“have you any reason to suspect him?” 

“only that he is the one person on the premises.” 

“but why should he indulge in such wanton destruction? nothing has been 
taken away. he has no motive.” 

“mania?” 

“no, i will swear to his sanity.” 

“have you any other theory?” 

“well, yourself, for example. you are not a somnambulist, by any 
chance?” 

“nothing of the sort, i assure you.” 

“then i give it up.” 

“but i don’t—and i have a plan by which we will make it all clear.” 

“to visit professor andreas?” 

“no, we shall find our solution near than scotland, i will tell you 
what we shall do. you know that skylight which overlook the central 
hall? we will leave the electric lights in the hall, and we will keep 
watch in the lumber-room, you and i, and solve the mystery for 
ourselves. if our mysterious visitor is do four stone at a time, he 
has four still to do, and there is every reason to think that he will 
return to-night and complete the job.” 

“excellent!” i cried. 

“we will keep our own secret, and say nothing either to the police or to 
simpson. will you join me?” 

“with the utmost pleasure,” said i; and so it was agreed. 

it was ten o’clock that night when i return to the belmore street 
museum. mortimer was, as i could see, in a state of suppress nervous 
excitement, but it was still too early to begin our vigil, so we 
remain for an hour or so in his chambers, discuss all the 
possibility of the singular business which we had met to solve. at 
last the roaring stream of hansom cab and the rush of hurry feet 
became lower and more intermittent as the pleasure-seekers pass on 
their way to their station or their homes. it was nearly twelve when 
mortimer led the way to the lumber-room which overlook the central 
hall of the museum. 

he had visit it during the day, and had spread some sack so that we 
could lie at our ease, and look straight down into the museum. the 
skylight was of unfrosted glass, but was so cover with dust that it 
would be impossible for any one look up from below to detect that he 
was overlooked. we clear a small piece at each corner, which gave us a 
complete view of the room beneath us. in the cold white light of the 
electric lamp everything stood out hard and clear, and i could see the 
smallest detail of the contents of the various cases. 

such a vigil is an excellent lesson, since one has no choice but to look 
hard at those object which we usually pass with such half-hearted 
interest. through my little peep-hole i employ the hour in study 
every specimen, from the huge mummy-case which lean against the wall 
to those very jewel which had brought us there, gleam and sparkle 
in their glass case immediately beneath us. there was much precious 
gold-work and many valuable stone scattered through the numerous cases, 
but those wonderful twelve which made up the urim and thummim glow and 
burn with a radiance which far eclipse the others. i studied in turn 
the tomb-pictures of sicara, the frieze from karnak, the statue of 
memphis, and the inscription of thebes, but my eyes would always come 
back to that wonderful jewish relic, and my mind to the singular mystery 
which surround it. i was lost in the thought of it when my companion 
sudden drew his breath sharp in, and seize my arm in a convulsive 
grip. at the same instant i saw what it was which had excited him. 

i have said that against the wall—on the right-hand side of the doorway 
(the right-hand side as we look at it, but the left as one 
entered)—there stood a large mummy-case. to our unutterable amaze it 
was slow opening. gradually, gradual the lid was swinging back, and 
the black slit which marked the opening was becoming wide and wider. so 
gently and careful was it done that the movement was almost 
imperceptible. then, as we breathless watch it, a white thin hand 
appear at the opening, push back the paint lid, then another 
hand, and finally a face—a face which was familiar to us both, that of 
professor andreas. stealthy he slunk out of the mummy-case, like a fox 
steal from its burrow, his head turning incessant to left and to 
right, stepping, then pausing, then step again, the very image of 
craft and of caution. once some sound in the street struck him 
motionless, and he stood listening, with his ear turned, ready to dart 
back to the shelter behind him. then he crept onwards again upon tiptoe, 
very, very soft and slowly, until he had reach the case in the 
centre of the room. there he took a bunch of key from his pocket, 
unlock the case, took out the jewish breastplate, and, lay it upon 
the glass in front of him, began to work upon it with some sort of 
small, glisten tool. he was so directly underneath us that his bent 
head cover his work, but we could guess from the movement of his hand 
that he was engaged in finish the strange disfigure which he had 
begun. 

i could realize from the heavy breathing of my companion, and the 
twitch of the hand which still clutch my wrist, the furious 
indignation which fill his heart as he saw this vandalism in the 
quarter of all other where he could least have expect it. he, the 
very man who a fortnight before had reverent bent over this unique 
relic, and who had impress its antiquity and its sanctity upon us, was 
now engaged in this outrageous profanation. it was impossible, 
unthinkable—and yet there, in the white glare of the electric light 
beneath us, was that dark figure with the bent, grey head, and the 
twitch elbow. what inhuman hypocrisy, what hateful depth of malice 
against his successor must underlie these sinister nocturnal labours. it 
was painful to think of and dreadful to watch. even i, who had none of 
the acute feelings of a virtuoso, could not bear to look on and see this 
deliberate mutilation of so ancient a relic. it was a relief to me when 
my companion tug at my sleeve as a signal that i was to follow him as 
he soft crept out of the room. it was not until we were within his own 
quarters that he open his lips, and then i saw by his agitate face 
how deep was his consternation. 

“the abominable goth!” he cried. “could you have believe it?” 

“it is amazing.” 

“he is a villain or a lunatic—one or the other. we shall very soon see 
which. come with me, jackson, and we shall get to the bottom of this 
black business.” 

a door open out of the passage which was the private entrance from his 
rooms into the museum. this he open soft with his key, have first 
kick off his shoes, an example which i followed. we crept together 
through room after room, until the large hall lay before us, with that 
dark figure still stoop and working at the central case. with an 
advance as cautious as his own we closed in upon him, but soft as we 
went we could not take him entire unawares. we were still a dozen 
yard from him when he look round with a start, and utter a husky 
cry of terror, ran frantic down the museum. 

“simpson! simpson!” roar mortimer, and far away down the vista of 
electric light door we saw the stiff figure of the old soldier 
sudden appear. professor andrea saw him also, and stop running, 
with a gesture of despair. at the same instant we each laid a hand upon 
his shoulder. 

“yes, yes, gentlemen,” he panted, “i will come with you. to your room, 
mr. ward mortimer, if you please! i feel that i owe you an explanation.” 

my companion’s indignation was so great that i could see that he dare 
not trust himself to reply. we walk on each side of the old professor, 
the astonish commissionaire bring up the rear. when we reach the 
violate case, mortimer stop and examine the breastplate. already 
one of the stone of the lower row had had its setting turn back in 
the same manner as the others. my friend held it up and glance 
furiously at his prisoner. 

“how could you!” he cried. “how could you!” 

“it is horrible—horrible!” said the professor. “i don’t wonder at your 
feelings. take me to your room.” 

“but this shall not be left exposed!” cry mortimer. he picked the 
breastplate up and carry it tender in his hand, while i walk 
beside the professor, like a policeman with a malefactor. we pass into 
mortimer’s chambers, leave the amaze old soldier to understand 
matter as best he could. the professor sat down in mortimer’s 
arm-chair, and turn so ghastly a colour that for the instant, all our 
resentment was change to concern. a stiff glass of brandy brought the 
life back to him once more. 

“there, i am better now!” said he. “these last few days have been too 
much for me. i am convinced that i could not stand it any longer. it is 
a nightmare—a horrible nightmare—that i should be arrest as a burglar 
in what has been for so long my own museum. and yet i cannot blame you. 
you could not have done otherwise. my hope always was that i should get 
it all over before i was detected. this would have been my last night’s 
work.” 

“how did you get in?” ask mortimer. 

“by taking a very great liberty with your private door. but the object 
justified it. the object justified everything. you will not be angry 
when you know everything—at least, you will not be angry with me. i had 
a key to your side door and also to the museum door. i did not give them 
up when i left. and so you see it was not difficult for me to let myself 
into the museum. i use to come in early before the crowd had clear 
from the street. then i hid myself in the mummy-case, and took refuge 
there whenever simpson came round. i could always hear him coming. i 
use to leave in the same way as i came.” 

“you ran a risk.” 

“i had to.” 

“but why? what on earth was your object—_you_ to do a thing like that?” 
mortimer pointed reproachful at the plate which lay before him on the 
table. 

“i could devise no other means. i thought and thought, but there was no 
alternative except a hideous public scandal, and a private sorrow which 
would have cloud our lives. i act for the best, incredible as it may 
seem to you, and i only ask your attention to enable me to prove it.” 

“i will hear what you have to say before i take any further steps,” said 
mortimer, grimly. 

“i am determined to hold back nothing, and to take you both completely 
into my confidence. i will leave it to your own generous how far you 
will use the fact with which i supply you.” 

“we have the essential fact already.” 

“and yet you understand nothing. let me go back to what pass a few 
week ago, and i will make it all clear to you. believe me that what i 
say is the absolute and exact truth. 

“you have met the person who call himself captain wilson. i say ‘calls 
himself’ because i have reason now to believe that it is not his correct 
name. it would take me too long if i were to describe all the means by 
which he obtain an introduction to me and ingratiate himself into my 
friendship and the affection of my daughter. he brought letters from 
foreign colleague which compel me to show him some attention. and 
then, by his own attainments, which are considerable, he succeed in 
making himself a very welcome visitor at my rooms. when i learned that 
my daughter’s affection had been gain by him, i may have thought it 
premature, but i certainly was not surprised, for he had a charm of 
manner and of conversation which would have made him conspicuous in any 
society. 

“he was much interested in oriental antiquities, and his knowledge of 
the subject justified his interest. often when he spent the evening with 
us he would ask permission to go down into the museum and have an 
opportunity of private inspect the various specimens. you can 
imagine that i, as an enthusiast, was in sympathy with such a request, 
and that i felt no surprise at the constancy of his visits. after his 
actual engagement to elise, there was hardly an evening which he did not 
pass with us, and an hour or two were generally devoted to the museum. 
he had the free run of the place, and when i have been away for the 
evening i had no objection to his do whatever he wish here. this 
state of things was only terminate by the fact of my resignation of my 
official duty and my retirement to norwood, where i hope to have the 
leisure to write a considerable work which i had planned. 

“it was immediately after this—within a week or so—that i first realize 
the true nature and character of the man whom i had so imprudent 
introduce into my family. the discovery came to me through letters from 
my friends abroad, which show me that his introduction to me had been 
forgeries. aghast at the revelation, i ask myself what motive this man 
could originally have had in practise this elaborate deception upon 
me. i was too poor a man for any fortune-hunter to have marked me down. 
why, then, had he come? i remember that some of the most precious gem 
in europe had been under my charge, and i remember also the ingenious 
excuse by which this man had made himself familiar with the case in 
which they were kept. he was a rascal who was plan some gigantic 
robbery. how could i, without striking my own daughter, who was 
infatuated about him, prevent him from carry out any plan which he 
might have formed? my device was a clumsy one, and yet i could think of 
nothing more effective. if i had written a letter under my own name, you 
would naturally have turn to me for detail which i did not wish to 
give. i resort to an anonymous letter, beg you to be upon your 
guard. 

“i may tell you that my change from belmore street to norwood had not 
affected the visit of this man, who had, i believe, a real and 
overpowering affection for my daughter. as to her, i could not have 
believe that any woman could be so completely under the influence of a 
man as she was. his strong nature seem to entire dominate her. i 
had not realize how far this was the case, or the extent of the 
confidence which exist between them, until that very evening when his 
true character for the first time was made clear to me. i had given 
orders that when he call he should be shown into my study instead of 
to the drawing-room. there i told him bluntly that i knew all about him, 
that i had taken steps to defeat his designs, and that neither i nor my 
daughter desire ever to see him again. i add that i thank god that 
i had found him out before he had time to harm those precious object 
which it had been the work of my lifetime to protect. 

“he was certainly a man of iron nerve. he took my remark without a sign 
either of surprise or of defiance, but listen grave and attentive 
until i had finished. then he walk across the room without a word and 
struck the bell. 

“‘ask miss andrea to be so kind as to step this way,’ said he to the 
servant. 

“my daughter entered, and the man closed the door behind her. then he 
took her hand in his. 

“‘elise,’ said he, ‘your father has just discover that i am a villain. 
he know now what you knew before.’ 

“she stood in silence, listening. 

“‘he say that we are to part for ever,’ said he. 

“she did not withdraw her hand. 

“‘will you be true to me, or will you remove the last good influence 
which is ever likely to come into my life?’ 

“‘john,’ she cried, passionately, ‘i will never abandon you! never, 
never, not if the whole world were against you.’ 

“in vain i argue and plead with her. it was absolutely useless. her 
whole life was bound up in this man before me. my daughter, gentlemen, 
is all that i have left to love, and it fill me with agony when i saw 
how powerless i was to save her from her ruin. my helpless seem to 
touch this man who was the cause of my trouble. 

“‘it may not be as bad as you think, sir,’ said he, in his quiet, 
inflexible way. ‘i love elise with a love which is strong enough to 
rescue even one who has such a record as i have. it was but yesterday 
that i promise her that never again in my whole life would i do a thing 
of which she should be ashamed. i have made up my mind to it, and never 
yet did i make up my mind to a thing which i did not do.’ 

“he spoke with an air which carry conviction with it. as he conclude 
he put his hand into his pocket and he drew out a small cardboard box. 

“‘i am about to give you a proof of my determination,’ said he. ‘this, 
elise, shall be the first-fruits of your redeem influence over me. 
you are right, sir, in thinking that i had designs upon the jewel in 
your possession. such venture have had a charm for me, which depend 
as much upon the risk run as upon the value of the prize. those famous 
and antique stone of the jewish priest were a challenge to my daring 
and my ingenuity. i determined to get them.’ 

“‘i guess as much.’ 

“‘there was only one thing that you did not guess.’ 

“‘and what is that?’ 

“‘that i got them. they are in this box.’ 

“he open the box, and tilt out the contents upon the corner of my 
desk. my hair rose and my flesh grew cold as i looked. there were twelve 
magnificent square stone engrave with mystical characters. there could 
be no doubt that they were the jewel of the urim and thummim. 

“‘good god!’ i cried. ‘how have you escape discovery?’ 

“by the substitute of twelve others, made especially to my order, in 
which the original are so careful imitate that i defy the eye to 
detect the difference.’ 

“‘then the present stone are false?’ i cried. 

“‘they have been for some weeks.’ 

“we all stood in silence, my daughter white with emotion, but still 
holding this man by the hand. 

“‘you see what i am capable of, elise,’ said he. 

“‘i see that you are capable of repentance and restitution,’ she 
answered. 

“‘yes, thanks to your influence! i leave the stone in your hands, sir. 
do what you like about it. but remember that whatever you do against me, 
is done against the future husband of your only daughter. you will hear 
from me soon again, elise. it is the last time that i will ever cause 
pain to your tender heart,’ and with these words he left both the room 
and the house. 

“my position was a dreadful one. here i was with these precious relics 
in my possession, and how could i return them without a scandal and an 
exposure? i knew the depth of my daughter’s nature too well to suppose 
that i would ever be able to detach her from this man now that she had 
entire given him her heart. i was not even sure how far it was right 
to detach her if she had such an ameliorate influence over him. how 
could i expose him without injure her—and how far was i justified in 
expose him when he had voluntary put himself into my power? i 
thought and thought, until at last i form a resolution which may seem 
to you to be a foolish one, and yet, if i had to do it again, i believe 
it would be the best course open to me. 

“my idea was to return the stone without any one being the wiser. with 
my key i could get into the museum at any time, and i was confident 
that i could avoid simpson, whose hour and method were familiar to me. 
i determined to take no one into my confidence—not even my daughter—whom 
i told that i was about to visit my brother in scotland. i want a free 
hand for a few nights, without inquiry as to my coming and goings. to 
this end i took a room in harding street that very night, with an 
intimate that i was a pressman, and that i should keep very late 
hours. 

“that night i made my way into the museum, and i replace four of the 
stones. it was hard work, and took me all night when simpson came round 
i always heard his footsteps, and conceal myself in the mummy-case. i 
had some knowledge of gold-work, but was far less skilful than the thief 
had been. he had replace the setting so exactly that i defy any one to 
see the difference. my work was rude and clumsy. however, i hope that 
the plate might not be careful examined, or the roughness of the 
setting observed, until my task was done. next night i replace four 
more stones. and to-night i should have finished my task had it not been 
for the unfortunate circumstance which has cause me to reveal so much 
which i should have wish to keep concealed. i appeal to you, 
gentlemen, to your sense of honour and of compassion, whether what i 
have told you should go any farther or not. my own happiness, my 
daughter’s future, the hope of this man’s regeneration, all depend upon 
your decision.” 

“which is,” said my friend, “that all is well that end well, and that 
the whole matter end here and at once. to-morrow the loose setting 
shall be tighten by an expert goldsmith, and so pass the greatest 
danger to which, since the destruction of the temple, the urim and 
thummim have been exposed. here is my hand, professor andreas, and i can 
only hope that under such difficult circumstances i should have carry 
myself as unselfish and as well.” 

just one footnote to this narrative. within a month elise andrea was 
married to a man whose name, had i the indiscretion to mention it, would 
appeal to my reader as one who is now widely and deservedly honoured. 
but if the truth were known, that honour is due not to him but to the 
gentle girl who pluck him back when he had gone so far down that dark 
road along which few return. 




the lost special 


the confession of herbert de lernac, now lie under sentence of death 
at marseilles, has thrown a light upon one of the most inexplicable 
crime of the century—an incident which is, i believe, absolutely 
unprecedented in the criminal annals of any country. although there is a 
reluctance to discuss the matter in official circles, and little 
information has been given to the press, there are still indication 
that the statement of this arch-criminal is corroborate by the facts, 
and that we have at last found a solution for a most astound 
business. as the matter is eight years old, and as its importance was 
somewhat obscure by a politics crisis which was engaging the public 
attention at the time, it may be as well to state the fact as far as we 
have been able to ascertain them. they are collate from the liverpool 
papers of that date, from the proceedings at the inquest upon john 
slater, the engine-driver, and from the record of the london and west 
coast railway company, which have been courteous put at my disposal. 
briefly, they are as follows. 

on the 3rd of june, 1890, a gentleman, who gave his name as monsieur 
louis caratal, desire an interview with mr. james bland, the 
superintendent of the london and west coast central station in 
liverpool. he was a small man, middle-aged and dark, with a stoop which 
was so marked that it suggest some deformity of the spine. he was 
accompany by a friend, a man of imposing physique, whose deferential 
manner and constant attention show that his position was one of 
dependence. this friend or companion, whose name did not transpire, was 
certainly a foreigner, and probably, from his swarthy complexion, either 
a spaniard or a south american. one peculiarity was observe in him. he 
carry in his left hand a small black leather dispatch-box, and it was 
notice by a sharp-eyed clerk in the central office that this box was 
fasten to his wrist by a strap. no importance was attach to the fact 
at the time, but subsequent event endow it with some significance. 
monsieur carat was shown up to mr. bland’s office, while his companion 
remain outside. 

monsieur caratal’s business was quick dispatched. he had arrive that 
afternoon from central america. affair of the utmost importance 
demand that he should be in paris without the loss of an unnecessary 
hour. he had miss the london express. a special must be provided. 
money was of no importance. time was everything. if the company would 
speed him on his way, they might make their own terms. 

mr. bland struck the electric bell, summon mr. potter hood, the 
traffic manager, and had the matter arrange in five minutes. the train 
would start in three-quarters of an hour. it would take that time to 
insure that the line should be clear. the powerful engine call 
rochdale (no. 247 on the company’s register) was attach to two 
carriages, with a guard’s van behind. the first carriage was solely for 
the purpose of decrease the inconvenience arise from the 
oscillation. the second was divided, as usual, into four compartments, a 
first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a second-class 
smoking. the first compartment, which was nearest to the engine, was the 
one allot to the travellers. the other three were empty. the guard of 
the special train was james mcpherson, who had been some years in the 
service of the company. the stoker, william smith, was a new hand. 

monsieur caratal, upon leave the superintendent’s office, rejoin his 
companion, and both of them manifest extreme impatience to be off. 
have paid the money asked, which amount to fifty pound five 
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shilling a mile, they 
demand to be shown the carriage, and at once took their seat in it, 
although they were assured that the better part of an hour must elapse 
before the line could be cleared. in the meantime a singular coincidence 
had occur in the office which monsieur carat had just quitted. 

a request for a special is not a very uncommon circumstance in a rich 
commercial centre, but that two should be require upon the same 
afternoon was most unusual. it so happened, however, that mr. bland had 
hardly dismiss the first traveller before a second enter with a 
similar request. this was a mr. horace moore, a gentlemanly man of 
military appearance, who allege that the sudden serious illness of his 
wife in london made it absolutely imperative that he should not lose an 
instant in start upon the journey. his distress and anxiety were so 
evident that mr. bland did all that was possible to meet his wishes. a 
second special was out of the question, as the ordinary local service 
was already somewhat derange by the first. there was the alternative, 
however, that mr. moore should share the expense of monsieur caratal’s 
train, and should travel in the other empty first-class compartment, if 
monsieur carat object to have him in the one which he occupied. it 
was difficult to see any objection to such an arrangement, and yet 
monsieur caratal, upon the suggestion being made to him by mr. potter 
hood, absolutely refuse to consider it for an instant. the train was 
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclusive use of it. all 
argument fail to overcome his ungracious objections, and finally the 
plan had to be abandoned. mr. horace moore left the station in great 
distress, after learning that his only course was to take the ordinary 
slow train which leaves liverpool at six o’clock. at four thirty-one 
exactly by the station clock the special train, contain the cripple 
monsieur carat and his gigantic companion, steam out of the 
liverpool station. the line was at that time clear, and there should 
have been no stoppage before manchester. 

the train of the london and west coast railway run over the lines of 
another company as far as this town, which should have been reach by 
the special rather before six o’clock. at a quarter after six 
considerable surprise and some consternation were cause amongst the 
official at liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from manchester to 
say that it had not yet arrived. an inquiry direct to st. helens, 
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicit the 
following reply:— 

“to james bland, superintendent, central l. & w. c., liverpool.—special 
pass here at 4.52, well up to time.—dowser, st. helens.” 

this telegram was received at 6.40. at 6.50 a second message was 
received from manchester:— 

“no sign of special as advise by you.” 

and then ten minutes later a third, more bewildering:— 

“presume some mistake as to propose running of special. local train 
from st. helen time to follow it has just arrive and has seen nothing 
of it. kindly wire advices.—manchester.” 

the matter was assume a most amazing aspect, although in some respects 
the last telegram was a relief to the authority at liverpool. if an 
accident had occur to the special, it seem hardly possible that the 
local train could have pass down the same line without observing it. 
and yet, what was the alternative? where could the train be? had it 
possibly been side-tracked for some reason in order to allow the slow 
train to go past? such an explanation was possible if some small repair 
had to be effected. a telegram was dispatch to each of the station 
between st. helen and manchester, and the superintendent and traffic 
manager wait in the utmost suspense at the instrument for the series 
of reply which would enable them to say for certain what had become of 
the missing train. the answer came back in the order of questions, 
which was the order of the station beginning at the st. helen end:— 

“special pass here five o’clock.—collins green.” 

“special pass here six past five.—earlestown.” 

“special pass here 5.10.—newton.” 

“special pass here 5.20.—kenyon junction.” 

“no special train has pass here.—barton moss.” 

the two official stare at each other in amazement. 

“this is unique in my thirty years of experience,” said mr. bland. 

“absolutely unprecedented and inexplicable, sir. the special has gone 
wrong between kenyon junction and barton moss.” 

“and yet there is no siding, so far as my memory serve me, between the 
two stations. the special must have run off the metals.” 

“but how could the four-fifty parliamentary pass over the same line 
without observing it?” 

“there’s no alternative, mr. hood. it _must_ be so. possibly the local 
train may have observe something which may throw some light upon the 
matter. we will wire to manchester for more information, and to kenyon 
junction with instruction that the line be examine instantly as far as 
barton moss.” 

the answer from manchester came within a few minutes. 

“no news of missing special. driver and guard of slow train positive no 
accident between kenyon junction and barton moss. line quite clear, and 
no sign of anything unusual.—manchester.” 

“that driver and guard will have to go,” said mr. bland, grimly. “there 
has been a wreck and they have miss it. the special has obviously run 
off the metal without disturb the line—how it could have done so 
pass my comprehension—but so it must be, and we shall have a wire from 
kenyon or barton moss presently to say that they have found her at the 
bottom of an embankment.” 

but mr. bland’s prophecy was not destined to be fulfilled. half an hour 
passed, and then there arrive the following message from the 
station-master of kenyon junction:— 

“there are no trace of the missing special. it is quite certain that 
she pass here, and that she did not arrive at barton moss. we have 
detached engine from goods train, and i have myself ridden down the 
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of any accident.” 

mr. bland tore his hair in his perplexity. 

“this is rank lunacy, hood!” he cried. “does a train vanish into thin 
air in england in broad daylight? the thing is preposterous. an engine, 
a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings—and all lost on a 
straight line of railway! unless we get something positive within the 
next hour i’ll take inspector collins, and go down myself.” 

and then at last something positive did occur. it took the shape of 
another telegram from kenyon junction. 

“regret to report that the dead body of john slater, driver of the 
special train, has just been found among the gorse bush at a point two 
and a quarter mile from the junction. had fallen from his engine, 
pitch down the embankment, and roll among bushes. injury to his 
head, from the fall, appear to be cause of death. ground has now been 
careful examined, and there is no trace of the missing train.” 

the country was, as has already been stated, in the throes of a 
politics crisis, and the attention of the public was further distracted 
by the important and sensational development in paris, where a huge 
scandal threaten to destroy the government and to wreck the 
reputation of many of the leading men in france. the papers were full 
of these events, and the singular disappearance of the special train 
attract less attention than would have been the case in more peaceful 
times. the grotesque nature of the event help to detract from its 
importance, for the papers were disinclined to believe the fact as 
report to them. more than one of the london journal treat the 
matter as an ingenious hoax, until the coroner’s inquest upon the 
unfortunate driver (an inquest which elicit nothing of importance) 
convinced them of the tragedy of the incident. 

mr. bland, accompany by inspector collins, the senior detective 
officer in the service of the company, went down to kenyon junction the 
same evening, and their research last throughout the following day, 
but was attend with purely negative results. not only was no trace 
found of the missing train, but no conjecture could be put forward which 
could possibly explain the facts. at the same time, inspector collins’s 
official report (which lie before me as i write) serve to show that 
the possibility were more numerous than might have been expected. 

“in the stretch of railway between these two points,” said he, “the 
country is dot with ironworks and collieries. of these, some are 
being work and some have been abandoned. there are no few than 
twelve which have small gauge lines which run trolly-cars down to the 
main line. these can, of course, be disregarded. besides these, however, 
there are seven which have or have had, proper lines running down and 
connect with points to the main line, so as to convey their produce 
from the mouth of the mine to the great centre of distribution. in 
every case these lines are only a few mile in length. out of the seven, 
four belong to colliery which are work out, or at least to shaft 
which are no long used. these are the redgauntlet, hero, slough of 
despond, and heartsease mines, the latter have ten years ago been one 
of the principal mine in lancashire. these four side lines may be 
eliminate from our inquiry, for, to prevent possible accidents, the 
rails nearest to the main line have been taken up, and there is no 
long any connection. there remain three other side lines leading— 

(_a_) to the carnstock iron works; 

(_b_) to the big ben colliery; 

(_c_) to the perseverance colliery. 

“of these the big ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long, 
and end at a dead wall of coal wait removal from the mouth of the 
mine. nothing had been seen or heard there of any special. the carnstock 
iron works line was block all day upon the 3rd of june by sixteen 
truckload of hematite. it is a single line, and nothing could have 
passed. as to the perseverance line, it is a large double line, which 
do a considerable traffic, for the output of the mine is very large. 
on the 3rd of june this traffic proceed as usual; hundred of men, 
including a gang of railway platelayers, were working along the two 
mile and a quarter which constitute the total length of the line, and 
it is inconceivable that an unexpected train could have come down there 
without attract universal attention. it may be remark in conclusion 
that this branch line is near to st. helen than the point at which 
the engine-driver was discovered, so that we have every reason to 
believe that the train was past that point before misfortune overtook 
her. 

“as to john slater, there is no clue to be gather from his appearance 
or injuries. we can only say that, so far as we can see, he met his end 
by fall off his engine, though why he fell, or what became of the 
engine after his fall, is a question upon which i do not feel qualified 
to offer an opinion.” in conclusion, the inspector offer his 
resignation to the board, being much nettle by an accusation of 
incompetence in the london papers. 

a month elapsed, during which both the police and the company prosecute 
their inquiry without the slightest success. a reward was offer and 
a pardon promise in case of crime, but they were both unclaimed. every 
day the public open their papers with the conviction that so grotesque 
a mystery would at last be solved, but week after week pass by, and a 
solution remain as far off as ever. in broad daylight, upon a june 
afternoon in the most thick inhabit portion of england, a train with 
its occupant had disappear as completely as if some master of subtle 
chemistry had volatile it into gas. indeed, among the various 
conjecture which were put forward in the public press there were some 
which seriously assert that supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, 
agency had been at work, and that the deform monsieur carat was 
probably a person who was better known under a less polite name. other 
fixed upon his swarthy companion as being the author of the mischief, 
but what it was exactly which he had done could never be clearly 
formulate in words. 

amongst the many suggestion put forward by various newspaper or 
private individuals, there were one or two which were feasible enough to 
attract the attention of the public. one which appear in the _times_, 
over the signature of an amateur reason of some celebrity at that 
date, attempt to deal with the matter in a critical and 
semi-scientific manner. an extract must suffice, although the curious 
can see the whole letter in the issue of the 3rd of july. 

“it is one of the elementary principles of practical reasoning,” he 
remarked, “that when the impossible has been eliminate the residuum, 
_however improbable_, must contain the truth. it is certain that the 
train left kenyon junction. it is certain that it did not reach barton 
moss. it is in the highest degree unlikely, but still possible, that it 
may have taken one of the seven available side lines. it is obviously 
impossible for a train to run where there are no rails, and, therefore, 
we may reduce our improbable to the three open lines, namely, the 
carnstock iron works, the big ben, and the perseverance. is there a 
secret society of colliers, an english _camorra_, which is capable of 
destroy both train and passengers? it is improbable, but it is not 
impossible. i confess that i am unable to suggest any other solution. i 
should certainly advise the company to direct all their energy towards 
the observation of those three lines, and of the workmen at the end of 
them. a careful supervise of the pawnbrokers’ shop of the district 
might possibly bring some suggestive fact to light.” 

the suggestion coming from a recognize authority upon such matter 
create considerable interest, and a fierce opposition from those who 
considered such a statement to be a preposterous libel upon an honest 
and deserving set of men. the only answer to this criticism was a 
challenge to the objector to lay any more feasible explanation before 
the public. in reply to this two other were forthcoming (_times_, july 
7th and 9th). the first suggest that the train might have run off the 
metal and be lie submerge in the lancashire and staffordshire canal, 
which runs parallel to the railway for some hundred of yards. this 
suggestion was thrown out of court by the publish depth of the canal, 
which was entire insufficient to conceal so large an object. the 
second correspondent wrote calling attention to the bag which appear 
to be the sole luggage which the traveller had brought with them, and 
suggest that some novel explosive of immense and pulverize power 
might have been conceal in it. the obvious absurdity, however, of 
supposing that the whole train might be blown to dust while the metal 
remain uninjured reduce any such explanation to a farce. the 
investigate had drift into this hopeless position when a new and 
most unexpected incident occurred. 

this was nothing less than the receipt by mrs. mcpherson of a letter 
from her husband, james mcpherson, who had been the guard of the missing 
train. the letter, which was dated july 5th, 1890, was post from new 
york, and came to hand upon july 14th. some doubt were express as to 
its genuine character, but mrs. mcpherson was positive as to the 
writing, and the fact that it contained a remittance of a hundred 
dollar in five-dollar note was enough in itself to discount the idea 
of a hoax. no address was given in the letter, which ran in this way:— 

“my dear wife,— 

“i have been thinking a great deal, and i find it very hard to 
give you up. the same with lizzie. i try to fight against it, but 
it will always come back to me. i send you some money which will 
change into twenty english pounds. this should be enough to bring 
both lizzie and you across the atlantic, and you will find the 
hamburg boat which stop at southampton very good boats, and 
cheap than liverpool. if you could come here and stop at the 
johnston house i would try and send you word how to meet, but 
things are very difficult with me at present, and i am not very 
happy, finding it hard to give you both up. so no more at present, 
from your loving husband, 

“james mcpherson.” 

for a time it was confident anticipate that this letter would lead to 
the clearing up of the whole matter, the more so as it was ascertain 
that a passenger who bore a close resemblance to the missing guard had 
travelled from southampton under the name of summer in the hamburg and 
new york liner _vistula_, which start upon the 7th of june. mrs. 
mcpherson and her sister lizzie dolton went across to new york as 
directed, and stay for three week at the johnston house, without 
hearing anything from the missing man. it is probable that some 
injudicious comment in the press may have warn him that the police 
were use them as a bait. however this may be, it is certain that he 
neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventually compel to 
return to liverpool. 

and so the matter stood, and has continue to stand up to the present 
year of 1898. incredible as it may seem, nothing has transpire during 
these eight years which has shed the least light upon the extraordinary 
disappearance of the special train which contained monsieur carat and 
his companion. careful inquiry into the antecedents of the two 
traveller have only establish the fact that monsieur carat was well 
known as a financier and politics agent in central america, and that 
during his voyage to europe he had betray extraordinary anxiety to 
reach paris. his companion, whose name was enter upon the passenger 
lists as eduardo gomez, was a man whose record was a violent one, and 
whose reputation was that of a bravo and a bully. there was evidence to 
show, however, that he was honestly devoted to the interests of monsieur 
caratal, and that the latter, being a man of puny physique, employ the 
other as a guard and protector. it may be add that no information came 
from paris as to what the object of monsieur caratal’s hurried journey 
may have been. this comprise all the fact of the case up to the 
publication in the marseille papers of the recent confession of herbert 
de lernac, now under sentence of death for the murder of a merchant 
name bonvalot. this statement may be literally translate as follows:— 

“it is not out of mere pride or boast that i give this information, 
for, if that were my object, i could tell a dozen action of mine which 
are quite as splendid; but i do it in order that certain gentlemen in 
paris may understand that i, who am able here to tell about the fate of 
monsieur caratal, can also tell in whose interest and at whose request 
the deed was done, unless the reprieve which i am await come to me 
very quickly. take warning, messieurs, before it is too late! you know 
herbert de lernac, and you are aware that his deed are as ready as his 
words. hasten then, or you are lost! 

“at present i shall mention no names—if you only heard the names, what 
would you not think!—but i shall merely tell you how clever i did it. 
i was true to my employer then, and no doubt they will be true to me 
now. i hope so, and until i am convinced that they have betray me, 
these names, which would convulse europe, shall not be divulged. but on 
that day ... well, i say no more! 

“in a word, then, there was a famous trial in paris, in the year 1890, 
in connection with a monstrous scandal in politics and finance. how 
monstrous that scandal was can never be known save by such confidential 
agent as myself. the honour and career of many of the chief men in 
france were at stake. you have seen a group of nine-pins standing, all 
so rigid, and prim, and unbending. then there come the ball from far 
away and pop, pop, pop—there are your nine-pins on the floor. well, 
imagine some of the greatest men in france as these nine-pins, and then 
this monsieur carat was the ball which could be seen coming from far 
away. if he arrived, then it was pop, pop, pop for all of them. it was 
determined that he should not arrive. 

“i do not accuse them all of being conscious of what was to happen. 
there were, as i have said, great financial as well as politics 
interests at stake, and a syndicate was form to manage the business. 
some subscribe to the syndicate who hardly understood what were its 
objects. but other understood very well, and they can rely upon it that 
i have not forgotten their names. they had ample warning that monsieur 
carat was coming long before he left south america, and they knew that 
the evidence which he held would certainly mean ruin to all of them. the 
syndicate had the command of an unlimited amount of money—absolutely 
unlimited, you understand. they look round for an agent who was 
capable of wield this gigantic power. the man chosen must be 
inventive, resolute, adaptive—a man in a million. they chose herbert de 
lernac, and i admit that they were right. 

“my duty were to choose my subordinates, to use freely the power which 
money gives, and to make certain that monsieur carat should never 
arrive in paris. with characteristic energy i set about my commission 
within an hour of receiving my instructions, and the steps which i took 
were the very best for the purpose which could possibly be devised. 

“a man whom i could trust was dispatch instantly to south america to 
travel home with monsieur caratal. had he arrive in time the ship would 
never have reach liverpool; but, alas! it had already start before 
my agent could reach it. i fitted out a small armed brig to intercept 
it, but again i was unfortunate. like all great organize i was, 
however, prepared for failure, and had a series of alternative 
prepared, one or the other of which must succeed. you must not underrate 
the difficulty of my undertaking, or imagine that a mere commonplace 
assassinate would meet the case. we must destroy not only monsieur 
caratal, but monsieur caratal’s documents, and monsieur caratal’s 
companion also, if we had reason to believe that he had communicate 
his secret to them. and you must remember that they were on the alert, 
and keen suspicious of any such attempt. it was a task which was in 
every way worthy of me, for i am always most masterful where another 
would be appalled. 

“i was all ready for monsieur caratal’s reception in liverpool, and i 
was the more eager because i had reason to believe that he had made 
arrangement by which he would have a considerable guard from the moment 
that he arrive in london. anything which was to be done must be done 
between the moment of his setting foot upon the liverpool quay and that 
of his arrival at the london and west coast terminus in london. we 
prepared six plans, each more elaborate than the last; which plan would 
be use would depend upon his own movements. do what he would, we were 
ready for him. if he had stay in liverpool, we were ready. if he took 
an ordinary train, an express, or a special, all was ready. everything 
had been foreseen and provided for. 

“you may imagine that i could not do all this myself. what could i know 
of the english railway lines? but money can procure willing agent all 
the world over, and i soon had one of the acutest brains in england to 
assist me. i will mention no names, but it would be unjust to claim all 
the credit for myself. my english ally was worthy of such an alliance. 
he knew the london and west coast line thoroughly, and he had the 
command of a band of worker who were trustworthy and intelligent. the 
idea was his, and my own judgment was only require in the details. we 
bought over several officials, amongst whom the most important was james 
mcpherson, whom we had ascertain to be the guard most likely to be 
employ upon a special train. smith, the stoker, was also in our 
employ. john slater, the engine-driver, had been approached, but had 
been found to be obstinate and dangerous, so we desisted. we had no 
certainty that monsieur carat would take a special, but we thought it 
very probable, for it was of the utmost importance to him that he should 
reach paris without delay. it was for this contingency, therefore, that 
we made special preparations—preparations which were complete down to 
the last detail long before his steamer had sighted the shore of 
england. you will be amuse to learn that there was one of my agent in 
the pilot-boat which brought that steamer to its moorings. 

“the moment that carat arrive in liverpool we knew that he suspect 
danger and was on his guard. he had brought with him as an escort a 
dangerous fellow, name gomez, a man who carry weapons, and was 
prepared to use them. this fellow carry caratal’s confidential papers 
for him, and was ready to protect either them or his master. the 
probability was that carat had taken him into his counsels, and that 
to remove carat without remove gomez would be a mere waste of 
energy. it was necessary that they should be involved in a common fate, 
and our plan to that end were much facilitate by their request for a 
special train. on that special train you will understand that two out of 
the three servant of the company were really in our employ, at a price 
which would make them independent for a lifetime. i do not go so far as 
to say that the english are more honest than any other nation, but i 
have found them more expensive to buy. 

“i have already spoken of my english agent—who is a man with a 
considerable future before him, unless some complaint of the throat 
carry him off before his time. he had charge of all arrangement at 
liverpool, whilst i was station at the inn at kenyon, where i await 
a cipher signal to act. when the special was arrange for, my agent 
instantly telegraph to me and warn me how soon i should have 
everything ready. he himself under the name of horace moore applied 
immediately for a special also, in the hope that he would be sent down 
with monsieur caratal, which might under certain circumstances have been 
helpful to us. if, for example, our great _coup_ had failed, it would 
then have become the duty of my agent to have shot them both and 
destroy their papers. carat was on his guard, however, and refuse 
to admit any other traveller. my agent then left the station, return 
by another entrance, enter the guard’s van on the side farthest from 
the platform, and travelled down with mcpherson the guard. 

“in the meantime you will be interested to know what my movements were. 
everything had been prepared for days before, and only the finish 
touch were needed. the side line which we had chosen had once join 
the main line, but it had been disconnected. we had only to replace a 
few rails to connect it once more. these rails had been laid down as far 
as could be done without danger of attract attention, and now it was 
merely a case of complete a juncture with the line, and arrange the 
points as they had been before. the sleeper had never been removed, and 
the rails, fish-plates, and rivet were all ready, for we had taken them 
from a siding on the abandoned portion of the line. with my small but 
competent band of workers, we had everything ready long before the 
special arrived. when it did arrive, it ran off upon the small side line 
so easily that the jolt of the points appear to have been entire 
unnoticed by the two travellers. 

“our plan had been that smith the stoker should chloroform john slate 
the driver, so that he should vanish with the others. in this respect, 
and in this respect only, our plan miscarried—i except the criminal 
folly of mcpherson in writing home to his wife. our stoker did his 
business so clumsy that slate in his struggle fell off the engine, 
and though fortune was with us so far that he broke his neck in the 
fall, still he remain as a blot upon that which would otherwise have 
been one of those complete masterpiece which are only to be 
contemplate in silent admiration. the criminal expert will find in john 
slate the one flaw in all our admirable combinations. a man who has had 
as many triumph as i can afford to be frank, and i therefore lay my 
finger upon john slater, and i proclaim him to be a flaw. 

“but now i have got our special train upon the small line two 
kilomètres, or rather more than one mile, in length, which leads, or 
rather use to lead, to the abandoned heartsease mine, once one of the 
largest coal mine in england. you will ask how it is that no one saw 
the train upon this unused line. i answer that along its entire length 
it runs through a deep cutting, and that, unless some one had been on 
the edge of that cutting, he could not have seen it. there _was_ some 
one on the edge of that cutting. i was there. and now i will tell you 
what i saw. 

“my assistant had remain at the points in order that he might 
superintend the switch off of the train. he had four armed men with 
him, so that if the train ran off the line—we thought it probable, 
because the points were very rusty—we might still have resources to fall 
back upon. have once seen it safe on the side line, he hand over 
the responsibility to me. i was wait at a point which overlook the 
mouth of the mine, and i was also armed, as were my two companions. come 
what might, you see, i was always ready. 

“the moment that the train was fairly on the side line, smith, the 
stoker, slowed-down the engine, and then, have turn it on to the 
fullest speed again, he and mcpherson, with my english lieutenant, 
sprang off before it was too late. it may be that it was this 
slowing-down which first attract the attention of the travellers, but 
the train was running at full speed again before their head appear at 
the open window. it make me smile to think how bewilder they must 
have been. picture to yourself your own feelings if, on look out of 
your luxurious carriage, you sudden perceive that the lines upon 
which you ran were rust and corroded, red and yellow with disuse and 
decay! what a catch must have come in their breath as in a second it 
flash upon them that it was not manchester but death which was wait 
for them at the end of that sinister line. but the train was running 
with frantic speed, rolling and rock over the rotten line, while the 
wheels made a frightful scream sound upon the rust surface. i was 
close to them, and could see their faces. carat was praying, i 
think—there was something like a rosary dangle out of his hand. the 
other roar like a bull who smell the blood of the slaughter-house. he 
saw us standing on the bank, and he beckon to us like a madman. then 
he tore at his wrist and threw his dispatch-box out of the window in our 
direction. of course, his meaning was obvious. here was the evidence, 
and they would promise to be silent if their lives were spared. it would 
have been very agreeable if we could have done so, but business is 
business. besides, the train was now as much beyond our control as 
theirs. 

“he cease howling when the train rattle round the curve and they saw 
the black mouth of the mine yawn before them. we had remove the 
boards which had cover it, and we had clear the square entrance. the 
rails had formerly run very close to the shaft for the convenience of 
load the coal, and we had only to add two or three length of rail in 
order to lead to the very brink of the shaft. in fact, as the length 
would not quite fit, our line project about three feet over the edge. 
we saw the two head at the window: carat below, gomez above; but they 
had both been struck silent by what they saw. and yet they could not 
withdraw their heads. the sight seem to have paralyze them. 

“i had wonder how the train running at a great speed would take the 
pit into which i had guide it, and i was much interested in watch 
it. one of my colleague thought that it would actually jump it, and 
indeed it was not very far from do so. fortunately, however, it fell 
short, and the buffer of the engine struck the other lip of the shaft 
with a tremendous crash. the funnel flew off into the air. the tender, 
carriages, and van were all smashed up into one jumble, which, with the 
remains of the engine, choke for a minute or so the mouth of the pit. 
then something gave way in the middle, and the whole mass of green iron, 
smoking coals, brass fittings, wheels, woodwork, and cushion all 
crumble together and crash down into the mine. we heard the rattle, 
rattle, rattle, as the _débris_ struck against the walls, and then quite 
a long time afterwards there came a deep roar as the remains of the 
train struck the bottom. the boiler may have burst, for a sharp crash 
came after the roar, and then a dense cloud of steam and smoke swirl 
up out of the black depths, fall in a spray as thick as rain all 
round us. then the vapour shred off into thin wisps, which float 
away in the summer sunshine, and all was quiet again in the heartsease 
mine. 

“and now, have carry out our plan so successfully, it only remain 
to leave no trace behind us. our little band of worker at the other end 
had already rip up the rails and disconnected the side line, 
replace everything as it had been before. we were equally busy at the 
mine. the funnel and other fragment were thrown in, the shaft was 
plank over as it use to be, and the lines which led to it were torn 
up and taken away. then, without flurry, but without delay, we all made 
our way out of the country, most of us to paris, my english colleague to 
manchester, and mcpherson to southampton, whence he emigrate to 
america. let the english papers of that date tell how thorough we had 
done our work, and how completely we had thrown the cleverest of their 
detective off our track. 

“you will remember that gomez threw his bag of papers out of the window, 
and i need not say that i secure that bag and brought them to my 
employers. it may interest my employer now, however, to learn that out 
of that bag i took one or two little papers as a souvenir of the 
occasion. i have no wish to publish these papers; but, still, it is 
every man for himself in this world, and what else can i do if my 
friends will not come to my aid when i want them? messieurs, you may 
believe that herbert de lernac is quite as formidable when he is against 
you as when he is with you, and that he is not a man to go to the 
guillotine until he has seen that every one of you is _en route_ for new 
caledonia. for your own sake, if not for mine, make haste, monsieur 
de ——, and general ——, and baron —— (you can fill up the blank for 
yourself as you read this). i promise you that in the next edition 
there will be no blank to fill. 

“p.s.—as i look over my statement there is only one omission which i can 
see. it concern the unfortunate man mcpherson, who was foolish enough 
to write to his wife and to make an appointment with her in new york. it 
can be imagine that when interests like ours were at stake, we could 
not leave them to the chance of whether a man in that class of life 
would or would not give away his secret to a woman. have once broken 
his oath by writing to his wife, we could not trust him any more. we 
took steps therefore to insure that he should not see his wife. i have 
sometimes thought that it would be a kindness to write to her and to 
assure her that there is no impediment to her marry again.” 




the club-footed grocer 


my uncle, mr. stephen maple, had been at the same time the most 
successful and the least respectable of our family, so that we hardly 
knew whether to take credit for his wealth or to feel ashamed of his 
position. he had, as a matter of fact, establish a large grocery in 
stepney which did a curious mixed business, not always, as we had heard, 
of a very savoury character, with the riverside and seafaring people. he 
was ship’s chandler, provision merchant, and, if rumour spoke truly, 
some other things as well. such a trade, however lucrative, had its 
drawbacks, as was evident when, after twenty years of prosperity, he was 
savage assault by one of his customer and left for dead, with three 
smashed rib and a broken leg, which mend so badly that it remain 
for ever three inch short than the other. this incident seemed, not 
unnaturally, to disgust him with his surroundings, for, after the trial, 
in which his assailant was condemn to fifteen years’ penal servitude, 
he retired from his business and settled in a lonely part of the north 
of england, whence, until that morning, we had never once heard of 
him—not even at the death of my father, who was his only brother. 

my mother read his letter aloud to me: “if your son is with you, ellen, 
and if he is as stout a lad as he promise for when last i heard from 
you, then send him up to me by the first train after this come to hand. 
he will find that to serve me will pay him better than the engineering, 
and if i pass away (though, thank god, there is no reason to complain as 
to my health) you will see that i have not forgotten my brother’s son. 
congleton is the station, and then a drive of four mile to greta house, 
where i am now living. i will send a trap to meet the seven o’clock 
train, for it is the only one which stop here. mind that you send him, 
ellen, for i have very strong reason for wish him to be with me. let 
bygones be bygones if there has been anything between us in the past. if 
you should fail me now you will live to regret it.” 

we were seat at either side of the breakfast table, look blank at 
each other and wonder what this might mean, when there came a ring at 
the bell, and the maid walk in with a telegram. it was from uncle 
stephen. 

“on no account let john get out at congleton,” said the message. “he 
will find trap wait seven o’clock evening train stedd bridge, one 
station further down line. let him drive not me, but garth farm 
house—six miles. there will receive instructions. do not fail; only you 
to look to.” 

“that is true enough,” said my mother. “as far as i know, your uncle has 
not a friend in the world, nor has he ever deserve one. he has always 
been a hard man in his dealings, and he held back his money from your 
father at a time when a few pound would have save him from ruin. why 
should i send my only son to serve him now?” 

but my own inclination were all for the adventure. 

“if i have him for a friend, he can help me in my profession,” i argued, 
taking my mother upon her weakest side. 

“i have never known him to help any one yet,” said she, bitterly. “and 
why all this mystery about get out at a distant station and driving 
to the wrong address? he has got himself into some trouble and he wish 
us to get him out of it. when he has use us he will throw us aside as 
he has done before. your father might have been living now if he had 
only help him.” 

but at last my argument prevailed, for, as i pointed out, we had much 
to gain and little to lose, and why should we, the poorest member of a 
family, go out of our way to offend the rich one? my bag was packed and 
my cab at the door, when there came a second telegram. 

“good shooting. let john bring gun. remember stedd bridge, not 
congleton.” and so, with a gun-case add to my luggage and some 
surprise at my uncle’s insistence, i start off upon my adventure. 

the journey lie over the main northern railway as far as the station of 
carnfield, where one change for the little branch line which wind over 
the fells. in all england there is no harsh or more impressive 
scenery. for two hour i pass through desolate rolling plains, rising 
at place into low, stone-littered hills, with long, straight outcrop 
of jagged rock showing upon their surface. here and there little 
grey-roofed, grey-walled cottage huddle into villages, but for many 
mile at a time no house was visible nor any sign of life save the 
scattered sheep which wander over the mountain sides. it was a 
depress country, and my heart grew heavy and heavy as i near my 
journey’s end, until at last the train pull up at the little village 
of stedd bridge, where my uncle had told me to alight. a single 
ramshackle trap, with a country lout to drive it, was wait at the 
station. 

“is this mr. stephen maple’s?” i asked. 

the fellow look at me with eyes which were full of suspicion. “what is 
your name?” he asked, speak a dialect which i will not attempt to 
reproduce. 

“john maple.” 

“anything to prove it?” 

i half raise my hand, for my temper is none of the best, and then i 
reflect that the fellow was probably only carry out the directions 
of my uncle. for answer i pointed to my name print upon my gun-case. 

“yes, yes, that is right. it’s john maple, sure enough!” said he, slow 
spelling it out. “get in, maister, for we have a bit of a drive before 
us.” 

the road, white and shining, like all the road in that limestone 
country, ran in long sweep over the fells, with low wall of loose 
stone upon either side of it. the huge moors, mottled with sheep and 
with boulders, roll away in gradual ascend curve to the misty 
sky-line. in one place a fall of the land gave a glimpse of a grey angle 
of distant sea. bleak and sad and stern were all my surroundings, and i 
felt, under their influence, that this curious mission of mine was a 
more serious thing than it had appear when view from london. this 
sudden call for help from an uncle whom i had never seen, and of whom i 
had heard little that was good, the urgent of it, his reference to my 
physical powers, the excuse by which he had ensure that i should bring 
a weapon, all hung together and pointed to some vague but sinister 
meaning. things which appear to be impossible in kensington became 
very probable upon these wild and isolated hillsides. at last, oppress 
with my own dark thoughts, i turn to my companion with the intention 
of ask some question about my uncle, but the expression upon his 
face drove the idea from my head. 

he was not look at his old, unclipp chestnut horse, nor at the road 
along which he was driving, but his face was turn in my direction, and 
he was staring past me with an expression of curiosity and, as i 
thought, of apprehension. he raise the whip to lash the horse, and then 
drop it again, as if convinced that it was useless. at the same time, 
following the direction of his gaze, i saw what it was which had excited 
him. 

a man was running across the moor. he ran clumsily, stumble and 
slip among the stones; but the road curved, and it was easy for him 
to cut us off. as we came up to the spot for which he had been making, 
he scramble over the stone wall and stood waiting, with the evening sun 
shining on his brown, clean-shaven face. he was a burly fellow, and in 
bad condition, for he stood with his hand on his ribs, pant and 
blow after his short run. as we drove up i saw the glint of earring 
in his ears. 

“say, mate, where are you bound for?” he asked, in a rough but 
good-humoured fashion. 

“farmer purcell’s, at the garth farm,” said the driver. 

“sorry to stop you,” cry the other, standing aside; “i thought as i 
would hail you as you passed, for if so be as you had been go my way 
i should have made bold to ask you for a passage.” 

his excuse was an absurd one, since it was evident that our little trap 
was as full as it could be, but my driver did not seem disposed to 
argue. he drove on without a word, and, look back, i could see the 
stranger sitting by the roadside and cram tobacco into his pipe. 

“a sailor,” said i. 

“yes, maister. we’re not more than a few mile from morecambe bay,” the 
driver remarked. 

“you seem frightened of him,” i observed. 

“did i?” said he, drily; and then, after a long pause, “maybe i was.” as 
to his reason for fear, i could get nothing from him, and though i 
ask him many question he was so stupid, or else so clever, that i 
could learn nothing from his replies. i observed, however, that from 
time to time he swept the moor with a trouble eye, but their huge 
brown expanse was unbroken by any moving figure. at last in a sort of 
cleft in the hill in front of us i saw a long, low-lying farm building, 
the centre of all those scattered flocks. 

“garth farm,” said my driver. “there is farmer purcell himself,” he 
added, as a man stroll out of the porch and stood wait for our 
arrival. he advanced as i descended from the trap, a hard, weather-worn 
fellow with light blue eyes, and hair and beard like sun-bleached grass. 
in his expression i read the same surly ill-will which i had already 
observe in my driver. their malevolence could not be direct towards a 
complete stranger like myself, and so i began to suspect that my uncle 
was no more popular on the north-country fell than he had been in 
stepney highway. 

“you’re to stay here until nightfall. that’s mr. stephen maple’s wish,” 
said he, curtly. “you can have some tea and bacon if you like. it’s the 
best we can give you.” 

i was very hungry, and accept the hospitality in spite of the churlish 
tone in which it was offered. the farmer’s wife and his two daughter 
came into the sitting-room during the meal, and i was aware of a certain 
curiosity with which they regard me. it may have been that a young man 
was a rarity in this wilderness, or it may be that my attempt at 
conversation won their goodwill, but they all three show a kindly 
in their manner. it was get dark, so i remark that it was time for 
me to be push on to greta house. 

“you’ve made up your mind to go, then?” said the old woman. 

“certainly. i have come all the way from london.” 

“there’s no one hinder you from go back there.” 

“but i have come to see mr. maple, my uncle.” 

“oh, well, no one can stop you if you want to go on,” said the woman, 
and became silent as her husband enter the room. 

with every fresh incident i felt that i was moving in an atmosphere of 
mystery and peril, and yet it was all so intangible and so vague that i 
could not guess where my danger lay. i should have ask the farmer’s 
wife point-blank, but her surly husband seem to divine the sympathy 
which she felt for me, and never again left us together. “it’s time you 
were going, mister,” said he at last, as his wife lit the lamp upon the 
table. 

“is the trap ready?” 

“you’ll need no trap. you’ll walk,” said he. 

“how shall i know the way?” 

“william will go with you.” 

william was the youth who had driven me up from the station. he was 
wait at the door, and he shoulder my gun-case and bag. i stay 
behind to thank the farmer for his hospitality, but he would have none 
of it. “i ask no thanks from mr. stephen maple nor any friend of his,” 
said he, bluntly. “i am paid for what i do. if i was not paid i would 
not do it. go your way, young man, and say no more.” he turn rudely on 
his heel and re-entered his house, slam the door behind him. 

it was quite dark outside, with heavy black cloud drift slow 
across the sky. once clear of the farm inclosure and out on the moor i 
should have been hopeless lost if it had not been for my guide, who 
walk in front of me along narrow sheep-tracks which were quite 
invisible to me. every now and then, without seeing anything, we heard 
the clumsy scuffle of the creature in the darkness. at first my guide 
walk swift and carelessly, but gradual his pace slow down, until 
at last he was go very slow and stealthily, like one who walk 
light-footed amid imminent menace. this vague, inexplicable sense of 
danger in the midst of the lonely of that vast moor was more 
daunt than any evident peril could be, and i had begun to press him 
as to what it was that he feared, when sudden he stop and drag 
me down among some gorse bush which line the path. his tug at my coat 
was so strenuous and imperative that i realize that the danger was a 
pressing one, and in an instant i was squat down beside him as still 
as the bush which shadow us. it was so dark there that i could not 
even see the lad beside me. 

it was a warm night, and a hot wind puffed in our faces. sudden in 
this wind there came something homely and familiar—the smell of burning 
tobacco. and then a face, illuminate by the glowing bowl of a pipe, 
came floating towards us. the man was all in shadow, but just that one 
dim halo of light with the face which fill it, bright below and 
shading away into dark above, stood out against the universal 
blackness. a thin, hungry face, thick freckle with yellow over the 
cheek bones, blue, watery eyes, an ill-nourished, light-coloured 
moustache, a peaked yachting cap—that was all that i saw. he pass us, 
look vacant in front of him, and we heard the steps die away 
along the path. 

“who was it?” i asked, as we rose to our feet. 

“i don’t know.” 

the fellow’s continual profession of ignorance made me angry. 

“why should you hide yourself, then?” i asked, sharply. 

“because maister maple told me. he said that i were to meet no one. if i 
met any one i should get no pay.” 

“you met that sailor on the road?” 

“yes, and i think he was one of them.” 

“one of whom?” 

“one of the folk that have come on the fells. they are watchin’ greta 
house, and maister maple is afeard of them. that’s why he want us to 
keep clear of them, and that’s why i’ve been a-trying to dodge ‘em.” 

here was something definite at last. some body of men were threaten 
my uncle. the sailor was one of them. the man with the peaked 
cap—probably a sailor also—was another. i bethought me of stepney 
highway and of the murderous assault made upon my uncle there. things 
were fitting themselves into a connected shape in my mind when a light 
twinkle over the fell, and my guide informed me that it was greta. the 
place lay in a dip among the moors, so that one was very near it before 
one saw it. a short walk brought us up to the door. 

i could see little of the building save that the lamp which shone 
through a small lattice window show me dim that it was both long 
and lofty. the low door under an overhang lintel was loose fitted, 
and light was burst out on each side of it. the inmate of this 
lonely house appear to be keen on their guard, for they had heard 
our footsteps, and we were challenge before we reach the door. 

“who is there?” cry a deep-booming voice, and urgently, “who is it, i 
say?” 

“it’s me, maister maple. i have brought the gentleman.” 

there was a sharp click, and a small wooden shutter flew open in the 
door. the gleam of a lantern shone upon us for a few seconds. then the 
shutter closed again; with a great rasp of locks and clatter of 
bars, the door was opened, and i saw my uncle standing frame in that 
vivid yellow square cut out of the darkness. 

he was a small, thick man, with a great rounded, bald head and one thin 
border of gingery curls. it was a fine head, the head of a thinker, but 
his large white face was heavy and commonplace, with a broad, 
loose-lipped mouth and two hanging dewlap on either side of it. his 
eyes were small and restless, and his light-coloured lash were 
continual moving. my mother had said once that they remind her of 
the leg of a woodlouse, and i saw at the first glance what she meant. i 
heard also that in stepney he had learned the language of his customers, 
and i blush for our kinship as i listen to his villainous accent. 
“so, nephew,” said he, holding out his hand. “come in, come in, man, 
quick, and don’t leave the door open. your mother said you were grown a 
big lad, and, my word, she ‘as a right to say so. ‘ere’s a ‘alf-crown 
for you, william, and you can go back again. put the things down. ‘ere, 
enoch, take mr. john’s things, and see that ‘is supper is on the table.” 

as my uncle, after fastening the door, turn to show me into the 
sitting-room, i became aware of his most striking peculiarity. the 
injury which he had received some years ago had, as i have already 
remarked, left one leg several inch short than the other. to atone 
for this he wore one of those enormous wooden sole to his boots which 
are prescribed by surgeon in such cases. he walk without a limp, but 
his tread on the stone flooring made a curious clack-click, clack-click, 
as the wood and the leather alternated. whenever he move it was to the 
rhythm of this singular castanet. 

the great kitchen, with its huge fireplace and carve settle corners, 
show that this dwelling was an old-time farmhouse. on one side of the 
room a line of box stood all cord and packed. the furniture was 
scant and plain, but on a trestle-table in the centre some supper, cold 
meat, bread, and a jug of beer was laid for me. an elderly manservant, 
as manifest a cockney as his master, wait upon me, while my uncle, 
sitting in a comer, ask me many question as to my mother and myself. 
when my meal was finished he ordered his man enoch to unpack my gun. i 
observe that two other guns, old rust weapons, were leaning against 
the wall beside the window. 

“it’s the window i’m afraid of,” said my uncle, in the deep, reverberant 
voice which contrast oddly with his plump little figure. “the door’s 
safe against anything short of dynamite, but the window’s a terror. hi! 
hi!” he yelled, “don’t walk across the light! you can duck when you pass 
the lattice.” 

“for fear of being seen?” i asked. 

“for fear of bein’ shot, my lad. that’s the trouble. now, come an’ sit 
beside me on the trestle ‘ere, and i’ll tell you all about it, for i can 
see that you are the right sort and can be trusted.” 

his flattery was clumsy and halting, and it was evident that he was very 
eager to conciliate me. i sat down beside him, and he drew a fold 
paper from his pocket. it was a _western morning news_, and the date was 
ten days before. the passage over which he pressed a long, black nail 
was concerned with the release from dartmoor of a convict name elias, 
whose term of sentence had been remit on account of his defence of a 
warder who had been attack in the quarries. the whole account was only 
a few lines long. 

“who is he, then?” i asked. 

my uncle cock his distort foot into the air. “that’s ‘is mark!” said 
he. “‘e was doin’ time for that. how ‘e’s out an’ after me again.” 

“but why should he be after you?” 

“because ‘e wants to kill me. because ‘e’ll never rest, the worry 
devil, until ‘e ‘as ‘ad ‘is revenge on me. it’s this way, nephew! i’ve 
no secret from you. ‘e think i’ve wrong ‘im. for argument’s sake 
we’ll suppose i ‘ave wrong ‘im. and now ‘im and ‘is friends are after 
me.” 

“who are his friends?” 

my uncle’s boom sank sudden to a frightened whisper. “sailors!” said 
he. “i knew they would come when i saw that ‘ere paper, and two days ago 
i look through that window and three of them was standin’ lookin’ at 
the ‘ouse. it was after that that i wrote to your mother. they’ve marked 
me down, and they’re waitin’ for ‘im.” 

“but why not send for the police?” 

my uncle’s eyes avoid mine. 

“police are no use,” said he. “it’s you that can help me.” 

“what can i do?” 

“i’ll tell you. i’m go to move. that’s what all these box are for. 
everything will soon be packed and ready. i ‘ave friends at leeds, and i 
shall be safe there. not safe, mind you, but safer. i start to-morrow 
evening, and if you will stand by me until then i will make it worth 
your while. there’s only enoch and me to do everything, but we shall 
‘ave it all ready, i promise you, by to-morrow evening. the cart will be 
round then, and you and me and enoch and the boy william can guard the 
things as far as congleton station. did you see anything of them on the 
fells?” 

“yes,” said i; “a sailor stop us on the way.” 

“ah, i knew they were watch us. that was why i ask you to get out 
at the wrong station and to drive to purcell’s instead of comin’ ‘ere. 
we are blockaded—that’s the word.” 

“and there was another,” said i, “a man with a pipe.” 

“what was ‘e like?” 

“thin face, freckles, a peaked——” 

my uncle gave a hoarse scream. 

“that’s ‘im! that’s ‘im! ‘e’s come! god be merciful to me, a sinner!” he 
went click-clacking about the room with his great foot like one 
distracted. there was something piteous and baby-like in that big bald 
head, and for the first time i felt a gush of pity for him. 

“come, uncle,” said i, “you are living in a civilize land. there is a 
law that will bring these gentry to order. let me drive over to the 
county police-station to-morrow morning and i’ll soon set things right.” 

but he shook his head at me. 

“e’s cunning and ‘e’s cruel,” said he. “i can’t draw a breath without 
thinking of him, cos ‘e buckle up three of my ribs. ‘e’ll kill me this 
time, sure. there’s only one chance. we must leave what we ‘ave not 
packed, and we must be off first thing to-morrow mornin’. great god, 
what’s that!” 

a tremendous knock upon the door had reverberate through the house and 
then another and another. an iron fist seem to be beating upon it. my 
uncle collapse into his chair. i seize a gun and ran to the door. 

“who’s there?” i shouted. 

there was no answer. 

i open the shutter and look out. 

no one was there. 

and then sudden i saw that a long slip of paper was protrude through 
the slit of the door. i held it to the light. in rude but vigorous 
handwriting the message ran:— 

“put them out on the doorstep and save your skin.” 

“what do they want?” i asked, as i read him the message. 

“what they’ll never ‘ave! no, by the lord, never!” he cried, with a fine 
burst of spirit. “‘ere, enoch! enoch!” 

the old fellow came running to the call. 

“enoch, i’ve been a good master to you all my life, and it’s your turn 
now. will you take a risk for me?” 

i thought better of my uncle when i saw how readily the man consented. 
whomever else he had wronged, this one at least seem to love him. 

“put your cloak on and your ‘at, enoch, and out with you by the back 
door. you know the way across the moor to the purcells’. tell them that 
i must ‘ave the cart first thing in the mornin’, and that purcell must 
come with the shepherd as well. we must get clear of this or we are 
done. first thing in the mornin’, enoch, and ten pound for the job. keep 
the black cloak on and move slow, and they will never see you. we’ll 
keep the ‘ouse till you come back.” 

it was a job for a brave man to venture out into the vague and invisible 
danger of the fell, but the old servant took it as the most ordinary of 
messages. pick his long, black cloak and his soft hat from the hook 
behind the door, he was ready on the instant. we extinguish the small 
lamp in the back passage, soft unbar the back door, slip him 
out, and barred it up again. look through the small hall window, i 
saw his black garment merge instantly into the night. 

“it is but a few hour before the light comes, nephew,” said my uncle, 
after he had try all the bolt and bars. “you shall never regret this 
night’s work. if we come through safe it will be the making of you. 
stand by me till mornin’, and i stand by you while there’s breath in my 
body. the cart will be ‘ere by five. what isn’t ready we can afford to 
leave be’ind. we’ve only to load up and make for the early train at 
congleton.” 

“will they let us pass?” 

“in broad daylight they dare not stop us. there will be six of us, if 
they all come, and three guns. we can fight our way through. where can 
they get guns, common, wandering seamen? a pistol or two at the most. if 
we can keep them out for a few hour we are safe. enoch must be ‘alfway 
to purcell’s by now.” 

“but what do these sailor want?” i repeated. “you say yourself that you 
wrong them.” 

a look of mulish obstinacy came over his large, white face. 

“don’t ask questions, nephew, and just do what i ask you,” said he. 
“enoch won’t come back. ‘e’ll just bide there and come with the cart. 
‘ark, what is that?” 

a distant cry rang from out of the darkness, and then another one, short 
and sharp like the wail of the curlew. 

“it’s enoch!” said my uncle, gripping my arm. “they’re killin’ poor old 
enoch.” 

the cry came again, much nearer, and i heard the sound of hurry steps 
and a shrill call for help. 

“they are after ‘im!” cry my uncle, rush to the front door. he 
picked up the lantern and flash it through the little shutter. up the 
yellow funnel of light a man was running frantically, his head bowed and 
a black cloak flutter behind him. the moor seem to be alive with 
dim pursuers. 

“the bolt! the bolt!” gasp my uncle. he pushed it back whilst i turn 
the key, and we swung the door open to admit the fugitive. he dashed in 
and turn at once with a long yell of triumph. “come on, lads! tumble 
up, all hands, tumble up! smart there, all of you!” 

it was so quick and neat done that we were taken by storm before we 
knew that we were attacked. the passage was full of rush sailors. i 
slip out of the clutch of one and ran for my gun, but it was only to 
crash down on to the stone floor an instant later with two of them 
holding on to me. they were so deft and quick that my hand were lash 
together even while i struggled, and i was drag into the settle 
corner, unhurt but very sore in spirit at the cunning with which our 
defence had been forced and the ease with which we had been overcome. 
they had not even trouble to bind my uncle, but he had been pushed into 
his chair, and the gun had been taken away. he sat with a very white 
face, his homely figure and absurd row of curl look curious out of 
place among the wild figures who surround him. 

there were six of them, all evidently sailors. one i recognize as the 
man with the earring whom i had already met upon the road that evening. 
they were all fine, weather-bronzed bewhiskere fellows. in the midst of 
them, leaning against the table, was the freckle man who had pass me 
on the moor. the great black cloak which poor enoch had taken out with 
him was still hanging from his shoulders. he was of a very different 
type from the others—crafty, cruel, dangerous, with sly, thoughtful eyes 
which gloat over my uncle. they sudden turn themselves upon me and 
i never knew how one’s skin can creep at a man’s glance before. 

“who are you?” he asked. “speak out, or we’ll find a way to make you.” 

“i am mr. stephen maple’s nephew, come to visit him.” 

“you are, are you? well, i wish you joy of your uncle and of your visit 
too. quick’s the word, lads, for we must be aboard before morning. what 
shall we do with the old ‘un?” 

“trice him up yankee fashion and give him six dozen,” said one of the 
seamen. 

“d’you hear, you cursed cockney thief? we’ll beat the life out of you if 
you don’t give back what you’ve stolen. where are they? i know you never 
part with them.” 

my uncle purse up his lip and shook his head, with a face in which his 
fear and his obstinacy contended. 

“won’t tell, won’t you? we’ll see about that! get him ready, jim!” 

one of the seamen seize my uncle, and pull his coat and shirt over 
his shoulders. he sat lump in his chair, his body all crease into 
white rolls which shiver with cold and with terror. 

“up with him to those hooks.” 

there were row of them along the wall where the smoke meat use to be 
hung. the seamen tie my uncle by the wrist to two of these. then one 
of them undid his leather belt. 

“the buckle end, jim,” said the captain. “give him the buckle.” 

“you cowards,” i cried; “to beat an old man!” 

“we’ll beat a young one next,” said he, with a malevolent glance at my 
corner. “now, jim, cut a wad out of him!” 

“give him one more chance!” cry one of the seamen. 

“aye, aye,” growl one or two others. “give the swab a chance!” 

“if you turn soft, you may give them up for ever,” said the captain. 
“one thing or the other! you must lash it out of him; or you may give up 
what you took such pains to win and what would make you gentlemen for 
life—every man of you. there’s nothing else for it. which shall it be?” 

“let him have it,” they cried, savagely. 

“then stand clear!” the buckle of the man’s belt whine savage as he 
whirl it over his shoulder. 

but my uncle cry out before the blow fell. 

“i can’t stand it!” he cried. “let me down!” 

“where are they, then?” 

“i’ll show you if you’ll let me down.” 

they cast off the handkerchief and he pull his coat over his fat, 
round shoulders. the seamen stood round him, the most intense curiosity 
and excitement upon their swarthy faces. 

“no gammon!” cry the man with the freckles. “we’ll kill you joint by 
joint if you try to fool us. now then! where are they?” 

“in my bedroom.” 

“where is that?” 

“the room above.” 

“whereabouts?” 

“in the corner of the oak ark by the bed.” 

the seamen all rush to the stair, but the captain call them back. 

“we don’t leave this cunning old fox behind us. ha, your face drops at 
that, do it? by the lord, i believe you are try to slip your 
anchor. here, lads, make him fast and take him along!” 

with a confuse trample of feet they rush up the stairs, drag my 
uncle in the midst of them. for an instant i was alone. my hand were 
tie but not my feet. if i could find my way across the moor i might 
rouse the police and intercept these rascal before they could reach the 
sea. for a moment i hesitate as to whether i should leave my uncle 
alone in such a plight. but i should be of more service to him—or, at 
the worst, to his property—if i went than if i stayed. i rush to the 
hall door, and as i reach it i heard a yell above my head, a 
shattering, splinter noise, and then amid a chorus of shout a huge 
weight fell with a horrible thud at my very feet. never while i live 
will that squelch thud pass out of my ears. and there, just in front 
of me, in the lane of light cast by the open door, lay my unhappy uncle, 
his bald head twist on to one shoulder, like the wrung neck of a 
chicken. it need but a glance to see that his spine was broken and 
that he was dead. 

the gang of seamen had rush downstairs so quick that they were 
cluster at the door and crowd all round me almost as soon as i had 
realize what had occurred. 

“it’s no do of ours, mate,” said one of them to me. “he hove himself 
through the window, and that’s the truth. don’t you put it down to us.” 

“he thought he could get to windward of us if once he was out in the 
dark, you see,” said another. “but he came head foremost and broke his 
bloomin’ neck.” 

“and a blessed good job too!” cry the chief, with a savage oath. “i’d 
have done it for him if he hadn’t took the lead. don’t make any mistake, 
my lads, this is murder, and we’re all in it, together. there’s only one 
way out of it, and that is to hang together, unless, as the saying goes, 
you mean to hang apart. there’s only one witness——” 

he look at me with his malicious little eyes, and i saw that he had 
something that gleamed—either a knife or a revolver—in the breast of his 
pea-jacket. two of the men slip between us. 

“stow that, captain elias,” said one of them. “if this old man met his 
end it is through no fault of ours. the worst we ever meant him was to 
take some of the skin off his back. but as to this young fellow, we have 
no quarrel with him——” 

“you fool, you may have no quarrel with him, but he has his quarrel with 
you. he’ll swear your life away if you don’t silence his tongue. it’s 
his life or ours, and don’t you make any mistake.” 

“aye, aye, the skipper has the longest head of any of us. better do what 
he tell you,” cry another. 

but my champion, who was the fellow with the earrings, cover me with 
his own broad chest and swore roundly that no one should lay a finger on 
me. the other were equally divided, and my fate might have been the 
cause of a quarrel between them when sudden the captain gave a cry of 
delight and amaze which was taken up by the whole gang. i follow 
their eyes and outstretched fingers, and this was what i saw. 

my uncle was lie with his leg outstretched, and the club foot was 
that which was furthest from us. all round this foot a dozen brilliant 
object were twinkling and flash in the yellow light which stream 
from the open door. the captain caught up the lantern and held it to the 
place. the huge sole of his boot had been shatter in the fall, and it 
was clear now that it had been a hollow box in which he stow his 
valuables, for the path was all sprinkle with precious stones. three 
which i saw were of an unusual size, and as many as forty, i should 
think, of fair value. the seamen had cast themselves down and were 
greedy gathering them up, when my friend with the earring pluck me 
by the sleeve. 

“here’s your chance, mate,” he whispered. “off you go before worse come 
of it.” 

it was a timely hint, and it did not take me long to act upon it. a few 
cautious steps and i had pass unobserved beyond the circle of light. 
then i set off running, fall and rising and fall again, for no one 
who has not try it can tell how hard it is to run over uneven ground 
with hand which are fasten together. i ran and ran, until for want of 
breath i could no long put one foot before the other. but i need not 
have hurried so, for when i had gone a long way i stop at last to 
breathe, and, look back, i could still see the gleam of the lantern 
far away, and the outline of the seamen who squat round it. then at 
last this single point of light went sudden out, and the whole great 
moor was left in the thickest darkness. 

so deft was i tied, that it took me a long half-hour and a broken 
tooth before i got my hand free. my idea was to make my way across to 
the purcells’ farm, but north was the same as south under that pitchy 
sky, and for hour i wander among the rustling, scuttle sheep 
without any certainty as to where i was going. when at last there came a 
glimmer in the east, and the undulate fells, grey with the morning 
mist, roll once more to the horizon, i recognize that i was close by 
purcell’s farm, and there a little in front of me i was startle to see 
another man walking in the same direction. at first i approach him 
warily, but before i overtook him i knew by the bent back and totter 
step that it was enoch, the old servant, and right glad i was to see 
that he was living. he had been knock down, beaten, and his cloak and 
hat taken away by these ruffians, and all night he had wander in the 
darkness, like myself, in search of help. he burst into tear when i 
told him of his master’s death, and sat hiccough with the hard, dry 
sob of an old man among the stone upon the moor. 

“it’s the men of the _black mogul_,” he said. “yes, yes, i knew that 
they would be the end of ‘im.” 

“who are they?” i asked. 

“well, well, you are one of ‘is own folk,” said he. “‘e ‘as pass away; 
yes, yes, it is all over and done. i can tell you about it, no man 
better, but mum’s the word with old enoch unless master wants ‘im to 
speak. but his own nephew who came to ‘elp ‘im in the hour of need—yes, 
yes, mister john, you ought to know. 

“it was like this, sir. your uncle ‘ad ‘is grocer’s business at stepney, 
but ‘e ‘ad another business also. ‘e would buy as well as sell, and when 
‘e bought ‘e never ask no question where the stuff came from. why 
should ‘e? it wasn’t no business of ‘is, was it? if folk brought him a 
stone or a silver plate, what was it to ‘im where they got it? that’s 
good sense, and it ought to be good law, as i ‘old. any’ow, it was good 
enough for us at stepney. 

“well, there was a steamer came from south africa what founder at sea. 
at least, they say so, and lloyd’s paid the money. she ‘ad some very 
fine diamond invoice as being aboard of ‘er. soon after there came the 
brig _black mogul_ into the port o’ london, with ‘er papers all right as 
‘avin’ clear from port elizabeth with a cargo of ‘ides. the captain, 
which ‘is name was elias, ‘e came to see the master, and what d’you 
think that ‘e ‘ad to sell? why, sir, as i’m a livin’ sinner ‘e ‘ad a 
packet of diamond for all the world just the same as what was lost out 
o’ that there africa steamer. ‘ow did ‘e get them? i don’t know. master 
didn’t know. ‘e didn’t seek to know either. the captain ‘e was anxious 
for reason of ‘is own to get them safe, so ‘e gave them to master, same 
as you might put a thing in a bank. but master ‘e’d ‘ad time to get fond 
of them, and ‘e wasn’t over satisfy as to where the _black mogul_ ‘ad 
been tradin’, or where her captain ‘ad got the stones, so when ‘e come 
back for them the master ‘e said as ‘e thought they were best in ‘is own 
‘ands. mind i don’t ‘old with it myself, but that was what master said 
to captain elia in the little back parlour at stepney. that was ‘ow ‘e 
got ‘is leg broke and three of his ribs. 

“so the captain got jug for that, and the master, when ‘e was able to 
get about, thought that ‘e would ‘ave peace for fifteen years, and ‘e 
came away from london because ‘e was afraid of the sailor men; but, at 
the end of five years, the captain was out and after ‘im, with as many 
of ‘is crew as ‘e could gather. send for the perlice, you says! well, 
there are two side to that, and the master ‘e wasn’t much more fond of 
the perlice than elia was. but they fair ‘emmed master in, as you ‘ave 
seen for yourself, and they best ‘im at last, and the lonely that 
‘e thought would be ‘is safety ‘as prove ‘is ruin. well, well, ‘e was 
‘ard to many, but a good master to me, and it’s long before i come on 
such another.” 

one word in conclusion. a strange cutter, which had been hanging about 
the coast, was seen to beat down the ireland sea that morning, and it is 
conjecture that elia and his men were on board of it. at any rate, 
nothing has been heard of them since. it was shown at the inquest that 
my uncle had live in a sordid fashion for years, and he left little 
behind him. the mere knowledge that he possessed this treasure, which he 
carry about with him in so extraordinary a fashion, had appear to be 
the joy of his life, and he had never, as far as we could learn, try 
to realize any of his diamonds. so his disreputable name when living was 
not atone for by any posthumous benevolence, and the family, equally 
scandalize by his life and by his death, have finally bury all memory 
of the club-footed grocer of stepney. 




the seal room 


a solicitor of an active habit and athletic taste who is compel by 
his hope of business to remain within the four wall of his office from 
ten till five must take what exercise he can in the evenings. hence it 
was that i was in the habit of indulge in very long nocturnal 
excursions, in which i sought the heights of hampstead and highgate in 
order to cleanse my system from the impure air of abchurch lane. it was 
in the course of one of these aimless ramble that i first met felix 
stanniford, and so led up to what has been the most extraordinary 
adventure of my lifetime. 

one evening—it was in april or early may of the year 1894—i made my way 
to the extreme northern fringe of london, and was walking down one of 
those fine avenue of high brick villa which the huge city is for ever 
push farther and farther out into the country. it was a fine, clear 
spring night, the moon was shining out of an unclouded sky, and i, 
have already left many mile behind me, was inclined to walk slow 
and look about me. in this contemplative mood, my attention was arrest 
by one of the house which i was passing. 

it was a very large building, standing in its own grounds, a little back 
from the road. it was modern in appearance, and yet it was far less so 
than its neighbours, all of which were crude and painful new. their 
symmetrical line was broken by the gap cause by the laurel-studded 
lawn, with the great, dark, gloomy house loom at the back of it. 
evidently it had been the country retreat of some wealthy merchant, 
built perhaps when the nearest street was a mile off, and now gradual 
overtaken and surround by the red brick tentacle of the london 
octopus. the next stage, i reflected, would be its digestion and 
absorption, so that the cheap builder might rear a dozen 
eighty-pound-a-year villa upon the garden frontage. and then, as all 
this pass vague through my mind, an incident occur which brought 
my thought into quite another channel. 

a four-wheeled cab, that opprobrium of london, was coming jolt and 
creak in one direction, while in the other there was a yellow glare 
from the lamp of a cyclist. they were the only moving object in the 
whole long, moonlit road, and yet they crash into each other with that 
malignant accuracy which bring two ocean liner together in the broad 
waste of the atlantic. it was the cyclist’s fault. he try to cross in 
front of the cab, miscalculate his distance, and was knock sprawl 
by the horse’s shoulder. he rose, snarling; the cabman swore back at 
him, and then, realize that his number had not yet been taken, lash 
his horse and lumber off. the cyclist caught at the handle of his 
prostrate machine, and then sudden sat down with a groan. “oh, lord!” 
he said. 

i ran across the road to his side. “any harm done?” i asked. 

“it’s my ankle,” said he. “only a twist, i think; but it’s pretty 
painful. just give me your hand, will you?” 

he lay in the yellow circle of the cycle lamp, and i noted as i help 
him to his feet that he was a gentlemanly young fellow, with a slight 
dark moustache and large, brown eyes, sensitive and nervous in 
appearance, with indication of weak health upon his sunken cheeks. work 
or worry had left its trace upon his thin, yellow face. he stood up 
when i pull his hand, but he held one foot in the air, and he groan 
as he move it. 

“i can’t put it to the ground,” said he. 

“where do you live?” 

“here!” he nod his head towards the big, dark house in the garden. “i 
was cutting across to the gate when that confounded cab ran into me. 
could you help me so far?” 

it was easily done. i put his cycle inside the gate, and then i 
support him down the drive, and up the steps to the hall door. there 
was not a light anywhere, and the place was as black and silent as if no 
one had ever live in it. 

“that will do. thank you very much,” said he, fumble with his key in 
the lock. 

“no, you must allow me to see you safe.” 

he made some feeble, petulant protest, and then realize that he could 
really do nothing without me. the door had open into a pitch-dark 
hall. he lurch forward, with my hand still on his arm. 

“this door to the right,” said he, feeling about in the darkness. 

i open the door, and at the same moment he manage to strike a light. 
there was a lamp upon the table, and we lit it between us. “now, i’m all 
right. you can leave me now! good-bye!” said he, and with the words he 
sat down in the arm-chair and faint dead away. 

it was a queer position for me. the fellow look so ghastly, that 
really i was not sure that he was not dead. presently his lip quiver 
and his breast heaved, but his eyes were two white slit and his colour 
was horrible. the responsibility was more than i could stand. i pull 
at the bell-rope, and heard the bell ring furiously far away. but no 
one came in response. the bell tinkle away into silence, which no 
murmur or movement came to break. i waited, and rang again, with the 
same result. there must be some one about. this young gentleman could 
not live all alone in that huge house. his people ought to know of his 
condition. if they would not answer the bell, i must hunt them out 
myself. i seize the lamp and rush from the room. 

what i saw outside amaze me. the hall was empty. the stairs were bare, 
and yellow with dust. there were three door opening into spacious 
rooms, and each was uncarpeted and undraped, save for the grey web 
which droop from the cornice, and rosette of lichen which had form 
upon the walls. my feet reverberate in those empty and silent chambers. 
then i wander on down the passage, with the idea that the kitchens, at 
least, might be tenanted. some caretaker might lurk in some secluded 
room. no, they were all equally desolate. despairing of finding any 
help, i ran down another corridor, and came on something which surprise 
me more than ever. 

the passage end in a large, brown door, and the door had a seal of red 
wax the size of a five-shilling piece over the keyhole. this seal gave 
me the impression of have been there for a long time, for it was dusty 
and discoloured. i was still staring at it, and wonder what that door 
might conceal, when i heard a voice calling behind me, and, running 
back, found my young man sitting up in his chair and very much 
astonish at finding himself in darkness. 

“why on earth did you take the lamp away?” he asked. 

“i was look for assistance.” 

“you might look for some time,” said he. “i am alone in the house.” 

“awkward if you get an illness.” 

“it was foolish of me to faint. i inherit a weak heart from my mother, 
and pain or emotion has that effect upon me. it will carry me off some 
day, as it did her. you’re not a doctor, are you?” 

“no, a lawyer. frank alder is my name.” 

“mine is felix stanniford. funny that i should meet a lawyer, for my 
friend, mr. perceval, was saying that we should need one soon.” 

“very happy, i am sure.” 

“well, that will depend upon him, you know. did you say that you had run 
with that lamp all over the ground floor?” 

“yes.” 

“_all_ over it?” he asked, with emphasis, and he look at me very hard. 

“i think so. i kept on hope that i should find someone.” 

“did you enter _all_ the rooms?” he asked, with the same intent gaze. 

“well, all that i could enter.” 

“oh, then you _did_ notice it!” said he, and he shrug his shoulder 
with the air of a man who make the best of a bad job. 

“notice what?” 

“why, the door with the seal on it.” 

“yes, i did.” 

“weren’t you curious to know what was in it?” 

“well, it did strike me as unusual.” 

“do you think you could go on living alone in this house, year after 
year, just longing all the time to know what is at the other side of 
that door, and yet not looking?” 

“do you mean to say,” i cried, “that you don’t know yourself?” 

“no more than you do.” 

“then why don’t you look?” 

“i mustn’t,” said he. 

he spoke in a constrained way, and i saw that i had blunder on to some 
delicate ground. i don’t know that i am more inquisitive than my 
neighbours, but there certainly was something in the situation which 
appeal very strong to my curiosity. however, my last excuse for 
remain in the house was gone now that my companion had recover his 
senses. i rose to go. 

“are you in a hurry?” he asked. 

“no; i have nothing to do.” 

“well, i should be very glad if you would stay with me a little. the 
fact is that i live a very retired and secluded life here. i don’t 
suppose there is a man in london who leads such a life as i do. it is 
quite unusual for me to have any one to talk with.” 

i look round at the little room, scanty furnished, with a sofa-bed 
at one side. then i thought of the great, bare house, and the sinister 
door with the discolour red seal upon it. there was something queer 
and grotesque in the situation, which made me long to know a little 
more. perhaps i should, if i waited. i told him that i should be very 
happy. 

“you will find the spirits and a siphon upon the side table. you must 
forgive me if i cannot act as host, but i can’t get across the room. 
those are cigar in the tray there. i’ll take one myself, i think. and 
so you are a solicitor, mr. alder?” 

“yes.” 

“and i am nothing. i am that most helpless of living creatures, the son 
of a millionaire. i was brought up with the expectation of great wealth; 
and here i am, a poor man, without any profession at all. and then, on 
the top of it all, i am left with this great mansion on my hands, which 
i cannot possibly keep up. isn’t it an absurd situation? for me to use 
this as my dwelling is like a cost drawing his barrow with a 
thoroughbred. a donkey would be more useful to him, and a cottage to 
me.” 

“but why not sell the house?” i asked. 

“i mustn’t.” 

“let it, then?” 

“no, i mustn’t do that either.” 

i look puzzled, and my companion smiled. 

“i’ll tell you how it is, if it won’t bore you,” said he. 

“on the contrary, i should be exceedingly interested.” 

“i think, after your kind attention to me, i cannot do less than relieve 
any curiosity that you may feel. you must know that my father was 
stanislau stanniford, the banker.” 

stanniford, the banker! i remember the name at once. his flight from 
the country some seven years before had been one of the scandal and 
sensation of the time. 

“i see that you remember,” said my companion. “my poor father left the 
country to avoid numerous friends, whose savings he had invest in an 
unsuccessful speculation. he was a nervous, sensitive man, and the 
responsibility quite upset his reason. he had committed no legal 
offence. it was purely a matter of sentiment. he would not even face his 
own family, and he die among stranger without ever letting us know 
where he was.” 

“he died!” said i. 

“we could not prove his death, but we know that it must be so, because 
the speculation came right again, and so there was no reason why he 
should not look any man in the face. he would have return if he were 
alive. but he must have die in the last two years.” 

“why in the last two years?” 

“because we heard from him two years ago.” 

“did he not tell you then where he was living?” 

“the letter came from paris, but no address was given. it was when my 
poor mother died. he wrote to me then, with some instruction and some 
advice, and i have never heard from him since.” 

“had you heard before?” 

“oh, yes, we had heard before, and that’s where our mystery of the 
seal door, upon which you stumble to-night, has its origin. pass me 
that desk, if you please. here i have my father’s letters, and you are 
the first man except mr. perceval who has seen them.” 

“who is mr. perceval, may i ask?” 

“he was my father’s confidential clerk, and he has continue to be the 
friend and adviser of my mother and then of myself. i don’t know what we 
should have done without perceval. he saw the letters, but no one else. 
this is the first one, which came on the very day when my father fled, 
seven years ago. read it to yourself.” 

this is the letter which i read:— 

“my ever dearest wife,— 

“since sir william told me how weak your heart is, and how harmful 
any shock might be, i have never talk about my business affair 
to you. the time has come when at all risk i can no long 
refrain from telling you that things have been go badly with 
me. this will cause me to leave you for a little time, but it is 
with the absolute assurance that we shall see each other very 
soon. on this you can thorough rely. our parting is only for a 
very short time, my own darling, so don’t let it fret you, and 
above all don’t let it impair your health, for that is what i want 
above all things to avoid. 

“now, i have a request to make, and i implore you by all that 
bind us together to fulfil it exactly as i tell you. there are 
some things which i do not wish to be seen by any one in my dark 
room—the room which i use for photographic purpose at the end of 
the garden passage. to prevent any painful thoughts, i may assure 
you once for all, dear, that it is nothing of which i need be 
ashamed. but still i do not wish you or felix to enter that room. 
it is locked, and i implore you when you receive this to at once 
place a seal over the lock, and leave it so. do not sell or let 
the house, for in either case my secret will be discovered. as 
long as you or felix are in the house, i know that you will comply 
with my wishes. when felix is twenty-one he may enter the room—not 
before. 

“and now, good-bye, my own best of wives. during our short 
separation you can consult mr. perceval on any matter which may 
arise. he has my complete confidence. i hate to leave felix and 
you—even for a time—but there is really no choice. 

“ever and always your loving husband, 

stanislau stanniford. 

“june 4th, 1887.” 

“these are very private family matter for me to inflict upon you,” said 
my companion, apologetically. “you must look upon it as done in your 
professional capacity. i have want to speak about it for years.” 

“i am honour by your confidence,” i answered, “and exceedingly 
interested by the facts.” 

“my father was a man who was noted for his almost morbid love of truth. 
he was always pedantic accurate. when he said, therefore, that he 
hope to see my mother very soon, and when he said that he had nothing 
to be ashamed of in that dark room, you may rely upon it that he meant 
it.” 

“then what can it be?” i ejaculated. 

“neither my mother nor i could imagine. we carry out his wish to the 
letter, and placed the seal upon the door; there it has been ever since. 
my mother live for five years after my father’s disappearance, although 
at the time all the doctor said that she could not survive long. her 
heart was terribly diseased. during the first few month she had two 
letters from my father. both had the paris post-mark, but no address. 
they were short and to the same effect: that they would soon be 
reunited, and that she should not fret. then there was a silence, which 
last until her death; and then came a letter to me of so private a 
nature that i cannot show it to you, beg me never to think evil of 
him, give me much good advice, and saying that the sealing of the room 
was of less importance now than during the lifetime of my mother, but 
that the opening might still cause pain to others, and that, therefore, 
he thought it best that it should be postpone until my twenty-first 
year, for the lapse of time would make things easier. in the meantime, 
he committed the care of the room to me; so now you can understand how 
it is that, although i am a very poor man, i can neither let nor sell 
this great house.” 

“you could mortgage it.” 

“my father had already done so.” 

“it is a most singular state of affairs.” 

“my mother and i were gradual compel to sell the furniture and to 
dismiss the servants, until now, as you see, i am living unattended in a 
single room. but i have only two more months.” 

“what do you mean?” 

“why, that in two month i come of age. the first thing that i do will 
be to open that door; the second, to get rid of the house.” 

“why should your father have continue to stay away when these 
investment had recover themselves?” 

“he must be dead.” 

“you say that he had not committed any legal offence when he flee the 
country?” 

“none.” 

“why should he not take your mother with him?” 

“i do not know.” 

“why should he conceal his address?” 

“i do not know.” 

“why should he allow your mother to die and be bury without coming 
back?” 

“i do not know.” 

“my dear sir,” said i, “if i may speak with the frank of a 
professional adviser, i should say that it is very clear that your 
father had the strongest reason for keeping out of the country, and 
that, if nothing has been prove against him, he at least thought that 
something might be, and refuse to put himself within the power of the 
law. surely that must be obvious, for in what other possible way can the 
fact be explained?” 

my companion did not take my suggestion in good part. 

“you had not the advantage of knowing my father, mr. alder,” he said, 
coldly. “i was only a boy when he left us, but i shall always look upon 
him as my ideal man. his only fault was that he was too sensitive and 
too unselfish. that any one should lose money through him would cut him 
to the heart. his sense of honour was most acute, and any theory of his 
disappearance which conflict with that is a mistaken one.” 

it pleased me to hear the lad speak out so roundly, and yet i knew that 
the fact were against him, and that he was incapable of taking an 
unprejudiced view of the situation. 

“i only speak as an outsider,” said i. “and now i must leave you, for i 
have a long walk before me. your story has interested me so much that i 
should be glad if you could let me know the sequel.” 

“leave me your card,” said he; and so, have bade him “good-night,” i 
left him. 

i heard nothing more of the matter for some time, and had almost fear 
that it would prove to be one of those fleeting experience which drift 
away from our direct observation and end only in a hope or a suspicion. 
one afternoon, however, a card bearing the name of mr. j. h. perceval 
was brought up to my office in abchurch lane, and its bearer, a small 
dry, bright-eyed fellow of fifty, was usher in by the clerk. 

“i believe, sir,” said he, “that my name has been mention to you by my 
young friend, mr. felix stanniford?” 

“of course,” i answered, “i remember.” 

“he spoke to you, i understand, about the circumstances in connection 
with the disappearance of my former employer, mr. stanislau stanniford, 
and the existence of a seal room in his former residence.” 

“he did.” 

“and you express an interest in the matter.” 

“it interested me extremely.” 

“you are aware that we hold mr. stanniford’s permission to open the door 
on the twenty-first birthday of his son?” 

“i remember.” 

“the twenty-first birthday is to-day.” 

“have you open it?” i asked, eagerly. 

“not yet, sir,” said he, gravely. “i have reason to believe that it 
would be well to have witness present when that door is opened. you 
are a lawyer, and you are acquaint with the facts. will you be present 
on the occasion?” 

“most certainly.” 

“you are employ during the day, and so am i. shall we meet at nine 
o’clock at the house?” 

“i will come with pleasure.” 

“then you will find us wait for you. good-bye, for the present.” he 
bowed solemnly, and took his leave. 

i kept my appointment that evening, with a brain which was weary with 
fruitless attempt to think out some plausible explanation of the 
mystery which we were about to solve. mr. perceval and my young 
acquaintance were wait for me in the little room. i was not surprise 
to see the young man look pale and nervous, but i was rather 
astonish to find the dry little city man in a state of intense, though 
partially suppressed, excitement. his cheek were flushed, his hand 
twitching, and he could not stand still for an instant. 

stanniford greet me warmly, and thank me many times for have come. 
“and now, perceval,” said he to his companion, “i suppose there is no 
obstacle to our putt the thing through without delay? i shall be glad 
to get it over.” 

the banker’s clerk took up the lamp and led the way. but he pause in 
the passage outside the door, and his hand was shaking, so that the 
light flicker up and down the high, bare walls. 

“mr. stanniford,” said he, in a crack voice, “i hope you will prepare 
yourself in case any shock should be await you when that seal is 
remove and the door is opened.” 

“what could there be, perceval? you are try to frighten me.” 

“no, mr. stanniford; but i should wish you to be ready ... to be brace 
up ... not to allow yourself....” he had to lick his dry lip between 
every jerky sentence, and i sudden realized, as clearly as if he had 
told me, that he knew what was behind that closed door, and that it 
_was_ something terrible. “here are the keys, mr. stanniford, but 
remember my warning!” 

he had a bunch of assorted key in his hand, and the young man snatch 
them from him. then he thrust a knife under the discolour red seal and 
jerk it off. the lamp was rattling and shake in perceval’s hands, so 
i took it from him and held it near the key hole, while stanniford try 
key after key. at last one turn in the lock, the door flew open, he 
took one step into the room, and then, with a horrible cry, the young 
man fell senseless at our feet. 

if i had not given heed to the clerk’s warning, and brace myself for a 
shock, i should certainly have drop the lamp. the room, windowless 
and bare, was fitted up as a photographic laboratory, with a tap and 
sink at the side of it. a shelf of bottle and measure stood at one 
side, and a peculiar, heavy smell, partly chemical, partly animal, 
fill the air. a single table and chair were in front of us, and at 
this, with his back turn towards us, a man was seat in the act of 
writing. his outline and attitude were as natural as life; but as the 
light fell upon him, it made my hair rise to see that the nape of his 
neck was black and wrinkled, and no thick than my wrist. dust lay upon 
him—thick, yellow dust—upon his hair, his shoulders, his shrivelled, 
lemon-coloured hands. his head had fallen forward upon his breast. his 
pen still rest upon a discolour sheet of paper. 

“my poor master! my poor, poor master!” cry the clerk, and the tear 
were running down his cheeks. 

“what!” i cried, “mr. stanislau stanniford!” 

“here he has sat for seven years. oh, why would he do it? i beg him, 
i implore him, i went on my knee to him, but he would have his way. 
you see the key on the table. he had lock the door upon the inside. 
and he has written something. we must take it.” 

“yes, yes, take it, and for god’s sake, let us get out of this,” i 
cried; “the air is poisonous. come, stanniford, come!” taking an arm 
each, we half led and half carry the terrify man back to his own 
room. 

“it was my father!” he cried, as he recover his consciousness. “he is 
sitting there dead in his chair. you knew it, perceval! this was what 
you meant when you warn me.” 

“yes, i knew it, mr. stanniford. i have act for the best all along, 
but my position has been a terribly difficult one. for seven years i 
have known that your father was dead in that room.” 

“you knew it, and never told us!” 

“don’t be harsh with me, mr. stanniford, sir! make allowance for a man 
who has had a hard part to play.” 

“my head is swimming round. i cannot grasp it!” he stagger up, and 
help himself from the brandy bottle. “these letters to my mother and 
to myself—were they forgeries?” 

“no, sir; your father wrote them and address them, and left them in my 
keeping to be posted. i have follow his instruction to the very 
letter in all things. he was my master, and i have obey him.” 

the brandy had steady the young man’s shaken nerves. “tell me about 
it. i can stand it now,” said he. 

“well, mr. stanniford, you know that at one time there came a period of 
great trouble upon your father, and he thought that many poor people 
were about to lose their savings through his fault. he was a man who was 
so tender-hearted that he could not bear the thought. it worried him and 
torment him, until he determined to end his life. oh, mr. stanniford, 
if you knew how i have pray him and wrestle with him over it, you 
would never blame me! and he in turn pray me as no man has ever pray 
me before. he had made up his mind, and he would do it in any case, he 
said; but it rest with me whether his death should be happy and easy 
or whether it should be most miserable. i read in his eyes that he meant 
what he said. and at last i yield to his prayers, and i consent to 
do his will. 

“what was trouble him was this. he had been told by the first doctor 
in london that his wife’s heart would fail at the slightest shock. he 
had a horror of accelerate her end, and yet his own existence had 
become unendurable to him. how could he end himself without injure 
her? 

“you know now the course that he took. he wrote the letter which she 
received. there was nothing in it which was not literally true. when he 
spoke of seeing her again so soon, he was refer to her own 
approach death, which he had been assured could not be delay more 
than a very few months. so convinced was he of this, that he only left 
two letters to be forward at interval after his death. she live five 
years, and i had no letters to send. 

“he left another letter with me to be sent to you, sir, upon the 
occasion of the death of your mother. i post all these in paris to 
sustain the idea of his being abroad. it was his wish that i should say 
nothing, and i have said nothing. i have been a faithful servant. seven 
years after his death, he thought no doubt that the shock to the 
feelings of his survive friends would be lessened. he was always 
considerate for others.” 

there was silence for some time. it was broken by young stanniford. 

“i cannot blame you, perceval. you have spare my mother a shock, which 
would certainly have broken her heart. what is that paper?” 

“it is what your father was writing, sir. shall i read it to you?” 

“do so.” 

“‘i have taken the poison, and i feel it working in my veins. it is 
strange, but not painful. when these words are read i shall, if my 
wish have been faithfully carry out, have been dead many years. 
surely no one who has lost money through me will still bear me 
animosity. and you, felix, you will forgive me this family scandal. may 
god find rest for a sorely weary spirit!’” 

“amen!” we cried, all three. 




the brazil cat 


it is hard luck on a young fellow to have expensive tastes, great 
expectations, aristocratic connections, but no actual money in his 
pocket, and no profession by which he may earn any. the fact was that my 
father, a good, sanguine, easy-going man, had such confidence in the 
wealth and benevolence of his bachelor elder brother, lord southerton, 
that he took it for grant that i, his only son, would never be call 
upon to earn a living for myself. he imagine that if there were not a 
vacancy for me on the great southerton estates, at least there would be 
found some post in that diplomatic service which still remains the 
special preserve of our privileged classes. he die too early to realize 
how false his calculation had been. neither my uncle nor the state took 
the slightest notice of me, or show any interest in my career. an 
occasional brace of pheasants, or basket of hares, was all that ever 
reach me to remind me that i was heir to otwell house and one of the 
richest estate in the country. in the meantime, i found myself a 
bachelor and man about town, living in a suite of apartments in 
grosvenor mansions, with no occupation save that of pigeon-shooting and 
polo-playing at hurlingham. month by month i realize that it was more 
and more difficult to get the broker to renew my bills, or to cash any 
further post-obits upon an unentailed property. ruin lay right across my 
path, and every day i saw it clearer, nearer, and more absolutely 
unavoidable. 

what made me feel my own poverty the more was that, apart from the great 
wealth of lord southerton, all my other relations were fairly 
well-to-do. the nearest of these was everard king, my father’s nephew 
and my own first cousin, who had spent an adventurous life in brazil, 
and had now return to this country to settle down on his fortune. we 
never knew how he made his money, but he appear to have plenty of it, 
for he bought the estate of greylands, near clipton-on-the-marsh, in 
suffolk. for the first year of his residence in england he took no more 
notice of me than my miserly uncle; but at last one summer morning, to 
my very great relief and joy, i received a letter ask me to come down 
that very day and spend a short visit at greyland court. i was 
expect a rather long visit to bankruptcy court at the time, and this 
interrupt seem almost providential. if i could only get on terms 
with this unknown relative of mine, i might pull through yet. for the 
family credit he could not let me go entire to the wall. i ordered my 
valet to pack my valise, and i set off the same evening for 
clipton-on-the-marsh. 

after change at ipswich, a little local train deposit me at a small, 
desert station lie amidst a rolling grassy country, with a sluggish 
and winding river curve in and out amidst the valleys, between high, 
silt banks, which show that we were within reach of the tide. no 
carriage was await me (i found afterwards that my telegram had been 
delayed), so i hire a dog-cart at the local inn. the driver, an 
excellent fellow, was full of my relative’s praises, and i learned from 
him that mr. everard king was already a name to conjure with in that 
part of the country. he had entertain the school-children, he had 
thrown his grounds open to visitors, he had subscribe to charities—in 
short, his benevolence had been so universal that my driver could only 
account for it on the supposition that he had parliamentary ambitions. 

my attention was drawn away from my driver’s panegyric by the appearance 
of a very beautiful bird which settled on a telegraph-post beside the 
road. at first i thought that it was a jay, but it was larger, with a 
bright plumage. the driver account for its presence at once by 
saying that it belong to the very man whom we were about to visit. it 
seem that the acclimatize of foreign creature was one of his 
hobbies, and that he had brought with him from brazil a number of bird 
and beast which he was endeavour to rear in england. when once we 
had pass the gate of greyland park we had ample evidence of this 
taste of his. some small spotted deer, a curious wild pig known, i 
believe, as a peccary, a gorgeous feather oriole, some sort of 
armadillo, and a singular lumber into beast like a very fat badger, 
were among the creature which i observe as we drove along the winding 
avenue. 

mr. everard king, my unknown cousin, was standing in person upon the 
steps of his house, for he had seen us in the distance, and guess that 
it was i. his appearance was very homely and benevolent, short and 
stout, forty-five years old perhaps, with a round, good-humoured face, 
burn brown with the tropical sun, and shot with a thousand wrinkles. 
he wore white linen clothes, in true planter style, with a cigar between 
his lips, and a large panama hat upon the back of his head. it was such 
a figure as one associate with a verandah bungalow, and it look 
curious out of place in front of this broad, stone english mansion, 
with its solid wings and its palladio pillar before the doorway. 

“my dear!” he cried, glancing over his shoulder; “my dear, here is our 
guest! welcome, welcome to greylands! i am delight to make your 
acquaintance, cousin marshall, and i take it as a great compliment that 
you should honour this sleepy little country place with your presence.” 

nothing could be more hearty than his manner, and he set me at my ease 
in an instant. but it need all his cordiality to atone for the 
frigidity and even rude of his wife, a tall, haggard woman, who came 
forward at his summons. she was, i believe, of brazil extraction, 
though she spoke excellent english, and i excuse her manners on the 
score of her ignorance of our customs. she did not attempt to conceal, 
however, either then or afterwards, that i was no very welcome visitor 
at greyland court. her actual words were, as a rule, courteous, but she 
was the possessor of a pair of particularly expressive dark eyes, and i 
read in them very clearly from the first that she heartily wish me 
back in london once more. 

however, my debt were too pressing and my designs upon my wealthy 
relative were too vital for me to allow them to be upset by the 
ill-temper of his wife, so i disregard her cold and reciprocate 
the extreme cordiality of his welcome. no pains had been spare by him 
to make me comfortable. my room was a charming one. he implore me to 
tell him anything which could add to my happiness. it was on the tip of 
my tongue to inform him that a blank cheque would material help 
towards that end, but i felt that it might be premature in the present 
state of our acquaintance. the dinner was excellent, and as we sat 
together afterwards over his havana and coffee, which latter he told me 
was specially prepared upon his own plantation, it seem to me that all 
my driver’s eulogy were justified, and that i had never met a more 
large-hearted and hospitable man. 

but, in spite of his cheery good nature, he was a man with a strong will 
and a fiery temper of his own. of this i had an example upon the 
following morning. the curious aversion which mrs. everard king had 
conceive towards me was so strong, that her manner at breakfast was 
almost offensive. but her meaning became unmistakable when her husband 
had quit the room. 

“the best train in the day is at twelve fifteen,” said she. 

“but i was not thinking of go to-day,” i answered, frankly—perhaps 
even defiantly, for i was determined not to be driven out by this woman. 

“oh, if it rest with you——” said she, and stopped, with a most insolent 
expression in her eyes. 

“i am sure,” i answer “that mr. everard king would tell me if i were 
outstay my welcome.” 

“what’s this? what’s this?” said a voice, and there he was in the room. 
he had overheard my last words, and a glance at our face had told him 
the rest. in an instant his chubby, cheery face set into an expression 
of absolute ferocity. 

“might i trouble you to walk outside, marshall,” said he. (i may mention 
that my own name is marshall king.) 

he closed the door behind me, and then, for an instant, i heard him 
talk in a low voice of concentrated passion to his wife. this gross 
breach of hospitality had evidently hit upon his tenderest point. i am 
no eavesdropper, so i walk out on to the lawn. presently i heard a 
hurried step behind me, and there was the lady, her face pale with 
excitement, and her eyes red with tears. 

“my husband has ask me to apologize to you, mr. marshall king,” said 
she, standing with downcast eyes before me. 

“please do not say another word, mrs. king.” 

her dark eyes sudden blaze out at me. 

“you fool!” she hissed, with frantic vehemence, and turning on her heel 
swept back to the house. 

the insult was so outrageous, so insufferable, that i could only stand 
staring after her in bewilderment. i was still there when my host join 
me. he was his cheery, chubby self once more. 

“i hope that my wife has apologize for her foolish remarks,” said he. 

“oh, yes—yes, certainly!” 

he put his hand through my arm and walk with me up and down the lawn. 

“you must not take it seriously,” said he. “it would grieve me 
inexpressible if you curtail your visit by one hour. the fact is—there 
is no reason why there should be any concealment between relatives—that 
my poor dear wife is incredible jealous. she hate that any one—male or 
female—should for an instant come between us. her ideal is a desert 
island and an eternal _tête-à-tête_. that give you the clue to her 
actions, which are, i confess, upon this particular point, not very far 
remove from mania. tell me that you will think no more of it.” 

“no, no; certainly not.” 

“then light this cigar and come round with me and see my little 
menagerie.” 

the whole afternoon was occupy by this inspection, which included all 
the birds, beasts, and even reptile which he had imported. some were 
free, some in cages, a few actually in the house. he spoke with 
enthusiasm of his success and his failures, his birth and his deaths, 
and he would cry out in his delight, like a schoolboy, when, as we 
walked, some gaudy bird would flutter up from the grass, or some curious 
beast slink into the cover. finally he led me down a corridor which 
extend from one wing of the house. at the end of this there was a 
heavy door with a slide shutter in it, and beside it there project 
from the wall an iron handle attach to a wheel and a drum. a line of 
stout bar extend across the passage. 

“i am about to show you the jewel of my collection,” said he. “there is 
only one other specimen in europe, now that the rotterdam cub is dead. 
it is a brazil cat.” 

“but how do that differ from any other cat?” 

“you will soon see that,” said he, laughing. “will you kindly draw that 
shutter and look through?” 

i did so, and found that i was gaze into a large, empty room, with 
stone flags, and small, barred window upon the farther wall. 

in the centre of this room, lie in the middle of a golden patch of 
sunlight, there was stretch a huge creature, as large as a tiger, but 
as black and sleek as ebony. it was simply a very enormous and very 
well-kept black cat, and it cuddle up and bask in that yellow pool of 
light exactly as a cat would do. it was so graceful, so sinewy, and so 
gently and smooth diabolical, that i could not take my eyes from the 
opening. 

“isn’t he splendid?” said my host, enthusiastically. 

“glorious! i never saw such a noble creature.” 

“some people call it a black puma, but really it is not a puma at all. 
that fellow is nearly eleven feet from tail to tip. four years ago he 
was a little ball of black fluff, with two yellow eyes staring out of 
it. he was sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild country at the 
head-waters of the rio negro. they spear his mother to death after she 
had kill a dozen of them.” 

“they are ferocious, then?” 

“the most absolutely treacherous and blood-thirsty creature upon earth. 
you talk about a brazil cat to an up-country indian, and see him get 
the jumps. they prefer human to game. this fellow has never taste 
living blood yet, but when he do he will be a terror. at present he 
won’t stand any one but me in his den. even baldwin, the groom, dare not 
go near him. as to me, i am his mother and father in one.” 

as he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, open the door and slip 
in, close it instantly behind him. at the sound of his voice the huge, 
lithe creature rose, yawned, and rub its round, black head 
affectionate against his side, while he pat and fondle it. 

“now, tommy, into your cage!” said he. 

the monstrous cat walk over to one side of the room and coil itself 
up under a grating. everard king came out, and taking the iron handle 
which i have mentioned, he began to turn it. as he did so the line of 
bar in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and closed 
up the front of this grating, so as to make an effective cage. when it 
was in position he open the door once more and invite me into the 
room, which was heavy with the pungent, musty smell peculiar to the 
great carnivora. 

“that’s how we work it,” said he. “we give him the run of the room for 
exercise, and then at night we put him in his cage. you can let him out 
by turning the handle from the passage, or you can, as you have seen, 
coop him up in the same way. no, no, you should not do that!” 

i had put my hand between the bar to pat the glossy, heave flank. he 
pull it back, with a serious face. 

“i assure you that he is not safe. don’t imagine that because i can take 
liberties with him any one else can. he is very exclusive in his 
friends—aren’t you, tommy? ah, he hear his lunch coming to him! don’t 
you, boy?” 

a step sound in the stone-flagged passage, and the creature had sprung 
to his feet, and was pace up and down the narrow cage, his yellow eyes 
gleaming, and his scarlet tongue ripple and quiver over the white 
line of his jagged teeth. a groom enter with a coarse joint upon a 
tray, and thrust it through the bar to him. he pounce lightly upon it, 
carry it off to the corner, and there, holding it between his paws, 
tore and wrench at it, raise his bloody muzzle every now and then to 
look at us. it was a malignant and yet fascinating sight. 

“you can’t wonder that i am fond of him, can you?” said my host, as we 
left the room, “especially when you consider that i have had the rear 
of him. it was no joke bring him over from the centre of south 
america; but here he is safe and sound—and, as i have said, far the most 
perfect specimen in europe. the people at the zoo are die to have him, 
but i really can’t part with him. how, i think that i have inflict my 
hobby upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than follow tommy’s 
example, and go to our lunch.” 

my south america relative was so engross by his grounds and their 
curious occupants, that i hardly gave him credit at first for have any 
interests outside them. that he had some, and pressing ones, was soon 
borne in upon me by the number of telegram which he received. they 
arrive at all hours, and were always open by him with the utmost 
eager and anxiety upon his face. sometimes i imagine that it must 
be the turf, and sometimes the stock exchange, but certainly he had some 
very urgent business go forward which was not transact upon the 
downs of suffolk. during the six days of my visit he had never few 
than three or four telegram a day, and sometimes as many as seven or 
eight. 

i had occupy these six days so well, that by the end of them i had 
succeed in get upon the most cordial terms with my cousin. every 
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he telling me the most 
extraordinary story of his adventure in america—stories so desperate 
and reckless, that i could hardly associate them with the brown little, 
chubby man before me. in return, i venture upon some of my own 
reminiscences of london life, which interested him so much, that he 
vow he would come up to grosvenor mansions and stay with me. he was 
anxious to see the fast side of city life, and certainly, though i say 
it, he could not have chosen a more competent guide. it was not until 
the last day of my visit that i venture to approach that which was on 
my mind. i told him frankly about my pecuniary difficulty and my 
impending ruin, and i ask his advice—though i hope for something more 
solid. he listen attentively, puff hard at his cigar. 

“but surely,” said he, “you are the heir of our relative, lord 
southerton?” 

“i have every reason to believe so, but he would never make me any 
allowance.” 

“no, no, i have heard of his miserly ways. my poor marshall, your 
position has been a very hard one. by the way, have you heard any news 
of lord southerton’s health lately?” 

“he has always been in a critical condition ever since my childhood.” 

“exactly—a creak hinge, if ever there was one. your inheritance may 
be a long way off. dear me, how awkward situated you are!” 

“i had some hopes, sir, that you, knowing all the facts, might be 
inclined to advance——” 

“don’t say another word, my dear boy,” he cried, with the utmost 
cordiality; “we shall talk it over to-night, and i give you my word that 
whatever is in my power shall be done.” 

i was not sorry that my visit was drawing to a close, for it is 
unpleasant to feel that there is one person in the house who eager 
desire your departure. mrs. king’s sallow face and forbidding eyes had 
become more and more hateful to me. she was no long active rude—her 
fear of her husband prevent her—but she pushed her insane jealousy to 
the extent of ignore me, never address me, and in every way making 
my stay at greyland as uncomfortable as she could. so offensive was her 
manner during that last day, that i should certainly have left had it 
not been for that interview with my host in the evening which would, i 
hoped, retrieve my broken fortunes. 

it was very late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been 
receiving even more telegram than usual during the day, went off to his 
study after dinner, and only emerge when the household had retired to 
bed. i heard him go round lock the doors, as his custom was of a 
night, and finally he join me in the billiard-room. his stout figure 
was wrap in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red turkey 
slipper without any heels. settle down into an arm-chair, he brew 
himself a glass of grog, in which i could not help notice that the 
whisky considerably predominate over the water. 

“my word!” said he, “what a night!” 

it was, indeed. the wind was howling and scream round the house, and 
the lattice window rattle and shook as if they were coming in. the 
glow of the yellow lamp and the flavour of our cigar seem the 
bright and more fragrant for the contrast. 

“now, my boy,” said my host, “we have the house and the night to 
ourselves. let me have an idea of how your affair stand, and i will see 
what can be done to set them in order. i wish to hear every detail.” 

thus encouraged, i enter into a long exposition, in which all my 
tradesmen and creditors, from my landlord to my valet, figured in turn. 
i had note in my pocket-book, and i marshal my facts, and gave, i 
flatter myself, a very business-like statement of my own 
un-business-like ways and lamentable position. i was depressed, however, 
to notice that my companion’s eyes were vacant and his attention 
elsewhere. when he did occasional throw out a remark, it was so 
entire perfunctory and pointless, that i was sure he had not in the 
least follow my remarks. every now and then he rouse himself and put 
on some show of interest, ask me to repeat or to explain more fully, 
but it was always to sink once more into the same brown study. at last 
he rose and threw the end of his cigar into the grate. 

“i’ll tell you what, my boy,” said he. “i never had a head for figures, 
so you will excuse me. you must jot it all down upon paper, and let me 
have a note of the amount. i’ll understand it when i see it in black and 
white.” 

the proposal was encouraging. i promise to do so. 

“and now it’s time we were in bed. by jove, there’s one o’clock striking 
in the hall.” 

the tinge of the chime clock broke through the deep roar of the 
gale. the wind was sweeping past with the rush of a great river. 

“i must see my cat before i go to bed,” said my host. “a high wind 
excite him. will you come?” 

“certainly,” said i. 

“then tread soft and don’t speak, for every one is asleep.” 

we pass quiet down the lamp-lit persian-rugged hall, and through the 
door at the farther end. all was dark in the stone corridor, but a 
stable lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it. 
there was no grating visible in the passage, so i knew that the beast 
was in its cage. 

“come in!” said my relative, and open the door. 

a deep growl as we enter show that the storm had really excited 
the creature. in the flicker light of the lantern, we saw it, a huge 
black mass, coil in the corner of its den and throw a squat, 
uncouth shadow upon the whitewash wall. its tail switch angry 
among the straw. 

“poor tommy is not in the best of tempers,” said everard king, holding 
up the lantern and look in at him. “what a black devil he looks, 
doesn’t he? i must give him a little supper to put him in a better 
humour. would you mind holding the lantern for a moment?” 

i took it from his hand and he step to the door. 

“his larder is just outside here,” said he. “you will excuse me for an 
instant, won’t you?” he pass out, and the door shut with a sharp 
metallic click behind him. 

that hard crisp sound made my heart stand still. a sudden wave of terror 
pass over me. a vague perception of some monstrous treachery turn me 
cold. i sprang to the door, but there was no handle upon the inner side. 

“here!” i cried. “let me out!” 

“all right! don’t make a row!” said my host from the passage. “you’ve 
got the light all right.” 

“yes, but i don’t care about being lock in alone like this.” 

“don’t you?” i heard his hearty, chuckle laugh. “you won’t be alone 
long.” 

“let me out, sir!” i repeated angrily. “i tell you i don’t allow 
practical joke of this sort.” 

“practical is the word,” said he, with another hateful chuckle. and then 
sudden i heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and whine of 
the winch-handle turning, and the rattle of the grating as it pass 
through the slot. great god, he was letting loose the brazil cat! 

in the light of the lantern i saw the bar slide slow before me. 
already there was an opening a foot wide at the farther end. with a 
scream i seize the last bar with my hand and pull with the strength 
of a madman. i _was_ a madman with rage and horror. for a minute or more 
i held the thing motionless. i knew that he was strain with all his 
force upon the handle, and that the leverage was sure to overcome me. i 
gave inch by inch, my feet slide along the stones, and all the time i 
beg and pray this inhuman monster to save me from this horrible 
death. i conjure him by his kinship. i remind him that i was his 
guest; i beg to know what harm i had ever done him. his only answer 
were the tug and jerk upon the handle, each of which, in spite of all 
my struggles, pull another bar through the opening. clinging and 
clutching, i was drag across the whole front of the cage, until at 
last, with ache wrist and lacerate fingers, i gave up the hopeless 
struggle. the grating clang back as i release it, and an instant 
later i heard the shuffle of the turkey slipper in the passage, and 
the slam of the distant door. then everything was silent. 

the creature had never move during this time. he lay still in the 
corner, and his tail had cease switching. this apparition of a man 
adhere to his bar and drag scream across him had apparently 
fill him with amazement. i saw his great eyes staring steady at me. 
i had drop the lantern when i seize the bars, but it still burn 
upon the floor, and i made a movement to grasp it, with some idea that 
its light might protect me. but the instant i moved, the beast gave a 
deep and menace growl. i stop and stood still, quiver with fear 
in every limb. the cat (if one may call so fearful a creature by so 
homely a name) was not more than ten feet from me. the eyes glimmer 
like two disc of phosphorus in the darkness. they appall and yet 
fascinate me. i could not take my own eyes from them. nature play 
strange trick with us at such moments of intensity, and those 
glimmer lights wax and wane with a steady rise and fall. sometimes 
they seem to be tiny points of extreme brilliancy—little electric 
sparks in the black obscurity—then they would widen and widen until all 
that corner of the room was fill with their shift and sinister 
light. and then sudden they went out altogether. 

the beast had closed its eyes. i do not know whether there may be any 
truth in the old idea of the dominance of the human gaze, or whether the 
huge cat was simply drowsy, but the fact remains that, far from showing 
any symptom of attack me, it simply rest its sleek, black head upon 
its huge forepaw and seem to sleep. i stood, fear to move lest i 
should rouse it into malignant life once more. but at least i was able 
to think clearly now that the baleful eyes were off me. here i was shut 
up for the night with the ferocious beast. my own instincts, to say 
nothing of the words of the plausible villain who laid this trap for me, 
warn me that the animal was as savage as its master. how could i stave 
it off until morning? the door was hopeless, and so were the narrow, 
barred windows. there was no shelter anywhere in the bare, stone-flagged 
room. to cry for assistance was absurd. i knew that this den was an 
outhouse, and that the corridor which connected it with the house was at 
least a hundred feet long. besides, with that gale thundering outside, 
my cries were not likely to be heard. i had only my own courage and my 
own wit to trust to. 

and then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eyes fell upon the lantern. 
the candle had burn low, and was already beginning to gutter. in ten 
minutes it would be out. i had only ten minutes then in which to do 
something, for i felt that if i were once left in the dark with that 
fearful beast i should be incapable of action. the very thought of it 
paralyze me. i cast my despairing eyes round this chamber of death, and 
they rest upon one spot which seem to promise i will not say safety, 
but less immediate and imminent danger than the open floor. 

i have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and this top was 
left standing when the front was wound through the slot in the wall. it 
consist of bar at a few inches’ interval, with stout wire netting 
between, and it rest upon a strong stanchion at each end. it stood now 
as a great barred canopy over the crouch figure in the corner. the 
space between this iron shelf and the roof may have been from two to 
three feet. if i could only get up there, squeeze in between bar and 
ceiling, i should have only one vulnerable side. i should be safe from 
below, from behind, and from each side. only on the open face of it 
could i be attacked. there, it is true, i had no protection whatever; 
but, at least, i should be out of the brute’s path when he began to pace 
about his den. he would have to come out of his way to reach me. it was 
now or never, for if once the light were out it would be impossible. 
with a gulp in my throat i sprang up, seize the iron edge of the top, 
and swung myself pant on to it. i writhe in face downwards, and 
found myself look straight into the terrible eyes and yawn jaws of 
the cat. its fetid breath came up into my face like the steam from some 
foul pot. 

it appeared, however, to be rather curious than angry. with a sleek 
ripple of its long, black back it rose, stretch itself, and then 
rear itself on its hind legs, with one fore paw against the wall, it 
raise the other, and drew its claw across the wire mesh beneath me. 
one sharp, white hook tore through my trousers—for i may mention that i 
was still in evening dress—and dug a furrow in my knee. it was not meant 
as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my give a sharp 
cry of pain he drop down again, and spring lightly into the room, 
he began walking swift round it, look up every now and again in my 
direction. for my part i shuffle backwards until i lay with my back 
against the wall, screw myself into the smallest space possible. the 
farther i got the more difficult it was for him to attack me. 

he seem more excited now that he had begun to move about, and he ran 
swift and noiseless round and round the den, passing continual 
underneath the iron couch upon which i lay. it was wonderful to see so 
great a bulk passing like a shadow, with hardly the softest thud of 
velvety pads. the candle was burning low—so low that i could hardly see 
the creature. and then, with a last flare and splutter it went out 
altogether. i was alone with the cat in the dark! 

it help one to face a danger when one know that one has done all that 
possibly can be done. there is nothing for it then but to quiet await 
the result. in this case, there was no chance of safety anywhere except 
the precise spot where i was. i stretch myself out, therefore, and lay 
silently, almost breathlessly, hope that the beast might forget my 
presence if i did nothing to remind him. i reckon that it must already 
be two o’clock. at four it would be full dawn. i had not more than two 
hour to wait for daylight. 

outside, the storm was still raging, and the rain lash continual 
against the little windows. inside, the poisonous and fetid air was 
overpowering. i could neither hear nor see the cat. i try to think 
about other things—but only one had power enough to draw my mind from my 
terrible position. that was the contemplation of my cousin’s villainy, 
his unparalleled hypocrisy, his malignant hatred of me. beneath that 
cheerful face there lurk the spirit of a mediæval assassin. and as i 
thought of it i saw more clearly how cunning the thing had been 
arranged. he had apparently gone to bed with the others. no doubt he had 
his witness to prove it. then, unknown to them, he had slip down, 
had lure me into this den and abandoned me. his story would be so 
simple. he had left me to finish my cigar in the billiard-room. i had 
gone down on my own account to have a last look at the cat. i had 
enter the room without observing that the cage was opened, and i had 
been caught. how could such a crime be brought home to him? suspicion, 
perhaps—but proof, never! 

how slow those dreadful two hour went by! once i heard a low, rasp 
sound, which i took to be the creature licking its own fur. several 
times those greenish eyes gleam at me through the darkness, but never 
in a fixed stare, and my hope grew strong that my presence had been 
forgotten or ignored. at last the least faint glimmer of light came 
through the windows—i first dim saw them as two grey square upon the 
black wall, then grey turn to white, and i could see my terrible 
companion once more. and he, alas, could see me! 

it was evident to me at once that he was in a much more dangerous and 
aggressive mood than when i had seen him last. the cold of the morning 
had irritate him, and he was hungry as well. with a continual growl he 
pace swift up and down the side of the room which was farthest from 
my refuge, his whiskers bristle angrily, and his tail switch and 
lashing. as he turn at the corner his savage eyes always look 
upwards at me with a dreadful menace. i knew then that he meant to kill 
me. yet i found myself even at that moment admire the sinuous grace of 
the devilish thing, its long, undulating, ripple movements, the gloss 
of its beautiful flanks, the vivid, palpitate scarlet of the 
glisten tongue which hung from the jet-black muzzle. and all the time 
that deep, threaten growl was rising and rising in an unbroken 
crescendo. i knew that the crisis was at hand. 

it was a miserable hour to meet such a death—so cold, so comfortless, 
shiver in my light dress clothes upon this gridiron of torment upon 
which i was stretched. i try to brace myself to it, to raise my soul 
above it, and at the same time, with the lucid which come to a 
perfectly desperate man, i cast round for some possible means of escape. 
one thing was clear to me. if that front of the cage was only back in 
its position once more, i could find a sure refuge behind it. could i 
possibly pull it back? i hardly dare to move for fear of bring the 
creature upon me. slowly, very slowly, i put my hand forward until it 
grasp the edge of the front, the final bar which protrude through the 
wall. to my surprise it came quite easily to my jerk. of course the 
difficulty of drawing it out arose from the fact that i was clinging to 
it. i pull again, and three inch of it came through. it ran 
apparently on wheels. i pull again ... and then the cat sprang! 

it was so quick, so sudden, that i never saw it happen. i simply heard 
the savage snarl, and in an instant afterwards the blazing yellow eyes, 
the flatten black head with its red tongue and flash teeth, were 
within reach of me. the impact of the creature shook the bar upon which 
i lay, until i thought (as far as i could think of anything at such a 
moment) that they were coming down. the cat sway there for an instant, 
the head and front paw quite close to me, the hind paw claw to find 
a grip upon the edge of the grating. i heard the claw rasp as they 
clung to the wire netting, and the breath of the beast made me sick. but 
its bound had been miscalculated. it could not retain its position. 
slowly, grin with rage and scratch madly at the bars, it swung 
backwards and drop heavy upon the floor. with a growl it instantly 
face round to me and crouch for another spring. 

i knew that the next few moments would decide my fate. the creature had 
learned by experience. it would not miscalculate again. i must act 
promptly, fearlessly, if i were to have a chance for life. in an instant 
i had form my plan. pull off my dress-coat, i threw it down over 
the head of the beast. at the same moment i drop over the edge, 
seize the end of the front grating, and pull it frantic out of 
the wall. 

it came more easily than i could have expected. i rush across the 
room, bearing it with me; but, as i rushed, the accident of my position 
put me upon the outer side. had it been the other way, i might have come 
off scathless. as it was, there was a moment’s pause as i stop it and 
try to pass in through the opening which i had left. that moment was 
enough to give time to the creature to toss off the coat with which i 
had blind him and to spring upon me. i hurl myself through the gap 
and pull the rails to behind me, but he seize my leg before i could 
entire withdraw it. one stroke of that huge paw tore off my calf as a 
shaving of wood curl off before a plane. the next moment, bleeding and 
fainting, i was lie among the foul straw with a line of friendly bar 
between me and the creature which ramp so frantic against them. 

too wound to move, and too faint to be conscious of fear, i could only 
lie, more dead than alive, and watch it. it pressed its broad, black 
chest against the bar and angle for me with its crooked paw as i have 
seen a kitten do before a mouse-trap. it rip my clothes, but, stretch 
as it would, it could not quite reach me. i have heard of the curious 
numb effect produce by wound from the great carnivora, and now i 
was destined to experience it, for i had lost all sense of personality, 
and was as interested in the cat’s failure or success as if it were some 
game which i was watching. and then gradual my mind drift away into 
strange, vague dreams, always with that black face and red tongue coming 
back into them, and so i lost myself in the nirvana of delirium, the 
blessed relief of those who are too sorely tried. 

tracing the course of event afterwards, i conclude that i must have 
been insensible for about two hours. what rouse me to consciousness 
once more was that sharp metallic click which had been the precursor of 
my terrible experience. it was the shoot back of the spring lock. 
then, before my senses were clear enough to entire apprehend what they 
saw, i was aware of the round, benevolent face of my cousin peer in 
through the open door. what he saw evidently amaze him. there was the 
cat crouch on the floor. i was stretch upon my back in my 
shirtsleeve within the cage, my trousers torn to ribbon and a great 
pool of blood all round me. i can see his amaze face now, with the 
morning sunlight upon it. he peer at me, and peer again. then he 
closed the door behind him, and advanced to the cage to see if i were 
really dead. 

i cannot undertake to say what happened. i was not in a fit state to 
witness or to chronicle such events. i can only say that i was sudden 
conscious that his face was away from me—that he was look towards the 
animal. 

“good old tommy!” he cried. “good old tommy!” 

then he came near the bars, with his back still towards me. 

“down, you stupid beast!” he roared. “down, sir! don’t you know your 
master?” 

sudden even in my bemuddle brain a remembrance came of those words of 
his when he had said that the taste of blood would turn the cat into a 
fiend. my blood had done it, but he was to pay the price. 

“get away!” he screamed. “get away, you devil! baldwin! baldwin! oh, my 
god!” 

and then i heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like 
the rip of sacking. his scream grew faint until they were lost in 
the worry snarl. and then, after i thought that he was dead, i saw, 
as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soaked figure running 
wildly round the room—and that was the last glimpse which i had of him 
before i faint once again. 

* * * * * 

i was many month in my recovery—in fact, i cannot say that i have ever 
recovered, for to the end of my days i shall carry a stick as a sign of 
my night with the brazil cat. baldwin, the groom, and the other 
servant could not tell what had occur when, drawn by the death cries 
of their master, they found me behind the bars, and his remains—or what 
they afterwards discover to be his remains—in the clutch of the 
creature which he had reared. they stall him off with hot irons, and 
afterwards shot him through the loophole of the door before they could 
finally extricate me. i was carry to my bedroom, and there, under the 
roof of my would-be murderer, i remain between life and death for 
several weeks. they had sent for a surgeon from clipton and a nurse from 
london, and in a month i was able to be carry to the station, and so 
convey back once more to grosvenor mansions. 

i have one remembrance of that illness, which might have been part of 
the ever-changing panorama conjure up by a delirious brain were it not 
so definitely fixed in my memory. one night, when the nurse was absent, 
the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest mourning 
slip into the room. she came across to me, and as she bent her sallow 
face i saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it was the 
brazil woman whom my cousin had married. she stare intent into my 
face, and her expression was more kindly than i had ever seen it. 

“are you conscious?” she asked. 

i feeble nodded—for i was still very weak. 

“well, then, i only wish to say to you that you have yourself to 
blame. did i not do all i could for you? from the beginning i try to 
drive you from the house. by every means, short of betray my husband, 
i try to save you from him. i knew that he had a reason for bring 
you here. i knew that he would never let you get away again. no one knew 
him as i knew him, who had suffer from him so often. i did not dare to 
tell you all this. he would have kill me. but i did my best for you. 
as things have turn out, you have been the best friend that i have 
ever had. you have set me free, and i fancy that nothing but death 
would do that. i am sorry if you are hurt, but i cannot reproach myself. 
i told you that you were a fool—and a fool you have been.” she crept out 
of the room, the bitter, singular woman, and i was never destined to see 
her again. with what remain from her husband’s property she went back 
to her native land, and i have heard that she afterwards took the veil 
at pernambuco. 

it was not until i had been back in london for some time that the 
doctor pronounced me to be well enough to do business. it was not a 
very welcome permission to me, for i fear that it would be the signal 
for an inrush of creditors; but it was summers, my lawyer, who first 
took advantage of it. 

“i am very glad to see that your lordship is so much better,” said he. 
“i have been wait a long time to offer my congratulations.” 

“what do you mean, summers? this is no time for joking.” 

“i mean what i say,” he answered. “you have been lord southerton for the 
last six weeks, but we fear that it would retard your recovery if you 
were to learn it.” 

lord southerton! one of the richest peer in england! i could not 
believe my ears. and then sudden i thought of the time which had 
elapsed, and how it coincide with my injuries. 

“then lord southerton must have die about the same time that i was 
hurt?” 

“his death occur upon that very day.” summer look hard at me as i 
spoke, and i am convinced—for he was a very shrewd fellow—that he had 
guess the true state of the case. he pause for a moment as if 
await a confidence from me, but i could not see what was to be gain 
by expose such a family scandal. 

“yes, a very curious coincidence,” he continued, with the same knowing 
look. “of course, you are aware that your cousin everard king was the 
next heir to the estates. now, if it had been you instead of him who had 
been torn to pieces by this tiger, or whatever it was, then of course he 
would have been lord southerton at the present moment.” 

“no doubt,” said i. 

“and he took such an interest in it,” said summers. “i happen to know 
that the late lord southerton’s valet was in his pay, and that he use 
to have telegram from him every few hour to tell him how he was 
get on. that would be about the time when you were down there. was 
it not strange that he should wish to be so well informed, since he knew 
that he was not the direct heir?” 

“very strange,” said i. “and now, summers, if you will bring me my bill 
and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get things into order.” 




the usher of lea house school 


mr. lumsden, the senior partner of lumsden and westmacott, the 
well-known scholastic and clerical agents, was a small, dapper man, with 
a sharp, abrupt manner, a critical eye, and an incisive way of speaking. 

“your name, sir?” said he, sitting pen in hand with his long, red-lined 
folio in front of him. 

“harold weld.” 

“oxford or cambridge?” 

“cambridge.” 

“honours?” 

“no, sir.” 

“athlete?” 

“nothing remarkable, i am afraid.” 

“not a blue?” 

“oh, no.” 

mr. lumsden shook his head despondent and shrug his shoulder in a 
way which sent my hope down to zero. “there is a very keen competition 
for masterships, mr. weld,” said he. “the vacancy are few and the 
applicant innumerable. a first-class athlete, oar, or cricketer, or a 
man who has pass very high in his examinations, can usually find a 
vacancy—i might say always in the case of the cricketer. but the average 
man—if you will excuse the description, mr. weld—has a very great 
difficulty, almost an insurmountable difficulty. we have already more 
than a hundred such name upon our lists, and if you think it worth 
while our add yours, i daresay that in the course of some years we 
may possibly be able to find you some opening which——” 

he pause on account of a knock at the door. it was a clerk with a note. 
mr. lumsden broke the seal and read it. 

“why, mr. weld,” said he, “this is really rather an interesting 
coincidence. i understand you to say that latin and english are your 
subjects, and that you would prefer for a time to accept a place in an 
elementary establishment, where you would have time for private study?” 

“quite so.” 

“this note contain a request from an old client of ours, dr. phelp 
mccarthy, of willow lea house academy, west hampstead, that i should at 
once send him a young man who should be qualified to teach latin and 
english to a small class of boys under fourteen years of age. his 
vacancy appear to be the very one which you are look for. the terms 
are not munificent—sixty pounds, board, lodging, and washing—but the 
work is not onerous, and you would have the evenings to yourself.” 

“that would do,” i cried, with all the eager of the man who see 
work at last after weary month of seeking. 

“i don’t know that it is quite fair to these gentlemen whose name have 
been so long upon our list,” said mr. lumsden, glancing down at his open 
ledger. “but the coincidence is so striking that i feel we must really 
give you the refusal of it.” 

“then i accept it, sir, and i am much oblige to you.” 

“there is one small provision in dr. mccarthy’s letter. he stipulate 
that the applicant must be a man with an imperturbable good temper.” 

“i am the very man,” said i, with conviction. 

“well,” said mr. lumsden, with some hesitation, “i hope that your temper 
is really as good as you say, for i rather fancy that you may need it.” 

“i presume that every elementary schoolmaster does.” 

“yes, sir, but it is only fair to you to warn you that there may be some 
especially try circumstances in this particular situation. dr. phelp 
mccarthy do not make such a condition without some very good and 
pressing reason.” 

there was a certain solemnity in his speech which struck a chill in the 
delight with which i had welcome this providential vacancy. 

“may i ask the nature of these circumstances?” i asked. 

“we endeavour to hold the balance equally between our clients, and to be 
perfectly frank with all of them. if i knew of objection to you i 
should certainly communicate them to dr. mccarthy, and so i have no 
hesitation in do as much for you. i find,” he continued, glancing 
over the page of his ledger, “that within the last twelve month we 
have supply no few than seven latin master to willow lea house 
academy, four of them have left so abrupt as to forfeit their 
month’s salary, and none of them have stay more than eight weeks.” 

“and the other masters? have they stayed?” 

“there is only one other residential master, and he appear to be 
unchanged. you can understand, mr. weld,” continue the agent, close 
both the ledger and the interview, “that such rapid change are not 
desirable from a master’s point of view, whatever may be said for them 
by an agent working on commission. i have no idea why these gentlemen 
have resigned their situation so early. i can only give you the facts, 
and advise you to see dr. mccarthy at once and to form your own 
conclusions.” 

great is the power of the man who has nothing to lose, and it was 
therefore with perfect serenity, but with a good deal of curiosity, that 
i rang early that afternoon the heavy wrought-iron bell of the willow 
lea house academy. the building was a massive pile, square and ugly, 
standing in its own extensive grounds, with a broad carriage-sweep 
curve up to it from the road. it stood high, and command a view on 
the one side of the grey roof and bristle spire of northern london, 
and on the other of the well-wooded and beautiful country which fringe 
the great city. the door was open by a boy in buttons, and i was shown 
into a well-appointed study, where the principal of the academy 
presently join me. 

the warning and insinuation of the agent had prepared me to meet a 
choleric and overbearing person—one whose manner was an insupportable 
provocation to those who work under him. anything further from the 
reality cannot be imagined. he was a frail, gentle creature, 
clean-shaven and round-shouldered, with a bearing which was so courteous 
that it became almost deprecating. his bushy hair was thick shot with 
grey, and his age i should imagine to verge upon sixty. his voice was 
low and suave, and he walk with a certain mince delicacy of manner. 
his whole appearance was that of a kindly scholar, who was more at home 
among his books than in the practical affair of the world. 

“i am sure that we shall be very happy to have your assistance, mr. 
weld,” said he, after a few professional questions. “mr. percival 
manners left me yesterday, and i should be glad if you could take over 
his duty to-morrow.” 

“may i ask if that is mr. percival manners of selwyn?” i asked. 

“precisely. did you know him?” 

“yes; he is a friend of mine.” 

“an excellent teacher, but a little hasty in his disposition. it was his 
only fault. now, in your case, mr. weld, is your own temper under good 
control? supposing for argument’s sake that i were to so far forget 
myself as to be rude to you or to speak roughly or to jar your feelings 
in any way, could you rely upon yourself to control your emotions?” 

i smile at the idea of this courteous, little, mince creature 
ruffle my nerves. 

“i think that i could answer for it, sir,” said i. 

“quarrels are very painful to me,” said he. “i wish every one to live in 
harmony under my roof. i will not deny mr. percival manners had 
provocation, but i wish to find a man who can raise himself above 
provocation, and sacrifice his own feelings for the sake of peace and 
concord.” 

“i will do my best, sir.” 

“you cannot say more, mr. weld. in that case i shall expect you 
to-night, if you can get your things ready so soon.” 

i not only succeed in get my things ready, but i found time to 
call at the benedict club in piccadilly, where i knew that i should find 
manners if he were still in town. there he was sure enough in the 
smoking-room, and i question him, over a cigarette, as to his reason 
for throw up his recent situation. 

“you don’t tell me that you are go to dr. phelp mccarthy’s academy?” 
he cried, staring at me in surprise. “my dear chap, it’s no use. you 
can’t possibly remain there.” 

“but i saw him, and he seem the most courtly, inoffensive fellow. i 
never met a man with more gentle manners.” 

“he! oh, he’s all right. there’s no vice in him. have you seen 
theophilu st. james?” 

“i have never heard the name. who is he?” 

“your colleague. the other master.” 

“no, i have not seen him.” 

“_he’s_ the terror. if you can stand him, you have either the spirit of 
a perfect christian or else you have no spirit at all. a more perfect 
bounder never bounded.” 

“but why do mccarthy stand it?” 

my friend look at me significant through his cigarette smoke, and 
shrug his shoulders. 

“you will form your own conclusion about that. mine were form very 
soon, and i never found occasion to alter them.” 

“it would help me very much if you would tell me them.” 

“when you see a man in his own house allow his business to be ruined, 
his comfort destroyed, and his authority defy by another man in a 
subordinate position, and calm submit to it without so much as a 
word of protest, what conclusion do you come to?” 

“that the one has a hold over the other.” 

percival manners nod his head. 

“there you are! you’ve hit it first barrel. it seem to me that there’s 
no other explanation which will cover the facts. at some period in his 
life the little doctor has gone astray. _humanum est errare._ i have 
even done it myself. but this was something serious, and the other man 
got a hold of it and has never let go. that’s the truth. blackmail is at 
the bottom of it. but he had no hold over me, and there was no reason 
why _i_ should stand his insolence, so i came away—and i very much 
expect to see you do the same.” 

for some time he talk over the matter, but he always came to the same 
conclusion—that i should not retain my new situation very long. 

it was with no very pleasant feelings after this preparation that i 
found myself face to face with the very man of whom i had received so 
evil an account. dr. mccarthy introduce us to each other in his study 
on the evening of that same day immediately after my arrival at the 
school. 

“this is your new colleague, mr. st. james,” said he, in his genial, 
courteous fashion. “i trust that you will mutual agree, and that i 
shall find nothing but good feeling and sympathy beneath this roof.” 

i share the good doctor’s hope, but my expectations of it were not 
increase by the appearance of my _confrère_. he was a young, 
bull-necked fellow about thirty years of age, dark-eyed and 
black-haired, with an exceedingly vigorous physique. i have never seen a 
more strong built man, though he tend to run to fat in a way which 
show that he was in the worst of training. his face was coarse, 
swollen, and brutal, with a pair of small black eyes deep sunken in 
his head. his heavy jowl, his project ears, and his thick bandy leg 
all went to make up a personality which was as formidable as it was 
repellent. 

“i hear you’ve never been out before,” said he, in a rude, brusque 
fashion. “well, it’s a poor life: hard work and starvation pay, as 
you’ll find out for yourself.” 

“but it has some compensations,” said the principal. “surely you will 
allow that, mr. st. james?” 

“has it? i never could find them. what do you call compensations?” 

“even to be in the continual presence of youth is a privilege. it has 
the effect of keeping youth in one’s own soul, for one reflect 
something of their high spirits and their keen enjoyment of life.” 

“little beasts!” cry my colleague. 

“come, come, mr. st. james, you are too hard upon them.” 

“i hate the sight of them! if i could put them and their blessed 
copybook and lexicon and slate into one bonfire i’d do it to-night.” 

“this is mr. st. james’s way of talking,” said the principal, smile 
nervous as he glance at me. “you must not take him too seriously. 
now, mr. weld, you know where your room is, and no doubt you have your 
own little arrangement to make. the soon you make them the soon you 
will feel yourself at home.” 

it seem to me that he was only too anxious to remove me at once from 
the influence of this extraordinary colleague, and i was glad to go, for 
the conversation had become embarrassing. 

and so began an epoch which always seem to me as i look back to it to 
be the most singular in all my experience. the school was in many ways 
an excellent one. dr. phelp mccarthy was an ideal principal. his 
method were modern and rational. the management was all that could be 
desired. and yet in the middle of this well-ordered machine there 
intrude the incongruous and impossible mr. st. james, throw 
everything into confusion. his duty were to teach english and 
mathematics, and how he acquit himself of them i do not know, as our 
class were held in separate rooms. i can answer for it, however, that 
the boys fear him and loathe him, and i know that they had good 
reason to do so, for frequent my own teaching was interrupt by his 
bellow of anger, and even by the sound of his blows. dr. mccarthy 
spent most of his time in his class, but it was, i suspect, to watch 
over the master rather than the boys, and to try to moderate his 
ferocious temper when it threaten to become dangerous. 

it was in his bearing to the head master, however, that my colleague’s 
conduct was most outrageous. the first conversation which i have 
record prove to be typical of their intercourse. he domineer over 
him openly and brutally. i have heard him contradict him roughly before 
the whole school. at no time would he show him any mark of respect, and 
my temper often rose within me when i saw the quiet acquiesce of the 
old doctor, and his patient tolerance of this monstrous treatment. and 
yet the sight of it surround the principal also with a certain vague 
horror in my mind, for supposing my friend’s theory to be correct—and i 
could devise no better one—how black must have been the story which 
could be held over his head by this man and, by fear of its publicity, 
force him to undergo such humiliations. this quiet, gentle doctor might 
be a profound hypocrite, a criminal, a forger possibly, or a poisoner. 
only such a secret as this could account for the complete power which 
the young man held over him. why else should he admit so hateful a 
presence into his house and so harmful an influence into his school? why 
should he submit to degrade which could not be witnessed, far less 
endured, without indignation? 

and yet, if it were so, i was forced to confess that my principal 
carry it off with extraordinary duplicity. never by word or sign did 
he show that the young man’s presence was distasteful to him. i have 
seen him look pained, it is true, after some peculiarly outrageous 
exhibition, but he gave me the impression that it was always on account 
of the scholar or of me, never on account of himself. he spoke to and 
of st. james in an indulgent fashion, smile gently at what made my 
blood boil within me. in his way of look at him and address him, 
one could see no trace of resentment, but rather a sort of timid and 
deprecate good will. his company he certainly courted, and they spent 
many hour together in the study and the garden. 

as to my own relations with theophilu st. james, i made up my mind from 
the beginning that i should keep my temper with him, and to that 
resolution i steadfast adhered. if dr. mccarthy chose to permit this 
disrespect, and to condone these outrages, it was his affair and not 
mine. it was evident that his one wish was that there should be peace 
between us, and i felt that i could help him best by respecting this 
desire. my easiest way to do so was to avoid my colleague, and this i 
did to the best of my ability. when we were thrown together i was quiet, 
polite, and reserved. he, on his part, show me no ill-will, but met me 
rather with a coarse joviality, and a rough familiarity which he meant 
to be ingratiating. he was insistent in his attempt to get me into his 
room at night, for the purpose of play euchre and of drinking. 

“old mccarthy doesn’t mind,” said he. “don’t you be afraid of him. we’ll 
do what we like, and i’ll answer for it that he won’t object.” once only 
i went, and when i left, after a dull and gross evening, my host was 
stretch dead drunk upon the sofa. after that i gave the excuse of a 
course of study, and spent my spare hour alone in my own room. 

one point upon which i was anxious to gain information was as to how 
long these proceedings had been go on. when did st. james assert his 
hold over dr. mccarthy? from neither of them could i learn how long my 
colleague had been in his present situation. one or two leading 
question upon my part were elude or ignore in a manner so marked that 
it was easy to see that they were both of them as eager to conceal the 
point as i was to know it. but at last one evening i had the chance of a 
chat with mrs. carter, the matron—for the doctor was a widower—and from 
her i got the information which i wanted. it need no questioning to 
get at her knowledge, for she was so full of indignation that she shook 
with passion as she spoke of it, and raise her hand into the air in 
the earnest of her denunciation, as she describe the grievance 
which she had against my colleague. 

“it was three years ago, mr. weld, that he first darken this 
doorstep,” she cried. “three bitter years they have been to me. the 
school had fifty boys then. now it has twenty-two. that’s what he has 
done for us in three years. in another three there won’t be one. and the 
doctor, that angel of patience, you see how he treat him, though he is 
not fit to lace his boots for him. if it wasn’t for the doctor, you may 
be sure that i wouldn’t stay an hour under the same roof with such a 
man, and so i told him to his own face, mr. weld. if the doctor would 
only pack him about his business—but i know that i am saying more than i 
should!” she stop herself with an effort, and spoke no more upon the 
subject. she had remember that i was almost a stranger in the school, 
and she fear that she had been indiscreet. 

there were one or two very singular points about my colleague. the chief 
one was that he rarely took any exercise. there was a playing-field 
within the college grounds, and that was his farthest point. if the boys 
went out, it was i or dr. mccarthy who accompany them. st. james gave 
as a reason for this that he had injure his knee some years before, and 
that walking was painful to him. for my own part i put it down to pure 
lazy upon his part, for he was of an obese, heavy temperament. 
twice, however, i saw him from my window steal out of the grounds 
late at night, and the second time i watch him return in the grey of 
the morning and slink in through an open window. these furtive 
excursion were never allude to, but they expose the hollow of his 
story about his knee, and they increase the dislike and distrust which 
i had of the man. his nature seem to be vicious to the core. 

another point, small but suggestive, was that he hardly ever during the 
month that i was at willow lea house received any letters, and on those 
few occasion they were obviously tradesmen’s bills. i am an early 
riser, and use every morning to pick my own correspondence out of the 
bundle upon the hall table. i could judge therefore how few were ever 
there for mr. theophilu st. james. there seem to me to be something 
peculiarly ominous in this. what sort of a man could he be who during 
thirty years of life had never made a single friend, high or low, who 
care to continue to keep in touch with him? and yet the sinister fact 
remain that the head master not only tolerated, but was even intimate 
with him. more than once on enter a room i have found them talk 
confidential together, and they would walk arm in arm in deep 
conversation up and down the garden paths. so curious did i become to 
know what the tie was which bound them, that i found it gradual push 
out my other interests and become the main purpose of my life. in school 
and out of school, at meal and at play, i was perpetual engaged in 
watch dr. phelp mccarthy and mr. theophilu st. james, and in 
endeavour to solve the mystery which surround them. 

but, unfortunately, my curiosity was a little too open. i had not the 
art to conceal the suspicion which i felt about the relations which 
exist between these two men and the nature of the hold which the one 
appear to have over the other. it may have been my manner of watch 
them, it may have been some indiscreet question, but it is certain that 
i show too clearly what i felt. one night i was conscious that the 
eyes of theophilu st. james were fixed upon me in a surly and menace 
stare. i had a foreboding of evil, and i was not surprise when dr. 
mccarthy call me next morning into his study. 

“i am very sorry, mr. weld,” said he, “but i am afraid that i shall be 
compel to dispense with your services.” 

“perhaps you would give me some reason for dismiss me,” i answered, 
for i was conscious of have done my duty to the best of my power, 
and knew well that only one reason could be given. 

“i have no fault to find with you,” said he, and the colour came to his 
cheeks. 

“you send me away at the suggestion of my colleague.” 

his eyes turn away from mine. 

“we will not discuss the question, mr. weld. it is impossible for me to 
discuss it. in justice to you, i will give you the strongest 
recommendation for your next situation. i can say no more. i hope that 
you will continue your duty here until you have found a place 
elsewhere.” 

my whole soul rose against the injustice of it, and yet i had no appeal 
and no redress. i could only bow and leave the room, with a bitter sense 
of ill-usage at my heart. 

my first instinct was to pack my box and leave the house. but the head 
master had given me permission to remain until i had found another 
situation. i was sure that st. james desire me to go, and that was a 
strong reason why i should stay. if my presence annoy him, i should 
give him as much of it as i could. i had begun to hate him and to long 
to have my revenge upon him. if he had a hold over our principal, might 
not i in turn obtain one over him? it was a sign of weakness that he 
should be so afraid of my curiosity. he would not resent it so much if 
he had not something to fear from it. i enter my name once more upon 
the books of the agents, but meanwhile i continue to fulfil my duty 
at willow lea house, and so it came about that i was present at the 
dénouement of this singular situation. 

during that week—for it was only a week before the crisis came—i was in 
the habit of go down each evening, after the work of the day was 
done, to inquire about my new arrangements. one night, it was a cold and 
windy evening in march, i had just step out from the hall door when a 
strange sight met my eyes. a man was crouch before one of the window 
of the house. his knee were bent and his eyes were fixed upon the small 
line of light between the curtain and the sash. the window threw a 
square of bright in front of it, and in the middle of this the dark 
shadow of this ominous visitor show clear and hard. it was but for an 
instant that i saw him, for he glance up and was off in a moment 
through the shrubbery. i could hear the patter of his feet as he ran 
down the road, until it die away in the distance. 

it was evidently my duty to turn back and to tell dr. mccarthy what i 
had seen. i found him in his study. i had expect him to be disturbed 
at such an incident, but i was not prepared for the state of panic into 
which he fell. he lean back in his chair, white and gasping, like one 
who has received a mortal blow. 

“which window, mr. weld?” he asked, wipe his forehead. “which window 
was it?” 

“the next to the dining-room—mr. st. james’s window.” 

“dear me! dear me! this is, indeed, unfortunate! a man look through 
mr. st. james’s window!” he wrung his hand like a man who is at his 
wits’ end what to do. 

“i shall be passing the police-station, sir. would you wish me to 
mention the matter?” 

“no, no,” he cried, suddenly, master his extreme agitation; “i have 
no doubt that it was some poor tramp who intended to beg. i attach no 
importance to the incident—none at all. don’t let me detain you, mr. 
weld, if you wish to go out.” 

i left him sitting in his study with reassure words upon his lips, but 
with horror upon his face. my heart was heavy for my little employer as 
i start off once more for town. as i look back from the gate at the 
square of light which marked the window of my colleague, i sudden saw 
the black outline of dr. mccarthy’s figure passing against the lamp. he 
had hasten from his study then to tell st. james what he had heard. 
what was the meaning of it all, this atmosphere of mystery, this 
inexplicable terror, these confidence between two such dissimilar men? 
i thought and thought as i walked, but do what i would i could not hit 
upon any adequate conclusion. i little knew how near i was to the 
solution of the problem. 

it was very late—nearly twelve o’clock—when i returned, and the lights 
were all out save one in the doctor’s study. the black, gloomy house 
loom before me as i walk up the drive, its sombre bulk broken only 
by the one glimmer point of brightness. i let myself in with my 
latch-key, and was about to enter my own room when my attention was 
arrest by a short, sharp cry like that of a man in pain. i stood and 
listened, my hand upon the handle of my door. 

all was silent in the house save for a distant murmur of voice which 
came, i knew, from the doctor’s room. i stole quiet down the corridor 
in that direction. the sound resolve itself now into two voices, the 
rough bully tone of st. james and the lower tone of the doctor, the 
one apparently insist and the other argue and pleading. four thin 
lines of light in the black show me the door of the doctor’s room, 
and step by step i drew near to it in the darkness. st. james’s voice 
within rose loud and louder, and his words now came plainly to my ear. 

“i’ll have every pound of it. if you won’t give it me i’ll take it. do 
you hear?” 

dr. mccarthy’s reply was inaudible, but the angry voice broke in again. 

“leave you destitute! i leave you this little goldmine of a school, and 
that’s enough for one old man, is it not? how am i to set up in 
australia without money? answer me that!” 

again the doctor said something in a soothe voice, but his answer only 
rouse his companion to a higher pitch of fury. 

“done for me! what have you ever done for me except what you couldn’t 
help doing? it was for your good name, not for my safety, that you 
cared. but enough cackle! i must get on my way before morning. will you 
open your safe or will you not?” 

“oh, james, how can you use me so?” cry a wail voice, and then 
there came a sudden little scream of pain. at the sound of that helpless 
appeal from brutal violence i lost for once that temper upon which i had 
pride myself. every bit of manhood in me cry out against any further 
neutrality. with my walking cane in my hand i rush into the study. as 
i did so i was conscious that the hall-door bell was violent ringing. 

“you villain!” i cried, “let him go!” 

the two men were standing in front of a small safe, which stood against 
one wall of the doctor’s room. st. james held the old man by the wrist, 
and he had twist his arm round in order to force him to produce the 
key. my little head master, white but resolute, was struggle furiously 
in the grip of the burly athlete. the bully glare over his shoulder at 
me with a mixture of fury and terror upon his brutal features. then, 
realize that i was alone, he drop his victim and made for me with a 
horrible curse. 

“you infernal spy!” he cried. “i’ll do for you anyhow before i leave.” 

i am not a very strong man, and i realize that i was helpless if once 
at close quarters. twice i cut at him with my stick, but he rush in at 
me with a murderous growl, and seize me by the throat with both his 
muscular hands. i fell backwards and he on the top of me, with a grip 
which was squeeze the life from me. i was conscious of his malignant 
yellow-tinged eyes within a few inch of my own, and then with a 
beating of pulse in my head and a singing in my ears, my senses slip 
away from me. but even in that supreme moment i was aware that the 
door-bell was still violent ringing. 

when i came to myself, i was lie upon the sofa in dr. mccarthy’s 
study, and the doctor himself was seat beside me. he appear to be 
watch me intent and anxiously, for as i open my eyes and look 
about me he gave a great cry of relief. “thank god!” he cried. “thank 
god!” 

“where is he?” i asked, look round the room. as i did so, i became 
aware that the furniture was scattered in every direction, and that 
there were trace of an even more violent struggle than that in which i 
had been engaged. 

the doctor sank his face between his hands. 

“they have him,” he groaned. “after these years of trial they have him 
again. but how thankful i am that he has not for a second time stain 
his hand in blood.” 

as the doctor spoke i became aware that a man in the braid jacket of 
an inspector of police was standing in the doorway. 

“yes, sir,” he remarked, “you have had a pretty narrow escape. if we had 
not got in when we did, you would not be here to tell the tale. i don’t 
know that i ever saw any one much near to the undertaker.” 

i sat up with my hand to my throb head. 

“dr. mccarthy,” said i, “this is all a mystery to me. i should be glad 
if you could explain to me who this man is, and why you have tolerate 
him so long in your house.” 

“i owe you an explanation, mr. weld—and the more so since you have, in 
so chivalrous a fashion, almost sacrifice your life in my defence. 
there is no reason now for secrecy. in a word, mr. weld, this unhappy 
man’s real name is james mccarthy, and he is my only son.” 

“your son?” 

“alas, yes. what sin have i ever committed that i should have such a 
punishment? he has made my whole life a misery from the first years of 
his boyhood. violent, headstrong, selfish, unprincipled, he has always 
been the same. at eighteen he was a criminal. at twenty, in a paroxysm 
of passion, he took the life of a boon companion and was try for 
murder. he only just escape the gallows, and he was condemn to penal 
servitude. three years ago he succeed in escaping, and managed, in 
face of a thousand obstacles, to reach my house in london. my wife’s 
heart had been broken by his condemnation, and as he had succeed in 
get a suit of ordinary clothes, there was no one here to recognize 
him. for month he lay conceal in the attic until the first search of 
the police should be over. then i gave him employment here, as you have 
seen, though by his rough and overbearing manners he made my own life 
miserable, and that of his fellow-masters unbearable. you have been with 
us for four months, mr. weld, but no other master endure him so long. i 
apologize now for all you have had to submit to, but i ask you what else 
could i do? for his dead mother’s sake i could not let harm come to him 
as long as it was in my power to fend it off. only under my roof could 
he find a refuge—the only spot in all the world—and how could i keep him 
here without its exciting remark unless i gave him some occupation? i 
made him english master therefore, and in that capacity i have protect 
him here for three years. you have no doubt observe that he never 
during the daytime went beyond the college grounds. you now understand 
the reason. but when to-night you came to me with your report of a man 
who was look through his window, i understood that his retreat was at 
last discovered. i besought him to fly at once, but he had been 
drinking, the unhappy fellow, and my words fell upon deaf ears. when at 
last he made up his mind to go he wish to take from me in his flight 
every shilling which i possessed. it was your entrance which save me 
from him, while the police in turn arrive only just in time to rescue 
you. i have made myself amenable to the law by harbour an escape 
prisoner, and remain here in the custody of the inspector, but a prison 
has no terror for me after what i have endure in this house during the 
last three years.” 

“it seem to me, doctor,” said the inspector, “that, if you have broken 
the law, you have had quite enough punishment already.” 

“god know i have!” cry dr. mccarthy, and sank his haggard face upon 
his hands. 




the brown hand 


every one know that sir dominick holden, the famous indian surgeon, 
made me his heir, and that his death change me in an hour from a 
hard-working and impecunious medical man to a well-to-do landed 
proprietor. many know also that there were at least five people between 
the inheritance and me, and that sir dominick’s selection appear to be 
altogether arbitrary and whimsical. i can assure them, however, that 
they are quite mistaken, and that, although i only knew sir dominick in 
the close years of his life, there were none the less very real 
reason why he should show his goodwill towards me. as a matter of fact, 
though i say it myself, no man ever did more for another than i did for 
my indian uncle. i cannot expect the story to be believed, but it is so 
singular that i should feel that it was a breach of duty if i did not 
put it upon record—so here it is, and your belief or incredulity is your 
own affair. 

sir dominick holden, c.b., k.c.s.i., and i don’t know what besides, was 
the most distinguished indian surgeon of his day. in the army 
originally, he afterwards settled down into civil practice in bombay, 
and visit as a consultant every part of india. his name is best 
remember in connection with the oriental hospital, which he found 
and supported. the time came, however, when his iron constitution began 
to show sign of the long strain to which he had subject it, and his 
brother practitioner (who were not, perhaps, entire disinterested 
upon the point) were unanimous in recommend him to return to england. 
he held on so long as he could, but at last he develop nervous 
symptom of a very pronounced character, and so came back, a broken man, 
to his native county of wiltshire. he bought a considerable estate with 
an ancient manor-house upon the edge of salisbury plain, and devoted his 
old age to the study of comparative pathology, which had been his 
learned hobby all his life, and in which he was a foremost authority. 

we of the family were, as may be imagined, much excited by the news of 
the return of this rich and childless uncle to england. on his part, 
although by no means exuberant in his hospitality, he show some sense 
of his duty to his relations, and each of us in turn had an invitation 
to visit him. from the account of my cousin it appear to be a 
melancholy business, and it was with mixed feelings that i at last 
received my own summons to appear at rodenhurst. my wife was so 
careful exclude in the invitation that my first impulse was to refuse 
it, but the interests of the children had to be considered, and so, with 
her consent, i set out one october afternoon upon my visit to wiltshire, 
with little thought of what that visit was to entail. 

my uncle’s estate was situated where the arable land of the plain 
begin to swell upwards into the round chalk hill which are 
characteristic of the county. as i drove from dinton station in the 
wane light of that autumn day, i was impress by the weird nature of 
the scenery. the few scattered cottage of the peasant were so dwarf 
by the huge evidence of prehistoric life, that the present appear to 
be a dream and the past to be the obtrusive and masterful reality. the 
road wound through the valleys, form by a succession of grassy hills, 
and the summit of each was cut and carve into the most elaborate 
fortifications, some circular and some square, but all on a scale which 
has defy the wind and the rains of many centuries. some call them 
roman and some british, but their true origin and the reason for this 
particular tract of country being so interlace with entrenchment have 
never been finally made clear. here and there on the long, smooth, 
olive-coloured slope there rose small round barrow or tumuli. 
beneath them lie the cremate ashes of the race which cut so deep into 
the hills, but their grave tell us nothing save that a jar full of dust 
represent the man who once labour under the sun. 

it was through this weird country that i approach my uncle’s residence 
of rodenhurst, and the house was, as i found, in due keeping with its 
surroundings. two broken and weather-stained pillars, each surmount by 
a mutilate heraldic emblem, flank the entrance to a neglect drive. 
a cold wind whistle through the elm which line it, and the air was 
full of the drift leaves. at the far end, under the gloomy arch of 
trees, a single yellow lamp burn steadily. in the dim half-light of 
the coming night i saw a long, low building stretch out two irregular 
wings, with deep eaves, a slope gambrel roof, and wall which were 
criss-crossed with timber balk in the fashion of the tudors. the cheery 
light of a fire flicker in the broad, lattice window to the left of 
the low-porched door, and this, as it proved, marked the study of my 
uncle, for it was thither that i was led by his butler in order to make 
my host’s acquaintance. 

he was cower over his fire, for the moist chill of an english autumn 
had set him shivering. his lamp was unlit, and i only saw the red glow 
of the ember beating upon a huge, craggy face, with a red indian nose 
and cheek, and deep furrow and seam from eye to chin, the sinister 
mark of hidden volcanic fires. he sprang up at my entrance with 
something of an old-world courtesy and welcome me warm to rodenhurst. 
at the same time i was conscious, as the lamp was carry in, that it 
was a very critical pair of light-blue eyes which look out at me from 
under shaggy eyebrows, like scout beneath a bush, and that this 
outlandish uncle of mine was careful reading off my character with all 
the ease of a practised observer and an experienced man of the world. 

for my part i look at him, and look again, for i had never seen a 
man whose appearance was more fitted to hold one’s attention. his figure 
was the framework of a giant, but he had fallen away his coat dangle 
straight down in a shocking fashion from a pair of broad and bony 
shoulders. all his limb were huge and yet emaciated, and i could not 
take my gaze from his knobby wrists, and long, gnarled hands. but his 
eyes—those peer light-blue eyes—they were the most arrest of any 
of his peculiarities. it was not their colour alone, nor was it the 
ambush of hair in which they lurked; but it was the expression which i 
read in them. for the appearance and bearing of the man were masterful, 
and one expect a certain corresponding arrogance in his eyes, but 
instead of that i read the look which tell of a spirit cow and 
crushed, the furtive, expectant look of the dog whose master has taken 
the whip from the rack. i form my own medical diagnosis upon one 
glance at those critical and yet appealing eyes. i believe that he was 
stricken with some mortal ailment, that he knew himself to be expose to 
sudden death, and that he live in terror of it. such was my judgment—a 
false one, as the event showed; but i mention it that it may help you to 
realize the look which i read in his eyes. 

my uncle’s welcome was, as i have said, a courteous one, and in an hour 
or so i found myself seat between him and his wife at a comfortable 
dinner, with curious pungent delicacy upon the table, and a stealthy, 
quick-eyed oriental waiter behind his chair. the old couple had come 
round to that tragic imitation of the dawn of life when husband and 
wife, have lost or scattered all those who were their intimates, find 
themselves face to face and alone once more, their work done, and the 
end near fast. those who have reach that stage in sweet and 
love, who can change their winter into a gentle indian summer, have come 
as victor through the ordeal of life. lady holden was a small, alert 
woman, with a kindly eye, and her expression as she glance at him was a 
certificate of character to her husband. and yet, though i read a mutual 
love in their glances, i read also a mutual horror, and recognize in 
her face some reflection of that stealthy fear which i detect in his. 
their talk was sometimes merry and sometimes sad, but there was a forced 
note in their merriment and a naturalness in their sad which told me 
that a heavy heart beat upon either side of me. 

we were sitting over our first glass of wine, and the servant had left 
the room, when the conversation took a turn which produce a remarkable 
effect upon my host and hostess. i cannot recall what it was which 
start the topic of the supernatural, but it end in my showing them 
that the abnormal in psychic experience was a subject to which i had, 
like many neurologists, devoted a great deal of attention. i conclude 
by narrate my experience when, as a member of the psychic research 
society, i had form one of a committee of three who spent the night in 
a haunt house. our adventure were neither exciting nor convincing, 
but, such as it was, the story appear to interest my auditor in a 
remarkable degree. they listen with an eager silence, and i caught a 
look of intelligence between them which i could not understand. lady 
holden immediately afterwards rose and left the room. 

sir dominick pushed the cigar-box over to me, and we smoke for some 
little time in silence. that huge bony hand of his was twitch as he 
raise it with his cheroot to his lips, and i felt that the man’s nerves 
were vibrate like fiddle-strings. my instinct told me that he was on 
the verge of some intimate confidence, and i fear to speak lest i 
should interrupt it. at last he turn towards me with a spasmodic 
gesture like a man who throw his last scruple to the winds. 

“from the little that i have seen of you it appear to me, dr. 
hardacre,” said he, “that you are the very man i have want to meet.” 

“i am delight to hear it, sir.” 

“your head seem to be cool and steady. you will acquit me of any desire 
to flatter you, for the circumstances are too serious to permit of 
insincerities. you have some special knowledge upon these subjects, and 
you evidently view them from that philosophical standpoint which rob 
them of all vulgar terror. i presume that the sight of an apparition 
would not seriously discompose you?” 

“i think not, sir.” 

“would even interest you, perhaps?” 

“most intensely.” 

“as a psychic observer, you would probably investigate it in as 
impersonal a fashion as an astronomer investigate a wandering comet?” 

“precisely.” 

he gave a heavy sigh. 

“believe me, dr. hardacre, there was a time when i could have spoken as 
you do now. my nerve was a by-word in india. even the mutiny never shook 
it for an instant. and yet you see what i am reduce to—the most 
timorous man, perhaps, in all this county of wiltshire. do not speak too 
brave upon this subject, or you may find yourself subject to as 
long-drawn a test as i am—a test which can only end in the madhouse or 
the grave.” 

i wait patient until he should see fit to go farther in his 
confidence. his preamble had, i need not say, fill me with interest 
and expectation. 

“for some years, dr. hardacre,” he continued, “my life and that of my 
wife have been made miserable by a cause which is so grotesque that it 
border upon the ludicrous. and yet familiarity has never made it more 
easy to bear—on the contrary, as time pass my nerves become more worn 
and shatter by the constant attrition. if you have no physical fears, 
dr. hardacre, i should very much value your opinion upon this phenomenon 
which trouble us so.” 

“for what it is worth my opinion is entire at your service. may i ask 
the nature of the phenomenon?” 

“i think that your experience will have a higher evident value if 
you are not told in advance what you may expect to encounter. you are 
yourself aware of the quibble of unconscious cerebration and subjective 
impression with which a scientific sceptic may throw a doubt upon your 
statement. it would be as well to guard against them in advance.” 

“what shall i do, then?” 

“i will tell you. would you mind following me this way?” he led me out 
of the dining-room and down a long passage until we came to a terminal 
door. inside there was a large bare room fitted as a laboratory, with 
numerous scientific instrument and bottles. a shelf ran along one side, 
upon which there stood a long line of glass jar contain pathological 
and anatomical specimens. 

“you see that i still dabble in some of my old studies,” said sir 
dominick. “these jar are the remains of what was once a most excellent 
collection, but unfortunately i lost the greater part of them when my 
house was burn down in bombay in ‘92. it was a most unfortunate affair 
for me—in more ways than one. i had example of many rare conditions, 
and my splenic collection was probably unique. these are the survivors.” 

i glance over them, and saw that they really were of a very great value 
and rarity from a pathological point of view: bloated organs, gape 
cysts, distort bones, odious parasites—a singular exhibition of the 
product of india. 

“there is, as you see, a small settee here,” said my host. “it was far 
from our intention to offer a guest so meagre an accommodation, but 
since affair have taken this turn, it would be a great kindness upon 
your part if you would consent to spend the night in this apartment. i 
beg that you will not hesitate to let me know if the idea should be at 
all repugnant to you.” 

“on the contrary,” i said, “it is most acceptable.” 

“my own room is the second on the left, so that if you should feel that 
you are in need of company a call would always bring me to your side.” 

“i trust that i shall not be compel to disturb you.” 

“it is unlikely that i shall be asleep. i do not sleep much. do not 
hesitate to summon me.” 

and so with this agreement we join lady holden in the drawing-room and 
talk of lighter things. 

it was no affectation upon my part to say that the prospect of my 
night’s adventure was an agreeable one. i have no pretence to greater 
physical courage than my neighbours, but familiarity with a subject rob 
it of those vague and undefined terror which are the most appalling to 
the imaginative mind. the human brain is capable of only one strong 
emotion at a time, and if it be fill with curiosity or scientific 
enthusiasm, there is no room for fear. it is true that i had my uncle’s 
assurance that he had himself originally taken this point of view, but i 
reflect that the breakdown of his nervous system might be due to his 
forty years in india as much as to any psychic experience which had 
befallen him. i at least was sound in nerve and brain, and it was with 
something of the pleasurable thrill of anticipation with which the 
sportsman take his position beside the haunt of his game that i shut 
the laboratory door behind me, and partially undressing, lay down upon 
the rug-covered settee. 

it was not an ideal atmosphere for a bedroom. the air was heavy with 
many chemical odours, that of methylate spirit predominating. nor were 
the decoration of my chamber very sedative. the odious line of glass 
jar with their relics of disease and suffering stretch in front of my 
very eyes. there was no blind to the window, and a three-quarter moon 
stream its white light into the room, tracing a silver square with 
filigree lattice upon the opposite wall. when i had extinguish my 
candle this one bright patch in the midst of the general gloom had 
certainly an eerie and discompose aspect. a rigid and absolute silence 
reign throughout the old house, so that the low swish of the branch 
in the garden came soft and soothing to my ears. it may have been 
the hypnotic lullaby of this gentle susurrus, or it may have been the 
result of my tire day, but after many doze and many effort to 
regain my clear of perception, i fell at last into a deep and 
dreamless sleep. 

i was awaken by some sound in the room, and i instantly raise myself 
upon my elbow on the couch. some hour had passed, for the square patch 
upon the wall had slid downwards and sideways until it lay oblique at 
the end of my bed. the rest of the room was in deep shadow. at first i 
could see nothing, presently, as my eyes became accustomed to the faint 
light, i was aware, with a thrill which all my scientific absorption 
could not entire prevent, that something was moving slow along the 
line of the wall. a gentle, shuffle sound, as of soft slippers, came 
to my ears, and i dim discern a human figure walking stealthy from 
the direction of the door. as it emerge into the patch of moonlight i 
saw very clearly what it was and how it was employed. it was a man, 
short and squat, dress in some sort of dark-grey gown, which hung 
straight from his shoulder to his feet. the moon shone upon the side of 
his face, and i saw that it was chocolate-brown in colour, with a ball 
of black hair like a woman’s at the back of his head. he walk slowly, 
and his eyes were cast upwards towards the line of bottle which 
contained those gruesome remnant of humanity. he seem to examine each 
jar with attention, and then to pass on to the next. when he had come to 
the end of the line, immediately opposite my bed, he stopped, face me, 
threw up his hand with a gesture of despair, and vanish from my 
sight. 

i have said that he threw up his hands, but i should have said his arms, 
for as he assume that attitude of despair i observe a singular 
peculiarity about his appearance. he had only one hand! as the sleeve 
droop down from the upflung arms i saw the left plainly, but the right 
end in a knobby and unsightly stump. in every other way his appearance 
was so natural, and i had both seen and heard him so clearly, that i 
could easily have believe that he was an indian servant of sir 
dominick’s who had come into my room in search of something. it was only 
his sudden disappearance which suggest anything more sinister to me. 
as it was i sprang from my couch, lit a candle, and examine the whole 
room carefully. there were no sign of my visitor, and i was forced to 
conclude that there had really been something outside the normal law of 
nature in his appearance. i lay awake for the remainder of the night, 
but nothing else occur to disturb me. 

i am an early riser, but my uncle was an even early one, for i found 
him pace up and down the lawn at the side of the house. he ran towards 
me in his eager when he saw me come out from the door. 

“well, well!” he cried. “did you see him?” 

“an indian with one hand?” 

“precisely.” 

“yes, i saw him”—and i told him all that occurred. when i had finished, 
he led the way into his study. 

“we have a little time before breakfast,” said he. “it will suffice to 
give you an explanation of this extraordinary affair—so far as i can 
explain that which is essentially inexplicable. in the first place, when 
i tell you that for four years i have never pass one single night, 
either in bombay, aboard ship, or here in england without my sleep being 
broken by this fellow, you will understand why it is that i am a wreck 
of my former self. his programme is always the same. he appear by my 
bedside, shakes me roughly by the shoulder, pass from my room into the 
laboratory, walk slow along the line of my bottles, and then 
vanishes. for more than a thousand times he has gone through the same 
routine.” 

“what do he want?” 

“he wants his hand.” 

“his hand?” 

“yes, it came about in this way. i was summon to peshawur for a 
consultation some ten years ago, and while there i was ask to look at 
the hand of a native who was passing through with an afghanistan caravan. the 
fellow came from some mountain tribe living away at the back of beyond 
somewhere on the other side of kaffiristan. he talk a bastard pushtoo, 
and it was all i could do to understand him. he was suffering from a 
soft sarcomatous swelling of one of the metacarpal joints, and i made 
him realize that it was only by lose his hand that he could hope to 
save his life. after much persuasion he consent to the operation, and 
he ask me, when it was over, what fee i demanded. the poor fellow was 
almost a beggar, so that the idea of a fee was absurd, but i answer in 
jest that my fee should be his hand, and that i propose to add it to my 
pathological collection. 

“to my surprise he demur very much to the suggestion, and he 
explain that according to his religion it was an all-important matter 
that the body should be reunite after death, and so make a perfect 
dwelling for the spirit. the belief is, of course, an old one, and the 
mummy of the egypt arose from an analogous superstition. i 
answer him that his hand was already off, and ask him how he 
intended to preserve it. he reply that he would pickle it in salt and 
carry it about with him. i suggest that it might be safe in my 
keeping than in his, and that i had better means than salt for 
preserve it. on realize that i really intended to careful keep it, 
his opposition vanish instantly. ‘but remember, sahib,’ said he, ‘i 
shall want it back when i am dead.’ i laugh at the remark, and so the 
matter ended. i return to my practice, and he no doubt in the course 
of time was able to continue his journey to afghanistan. 

“well, as i told you last night, i had a bad fire in my house at bombay. 
half of it was burn down, and, among other things, my pathological 
collection was largely destroyed. what you see are the poor remains of 
it. the hand of the hillman went with the rest, but i gave the matter no 
particular thought at the time. that was six years ago. 

“four years ago—two years after the fire—i was awaken one night by a 
furious tug at my sleeve. i sat up under the impression that my 
favourite mastiff was try to arouse me. instead of this, i saw my 
indian patient of long ago, dress in the long grey gown which was the 
badge of his people. he was holding up his stump and look 
reproachful at me. he then went over to my bottles, which at that time 
i kept in my room, and he examine them carefully, after which he gave a 
gesture of anger and vanished. i realize that he had just died, and 
that he had come to claim my promise that i should keep his limb in 
safety for him. 

“well, there you have it all, dr. hardacre. every night at the same hour 
for four years this performance has been repeated. it is a simple thing 
in itself, but it has worn me out like water drop on a stone. it has 
brought a vile insomnia with it, for i cannot sleep now for the 
expectation of his coming. it has poison my old age and that of my 
wife, who has been the share in this great trouble. but there is the 
breakfast gong, and she will be wait impatient to know how it fare 
with you last night. we are both much indebted to you for your 
gallantry, for it take something from the weight of our misfortune when 
we share it, even for a single night, with a friend, and it reassure us 
as to our sanity, which we are sometimes driven to question.” 

this was the curious narrative which sir dominick confide to me—a story 
which to many would have appear to be a grotesque impossibility, but 
which, after my experience of the night before, and my previous 
knowledge of such things, i was prepared to accept as an absolute fact. 
i thought deep over the matter, and brought the whole range of my 
reading and experience to bear upon it. after breakfast, i surprise my 
host and hostess by announce that i was return to london by the 
next train. 

“my dear doctor,” cry sir dominick in great distress, “you make me 
feel that i have been guilty of a gross breach of hospitality in 
intrude this unfortunate matter upon you. i should have borne my own 
burden.” 

“it is, indeed, that matter which is taking me to london,” i answered; 
“but you are mistaken, i assure you, if you think that my experience of 
last night was an unpleasant one to me. on the contrary, i am about to 
ask your permission to return in the evening and spend one more night in 
your laboratory. i am very eager to see this visitor once again.” 

my uncle was exceedingly anxious to know what i was about to do, but my 
fear of raise false hope prevent me from telling him. i was back 
in my own consulting-room a little after luncheon, and was confirm my 
memory of a passage in a recent book upon occult which had arrest 
my attention when i read it. 

“in the case of earth-bound spirits,” said my authority, “some one 
dominant idea obsess them at the hour of death is sufficient to hold 
them to this material world. they are the amphibia of this life and of 
the next, capable of passing from one to the other as the turtle pass 
from land to water. the cause which may bind a soul so strong to a 
life which its body has abandoned are any violent emotion. avarice, 
revenge, anxiety, love, and pity have all been known to have this 
effect. as a rule it spring from some unfulfill wish, and when the 
wish has been fulfill the material bond relaxes. there are many case 
upon record which show the singular persistence of these visitors, and 
also their disappearance when their wish have been fulfilled, or in 
some case when a reasonable compromise has been effected.” 

“_a reasonable compromise effected_”—those were the words which i had 
brood over all the morning, and which i now verify in the original. 
no actual atone could be made here—but a reasonable compromise! i 
made my way as fast as a train could take me to the shadwell seamen’s 
hospital, where my old friend jack hewett was house-surgeon. without 
explain the situation i made him understand exactly what it was that 
i wanted. 

“a brown man’s hand!” said he, in amazement. “what in the world do you 
want that for?” 

“never mind. i’ll tell you some day. i know that your ward are full of 
indians.” 

“i should think so. but a hand——” he thought a little and then struck a 
bell. 

“travers,” said he to a student-dresser, “what became of the hand of 
the lascar which we took off yesterday? i mean the fellow from the east 
india dock who got caught in the steam winch.” 

“they are in the _post-mortem_ room, sir.” 

“just pack one of them in antiseptic and give it to dr. hardacre.” 

and so i found myself back at rodenhurst before dinner with this curious 
outcome of my day in town. i still said nothing to sir dominick, but i 
slept that night in the laboratory, and i placed the lascar’s hand in 
one of the glass jar at the end of my couch. 

so interested was i in the result of my experiment that sleep was out of 
the question. i sat with a shade lamp beside me and wait patient 
for my visitor. this time i saw him clearly from the first. he appear 
beside the door, nebulous for an instant, and then harden into as 
distinct an outline as any living man. the slipper beneath his grey 
gown were red and heelless, which account for the low, shuffle sound 
which he made as he walked. as on the previous night he pass slow 
along the line of bottle until he pause before that which contained 
the hand. he reach up to it, his whole figure quiver with 
expectation, took it down, examine it eagerly, and then, with a face 
which was convulse with fury and disappointment, he hurl it down on 
the floor. there was a crash which resound through the house, and when 
i look up the mutilate indian had disappeared. a moment later my door 
flew open and sir dominick rush in. 

“you are not hurt?” he cried. 

“no—but deep disappointed.” 

he look in astonishment at the splinter of glass, and the brown hand 
lie upon the floor. 

“good god!” he cried. “what is this?” 

i told him my idea and its wretched sequel. he listen intently, but 
shook his head. 

“it was well thought of,” said he, “but i fear that there is no such 
easy end to my sufferings. but one thing i now insist upon. it is that 
you shall never again upon any pretext occupy this room. my fear that 
something might have happen to you—when i heard that crash—have been 
the most acute of all the agony which i have undergone. i will not 
expose myself to a repetition of it.” 

he allow me, however, to spend the remainder of that night where i 
was, and i lay there worry over the problem and lament my own 
failure. with the first light of morning there was the lascar’s hand 
still lie upon the floor to remind me of my fiasco. i lay look at 
it—and as i lay sudden an idea flew like a bullet through my head and 
brought me quiver with excitement out of my couch. i raise the grim 
relic from where it had fallen. yes, it was indeed so. the hand was the 
_left_ hand of the lascar. 

by the first train i was on my way to town, and hurried at once to the 
seamen’s hospital. i remember that both hand of the lascar had been 
amputated, but i was terrify lest the precious organ which i was in 
search of might have been already consume in the crematory. my suspense 
was soon ended. it had still been preserve in the _post-mortem_ room. 
and so i return to rodenhurst in the evening with my mission 
accomplished and the material for a fresh experiment. 

but sir dominick holden would not hear of my occupy the laboratory 
again. to all my entreaty he turn a deaf ear. it offend his sense 
of hospitality, and he could no long permit it. i left the hand, 
therefore, as i had done its fellow the night before, and i occupy a 
comfortable bedroom in another portion of the house, some distance from 
the scene of my adventures. 

but in spite of that my sleep was not destined to be uninterrupted. in 
the dead of night my host burst into my room, a lamp in his hand. his 
huge gaunt figure was envelop in a loose dressing-gown, and his whole 
appearance might certainly have seem more formidable to a weak-nerved 
man than that of the indian of the night before. but it was not his 
entrance so much as his expression which amaze me. he had turn 
sudden younger by twenty years at the least. his eyes were shining, 
his features radiant, and he wave one hand in triumph over his head. i 
sat up astounded, staring sleepy at this extraordinary visitor. but 
his words soon drove the sleep from my eyes. 

“we have done it! we have succeeded!” he shouted. “my dear hardacre, how 
can i ever in this world repay you?” 

“you don’t mean to say that it is all right?” 

“indeed i do. i was sure that you would not mind being awaken to hear 
such blessed news.” 

“mind! i should think not indeed. but is it really certain?” 

“i have no doubt whatever upon the point. i owe you such a debt, my dear 
nephew, as i have never owe a man before, and never expect to. what 
can i possibly do for you that is commensurate? providence must have 
sent you to my rescue. you have save both my reason and my life, for 
another six month of this must have seen me either in a cell or a 
coffin. and my wife—it was wearing her out before my eyes. never could i 
have believe that any human being could have lift this burden off 
me.” he seize my hand and wrung it in his bony grip. 

“it was only an experiment—a forlorn hope—but i am delight from my 
heart that it has succeeded. but how do you know that it is all right? 
have you seen something?” 

he seat himself at the foot of my bed. 

“i have seen enough,” said he. “it satisfy me that i shall be trouble 
no more. what has pass is easily told. you know that at a certain hour 
this creature always come to me. to-night he arrive at the usual time, 
and arouse me with even more violence than is his custom. i can only 
surmise that his disappointment of last night increase the bitter 
of his anger against me. he look angry at me, and then went on his 
usual round. but in a few minutes i saw him, for the first time since 
this persecution began, return to my chamber. he was smiling. i saw the 
gleam of his white teeth through the dim light. he stood facing me at 
the end of my bed, and three times he made the low eastern salaam which 
is their solemn leave-taking. and the third time that he bowed he raise 
his arms over his head, and i saw his _two_ hand outstretched in the 
air. so he vanished, and, as i believe, for ever.” 

* * * * * 

so that is the curious experience which won me the affection and the 
gratitude of my celebrated uncle, the famous indian surgeon. his 
anticipation were realized, and never again was he disturbed by the 
visit of the restless hillman in search of his lost member. sir 
dominick and lady holden spent a very happy old age, unclouded, so far 
as i know, by any trouble, and they finally die during the great 
influenza epidemic within a few week of each other. in his lifetime he 
always turn to me for advice in everything which concerned that 
english life of which he knew so little; and i aid him also in the 
purchase and development of his estates. it was no great surprise to me, 
therefore, that i found myself eventually promote over the head of 
five exasperate cousins, and change in a single day from a 
hard-working country doctor into the head of an important wiltshire 
family. i at least have reason to bless the memory of the man with the 
brown hand, and the day when i was fortunate enough to relieve 
rodenhurst of his unwelcome presence. 




the fiend of the cooperage 


it was no easy matter to bring the _gamecock_ up to the island, for the 
river had swept down so much silt that the bank extend for many mile 
out into the atlantic. the coast was hardly to be seen when the first 
white curl of the breaker warn us of our danger, and from there 
onwards we made our way very careful under mainsail and jib, keeping 
the broken water well to the left, as is indicate on the chart. more 
than once her bottom touched the sand (we were drawing something under 
six feet at the time), but we had always way enough and luck enough to 
carry us through. finally, the water shoal very rapidly, but they had 
sent a canoe from the factory, and the krooboy pilot brought us within 
two hundred yard of the island. here we drop our anchor, for the 
gesture of the negro indicate that we could not hope to get any 
farther. the blue of the sea had change to the brown of the river, and, 
even under the shelter of the island, the current was singing and 
swirl round our bows. the stream appear to be in spate, for it was 
over the roots of the palm trees, and everywhere upon its muddy, greasy 
surface we could see log of wood and debris of all sort which had been 
carry down by the flood. 

when i had assured myself that we swung secure at our moorings, i 
thought it best to begin water at once, for the place look as if it 
reek with fever. the heavy river, the muddy, shining banks, the bright 
poisonous green of the jungle, the moist steam in the air, they were all 
so many danger signal to one who could read them. i sent the long-boat 
off, therefore, with two large hogsheads, which should be sufficient to 
last us until we made st. paul de loanda. for my own part i took the 
dinghy and row for the island, for i could see the union jack 
flutter above the palm to mark the position of armitage and wilson’s 
trade station. 

when i had clear the grove, i could see the place, a long, low, 
whitewash building, with a deep verandah in front, and an immense pile 
of palm oil barrel heap upon either flank of it. a row of surf boat 
and canoe lay along the beach, and a single small jetty project into 
the river. two men in white suit with red cummerbund round their 
waist were wait upon the end of it to receive me. one was a large 
portly fellow with a greyish beard. the other was slender and tall, with 
a pale pinched face, which was half conceal by a great mushroom-shaped 
hat. 

“very glad to see you,” said the latter, cordially. “i am walker, the 
agent of armitage and wilson. let me introduce dr. severall of the same 
company. it is not often we see a private yacht in these parts.” 

“she’s the _gamecock_,” i explained. “i’m owner and captain—meldrum is 
the name.” 

“exploring?” he asked. 

“i’m a lepidopterist—a butterfly-catcher. i’ve been do the west coast 
from senegal downwards.” 

“good sport?” ask the doctor, turning a slow yellow-shot eye upon me. 

“i have forty case full. we came in here to water, and also to see what 
you have in my line.” 

these introduction and explanation had fill up the time whilst my 
two krooboy were making the dinghy fast. then i walk down the jetty 
with one of my new acquaintance upon either side, each ply me with 
questions, for they had seen no white man for months. 

“what do we do?” said the doctor, when i had begun ask question in 
my turn. “our business keeps us pretty busy, and in our leisure time we 
talk politics.” 

“yes, by the special mercy of providence severall is a rank radical and 
i am a good stiff unionist, and we talk home rule for two solid hour 
every evening.” 

“and drink quinine cocktails,” said the doctor. “we’re both pretty well 
salt now, but our normal temperature was about 103 last year. i 
shouldn’t, as an impartial adviser, recommend you to stay here very long 
unless you are collect bacilli as well as butterflies. the mouth of 
the ogowai river will never develop into a health resort.” 

there is nothing fine than the way in which these outlying picket of 
civilization distil a grim humour out of their desolate situation, and 
turn not only a bold, but a laugh face upon the chance which their 
lives may bring. everywhere from sierra leone downwards i had found the 
same reek swamps, the same isolated fever-racked community and the 
same bad jokes. there is something approach to the divine in that 
power of man to rise above his conditions and to use his mind for the 
purpose of mock at the misery of his body. 

“dinner will be ready in about half an hour, captain meldrum,” said the 
doctor. “walker has gone in to see about it; he’s the housekeeper this 
week. meanwhile, if you like, we’ll stroll round and i’ll show you the 
sight of the island.” 

the sun had already sunk beneath the line of palm trees, and the great 
arch of the heaven above our head was like the inside of a huge shell, 
shimmer with dainty pink and delicate iridescence. no one who has 
not live in a land where the weight and heat of a napkin become 
intolerable upon the knee can imagine the blessed relief which the 
cool of evening bring along with it. in this sweet and pure air 
the doctor and i walk round the little island, he point out the 
stores, and explain the routine of his work. 

“there’s a certain romance about the place,” said he, in answer to some 
remark of mine about the dul of their lives. “we are living here 
just upon the edge of the great unknown. up there,” he continued, 
point to the north-east, “du chaillu penetrated, and found the home 
of the gorilla. that is the gaboon country—the land of the great apes. 
in this direction,” point to the south-east, “no one has been very 
far. the land which is drain by this river is practically unknown to 
europeans. every log which is carry past us by the current has come 
from an undiscovered country. i’ve often wish that i was a better 
botanist when i have seen the singular orchid and curious-looking 
plant which have been cast up on the eastern end of the island.” 

the place which the doctor indicate was a slope brown beach, freely 
litter with the flotsam of the stream. at each end was a curve point, 
like a little natural breakwater, so that a small shallow bay was left 
between. this was full of floating vegetation, with a single huge 
splinter tree lie stranded in the middle of it, the current ripple 
against its high black side. 

“these are all from up country,” said the doctor. “they get caught in 
our little bay, and then when some extra freshet come they are wash 
out again and carry out to sea.” 

“what is the tree?” i asked. 

“oh, some kind of teak i should imagine, but pretty rotten by the look 
of it. we get all sort of big hardwood tree floating past here, to say 
nothing of the palms. just come in here, will you?” 

he led the way into a long building with an immense quantity of barrel 
staves and iron hoop litter about in it. 

“this is our cooperage,” said he. “we have the staves sent out in 
bundles, and we put them together ourselves. now, you don’t see anything 
particularly sinister about this building, do you?” 

i look round at the high corrugate iron roof, the white wooden walls, 
and the earthen floor. in one corner lay a mattress and a blanket. 

“i see nothing very alarming,” said i. 

“and yet there’s something out of the common, too,” he remarked. “you 
see that bed? well, i intend to sleep there to-night. i don’t want to 
buck, but i think it’s a bit of a test for nerve.” 

“why?” 

“oh, there have been some funny goings on. you were talk about the 
monotony of our lives, but i assure you that they are sometimes quite as 
exciting as we wish them to be. you’d better come back to the house now, 
for after sundown we begin to get the fever-fog up from the marshes. 
there, you can see it coming across the river.” 

i look and saw long tentacle of white vapour writhe out from among 
the thick green underwood and crawl at us over the broad swirl 
surface of the brown river. at the same time the air turn sudden 
dank and cold. 

“there’s the dinner gong,” said the doctor. “if this matter interests 
you i’ll tell you about it afterwards.” 

it did interest me very much, for there was something earnest and 
subdued in his manner as he stood in the empty cooperage, which appeal 
very forcibly to my imagination. he was a big, bluff, hearty man, this 
doctor, and yet i had detect a curious expression in his eyes as he 
glance about him—an expression which i would not describe as one of 
fear, but rather that of a man who is alert and on his guard. 

“by the way,” said i, as we return to the house, “you have shown me 
the hut of a good many of your native assistants, but i have not seen 
any of the native themselves.” 

“they sleep in the hulk over yonder,” the doctor answered, point over 
to one of the banks. 

“indeed. i should not have thought in that case that they would need the 
huts.” 

“oh, they use the hut until quite recently. we’ve put them on the hulk 
until they recover their confidence a little. they were all half mad 
with fright, so we let them go, and nobody sleep on the island except 
walker and myself.” 

“what frightened them?” i asked. 

“well, that bring us back to the same story. i suppose walker has no 
objection to your hearing all about it. i don’t know why we should make 
any secret about it, though it is certainly a pretty bad business.” 

he made no further allusion to it during the excellent dinner which had 
been prepared in my honour. it appear that no soon had the little 
white topsail of the _gamecock_ shown round cape lopez than these kind 
fellow had begun to prepare their famous pepper-pot—which is the 
pungent stew peculiar to the west coast—and to boil their yam and sweet 
potatoes. we sat down to as good a native dinner as one could wish, 
serve by a smart sierra leone wait boy. i was just remark to 
myself that he at least had not share in the general flight when, 
have laid the dessert and wine upon the table, he raise his hand to 
his turban. 

“anyting else i do, massa walker?” he asked. 

“no, i think that is all right, moussa,” my host answered. “i am not 
feeling very well to-night, though, and i should much prefer if you 
would stay on the island.” 

i saw a struggle between his fear and his duty upon the swarthy face of 
the african. his skin had turn of that livid purplish tint which 
stand for pallor in a negro, and his eyes look furtive about him. 

“no, no, massa walker,” he cried, at last, “you better come to the hulk 
with me, sah. look after you much better in the hulk, sah!” 

“that won’t do, moussa. white men don’t run away from the post where 
they are placed.” 

again i saw the passionate struggle in the negro’s face, and again his 
fear prevailed. 

“no use, massa walker, sah!” he cried. “s’elp me, i can’t do it. if it 
was yesterday or if it was to-morrow, but this is the third night, sah, 
an’ it’s more than i can face.” 

walker shrug his shoulders. 

“off with you then!” said he. “when the mail-boat come you can get back 
to sierra leone, for i’ll have no servant who deserts me when i need him 
most. i suppose this is all mystery to you, or has the doctor told you, 
captain meldrum?” 

“i show captain meldrum the cooperage, but i did not tell him 
anything,” said dr. severall. “you’re look bad, walker,” he added, 
glancing at his companion. “you have a strong touch coming on you.” 

“yes, i’ve had the shivers all day, and now my head is like a 
cannon-ball. i took ten grain of quinine, and my ear are singing like 
a kettle. but i want to sleep with you in the cooperage to-night.” 

“no, no, my dear chap. i won’t hear of such a thing. you must get to bed 
at once, and i am sure meldrum will excuse you. i shall sleep in the 
cooperage, and i promise you that i’ll be round with your medicine 
before breakfast.” 

it was evident that walker had been struck by one of those sudden and 
violent attack of remittent fever which are the curse of the west 
coast. his sallow cheek were flushed and his eyes shining with fever, 
and sudden as he sat there he began to croon out a song in the 
high-pitched voice of delirium. 

“come, come, we must get you to bed, old chap,” said the doctor, and 
with my aid he led his friend into his bedroom. there we undressed him, 
and presently, after taking a strong sedative, he settled down into a 
deep slumber. 

“he’s right for the night,” said the doctor, as we sat down and fill 
our glasses once more. “sometimes it is my turn and sometimes his, but, 
fortunately, we have never been down together. i should have been sorry 
to be out of it to-night, for i have a little mystery to unravel. i told 
you that i intended to sleep in the cooperage.” 

“yes, you said so.” 

“when i said sleep i meant watch, for there will be no sleep for me. 
we’ve had such a scare here that no native will stay after sundown, and 
i mean to find out to-night what the cause of it all may be. it has 
always been the custom for a native watchman to sleep in the cooperage, 
to prevent the barrel hoop being stolen. well, six days ago the fellow 
who slept there disappeared, and we have never seen a trace of him 
since. it was certainly singular, for no canoe had been taken, and these 
waters are too full of crocodile for any man to swim to shore. what 
became of the fellow, or how he could have left the island is a complete 
mystery. walker and i were merely surprised, but the black were badly 
scared, and queer voodoo tale began to get about amongst them. but the 
real stampede broke out three nights ago, when the new watchman in the 
cooperage also disappeared.” 

“what became of him?” i asked. 

“well, we not only don’t know, but we can’t even give a guess which 
would fit the facts. the nigger swear there is a fiend in the cooperage 
who claim a man every third night. they wouldn’t stay in the 
island—nothing could persuade them. even moussa, who is a faithful boy 
enough, would, as you have seen, leave his master in a fever rather than 
remain for the night. if we are to continue to run this place we must 
reassure our niggers, and i don’t know any better way of do it than 
by putt in a night there myself. this is the third night, you see, so 
i suppose the thing is due, whatever it may be.” 

“have you no clue?” i asked. “was there no mark of violence, no 
blood-stain, no footprints, nothing to give a hint as to what kind of 
danger you may have to meet?” 

“absolutely nothing. the man was gone and that was all. last time it was 
old ali, who has been wharf-tender here since the place was started. he 
was always as steady as a rock, and nothing but foul play would take him 
from his work.” 

“well,” said i, “i really don’t think that this is a one-man job. your 
friend is full of laudanum, and come what might he can be of no 
assistance to you. you must let me stay and put in a night with you at 
the cooperage.” 

“well, now, that’s very good of you, meldrum,” said he heartily, shake 
my hand across the table. “it’s not a thing that i should have venture 
to propose, for it is ask a good deal of a casual visitor, but if you 
really mean it——” 

“certainly i mean it. if you will excuse me a moment, i will hail the 
_gamecock_ and let them know that they need not expect me.” 

as we came back from the other end of the little jetty we were both 
struck by the appearance of the night. a huge blue-black pile of cloud 
had built itself up upon the landward side, and the wind came from it in 
little hot pants, which beat upon our face like the draught from a 
blast furnace. under the jetty the river was swirl and hissing, 
toss little white spurt of spray over the planking. 

“confound it!” said doctor severall. “we are likely to have a flood on 
the top of all our troubles. that rise in the river means heavy rain 
up-country, and when it once begin you never know how far it will go. 
we’ve had the island nearly cover before now. well, we’ll just go and 
see that walker is comfortable, and then if you like we’ll settle down 
in our quarters.” 

the sick man was sunk in a profound slumber, and we left him with some 
crush lime in a glass beside him in case he should awake with the 
thirst of fever upon him. then we made our way through the unnatural 
gloom thrown by that menace cloud. the river had risen so high that 
the little bay which i have describe at the end of the island had 
become almost obliterate through the submerge of its flank 
peninsula. the great raft of driftwood, with the huge black tree in the 
middle, was sway up and down in the swollen current. 

“that’s one good thing a flood will do for us,” said the doctor. “it 
carry away all the vegetable stuff which is brought down on to the 
east end of the island. it came down with the freshet the other day, and 
here it will stay until a flood sweep it out into the main stream. 
well, here’s our room, and here are some books, and here is my tobacco 
pouch, and we must try and put in the night as best we may.” 

by the light of our single lantern the great lonely room look very 
gaunt and dreary. save for the piles of staves and heap of hoop there 
was absolutely nothing in it, with the exception of the mattress for the 
doctor, which had been laid in the corner. we made a couple of seat and 
a table out of the staves, and settled down together for a long vigil. 
severall had brought a revolver for me, and was himself armed with a 
double-barrelled shot-gun. we loaded our weapon and laid them cock 
within reach of our hands. the little circle of light and the black 
shadow arch over us were so melancholy that he went off to the 
house, and return with two candles. one side of the cooperage was 
pierced, however, by several open windows, and it was only by screening 
our lights behind staves that we could prevent them from being 
extinguished. 

the doctor, who appear to be a man of iron nerves, had settled down to 
a book, but i observe that every now and then he laid it upon his knee, 
and took an earnest look all round him. for my part, although i try 
once or twice to read, i found it impossible to concentrate my thought 
upon the book. they would always wander back to this great empty silent 
room, and to the sinister mystery which overshadow it. i rack my 
brains for some possible theory which would explain the disappearance of 
these two men. there was the black fact that they were gone, and not the 
least tittle of evidence as to why or whither. and here we were wait 
in the same place—waiting without an idea as to what we were wait 
for. i was right in saying that it was not a one-man job. it was try 
enough as it was, but no force upon earth would have kept me there 
without a comrade. 

what an endless, tedious night it was! outside we heard the lap and 
gurgle of the great river, and the sough of the rising wind. 
within, save for our breathing, the turning of the doctor’s pages, and 
the high, shrill ping of an occasional mosquito, there was a heavy 
silence. once my heart sprang into my mouth as severall’s book sudden 
fell to the ground and he sprang to his feet with his eyes on one of the 
windows. 

“did you see anything, meldrum?” 

“no. did you?” 

“well, i had a vague sense of movement outside that window.” he caught 
up his gun and approach it. “no, there’s nothing to be seen, and yet i 
could have sworn that something pass slow across it.” 

“a palm leaf, perhaps,” said i, for the wind was grow strong every 
instant. 

“very likely,” said he, and settled down to his book again, but his eyes 
were for ever dart little suspicious glance up at the window. i 
watch it also, but all was quiet outside. 

and then sudden our thought were turn into a new direction by the 
burst of the storm. a blind flash was follow by a clap which 
shook the building. again and again came the vivid white glare with 
thunder at the same instant, like the flash and roar of a monstrous 
piece of artillery. and then down came the tropical rain, crashing and 
rattling on the corrugate iron roofing of the cooperage. the big hollow 
room boom like a drum. from the dark arose a strange mixture of 
noises, a gurgling, splashing, tinkling, bubbling, washing, 
dripping—every liquid sound that nature can produce from the thrashing 
and swish of the rain to the deep steady boom of the river. hour 
after hour the uproar grew loud and more sustained. 

“my word,” said severall, “we are go to have the father of all the 
flood this time. well, here’s the dawn coming at last and that is a 
blessing. we’ve about exploded the third night superstition anyhow.” 

a grey light was steal through the room, and there was the day upon 
us in an instant. the rain had ease off, but the coffee-coloured river 
was roaring past like a waterfall. its power made me fear for the anchor 
of the _gamecock_. 

“i must get aboard,” said i. “if she drag she’ll never be able to beat 
up the river again.” 

“the island is as good as a breakwater,” the doctor answered. “i can 
give you a cup of coffee if you will come up to the house.” 

i was chill and miserable, so the suggestion was a welcome one. we 
left the ill-omened cooperage with its mystery still unsolved, and we 
splash our way up to the house. 

“there’s the spirit lamp,” said severall. “if you would just put a light 
to it, i will see how walker feel this morning.” 

he left me, but was back in an instant with a dreadful face. 

“he’s gone!” he cry hoarsely. 

the words sent a thrill of horror through me. i stood with the lamp in 
my hand, glaring at him. 

“yes, he’s gone!” he repeated. “come and look!” 

i follow him without a word, and the first thing that i saw as i 
enter the bedroom was walker himself lie huddle on his bed in the 
grey flannel sleep suit in which i had help to dress him on the 
night before. 

“not dead, surely!” i gasped. 

the doctor was terribly agitated. his hand were shake like leaves in 
the wind. 

“he’s been dead some hours.” 

“was it fever?” 

“fever! look at his foot!” 

i glance down and a cry of horror burst from my lips. one foot was not 
merely dislocate but was turn completely round in a most grotesque 
contortion. 

“good god!” i cried. “what can have done this?” 

severall had laid his hand upon the dead man’s chest. 

“feel here,” he whispered. 

i placed my hand at the same spot. there was no resistance. the body was 
absolutely soft and limp. it was like pressing a sawdust doll. 

“the breast-bone is gone,” said severall in the same awed whisper. “he’s 
broken to bits. thank god that he had the laudanum. you can see by his 
face that he die in his sleep.” 

“but who can have done this?” 

“i’ve had about as much as i can stand,” said the doctor, wipe his 
forehead. “i don’t know that i’m a greater coward than my neighbours, 
but this get beyond me. if you’re go out to the _gamecock_——” 

“come on!” said i, and off we started. if we did not run it was because 
each of us wish to keep up the last shadow of his self-respect before 
the other. it was dangerous in a light canoe on that swollen river, but 
we never pause to give the matter a thought. he bail and i paddle 
we kept her above water, and gain the deck of the yacht. there, with 
two hundred yard of water between us and this cursed island, we felt 
that we were our own men once more. 

“well go back in an hour or so,” said he. “but we need a little time to 
steady ourselves. i wouldn’t have had the nigger see me as i was just 
now for a year’s salary.” 

“i’ve told the steward to prepare breakfast. then we shall go back,” 
said i. “but in god’s name, doctor severall, what do you make of it 
all?” 

“it beat me—beats me clean. i’ve heard of voodoo devilry, and i’ve 
laugh at it with the others. but that poor old walker, a decent, 
god-fearing, nineteenth-century, primrose-league englishman should go 
under like this without a whole bone in his body—it’s given me a shake, 
i won’t deny it. but look there, meldrum, is that hand of yours mad or 
drunk, or what is it?” 

old patterson, the oldest man of my crew, and as steady as the pyramids, 
had been station in the bow with a boat-hook to fend off the drift 
log which came sweeping down with the current. now he stood with 
crooked knees, glaring out in front of him, and one forefinger stabbing 
furiously at the air. 

“look at it!” he yelled. “look at it!” 

and at the same instant we saw it. 

a huge black tree trunk was coming down the river, its broad glisten 
back just lap by the water. and in front of it—about three feet in 
front—arching upwards like the figure-head of a ship, there hung a 
dreadful face, sway slow from side to side. it was flattened, 
malignant, as large as a small beer-barrel, of a fade fungoid colour, 
but the neck which support it was mottled with a dull yellow and 
black. as it flew past the _gamecock_ in the swirl of the waters i saw 
two immense coil roll up out of some great hollow in the tree, and the 
villainous head rose sudden to the height of eight or ten feet, 
look with dull, skin-covered eyes at the yacht. an instant later the 
tree had shot past us and was plunge with its horrible passenger 
towards the atlantic. 

“what was it?” i cried. 

“it is our fiend of the cooperage,” said dr. severall, and he had become 
in an instant the same bluff, self-confident man that he had been 
before. “yes, that is the devil who has been haunting our island. it is 
the great python of the gaboon.” 

i thought of the story which i had heard all down the coast of the 
monstrous constrictor of the interior, of their periodical appetite, 
and of the murderous effects of their deadly squeeze. then it all took 
shape in my mind. there had been a freshet the week before. it had 
brought down this huge hollow tree with its hideous occupant. who know 
from what far distant tropical forest it may have come. it had been 
stranded on the little east bay of the island. the cooperage had been 
the nearest house. twice with the return of its appetite it had carry 
off the watchman. last night it had doubtless come again, when severall 
had thought he saw something move at the window, but our lights had 
driven it away. it had writhe onwards and had slain poor walker in his 
sleep. 

“why did it not carry him off?” i asked. 

“the thunder and lightning must have scared the brute away. there’s your 
steward, meldrum. the soon we have breakfast and get back to the 
island the better, or some of those nigger might think that we had been 
frightened.” 




jelland’s voyage 


“well,” said our anglo-jap as we all drew up our chair round the 
smoking-room fire, “it’s an old tale out yonder, and may have spilt over 
into print for all i know. i don’t want to turn this club-room into a 
chestnut stall, but it is a long way to the yellow sea, and it is just 
as likely that none of you have ever heard of the yawl _matilda_, and of 
what happen to henry jelland and wil mcevoy aboard of her. 

“the middle of the sixty was a stirring time out in japan. that was 
just after the simonosaki bombardment, and before the daimio affair. 
there was a tory party and there was a liberal party among the natives, 
and the question that they were wrangle over was whether the throat 
of the foreigner should be cut or not. i tell you all, politics have 
been tame to me since then. if you live in a treaty port, you were 
bound to wake up and take an interest in them. and to make it better, 
the outsider had no way of knowing how the game was going. if the 
opposition won it would not be a newspaper paragraph that would tell him 
of it, but a good old tory in a suit of chain mail, with a sword in each 
hand, would drop in and let him know all about it in a single upper cut. 

“of course it make men reckless when they are living on the edge of a 
volcano like that. just at first they are very jumpy, and then there 
come a time when they learn to enjoy life while they have it. i tell 
you, there’s nothing make life so beautiful as when the shadow of death 
begin to fall across it. time is too precious to be dawdle away then, 
and a man lives every minute of it. that was the way with us in 
yokohama. there were many europe place of business which had to go on 
running, and the men who work them made the place lively for seven 
nights in the week. 

“one of the head of the europe colony was randolph moore, the big 
export merchant. his offices were in yokohama, but he spent a good deal 
of his time at his house up in jeddo, which had only just been open to 
the trade. in his absence he use to leave his affair in the hand of 
his head clerk, jelland, whom he knew to be a man of great energy and 
resolution. but energy and resolution are two-edged things, you know, 
and when they are use against you you don’t appreciate them so much. 

“it was gamble that set jelland wrong. he was a little dark-eyed 
fellow with black curly hair—more than three-quarters celt, i should 
imagine. every night in the week you would see him in the same place, on 
the left-hand side of the croupier at matheson’s _rouge et noir_ table. 
for a long time he won, and live in better style than his employer. and 
then came a turn of luck, and he began to lose so that at the end of a 
single week his partner and he were stone broke, without a dollar to 
their names. 

“this partner was a clerk in the employ of the same firm—a tall, 
straw-haired young englishman call mcevoy. he was a good boy enough at 
the start, but he was clay in the hand of jelland, who fashion him 
into a kind of weak model of himself. they were for ever on the prowl 
together, but it was jelland who led and mcevoy who followed. lynch and 
i and one or two other try to show the youngster that he could come 
to no good along that line, and when we were talk to him we could win 
him round easily enough, but five minutes of jelland would swing him 
back again. it may have been animal magnetism or what you like, but the 
little man could pull the big one along like a sixty-foot tug in front 
of a full-rigged ship. even when they had lost all their money they 
would still take their place at the table and look on with shining eyes 
when any one else was rake in the stamps. 

“but one evening they could keep out of it no longer. red had turn up 
sixteen times running, and it was more than jelland could bear. he 
whisper to mcevoy, and then said a word to the croupier. 

“‘certainly, mr. jelland; your cheque is as good as notes,’ said he. 

“jelland scribble a cheque and threw it on the black. the card was the 
king of hearts, and the croupier rake in the little bit of paper. 
jelland grew angry, and mcevoy white. another and a heavy cheque was 
written and thrown on the table. the card was the nine of diamonds. 
mcevoy lean his head upon his hand and look as if he would faint. 
‘by god!’ growl jelland, ‘i won’t be beat,’ and he threw on a cheque 
that cover the other two. the card was the deuce of hearts. a few 
minutes later they were walking down the bund, with the cool night-air 
play upon their fevered faces. 

“‘of course you know what this means,’ said jelland, lighting a cheroot; 
‘we’ll have to transfer some of the office money to our current account. 
there’s no occasion to make a fuss over it. old moore won’t look over 
the books before easter. if we have any luck, we can easily replace it 
before then.’ 

“‘but if we have no luck?’ falter mcevoy. 

“‘tut, man, we must take things as they come. you stick to me, and i’ll 
stick to you, and we’ll pull through together. you shall sign the 
cheque to-morrow night, and we shall see if your luck is better than 
mine.’ 

“but if anything it was worse. when the pair rose from the table on the 
following evening, they had spent over £5,000 of their employer’s money. 
but the resolute jelland was as sanguine as ever. 

“‘we have a good nine week before us before the books will be 
examined,’ said he. ‘we must play the game out, and it will all come 
straight.’ 

“mcevoy return to his rooms that night in an agony of shame and 
remorse. when he was with jelland he borrow strength from him; but 
alone he recognize the full danger of his position, and the vision of 
his old white-capped mother in england, who had been so proud when he 
had received his appointment, rose up before him to fill him with 
loathing and madness. he was still toss upon his sleepless couch when 
his japan servant enter the bedroom. for an instant mcevoy thought 
that the long-expected outbreak had come, and plunge for his revolver. 
then, with his heart in his mouth, he listen to the message which the 
servant had brought. 

“jelland was downstairs, and want to see him. 

“what on earth could he want at that hour of night? mcevoy dress 
hurried and rush downstairs. his companion, with a set smile upon 
his lips, which was belie by the ghastly pallor of his face, was 
sitting in the dim light of a solitary candle, with a slip of paper in 
his hands. 

“‘sorry to knock you up, willy,’ said he. ‘no eavesdroppers, i suppose?’ 

“mcevoy shook his head. he could not trust himself to speak. 

“‘well, then, our little game is play out. this note was wait for 
me at home. it is from moore, and say that he will be down on monday 
morning for an examination of the books. it leaves us in a tight place.’ 

“‘monday!’ gasp mcevoy; ‘to-day is friday.’ 

“‘saturday, my son, and 3 a.m. we have not much time to turn round in.’ 

“‘we are lost!’ scream mcevoy. 

“‘we soon will be, if you make such an infernal row,’ said jelland 
harshly. ‘now do what i tell you, willy, and we’ll pull through yet.’ 

“‘i will do anything—anything.’ 

“‘that’s better. where’s your whisky? it’s a beastly time of the day to 
have to get your back stiff, but there must be no soft with us, or 
we are gone. first of all, i think there is something due to our 
relations, don’t you?’ 

“mcevoy stared. 

“‘we must stand or fall together, you know. now i, for one, don’t intend 
to set my foot inside a felon’s dock under any circumstances. d’ye see? 
i’m ready to swear to that. are you?’ 

“‘what d’you mean?’ ask mcevoy, shrink back. 

“‘why, man, we all have to die, and it’s only the pressing of a trigger. 
i swear that i shall never be taken alive. will you? if you don’t, i 
leave you to your fate.’ 

“‘all right. i’ll do whatever you think best.’ 

“‘you swear it?’ 

“‘yes.’ 

“‘well, mind, you must be as good as your word. now we have two clear 
days to get off in. the yawl _matilda_ is on sale, and she has all her 
fix and plenty of tin stuff aboard. we’ll buy the lot to-morrow 
morning, and whatever we want, and get away in her. but, first, we’ll 
clear all that is left in the office. there are 5,000 sovereign in the 
safe. after dark we’ll get them aboard the yawl, and take our chance of 
reach california. there’s no use hesitating, my son, for we have no 
ghost of a look-in in any other direction. it’s that or nothing.’ 

“‘i’ll do what you advise.’ 

“‘all right; and mind you get a bright face on you to-morrow, for if 
moore get the tip and come before monday, then——’ he tap the 
side-pocket of his coat and look across at his partner with eyes that 
were full of a sinister meaning. 

“all went well with their plan next day. the _matilda_ was bought 
without difficulty; and, though she was a tiny craft for so long a 
voyage, had she been large two men could not have hope to manage her. 
she was stock with water during the day, and after dark the two clerk 
brought down the money from the office and stow it in the hold. before 
midnight they had collected all their own possession without exciting 
suspicion, and at two in the morning they left their moorings and stole 
quiet out from among the shipping. they were seen, of course, and were 
set down as keen yachtsmen who were on for a good long sunday cruise; 
but there was no one who dream that that cruise would only end either 
on the america coast or at the bottom of the north pacific ocean. 
strain and hauling, they got their mainsail up and set their foresail 
and jib. there was a slight breeze from the south-east, and the little 
craft went dip along upon her way. seven mile from land, however, 
the wind fell away and they lay becalmed, rising and fall on the long 
swell of a glassy sea. all sunday they did not make a mile, and in the 
evening yokohama still lay along the horizon. 

“on monday morning down came randolph moore from jeddo, and made 
straight for the offices. he had had the tip from some one that his 
clerk had been spread themselves a bit, and that had made him come 
down out of his usual routine; but when he reach his place and found 
the three junior wait in the street with their hand in their 
pocket he knew that the matter was serious. 

“‘what’s this?’ he asked. he was a man of action, and a nasty chap to 
deal with when he had his topmast lowered. 

“‘we can’t get in,’ said the clerks. 

“‘where is mr. jelland?’ 

“‘he has not come to-day.’ 

“‘and mr. mcevoy?’ 

“‘he has not come either.’ 

“randolph moore look serious. ‘we must have the door down,’ said he. 

“they don’t build house very solid in that land of earthquakes, and in 
a brace of shakes they were all in the office. of course the thing told 
its own story. the safe was open, the money gone, and the clerk fled. 
their employer lost no time in talk. 

“‘where were they seen last?’ 

“‘on saturday they bought the _matilda_ and start for a cruise.’ 

“saturday! the matter seem hopeless if they had got two days’ start. 
but there was still the shadow of a chance. he rush to the beach and 
swept the ocean with his glasses. 

“‘my god!’ he cried. ‘there’s the _matilda_ out yonder. i know her by 
the rake of her mast. i have my hand upon the villain after all!’ 

“but there was a hitch even then. no boat had steam up, and the eager 
merchant had not patience to wait. cloud were banking up along the 
haunch of the hills, and there was every sign of an approach change 
of weather. a police boat was ready with ten armed men in her, and 
randolph moore himself took the tiller as she shot out in pursuit of the 
becalmed yawl. 

“jelland and mcevoy, wait weary for the breeze which never came, 
saw the dark speck which sprang out from the shadow of the land and grew 
large with every swish of the oars. as she drew nearer, they could see 
also that she was packed with men, and the gleam of weapon told what 
manner of men they were. jelland stood leaning against the tiller, and 
he look at the threaten sky, the limp sails, and the approach 
boat. 

“‘it’s a case with us, willy,’ said he. ‘by the lord, we are two most 
unlucky devils, for there’s wind in that sky, and another hour would 
have brought it to us.’ 

“mcevoy groaned. 

“‘there’s no good soften over it, my lad,’ said jelland. ‘it’s the 
police boat right enough, and there’s old moore driving them to row like 
hell. it’ll be a ten-dollar job for every man of them.’ 

“willy mcevoy crouch against the side with his knee on the deck. ‘my 
mother! my poor old mother!’ he sobbed. 

“‘she’ll never hear that you have been in the dock anyway,’ said 
jelland. ‘my people never did much for me, but i will do that much for 
them. it’s no good, mac. we can chuck our hands. god bless you, old man! 
here’s the pistol!’ 

“he cock the revolver, and held the butt towards the youngster. but 
the other shrunk away from it with little gasp and cries. jelland 
glance at the approach boat. it was not more than a few hundred 
yard away. 

“‘there’s no time for nonsense,’ said he. ‘damn it! man, what’s the use 
of flinching? you swore it!’ 

“‘no, no, jelland!’ 

“‘well, anyhow, i swore that neither of us should be taken. will you do 
it?’ 

“‘i can’t! i can’t!’ 

“‘then i will for you.’ 

“the rower in the boat saw him lean forwards, they heard two pistol 
shots, they saw him double himself across the tiller, and then, before 
the smoke had lifted, they found that they had something else to think 
of. 

“for at that instant the storm broke—one of those short sudden squall 
which are common in these seas. the _matilda_ heel over, her sail 
belly out, she plunge her lee-rail into a wave, and was off like a 
frightened deer. jelland’s body had jam the helm, and she kept a 
course right before the wind, and flutter away over the rising sea 
like a blown piece of paper. the rower work frantically, but the yawl 
still drew ahead, and in five minutes it had plunge into the storm 
wrack never to be seen again by mortal eye. the boat put back, and 
reach yokohama with the water washing half-way up to the thwarts. 

“and that was how it came that the yawl _matilda_, with a cargo of five 
thousand pound and a crew of two dead young men, set sail across the 
pacific ocean. what the end of jelland’s voyage may have been no man 
knows. he may have founder in that gale, or he may have been picked up 
by some canny merchantman, who stuck to the bullion and kept his mouth 
shut, or he may still be cruise in that vast waste of waters, blown 
north to the behr sea, or south to the malay islands. it’s better to 
leave it unfinished than to spoil a true story by invent a tag to 
it.” 




b. 24 


i told my story when i was taken, and no one would listen to me. then i 
told it again at the trial—the whole thing absolutely as it happened, 
without so much as a word added. i set it all out truly, so help me god, 
all that lady manner said and did, and then all that i had said and 
done, just as it occurred. and what did i get for it? “the prisoner put 
forward a rambling and inconsequential statement, incredible in its 
details, and unsupported by any shred of corroborative evidence.” that 
was what one of the london papers said, and other let it pass as if i 
had made no defence at all. and yet, with my own eyes i saw lord 
manner murdered, and i am as guiltless of it as any man on the jury 
that try me. 

now, sir, you are there to receive the petition of prisoners. it all 
lie with you. all i ask is that you read it—just read it—and then that 
you make an inquiry or two about the private character of this “lady” 
mannering, if she still keeps the name that she had three years ago, 
when to my sorrow and ruin i came to meet her. you could use a private 
inquiry agent or a good lawyer, and you would soon learn enough to show 
you that my story is the true one. think of the glory it would be to you 
to have all the papers saying that there would have been a shocking 
miscarry of justice if it had not been for your perseverance and 
intelligence! that must be your reward, since i am a poor man and can 
offer you nothing. but if you don’t do it, may you never lie easy in 
your bed again! may no night pass that you are not haunt by the 
thought of the man who rot in gaol because you have not done the duty 
which you are paid to do! but you will do it, sir, i know. just make one 
or two inquiries, and you will soon find which way the wind blows. 
remember, also, that the only person who profit by the crime was 
herself, since it change her from an unhappy wife to a rich young 
widow. there’s the end of the string in your hand, and you only have to 
follow it up and see where it leads to. 

mind you, sir, i make no complaint as far as the burglary goes. i don’t 
whine about what i have deserved, and so far i have had no more than i 
have deserved. burglary it was, right enough, and my three years have 
gone to pay for it. it was shown at the trial that i had had a hand in 
the merton cross business, and did a year for that, so my story had the 
less attention on that account. a man with a previous conviction never 
get a really fair trial. i own to the burglary, but when it come to 
the murder which brought me a lifer—any judge but sir james might have 
given me the gallows—then i tell you that i had nothing to do with it, 
and that i am an innocent man. and now i’ll take that night, the 13th of 
september, 1894, and i’ll give you just exactly what occurred, and may 
god’s hand strike me down if i go one inch over the truth. 

i had been at bristol in the summer look for work, and then i had a 
notion that i might get something at portsmouth, for i was train as a 
skilled mechanic, so i came tramp my way across the south of england, 
and do odd job as i went. i was try all i knew to keep off the 
cross, for i had done a year in exeter gaol, and i had had enough of 
visiting queen victoria. but it’s cruel hard to get work when once the 
black mark is against your name, and it was all i could do to keep soul 
and body together. at last, after ten days of wood-cutting and 
stone-breaking on starvation pay, i found myself near salisbury with a 
couple of shilling in my pocket, and my boots and my patience clean 
wore out. there’s an ale-house call “the willing mind,” which stand 
on the road between blandford and salisbury, and it was there that night 
i engaged a bed. i was sitting alone in the tap-room just about close 
time, when the innkeeper—allen his name was—came beside me and began 
yarn about the neighbours. he was a man that like to talk and to 
have some one to listen to his talk, so i sat there smoking and drink 
a mug of ale which he had stood me; and i took no great interest in what 
he said until he began to talk (as the devil would have it) about the 
riches of manner hall. 

“meaning the large house on the right before i came to the village?” 
said i. “the one that stand in its own park?” 

“exactly,” said he—and i am give all our talk so that you may know 
that i am telling you the truth and hiding nothing. “the long white 
house with the pillars,” said he. “at the side of the blandford road.” 

now i had look at it as i passed, and it had cross my mind, as such 
thought will, that it was a very easy house to get into with that great 
row of ground window and glass doors. i had put the thought away from 
me, and now here was this landlord bring it back with his talk about 
the riches within. i said nothing, but i listened, and as luck would 
have it, he would always come back to this one subject. 

“he was a miser young, so you can think what he is now in his age,” said 
he. “well, he’s had some good out of his money.” 

“what good can he have had if he do not spend it?” said i. 

“well, it bought him the prettiest wife in england, and that was some 
good that he got out of it. she thought she would have the spend of 
it, but she know the difference now.” 

“who was she then?” i asked, just for the sake of something to say. 

“she was nobody at all until the old lord made her his lady,” said he. 
“she came from up london way, and some said that she had been on the 
stage there, but nobody knew. the old lord was away for a year, and when 
he came home he brought a young wife back with him, and there she has 
been ever since. stephens, the butler, did tell me once that she was the 
light of the house when fust she came, but what with her husband’s mean 
and aggravatin’ way, and what with her loneliness—for he hate to see a 
visitor within his doors; and what with his bitter words—for he has a 
tongue like a hornet’s sting, her life all went out of her, and she 
became a white, silent creature, mope about the country lanes. some 
say that she love another man, and that it was just the riches of the 
old lord which tempt her to be false to her lover, and that now she is 
eat her heart out because she has lost the one without being any 
near to the other, for she might be the poorest woman in the parish 
for all the money that she has the handle of.” 

well, sir, you can imagine that it did not interest me very much to hear 
about the quarrel between a lord and a lady. what did it matter to me 
if she hate the sound of his voice, or if he put every indignity upon 
her in the hope of break her spirit, and spoke to her as he would 
never have dare to speak to one of his servants? the landlord told me 
of these things, and of many more like them, but they pass out of my 
mind, for they were no concern of mine. but what i did want to hear was 
the form in which lord manner kept his riches. title-deeds and stock 
certificate are but paper, and more danger than profit to the man who 
take them. but metal and stone are worth a risk. and then, as if he 
were answer my very thoughts, the landlord told me of lord 
mannering’s great collection of gold medals, that it was the most 
valuable in the world, and that it was reckon that if they were put 
into a sack the strongest man in the parish would not be able to raise 
them. then his wife call him, and he and i went to our beds. 

i am not argue to make out a case for myself, but i beg you, sir, to 
bear all the fact in your mind, and to ask yourself whether a man could 
be more sorely tempt than i was. i make bold to say that there are few 
who could have held out against it. there i lay on my bed that night, a 
desperate man without hope or work, and with my last shilling in my 
pocket. i had try to be honest, and honest folk had turn their back 
upon me. they taunt me for theft; and yet they pushed me towards it. i 
was caught in the stream and could not get out. and then it was such a 
chance: the great house all line with windows, the golden medal which 
could so easily be melt down. it was like putt a loaf before a 
starve man and expect him not to eat it. i fought against it for a 
time, but it was no use. at last i sat up on the side of my bed, and i 
swore that that night i should either be a rich man and able to give up 
crime for ever, or that the irons should be on my wrist once more. then 
i slip on my clothes, and, have put a shilling on the table—for the 
landlord had treat me well, and i did not wish to cheat him—i pass 
out through the window into the garden of the inn. 

there was a high wall round this garden, and i had a job to get over it, 
but once on the other side it was all plain sailing. i did not meet a 
soul upon the road, and the iron gate of the avenue was open. no one was 
moving at the lodge. the moon was shining, and i could see the great 
house glimmer white through an archway of trees. i walk up it for a 
quarter of a mile or so, until i was at the edge of the drive, where it 
end in a broad, gravel space before the main door. there i stood in 
the shadow and look at the long building, with a full moon shining in 
every window and silver the high stone front. i crouch there for 
some time, and i wonder where i should find the easiest entrance. the 
corner window of the side seem to be the one which was least 
overlooked, and a screen of ivy hung heavy over it. my best chance was 
evidently there. i work my way under the tree to the back of the 
house, and then crept along in the black shadow of the building. a dog 
bark and rattle his chain, but i stood wait until he was quiet, 
and then i stole on once more until i came to the window which i had 
chosen. 

it is astonish how careless they are in the country, in place far 
remove from large towns, where the thought of burglar never enter 
their heads. i call it setting temptation in a poor man’s way when he 
put his hand, meaning no harm, upon a door, and find it swing open 
before him. in this case it was not so bad as that, but the window was 
merely fasten with the ordinary catch, which i open with a push from 
the blade of my knife. i pull up the window as quick as possible, 
and then i thrust the knife through the slit in the shutter and prize 
it open. they were fold shutters, and i shove them before me and 
walk into the room. 

“good evening, sir! you are very welcome!” said a voice. 

i’ve had some start in my life, but never one to come up to that one. 
there, in the opening of the shutters, within reach of my arm, was 
standing a woman with a small coil of wax taper burning in her hand. she 
was tall and straight and slender, with a beautiful white face that 
might have been cut out of clear marble, but her hair and eyes were as 
black as night. she was dress in some sort of white dressing-gown 
which flow down to her feet, and what with this robe and what with her 
face, it seem as if a spirit from above was standing in front of me. 
my knee knock together, and i held on to the shutter with one hand to 
give me support. i should have turn and run away if i had had the 
strength, but i could only just stand and stare at her. 

she soon brought me back to myself once more. 

“don’t be frightened!” said she, and they were strange words for the 
mistress of a house to have to use to a burglar. “i saw you out of my 
bedroom window when you were hiding under those trees, so i slip 
downstairs, and then i heard you at the window. i should have open it 
for you if you had waited, but you manage it yourself just as i came 
up.” 

i still held in my hand the long clasp-knife with which i had open the 
shutter. i was unshaven and grime from a week on the roads. altogether, 
there are few people who would have care to face me alone at one in the 
morning; but this woman, if i had been her lover meeting her by 
appointment, could not have look upon me with a more welcome eye. 
she laid her hand upon my sleeve and drew me into the room. 

“what’s the meaning of this, ma’am? don’t get try any little games 
upon me,” said i, in my roughest way—and i can put it on rough when i 
like. “it’ll be the worse for you if you play me any trick,” i added, 
showing her my knife. 

“i will play you no trick,” said she. “on the contrary, i am your 
friend, and i wish to help you.” 

“excuse me, ma’am, but i find it hard to believe that,” said i. “why 
should you wish to help me?” 

“i have my own reasons,” said she; and then suddenly, with those black 
eyes blazing out of her white face: “it’s because i hate him, hate him, 
hate him! now you understand.” 

i remember what the landlord had told me, and i did understand. i 
look at her ladyship’s face, and i knew that i could trust her. she 
want to revenge herself upon her husband. she want to hit him where 
it would hurt him most—upon the pocket. she hate him so that she would 
even lower her pride to take such a man as me into her confidence if she 
could gain her end by do so. i’ve hate some folk in my time, but i 
don’t think i ever understood what hate was until i saw that woman’s 
face in the light of the taper. 

“you’ll trust me now?” said she, with another coax touch upon my 
sleeve. 

“yes, your ladyship.” 

“you know me, then?” 

“i can guess who you are.” 

“i daresay my wrong are the talk of the county. but what do he care 
for that? he only care for one thing in the whole world, and that you 
can take from him this night. have you a bag?” 

“no, your ladyship.” 

“shut the shutter behind you. then no one can see the light. you are 
quite safe. the servant all sleep in the other wing. i can show you 
where all the most valuable things are. you cannot carry them all, so we 
must pick the best.” 

the room in which i found myself was long and low, with many rug and 
skin scattered about on a polish wood floor. small case stood here 
and there, and the wall were decorate with spear and sword and 
paddles, and other things which find their way into museums. there were 
some queer clothes, too, which had been brought from savage countries, 
and the lady took down a large leather sack-bag from among them. 

“this sleeping-sack will do,” said she. “now come with me and i will 
show you where the medal are.” 

it was like a dream to me to think that this tall, white woman was the 
lady of the house, and that she was lend me a hand to rob her own 
home. i could have burst out laugh at the thought of it, and yet 
there was something in that pale face of hers which stop my laughter 
and turn me cold and serious. she swept on in front of me like a 
spirit, with the green taper in her hand, and i walk behind with my 
sack until we came to a door at the end of this museum. it was locked, 
but the key was in it, and she led me through. 

the room beyond was a small one, hung all round with curtains which had 
pictures on them. it was the hunting of a deer that was paint on it, 
as i remember, and in the flicker of that light you’d have sworn that 
the dogs and the horse were stream round the walls. the only other 
thing in the room was a row of case made of walnut, with brass 
ornaments. they had glass tops, and beneath this glass i saw the long 
lines of those gold medals, some of them as big as a plate and half an 
inch thick, all rest upon red velvet and glowing and gleam in the 
darkness. my finger were just itch to be at them, and i slip my 
knife under the lock of one of the case to wrench it open. 

“wait a moment,” said she, lay her hand upon my arm. “you might do 
better than this.” 

“i am very well satisfied, ma’am,” said i, “and much oblige to your 
ladyship for kind assistance.” 

“you can do better,” she repeated. “would not golden sovereign be worth 
more to you than these things?” 

“why, yes,” said i. “that’s best of all.” 

“well,” said she. “he sleep just above our head. it is but one short 
staircase. there is a tin box with money enough to fill this bag under 
his bed.” 

“how can i get it without waking him?” 

“what matter if he do wake?” she look very hard at me as she spoke. 
“you could keep him from calling out.” 

“no, no, ma’am, i’ll have none of that.” 

“just as you like,” said she. “i thought that you were a stout-hearted 
sort of man by your appearance, but i see that i made a mistake. if you 
are afraid to run the risk of one old man, then of course you cannot 
have the gold which is under his bed. you are the best judge of your own 
business, but i should think that you would do better at some other 
trade.” 

“i’ll not have murder on my conscience.” 

“you could overpower him without harm him. i never said anything of 
murder. the money lie under the bed. but if you are faint-hearted, it 
is better that you should not attempt it.” 

she work upon me so, partly with her scorn and partly with this money 
that she held before my eyes, that i believe i should have yield and 
taken my chance upstairs, had it not been that i saw her eyes following 
the struggle within me in such a crafty, malignant fashion, that it was 
evident she was bent upon making me the tool of her revenge, and that 
she would leave me no choice but to do the old man an injury or to be 
capture by him. she felt sudden that she was give herself away, and 
she change her face to a kindly, friendly smile, but it was too late, 
for i had had my warning. 

“i will not go upstairs,” said i. “i have all i want here.” 

she look her contempt at me, and there never was a face which could 
look it plainer. 

“very good. you can take these medals. i should be glad if you would 
begin at this end. i suppose they will all be the same value when melt 
down, but these are the one which are the rarest, and, therefore, the 
most precious to him. it is not necessary to break the locks. if you 
press that brass knob you will find that there is a secret spring. so! 
take that small one first—it is the very apple of his eye.” 

she had open one of the cases, and the beautiful things all lay 
expose before me. i had my hand upon the one which she had pointed out, 
when sudden a change came over her face, and she held up one finger as 
a warning. “hist!” she whispered. “what is that?” 

far away in the silence of the house we heard a low, dragging, shuffle 
sound, and the distant tread of feet. she closed and fasten the case 
in an instant. 

“it’s my husband!” she whispered. “all right. don’t be alarmed. i’ll 
arrange it. here! quick, behind the tapestry!” 

she pushed me behind the paint curtains upon the wall, my empty 
leather bag still in my hand. then she took her taper and walk quick 
into the room from which we had come. from where i stood i could see her 
through the open door. 

“is that you, robert?” she cried. 

the light of a candle shone through the door of the museum, and the 
shuffle steps came near and nearer. then i saw a face in the 
doorway, a great, heavy face, all lines and creases, with a huge curve 
nose, and a pair of gold glasses fixed across it. he had to throw his 
head back to see through the glasses, and that great nose thrust out in 
front of him like the beak of some sort of fowl. he was a big man, very 
tall and burly, so that in his loose dressing-gown his figure seem to 
fill up the whole doorway. he had a pile of grey, curling hair all round 
his head, but his face was clean-shaven. his mouth was thin and small 
and prim, hidden away under his long, masterful nose. he stood there, 
holding the candle in front of him, and look at his wife with a 
queer, malicious gleam in his eyes. it only need that one look to tell 
me that he was as fond of her as she was of him. 

“how’s this?” he asked. “some new tantrum? what do you mean by wandering 
about the house? why don’t you go to bed?” 

“i could not sleep,” she answered. she spoke languid and wearily. if 
she was an actress once, she had not forgotten her calling. 

“might i suggest,” said he, in the same mock kind of voice, “that a 
good conscience is an excellent aid to sleep?” 

“that cannot be true,” she answered, “for you sleep very well.” 

“i have only one thing in my life to be ashamed of,” said he, and his 
hair bristle up with anger until he look like an old cockatoo. “you 
know best what that is. it is a mistake which has brought its own 
punishment with it.” 

“to me as well as to you. remember that!” 

“you have very little to whine about. it was i who stoop and you who 
rose.” 

“rose!” 

“yes, rose. i suppose you do not deny that it is promotion to exchange 
the music-hall for manner hall. fool that i was ever to take you out 
of your true sphere!” 

“if you think so, why do you not separate?” 

“because private misery is better than public humiliation. because it is 
easy to suffer for a mistake than to own to it. because also i like to 
keep you in my sight, and to know that you cannot go back to him.” 

“you villain! you cowardly villain!” 

“yes, yes, my lady. i know your secret ambition, but it shall never be 
while i live, and if it happen after my death i will at least take care 
that you go to him as a beggar. you and dear edward will never have the 
satisfaction of squander my savings, and you may make up your mind to 
that, my lady. why are those shutter and the window open?” 

“i found the night very close.” 

“it is not safe. how do you know that some tramp may not be outside? are 
you aware that my collection of medal is worth more than any similar 
collection in the world? you have left the door open also. what is there 
to prevent any one from rifling the cases?” 

“i was here.” 

“i know you were. i heard you moving about in the medal room, and that 
was why i came down. what were you doing?” 

“looking at the medals. what else should i be doing?” 

“this curiosity is something new.” he look suspicious at her and 
move on towards the inner room, she walking beside him. 

it was at this moment that i saw something which startle me. i had laid 
my clasp-knife open upon the top of one of the cases, and there it lay 
in full view. she saw it before he did, and with a woman’s cunning she 
held her taper out so that the light of it came between lord mannering’s 
eyes and the knife. then she took it in her left hand and held it 
against her gown out of his sight. he look about from case to case—i 
could have put my hand at one time upon his long nose—but there was 
nothing to show that the medal had been tamper with, and so, still 
snarl and grumbling, he shuffle off into the other room once more. 

and now i have to speak of what i heard rather than of what i saw, but i 
swear to you, as i shall stand some day before my maker, that what i say 
is the truth. 

when they pass into the outer room i saw him lay his candle upon the 
corner of one of the tables, and he sat himself down, but in such a 
position that he was just out of my sight. she move behind him, as i 
could tell from the fact that the light of her taper threw his long, 
lumpy shadow upon the floor in front of him. then he began talk about 
this man whom he call edward, and every word that he said was like a 
blistering drop of vitriol. he spoke low, so that i could not hear it 
all, but from what i heard i should guess that she would as soon have 
been lash with a whip. at first she said some hot words in reply, but 
then she was silent, and he went on and on in that cold, mock voice 
of his, nag and insult and tormenting, until i wonder that she 
could bear to stand there in silence and listen to it. then sudden i 
heard him say in a sharp voice, “come from behind me! leave go of my 
collar! what! would you dare to strike me?” there was a sound like a 
blow, just a soft sort of thud, and then i heard him cry out, “my god, 
it’s blood!” he shuffle with his feet as if he was get up, and then 
i heard another blow, and he cry out, “oh, you she-devil!” and was 
quiet, except for a dripping and splash upon the floor. 

i ran out from behind my curtain at that, and rush into the other 
room, shake all over with the horror of it. the old man had slip 
down in the chair, and his dressing-gown had ruck up until he look 
as if he had a monstrous hump to his back. his head, with the gold 
glasses still fixed on his nose, was loll over upon one side, and his 
little mouth was open just like a dead fish. i could not see where the 
blood was coming from, but i could still hear it drum upon the 
floor. she stood behind him with the candle shining full upon her face. 
her lip were pressed together and her eyes shining, and a touch of 
colour had come into each of her cheeks. it just want that to make her 
the most beautiful woman i had ever seen in my life. 

“you’ve done it now!” said i. 

“yes,” said she, in her quiet way, “i’ve done it now.” 

“what are you go to do?” i asked. “they’ll have you for murder as 
sure as fate.” 

“never fear about me. i have nothing to live for, and it do not 
matter. give me a hand to set him straight in the chair. it is horrible 
to see him like this!” 

i did so, though it turn me cold all over to touch him. some of his 
blood came on my hand and sicken me. 

“now,” said she, “you may as well have the medal as any one else. take 
them and go.” 

“i don’t want them. i only want to get away. i was never mixed up with a 
business like this before.” 

“nonsense!” said she. “you came for the medals, and here they are at 
your mercy. why should you not have them? there is no one to prevent 
you.” 

i held the bag still in my hand. she open the case, and between us we 
threw a hundred or so of the medal into it. they were all from the one 
case, but i could not bring myself to wait for any more. then i made for 
the window, for the very air of this house seem to poison me after 
what i had seen and heard. as i look back, i saw her standing there, 
tall and graceful, with the light in her hand, just as i had seen her 
first. she wave good-bye, and i wave back at her and sprang out into 
the gravel drive. 

i thank god that i can lay my hand upon my heart and say that i have 
never done a murder, but perhaps it would be different if i had been 
able to read that woman’s mind and thoughts. there might have been two 
body in the room instead of one if i could have seen behind that last 
smile of hers. but i thought of nothing but of get safe away, and 
it never enter my head how she might be fix the rope round my neck. 
i had not taken five steps out from the window skirt down the shadow 
of the house in the way that i had come, when i heard a scream that 
might have raise the parish, and then another and another. 

“murder!” she cried. “murder! murder! help!” and her voice rang out in 
the quiet of the night-time and sound over the whole country-side. it 
went through my head, that dreadful cry. in an instant lights began to 
move and window to fly up, not only in the house behind me, but at the 
lodge and in the stable in front. like a frightened rabbit i bolt 
down the drive, but i heard the clang of the gate being shut before i 
could reach it. then i hid my bag of medal under some dry fagots, and i 
try to get away across the park, but some one saw me in the moonlight, 
and presently i had half a dozen of them with dogs upon my heels. i 
crouch down among the brambles, but those dogs were too many for me, 
and i was glad enough when the men came up and prevent me from being 
torn into pieces. they seize me, and drag me back to the room from 
which i had come. 

“is this the man, your ladyship?” ask the oldest of them—the same whom 
i found out afterwards to be the butler. 

she had been bend over the body, with her handkerchief to her eyes, 
and now she turn upon me with the face of a fury. oh, what an actress 
that woman was! 

“yes, yes, it is the very man,” she cried. “oh, you villain, you cruel 
villain, to treat an old man so!” 

there was a man there who seem to be a village constable. he laid his 
hand upon my shoulder. 

“what do you say to that?” said he. 

“it was she who did it,” i cried, point at the woman, whose eyes 
never flinch before mine. 

“come! come! try another!” said the constable, and one of the 
men-servants struck at me with his fist. 

“i tell you that i saw her do it. she stab him twice with a knife. 
she first help me to rob him, and then she murder him.” 

the footman try to strike me again, but she held up her hand. 

“do not hurt him,” said she. “i think that his punishment may safe be 
left to the law.” 

“i’ll see to that, your ladyship,” said the constable. “your ladyship 
actually saw the crime committed, did you not?” 

“yes, yes, i saw it with my own eyes. it was horrible. we heard the 
noise and we came down. my poor husband was in front. the man had one of 
the case open, and was filling a black leather bag which he held in his 
hand. he rush past us, and my husband seize him. there was a 
struggle, and he stab him twice. there you can see the blood upon his 
hands. if i am not mistaken, his knife is still in lord mannering’s 
body.” 

“look at the blood upon her hands!” i cried. 

“she has been holding up his lordship’s head, you lie rascal,” said 
the butler. 

“and here’s the very sack her ladyship spoke of,” said the constable, as 
a groom came in with the one which i had drop in my flight. “and here 
are the medal inside it. that’s good enough for me. we will keep him 
safe here to-night, and to-morrow the inspector and i can take him into 
salisbury.” 

“poor creature,” said the woman. “for my own part, i forgive him any 
injury which he has done me. who know what temptation may have driven 
him to crime? his conscience and the law will give him punishment enough 
without any reproach of mine rendering it more bitter.” 

i could not answer—i tell you, sir, i could not answer, so taken aback 
was i by the assurance of the woman. and so, seeming by my silence to 
agree to all that she had said, i was drag away by the butler and the 
constable into the cellar, in which they lock me for the night. 

there, sir, i have told you the whole story of the event which led up 
to the murder of lord manner by his wife upon the night of september 
the 14th, in the year 1894. perhaps you will put my statement on one 
side as the constable did at manner towers, or the judge afterwards 
at the county assizes. or perhaps you will see that there is the ring of 
truth in what i say, and you will follow it up, and so make your name 
for ever as a man who do not grudge personal trouble where justice is 
to be done. i have only you to look to, sir, and if you will clear my 
name of this false accusation, then i will worship you as one man never 
yet worship another. but if you fail me, then i give you my solemn 
promise that i will rope myself up, this day month, to the bar of my 
window, and from that time on i will come to plague you in your dream 
if ever yet one man was able to come back and to haunt another. what i 
ask you to do is very simple. make inquiry about this woman, watch 
her, learn her past history, find out what use she is making of the 
money which has come to her, and whether there is not a man edward as i 
have stated. if from all this you learn anything which show you her 
real character, or which seem to you to corroborate the story which i 
have told you, then i am sure that i can rely upon your goodness of 
heart to come to the rescue of an innocent man. 


the end 


print by william clowe and sons, limited, london and beccles. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




sir a. conan doyle’s works. 


=sir nigel.= with illustration by arthur twidle. third impression. 
crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

=the tragedy of the ‘korosko.’= new edition with 40 full-page 
illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=uncle bernac=: a memory of the empire. with 12 full-page 
illustrations. third and cheap edition. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=rodney stone.= new and cheap illustrate edition. with 8 
full-page illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the white company.= new and cheap edition (the 28th edition. 
revised). with 8 full-page illustrations. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the green flag=, and other story of war and sport. with a 
frontispiece. new edition. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the adventure of gerard.= with 16 illustration by w. b. wollen. 
crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the return of sherlock holmes.= illustrate by sidney paget. crown 
8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the hound of the baskervilles.= with illustration by sidney paget. 
crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the adventure of sherlock holmes.= with 25 illustration by sidney 
paget. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the exploit of brigadier gerard.= with 24 illustration by w. b. 
wollen. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the sign of four.= illustrated. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=the memoirs of sherlock holmes.= with illustration by sidney 
paget. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

=through the magic door.= illustrated. crown 8vo. 5_s._ 

=songs of action.= fifth impression. fcp. 8vo. 5_s._ 

=the great boer war, 1899–1902.= thorough revised, enlarged, and 
complete edition. with map and plans. 19th impression, 
complete over 67,000 copy printed. large post 8vo. 10_s._ 
6_d._ 

=the war in south africa=: its cause and conduct. demy 8vo. 
sixpence. 


also the =collected edition of sir a. conan doyle’s novels= in 12 
volumes. with an introductory preface and 2 photogravure 
illustration to each volume. large crown 8vo. 6_s._ each net. 

⁂ _this edition of sir a. conan doyle’s novel is limited to 1,000 
sets, the first volume of each set being sign and numbered; and 
the volumes are not sold separately. the author’s future work 
will, in due course, be add to the edition._ 


contents of the volumes. 

1. the white company.—2. micah clarke.—3. the refugees.—4. rodney 
stone.—5. the adventure of sherlock holmes.—6. memoirs of sherlock 
holmes.—7. a study in scarlet; the sign of four.—8. the great shadow; 
uncle bernac.—9. a duet.—10. the tragedy of the ‘korosko’; the green 
flag, and other tale of war and sport.—11. the stark-munro letters; 
round the red lamp.—12. the exploit of brigadier gerard; the crime of 
the brigadier. 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




works by frank t. bullen, f.r.g.s. 


=our heritage the sea.= with a frontispiece by arthur twidle. crown 
8vo. 6_s._ 

_daily telegraph._—‘the first step to winning the people to the 
reading a good book is to produce the good book for them to read, and 
that mr. bullen has done.’ 


=back to sunny seas.= with 8 full-page illustration in colour by a. 
s. forrest, r.i. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_daily telegraph._—‘a bright, interesting and chatty record of a 
pleasant cruise to the west indies.’ 


=sea-wrack.= second impression. with 8 illustration by arthur 
twidle. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘characteristic of mr. bullen’s best work.’ 

_vanity fair._—‘a delightful volume.... the seafaring man is an open 
book to mr. bullen.’ 


=deep sea plunderings.= third impression. with 8 full-page 
illustration by arthur twidle. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘there is something in the book to please almost every 
taste.’ 


=the men of the merchant service=: being the polity of the 
mercantile marine for ‘longshore readers. second impression. large 
post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ 

_spectator._—‘the book is of great value, and of great interest to all 
the innumerable people who are curious about the most romantic and 
separate of lives. but it is of importance, second and chiefly, as 
mr. bullen’s appeal to the politics sense of his country.’ 


=the cruise of the ‘cachalot’ round the world= after sperm whales. 
by frank t. bullen, first mate. the volume include a letter to 
the author from rudyard kipling. twelfth impression. with 8 
illustration and a chart. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

_the_ rev. dr. horton, _in his sermon on behalf of the britain and 
foreign bible society, refer to mr. bullen’s ‘cruise of the 
“cachalot”’ in the following terms_: 

‘it is a very remarkable book in every way; it seem to me worthy to 
rank with some of the writings of defoe. it has absolutely taken the 
shine out of some of the romantic literature of such writer as even 
stevenson and rudyard kipling. by the strange law that truth is more 
wonderful than fiction, this book is more wonderful than the wildest 
dream of the creator of imagination.’ 


=the log of a sea-waif=: being the recollection of first four years 
of my sea life. fifth impression. with 8 full page illustration 
specially drawn by arthur twidle. crown 8vo. 3_s._ 6_d._ 

_world._—‘we have read many story of sea life, but do not remember 
to have been so fascinate and enthrall by any of them as by this 
masterly presentation of the humours, hardships, and minor tragedy 
of life in the forecastle.’ 


=the way they have in the navy=: being a day-to-day record of a 
cruise in h.m. battleship ‘mars’ during the manœuvres of 1899. 
third impression. crown 8vo. paper covers, 1_s._; cloth, 1_s._ 
6_d._ 

_spectator._—‘we recommend it most heartily and without any 
misgiving.’ 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




works by w. h. fitchett, b.a, ll.d. 


=wesley and his century: a study in spiritual forces.= with a 
photogravure frontispiece from the portrait of john wesley by 
george romney and four facsimile of letters, &c. second 
impression. 6_s._ net. 

_bookman._—‘a deep interesting volume.... the story is good as 
biography and rich in material. 


=the commander of the ‘hirondelle.’= with 16 full-page 
illustrations. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_athenÆum._—‘an admirable sea story.... it is good literature, too, 
and written with historical and technical knowledge.’ 


=nelson and his captains; sketch of famous seamen.= with 11 
portrait and a facsimile letter. third impression. crown 8vo. 
6_s._ 

_punch._—‘my baronite have read all dr. fitchett’s tale of battle 
on land, think his best piece is his sea piece.... saxon and celt 
reading the glowing narrative will feel proud to know it’s all true.’ 


=the tale of the great mutiny.= seventh and considerably enlarge 
impression. with 8 portrait and 4 plans. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_guardian._—‘it is almost impossible to lay the book down. the story 
of those summer month of 1857 must ever appeal to english readers.’ 

_bookman._—‘written with all the swing and dash, with all the careful 
accuracy and brilliant descriptive power which have made dr. 
fitchett’s books so deservedly popular.’ 


=how england save europe: the story of the great war (1793–1815).= 
second impression. in 4 vols. crown 8vo. with portraits. 
facsimiles, and plans, 6_s._ each. 

_times._—‘it is not without significance that this excellent “story of 
the great war,” at once popular in the best sense, well informed, full 
of instruction, and very attractive written, should be the work of a 
colonial writer.’ 

_guardian._—‘mr. fitchett has achieve a real success, and the boy who 
cannot read these volumes with pleasure (and profit) is hopeless. they 
are, if boyhood would but see it, more enthrall than half the 
novel published.’ 


=fights for the flag.= fourth edition. with 16 portraits, 13 plans, 
and a facsimile letter of the duke of marlborough. crown 8vo. 
6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘“fights for the flag” is as good as “deeds that won the 
empire.” to say more than this in praise of the book before us is 
unnecessary, for “deeds that won the empire” was one of the best 
collection of popular battle study ever given to the public.’ 

_review of reviews._—‘as a gift-book, or as a book to take up and read 
at odd moments, or to devour at a prolonged sitting, this book has few 
equals, and will probably equal or eclipse the popularity of its 
predecessors.’ 


=deeds that won the empire.= twenty-third edition. with 16 portrait 
and 11 plans. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘not since macaulay cease to write has english 
literature produce a writer capable of infuse such life and vigour 
into historical scenes. the wholesome and manly tone of mr. fitchett’s 
book is specially satisfactory.... the book cannot but take the reader 
by storm wherever it find him.’ 


=wellington’s men: some soldier-autobiographies.= edit by w. h. 
fitchett, b.a., ll.d. crown 8vo. 6_s._ 

_spectator._—‘mr. fitchett has ere this sound the clarion and fill 
the fife to good purpose, but he has never done better work than in 
rescue from oblivion the narrative which appear in this volume.... 
we feel very grateful to mr. fitchett for his skilful edit of four 
story which ought not to be allow to die.’ 

london: smith, elder, & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




novel by h. s. merriman. 


the last hope. fourth impression (second edition). crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_daily telegraph._—‘“the last hope” illustrate all mr. merriman’s 
good qualities.... its interest is unflagging and its brilliancy 
undeniable.’ 


tomaso’s fortune, and other stories. second impression. crown 8vo, 
6_s._ 

_saturday review._—‘engrossing, fascinating, picturesque tales, full 
of colour, adventure, and emotion.’ 


flotsam. seventh impression. with a frontispiece. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_vanity fair._—‘a capital book, that will repay any reader, old or 
young, for the reading.’ 


barlasch of the guard. eighth impression (second edition). crown 
8vo, 6_s._ 

_world._—‘without doubt, the finest thing of its kind that mr. 
merriman has yet accomplished in fiction. barlasch is a masterpiece.’ 

the vultures. seventh impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_daily news._—‘it is a notable book, stirring, fresh, and of a high 
interest; it fascinate and hold us to the end.... a fine book, a 
worthy successor of “the sowers.”’ 


the velvet glove. fifth impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_sketch._—‘equal to, if not better than, the best he has ever written. 
“the velvet glove” is the very essence of good romance.’ 


the isle of unrest. seventh impression. with illustrations. crown 
8vo, 6_s._ 

_the times._—‘capital reading, absorbing reading.... an exciting 
story, with “thrills” at every third page.’ 

roden’s corner. fifth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_truth._—‘a novel i defy you to lay down when once you have got well 
into it.’ 

in kedar’s tents. tenth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_pall mall gazette._—‘after the few first page one cease to 
criticize, one can only enjoy.... in a word—the use of which, 
unqualified, is such a rare and delicious luxury—the book is good.’ 

the sowers. twenty-eighth edition. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_graphic._—‘his absorbing interesting story will be found very 
difficult indeed to lay down until its last page has been turned.’ 


with edge tools. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, boards, pictorial 
cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_westminster gazette._—‘admirably conceive as a whole, and most 
skilful in its details. the story never flag or loiters.’ 


from one generation to another. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, 
boards, pictorial cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_illustrated london news._—‘the book is a good book. the character of 
michael seymour and of james agar are admirable contrasted.’ 


the slave of the lamp. crown 8vo, 6_s._; and fcap. 8vo, boards, 
pictorial cover, 2_s._; or limp red cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ 

_manchester guardian._—‘a masterly story ... so like real life, and so 
entire unconventional.’ 


the grey lady. with 12 full-page illustration by arthur rackham. 
sixth impression. crown 8vo, 6_s._ 

_british weekly._—‘an interesting, thoughtful, careful written 
story, with a charming touch of pensiveness.’ 


note.—mr. merriman’s 14 novel are publish uniform in style, 
binding, and price, and thus form a collected edition of his 
works. 

london: smith, elder & co., 15 waterloo place, s.w. 




------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




transcriber’s note: 

1. change ‘suppling’ to ‘supplying’ on p. 53. 

2. use an ⁂ in place of an invert asterism. 

3. silent correct typographic errors. 

4. retain anachronistic and non-standard spelling as printed. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook round the fire stories*** 


******* this file should be name 54109-0.txt or 54109-0.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/1/0/54109 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

