the project gutenberg ebook of the damned, by algernon blackwood 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the damn 

author: algernon blackwood 

release date: february 13, 2004 [ebook #11074] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the damn *** 




produce by suzanne shell, david cortesi and pg distribute proofread 




the damn 

algernon blackwood 

1914 



chapter i 


"i'm over forty, frances, and rather set in my ways," i said 
good-naturedly, ready to yield if she insist that our go together 
on the visit involved her happiness. "my work is rather heavy just now 
too, as you know. the question is, could i work there--with a lot of 
unassorted people in the house?" 

"mabel doesn't mention any other people, bill," was my sister's 
rejoinder. "i gather she's alone--as well as lonely." 

by the way she look sideways out of the window at nothing, it was 
obvious she was disappointed, but to my surprise she did not urge the 
point; and as i glance at mrs. franklyn's invitation lie upon her 
slope lap, the neat, childish handwriting conjure up a mental picture 
of the banker's widow, with her timid, insignificant personality, her 
pale grey eyes and her expression as of a backward child. i thought, 
too, of the roomy country mansion her late husband had alter to suit 
his particular needs, and of my visit to it a few years ago when its 
barren spacious suggest a wing of kensington museum fitted up 
temporary as a place to eat and sleep in. compare it mental with 
the poky chelsea flat where i and my sister kept impecunious house, i 
realize other points as well. unworthy detail flash across me to 
entice: the fine library, the organ, the quiet work-room i should have, 
perfect service, the delicious cup of early tea, and hot baths at any 
moment of the day--without a geyser! 

"it's a longish visit, a month--isn't it?" i hedged, smile at the 
detail that seduce me, and ashamed of my man's selfishness, yet 
knowing that frances expect it of me. "there are points about it, i 
admit. if you're set on my go with you, i could manage it all right." 

i spoke at length in this way because my sister made no answer. i saw 
her tired eyes gaze into the dreary of oakley street and felt a 
pang strike through me. after a pause, in which again she said no word, 
i added: "so, when you write the letter, you might hint, perhaps, that i 
usually work all the morning, and--er--am not a very lively visitor! 
then she'll understand, you see." and i half-rose to return to my 
diminutive study, where i was slaving, just then, at an absorbing 
article on comparative aesthetic value in the blind and deaf. 

but frances did not move. she kept her grey eyes upon oakley street 
where the evening mist from the river drew mournful perspective into 
view. it was late october. we heard the omnibus thundering across the 
bridge. the monotony of that broad, characterless street seem more 
than usually depressing. even in june sunshine it was dead, but with 
autumn its melancholy soaked into every house between king's road and 
the embankment. it wash thought into the past, instead of inviting it 
hopefully towards the future. for me, its easy width was an avenue 
through which nameless slum across the river sent creep message of 
depression, and i always regard it as winter's main entrance into 
london--fog, slush, gloom troop down it every november, wave their 
forbidding banner till march came to rout them. 

its one claim upon my love was that the south wind swept sometimes 
unobstructed up it, soft with suggestion of the sea. these lugubrious 
thought i naturally kept to myself, though i never cease to regret the 
little flat whose cheap had seduce us. now, as i watch my 
sister's impassive face, i realize that perhaps she, too, felt as i 
felt, yet, brave woman, without betray it. 

"and, look here, fanny," i said, putt a hand upon her shoulder as i 
cross the room, "it would be the very thing for you. you're worn out 
with cater and housekeeping. mabel is your oldest friend, besides, 
and you've hardly seen her since he died--" 

"she's been abroad for a year, bill, and only just came back," my sister 
interposed. "she came back rather unexpectedly, though i never thought 
she would go there to live--" she stop abruptly. clearly, she was 
only speak half her mind. "probably," she went on, "mabel wants to 
pick up old links again." 

"naturally," i put in, "yourself chief among them." the veiled reference 
to the house i let pass. 

it involved discuss the dead man for one thing. 

"i feel i ought to go anyhow," she resumed, "and of course it would be 
jolly if you came too. you'd get in such a muddle here by yourself, 
and eat wrong things, and forget to air the rooms, and--oh, everything!" 
she look up laughing. "only," she added, "there's the britain 
museum--?" 

"but there's a big library there," i answered, "and all the books of 
reference i could possibly want. it was of you i was thinking. you could 
take up your painting again; you always sell half of what you paint. it 
would be a splendid rest too, and sussex is a jolly country to walk in. 
by all means, fanny, i advise--" 

our eyes met, as i stammer in my attempt to avoid express the 
thought that hid in both our minds. my sister had a weakness for 
dabble in the various "new" theory of the day, and mabel, who before 
her marriage had belong to foolish society for investigate the 
future life to the neglect of the present one, had foster this 
undesirable tendency. her amiable, impressionable temperament was open 
to every psychic wind that blew. i deplored, detest the whole 
business. but even more than this i abhor the later influence that 
mr. franklyn had steep his wife in, capture her body and soul in his 
somber doctrines. i had dread lest my sister also might be caught. 

"now that she is alone again--" 

i stop short. our eyes now made pretence impossible, for the truth 
had slip out inevitably, stupidly, although unexpress in definite 
language. we laughed, turning our face a moment to look at other things 
in the room. frances picked up a book and examine its cover as though 
she had made an important discovery, while i took my case out and lit a 
cigarette i did not want to smoke. we left the matter there. i went out 
of the room before further explanation could cause tension. 
disagreement grow into discord from such tiny things--wrong adjectives, 
or a chance inflection of the voice. frances had a right to her view of 
life as much as i had. at least, i reflect comfortably, we had 
separate upon an agreement this time, recognize mutually, though not 
actually stated. 

and this point of meeting was, oddly enough, our way of regarding some 
one who was dead. 

for we had both dislike the husband with a great dislike, and during 
his three years' married life had only been to the house once--for a 
weekend visit; arrive late on saturday, we had left after an early 
breakfast on monday morning. ascribe my sister's dislike to a natural 
jealousy at lose her old friend, i said merely that he displease me. 
yet we both knew that the real emotion lay much deeper. frances, loyal, 
honorable creature, had kept silence; and beyond saying that house and 
grounds--he alter one and laid out the other--distressed her as an 
expression of his personality somehow ('distressed' was the word she 
used), no further explanation had pass her lips. 

our dislike of his personality was easily account for--up to a point, 
since both of us share the artist's point of view that a creed, cut to 
measure and careful dried, was an ugly thing, and that a dogma to 
which believer must subscribe or perish everlastingly was a barbarism 
rest upon cruelty. but while my own dislike was purely due to an 
abstract worship of beauty, my sister's had another twist in it, for 
with her "new" tendencies, she believe that all religion were an 
aspect of truth and that no one, even the lowest wretch, could escape 
"heaven" in the long run. 

samuel franklyn, the rich banker, was a man universally respect and 
admired, and the marriage, though mabel was fifteen years his junior, 
won general applause; his bride was an heiress in her own right-- 
breweries--and the story of her conversion at a revivalist meeting where 
samuel franklyn had spoken fervid of heaven, and terrifying of sin, 
hell and damnation, even contained a touch of genuine romance. she was a 
brand snatch from the burning; his detailed eloquence had frightened 
her into heaven; salvation came in the nick of time; his words had 
pluck her from the edge of that lake of fire and brimstone where their 
worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched. she regard him as a hero, 
sigh her relief upon his saintly shoulder, and accept the peace he 
offer her with a grateful resignation. 

for her husband was a "religious man" who successful combine great 
riches with the glamour of winning souls. he was a portly figure, though 
tall, with masterful, big hands, his finger rather thick and red; and 
his dignity, that just escape being pompous, held in it something that 
was implacable. a convinced assurance, almost remorseless, gleam in 
his eyes when he preach especially, and his threat of hell fire must 
have scared soul strong than the timid, receptive mabel whom he 
married. he clad himself in long frock-coats hat button unevenly, big 
square boots, and trousers that invariable bag at the knee and were a 
little short; he wore low collars, spat occasionally, and a tall black 
hat that was not of silk. his voice was alternate hard and unctuous; 
and he regard theaters, ballrooms, and racecourse as the vestibule of 
that brimstone lake of whose geography he was as positive as of his 
great banking offices in the city. a philanthropist up to the hilt, 
however, no one ever doubt his complete sincerity; his conviction 
were ingrained, his faith borne out by his life--as witness his name 
upon so many admirable societies, as treasurer, patron, or heading the 
donation list. he bulk large in the world of do good, a broad and 
stately stone in the rampart against evil. and his heart was genuine 
kind and soft for others--who believe as he did. 

yet, in spite of this true sympathy with suffering and his desire to 
help, he was narrow as a telegraph wire and unbending as a church 
pillar; he was intense selfish; intolerant as an officer of the 
inquisition, his bourgeois soul construct a revolting scheme of heaven 
that was reproduce in miniature in all he did and planned. faith was 
the sine qua non of salvation, and by "faith" he meant belief in his own 
particular view of things--"which faith, except every one do keep whole 
and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly." all the 
world but his own small, exclusive sect must be damn eternally--a 
pity, but alas, inevitable. he was right. 

yet he pray without ceasing, and gave heavy to the poor--the only 
thing he could not give being big idea to his provincial and suburban 
deity. petty than an insect, and more obstinate than a mule, he had 
also the superior, sleek humility of a "chosen one." he was churchwarden 
too. he read the lesson in a "place of worship," either chilly or 
overheated, where neither organ, vestments, nor light candle were 
permitted, but where the odor of hair-wash on the boys' head in the 
back row pervade the entire building. 

this portrait of the banker, who accumulate riches both on earth and in 
heaven, may possibly be overdrawn, however, because frances and i were 
"artistic temperaments" that view the type with a dislike and distrust 
amount to contempt. the majority considered samuel franklyn a worthy 
man and a good citizen. the majority, doubtless, held the sane view. a 
few years more, and he certainly would have been made a baronet. he 
relieved much suffering in the world, as assured as he cause many 
soul the agony of torture fear by his emphasis upon damnation. 

had there been one point of beauty in him, we might have been more 
lenient; only we found it not, and, i admit, took little pains to 
search. i shall never forget the look of dour forgiveness with which he 
heard our excuse for missing morning prayer that sunday morning of our 
single visit to the towers. my sister learned that a change was made 
soon afterwards, prayer being "conducted" after breakfast instead of 
before. 

the tower stood solemn upon a sussex hill amid park-like modern 
grounds, but the house cannot better be described--it would be so 
wearisome for one thing--than by saying that it was a cross between an 
overgrown, pretentious norwood villa and one of those saturnine 
institute for cripple the train pass as it slink ashamed through 
south london into surrey. it was "wealthily" furnish and at first 
sight imposing, but on close acquaintance reveal a meager 
personality, barren and austere. one look for rule and regulation on 
the walls, all sign by order. the place was a prison that shut out 
"the world." there was, of course, no billiard-room, no smoking-room, no 
room for play of any kind, and the great hall at the back, once a 
chapel, which might have been use for dancing, theatricals, or other 
innocent amusements, was consecrate in his day to meeting of various 
kinds, chiefly brigades, temperance or missionary societies. there was a 
harmonium at one end--on the level floor--a raise dais or platform at 
the other, and a gallery above for the servants, gardeners, and 
coachmen. it was heated with hot-water pipes, and hung with doré's 
pictures, though these latter were soon remove and store out of sight 
in the attic as being too unspiritual. in polished, shiny wood, it was 
a representation in miniature of that poky exclusive heaven he took 
about with him, externalize it in all he did and planned, even in the 
grounds about the house. 

change in the towers, frances told me, had been made during mabel's 
year of widowhood abroad--an organ put into the big hall, the library 
made livable and re-catalogued--when it was permissible to suppose she 
had found her soul again and return to her normal, healthy view of 
life, which included enjoyment and play, literature, music and the arts, 
without, however, a touch of that trivial thoughtless usually term 
worldliness. mrs. franklyn, as i remember her, was a quiet little 
woman, shallow, perhaps, and easily influenced, but sincere as a dog and 
thorough in her faithful friendship. her taste at heart were catholic, 
and that heart was simple and unimaginative. that she took up with the 
various movements of the day was sign merely that she was searching in 
her limited way for a belief that should bring her peace. she was, in 
fact, a very ordinary woman, her caliber a little less than that of 
frances. i knew they use to discuss all kind of theory together, but 
as these discussion never result in action, i had come to regard her 
as harmless. still, i was not sorry when she married, and i did not 
welcome now a renewal of the former intimacy. the philanthropist she had 
given no children, or she would have made a good and sensible mother. no 
doubt she would marry again. 

"mabel mention that she's been alone at the tower since the end of 
august," frances told me at teatime; "and i'm sure she feel out of it 
and lonely. it would be a kindness to go. besides, i always like her." 

i agreed. i had recover from my attack of selfishness. i express my 
pleasure. 

"you've written to accept," i said, half statement and half question. 

frances nodded. "i thank for you," she add quietly, "explaining that 
you were not free at the moment, but that later, if not inconvenient, 
you might come down for a bit and join me." 

i stared. frances sometimes had this independent way of decide things. 
i was convicted, and punish into the bargain. 

of course there follow argument and explanation, as between brother 
and sister who were affectionate, but the recording of our talk could be 
of little interest. it was arrange thus, frances and i both satisfied. 
two days later she departed for the towers, leave me alone in the flat 
with everything plan for my comfort and good behavior--she was rather 
a tyrant in her quiet way--and her last words as i saw her off from 
char cross rang in my head for a long time after she was gone: 

"i'll write and let you know, bill. eat properly, mind, and let me know 
if anything go wrong." 

she wave her small glove hand, nod her head till the feather 
brush the window, and was gone. 




chapter ii 


after the note announce her safe arrival a week of silence passed, and 
then a letter came; there were various suggestion for my welfare, and 
the rest was the usual rambling information and description frances 
loved, generous italicized. 

" ...and we are quite alone," she went on in her enormous handwriting 
that seem such a waste of space and labor, "though some other are 
coming presently, i believe. you could work here to your heart's 
content. mabel quite understands, and say she would love to have you 
when you feel free to come. she has change a bit--back to her old 
natural self: she never mention him. the place has change too in 
certain ways: it has more cheerfulness, i think. she has put it in, this 
cheerfulness, spade it in, if you know what i mean; but it lie about 
uneasy and is not natural--quite. the organ is a beauty. she must be 
very rich now, but she's as gentle and sweet as ever. do you know, bill, 
i think he must have frightened her into marry him. i get the 
impression she was afraid of him." this last sentence was ink out, i 
but i read it through the scratching; the letters being too big to hide. 
"he had an inflexible will beneath all that oily kindness which pass 
for spiritual. he was a real personality, i mean. i'm sure he'd have 
sent you and me cheerful to the stake in another century--for our own 
good. isn't it odd she never speak of him, even to me?" this, again, 
was stroke through, though without the intention to obliterate--merely 
because it was repetition, probably. "the only reminder of him in the 
house now is a big copy of the presentation portrait that stand on the 
stairs of the multitechnic institute at peckham--you know--that 
life-size one with his fat hand sprinkle with ring rest on a thick 
bible and the other slip between the buttons of a tight frock-coat. 
it hang in the dine room and rather dominate our meals. i wish mabel 
would take it down. i think she'd like to, if she dared. there's not a 
single photograph of him anywhere, even in her own room. mrs. marsh is 
here--you remember her, his housekeeper, the wife of the man who got 
penal servitude for killing a baby or something--you said she rob him 
and justified her steal because the story of the unjust steward was 
in the bible! how we laugh over that! she's just the same too, gliding 
about all over the house and turning up when least expected." 

other reminiscences fill the next two side of the letter, and ran, 
without a trace of punctuation, into instruction about a salamander 
stove for heating my work-room in the flat; these were follow by 
things i was to tell the cook, and by request for several articles she 
had forgotten and would like sent after her, two of them blouses, with 
description so lengthy and contradictory that i sigh as i read them-- 
"unless you come down soon, in which case perhaps you wouldn't mind 
bring them; not the mauve one i wear in the evening sometimes, but 
the pale blue one with lace round the collar and the crinkly front. 
they're in the cupboard--or the drawer, i'm not sure which--of my 
bedroom. ask annie if you're in doubt. thanks most awfully. send a 
telegram, remember, and we'll meet you in the motor any time. i don't 
quite know if i shall stay the whole month--alone. it all depends...." 
and she closed the letter, the italicize words increase reckless 
towards the end, with a repetition that mabel would love to have me "for 
myself," as also to have a "man in the house," and that i only had to 
telegraph the day and the train.... this letter, coming by the second 
post, interrupt me in a moment of absorbing work, and, have read it 
through to make sure there was nothing require instant attention, i 
threw it aside and went on with my note and reading. within five 
minutes, however, it was back at me again. that restless thing call 
"between the lines" flutter about my mind. my interest in the balkan 
states--political article that had been "ordered"--faded. somewhere, 
somehow i felt disquieted, disturbed. at first i persist in my work, 
force myself to concentrate, but soon found that a layer of new 
impression float between the article and my attention. it was like a 
shadow, though a shadow that dissolve upon inspection. once or twice i 
glance up, expect to find some one in the room, that the door had 
open unobserved and annie was wait for instructions. i heard the 
bus thundering across the bridge. i was aware of oakley street. 

montenegro and the blue adriatic melt into the october haze along that 
depress embankment that aped a riverbank, and sentence from the 
letter flash before my eyes and stung me. pick it up and reading it 
through more carefully, i rang the bell and told annie to find the 
blouse and pack them for the post, showing her finally the written 
description, and resent the superior smile with which she at once 
interrupted. "i know them, sir," and disappeared. 

but it was not the blouses: it was that exasperate thing "between the 
lines" that put an end to my work with its elusive tease nuisance. the 
first sharp impression is alone of value in such a case, for once 
analysis begin the imagination construct all kind of false 
interpretation. the more i thought, the more i grew fuddled. the letter, 
it seem to me, want to say another thing; instead the eight sheet 
convey it merely. it came to the edge of disclosure, then halted. 

there was something on the writer's mind, and i felt uneasy. study 
the sentence brought, however, no revelation, but increase confusion 
only; for while the uneasy remained, the first clear hint had 
vanished. in the end i closed my books and went out to look up another 
matter at the britain museum library. perhaps i should discover it that 
way--by turning the mind in a total new direction. i lunch at the 
express dairy in oxford street close by, and telephone to annie that i 
would be home to tea at five. 

and at tea, tired physically and mental after breathing the exhaust 
air of the rotunda for five hours, my mind sudden deliver up its 
original impression, vivid and clear-cut; no proof accompany the 
revelation; it was mere presentiment, but convincing. frances was 
disturbed in her mind, her orderly, sensible, housekeeping mind; she was 
uneasy, even perhaps afraid; something in the house distress her, and 
she had need of me. unless i went down, her time of rest and change, her 
quite necessary holiday, in fact, would be spoilt. she was too unselfish 
to say this, but it ran everywhere between the lines. i saw it clearly 
now. mrs. franklyn, moreover--and that meant frances too--would like a 
"man in the house." it was a disagreeable phrase, a suggestive way of 
hint something she dare not state definitely. the two women in that 
great, lonely barrack of a house were afraid. 

my sense of duty, affection, unselfishness, whatever the composite 
emotion may be termed, was stirred; also my vanity. i act quickly, 
lest reflection should warp clear, decent judgment. 

"annie," i said, when she answer the bell, "you need not send those 
blouse by the post. i'll take them down tomorrow when i go. i shall be 
away a week or two, possibly longer." and, have look up a train, i 
hasten out to telegraph before i could change my fickle mind. 

but no desire came that night to change my mind. i was do the right, 
the necessary thing. i was even in something of a hurry to get down to 
the tower as soon as possible. i chose an early afternoon train. 




chapter iii 


a telegram had told me to come to a town ten mile from the house, so i 
was save the crawl train to the local station, and traveled down by 
an express. as soon as we left london the fog clear off, and an autumn 
sun, though without heat in it, paint the landscape with golden brown 
and yellows. my spirits rose as i lay back in the luxurious motor and 
sped between the wood and hedges. oddly enough, my anxiety of overnight 
had disappeared. it was due, no doubt, to that exaggeration of detail 
which reflection in lonely brings. frances and i had not been 
separate for over a year, and her letters from the tower told so 
little. it had seem unnatural to be deprived of those intimate 
particulars of mood and feeling i was accustomed to. we had such 
confidence in one another, and our affection was so deep. though she was 
but five years younger than myself, i regard her as a child. my 
attitude was fatherly. 

in return, she certainly mother me with a solicitude that never 
cloyed. i felt no desire to marry while she was still alive. she paint 
in watercolor with a reasonable success, and kept house for me; i 
wrote, review books and lecture on aesthetics; we were a humdrum 
couple of quasi-artists, well satisfy with life, and all i fear for 
her was that she might become a suffragette or be taken captive by one 
of these wild theory that caught her imagination sometimes, and that 
mabel, for one, had fostered. as for myself, no doubt she deem me a 
trifle solid or stolid--i forget which word she preferred--but on the 
whole there was just sufficient difference of opinion to make 
intercourse suggestive without monotony, and certainly without 
quarrelling. 

drawing in deep draughts of the sting autumn air, i felt happy and 
exhilarated. it was like go for a holiday, with comfort at the end of 
the journey instead of bargain for centimes. 

but my heart sank noticeable the moment the house came into view. the 
long drive, line with hostile monkey tree and formal wellingtonia 
that were solemn and sedate, was mere extension of the miniature 
approach to a thousand semidetached suburban "residences"; and the 
appearance of the towers, as we turn the corner with a rush, suggest 
a commonplace climax to a story that had begun interestingly, almost 
thrillingly. a villa had escape from the shadow of the crystal palace, 
thump its way down by night, grown sudden monstrous in a shower of 
rich rain, and settled itself insolent to stay. ivy climb about the 
opulent red-brick walls, but climb neat and with disfigure effect, 
sham as on a prison or--the simile made me smile--an orphan asylum. 
there was no hint of the comely roughness of untidy ivy on a ruin. 
clipped, trained, and precise it was, as on a brand-new protestant 
church. i swear there was not a bird's nest nor a single earwig in it 
anywhere. about the porch it was particularly thick, smother a 
seventeenth-century lamp with a contrast that was quite horrible. 
extensive glass-houses spread away on the farther side of the house; the 
numerous tower to which the building owe its name seem made to hold 
school bells; and the windowsills, thick with potted flowers, made me 
think of the desolate suburbs of brighton or bexhill. in a commanding 
position upon the crest of a hill, it overlook mile of undulating, 
wooded country southwards to the downs, but behind it, to the north, 
thick bank of ilex, holly, and privet protect it from the cleaner and 
more stimulate winds. hence, though highly placed, it was shut in. 
three years had pass since i last set eyes upon, it, but the unsightly 
memory i had retain was justified by the reality. the place was 
deplorable. 

it is my habit to express my opinion audible sometimes, when 
impression are strong enough to warrant it; but now i only sigh "oh, 
dear," as i extricate my leg from many rug and went into the house. a 
tall parlor-maid, with the bearing of a grenadier, received me, and 
standing behind her was mrs. marsh, the housekeeper, whom i remember 
because her untidy back hair had suggest to me that it had been burnt. 
i went at once to my room, my hostess already dressing for dinner, but 
frances came in to see me just as i was struggle with my black tie 
that had got tangle like a bootlace. she fasten it for me in a neat, 
effective bow, and while i held my chin up for the operation, staring 
blank at the ceiling, the impression came--i wondered, was it her 
touch that cause it?--that something in her trembled. shrink perhaps 
is the true word. nothing in her face or manner betray it, nor in her 
pleasant, easy talk while she tidy my things and scold my slovenly 
packing, as her habit was, questioning me about the servant at the 
flat. the blouses, though right, were crumpled, and my scold was 
deserved. there was no impatience even. yet somehow or other the 
suggestion of a shrink reserve and holding back reach my mind. she 
had been lonely, of course, but it was more than that; she was glad that 
i had come, yet for some reason unstated she could have wish that i 
had stay away. we discuss the news that had accumulate during our 
brief separation, and in do so the impression, at best exceedingly 
slight, was forgotten. my chamber was large and beautiful furnished; 
the hall and dine room of our flat would have gone into it with a good 
remainder; yet it was not a place i could settle down in for work. it 
convey the idea of impermanence, making me feel transient as in a 
hotel bedroom. this, of course, was the fact. but some rooms convey a 
settled, lasting hospitality even in a hotel; this one did not; and as i 
was accustomed to work in the room i slept in, at least when visiting, a 
slight frown must have crept between my eyes. 

"mabel has fitted a work-room for you just out of the library," said the 
clairvoyant frances. 

"no one will disturb you there, and you'll have fifteen thousand books 
all catalogue within easy reach. there's a private staircase too. you 
can breakfast in your room and slip down in your dressing gown if you 
want to." she laughed. my spirits took a turn upwards as absurd as 
they had gone down. 

"and how are you?" i asked, give her a belated kiss. "it's jolly to be 
together again. i did feel rather lost without you, i'll admit." 

"that's natural," she laughed. "i'm so glad." 

she look well and had country color in her cheeks. she informed me 
that she was eat and sleep well, go out for little walk with 
mabel, painting bit of scenery again, and enjoy a complete change 
and rest; and yet, for all her brave description, the word somehow did 
not quite ring true. those last words in particular did not ring true. 
there lay in her manner, just out of sight, i felt, this suggestion of 
the exact reverse--of unrest, shrinking, almost of anxiety. certain 
small strings in her seem over-tight. "keyed-up" was the slang 
expression that cross my mind. i look rather searching into her 
face as she was telling me this. 

"only--the evenings," she added, notice my query, yet rather avoid 
my eyes, "the evenings are--well, rather heavy sometimes, and i find it 
difficult to keep awake." 

"the strong air after london make you drowsy," i suggested, "and you 
like to get early to bed." 

frances turn and look at me for a moment steadily. "on the contrary, 
bill, i dislike go to bed--here. and mabel go so early." she said 
it lightly enough, fingering the disorder upon my dressing table in such 
a stupid way that i saw her mind was working in another direction 
altogether. she look up sudden with a kind of nervous from the 
brush and scissors. 

"billy," she said abruptly, lower her voice, "isn't it odd, but i 
hate sleep alone here? i can't make it out quite; i've never felt 
such a thing before in my life. do you--think it's all nonsense?" 

and she laughed, with her lip but not with her eyes; there was a note 
of defiance in her i fail to understand. 

"nothing a nature like yours feel strong is nonsense, frances," i 
reply soothingly. 

but i, too, answer with my lip only, for another part of my mind was 
working elsewhere, and among uncomfortable things. a touch of 
bewilder pass over me. i was not certain how best to continue. if 
i laugh she would tell me no more, yet if i took her too seriously the 
strings would tighten further. instinctively, then, this flash rapid 
across me: that something of what she felt, i had also felt, though 
interpret it differently. vague it was, as the coming of rain or 
storm that announce themselves hour in advance with their hint of 
faint, unsettle excitement in the air. i had been but a short hour in 
the house--big, comfortable, luxurious house--but had experienced this 
sense of being unsettled, unfixed, fluctuating--a kind of impermanence 
that transient lodger in hotel must feel, but that a guest in a 
friend's home ought not to feel, be the visit short or long. to frances, 
an impressionable woman, the feeling had come in the terms of alarm. she 
dislike sleep alone, while yet she long to sleep. the precise idea 
in my mind evade capture, merely brush through me, three-quarters 
out of sight; i realize only that we both felt the same thing, and that 
neither of us could get at it clearly. 

degree of unrest we felt, but the actual thing did not disclose itself. 
it did not happen. 

i felt strange at sea for a moment. frances would interpret hesitation 
as endorsement, and encouragement might be the last thing that could 
help her. 

"sleeping in a strange house," i answer at length, "is often difficult 
at first, and one feel lonely. after fifteen month in our tiny flat 
one feel lost and uncared-for in a big house. it's an uncomfortable 
feeling--i know it well. and this is a barrack, isn't it? the masses of 
furniture only make it worse. one feel in storage somewhere 
underground--the furniture doesn't furnish. one must never yield to 
fancies, though--" 

frances look away towards the windows; she seem disappointed a 
little. 

"after our thickly-populated chelsea," i went on quickly, "it seem 
isolated here." 

but she did not turn back, and clearly i was saying the wrong thing. a 
wave of pity rush sudden over me. was she really frightened, 
perhaps? she was imaginative, i knew, but never moody; common sense was 
strong in her, though she had her times of hypersensitiveness. i caught 
the echo of some unreasoning, big alarm in her. she stood there, gaze 
across my balcony towards the sea of wooded country that spread dim and 
vague in the obscurity of the dusk. the deepen shadow enter the 
room, i fancied, from the grounds below. following her abstracted gaze a 
moment, i experienced a curious sharp desire to leave, to escape. out 
yonder was wind and space and freedom. this enormous building was 
oppressive, silent, still. 

great catacomb occur to me, things beneath the ground, imprison 
and capture. i believe i even shudder a little. 

i touched her shoulder. she turn round slowly, and we look with a 
certain deliberation into each other's eyes. 

"fanny," i asked, more grave than i intended, "you are not frightened, 
are you? nothing has happened, has it?" 

she reply with emphasis, "of course not! how could it--i mean, why 
should i?" she stammered, as though the wrong sentence fluster her a 
second. "it's simply--that i have this ter--this dislike of sleep 
alone." 

naturally, my first thought was how easy it would be to cut our visit 
short. but i did not say this. had it been a true solution, frances 
would have said it for me long ago. 

"wouldn't mabel double-up with you?" i said instead, "or give you an 
adjoin room, so that you could leave the door between you open? 
there's space enough, heaven knows." 

and then, as the gong sound in the hall below for dinner, she said, as 
with an effort, this thing: 

"mabel did ask me--on the third night--after i had told her. but i 
declined." 

"you'd rather be alone than with her?" i asked, with a certain relief. 

her reply was so grave given, a child would have known there was more 
behind it: "not that; but that she did not really want it." 

i had a moment's intuition and act on it impulsively. "she feel it 
too, perhaps, but wish to face it by herself--and get over it?" 

my sister bowed her head, and the gesture made me realize of a sudden 
how grave and solemn our talk had grown, as though some portentous thing 
were under discussion. it had come of itself--indefinite as a gradual 
change of temperature. yet neither of us knew its nature, for apparently 
neither of us could state it plainly. nothing happened, even in our 
words. 

"that was my impression," she said, "--that if she yield to it she 
encourage it. and a habit form so easily. just think," she add with 
a faint smile that was the first sign of lightness she had yet betrayed, 
"what a nuisance it would be--everywhere--if everybody was afraid of 
being alone--like that." 

i snatch readily at the chance. we laugh a little, though it was a 
quiet kind of laughter that seem wrong. i took her arm and led her 
towards the door. 

"disastrous, in fact," i agreed. 

she raise her voice to its normal pitch again, as i had done. "no doubt 
it will pass," she said, "now that you have come. of course, it's 
chiefly my imagination." her tone was lighter, though nothing could 
convince me that the matter itself was light--just then. "and in any 
case," tighten her grip on my arm as we pass into the bright 
enormous corridor and caught sight of mrs. franklyn wait in the 
cheerless hall below, "i'm very glad you're here, bill, and mabel, i 
know, is too." 

"if it doesn't pass," i just had time to whisper with a feeble attempt 
at jollity, "i'll come at night and snore outside your door. after that 
you'll be so glad to get rid of me that you won't mind being alone." 

"that's a bargain," said frances. 

i shook my hostess by the hand, made a banal remark about the long 
interval since last we met, and walk behind them into the great dine 
room, dim lit by candles, wonder in my heart how long my sister and 
i should stay, and why in the world we had ever left our cozy little 
flat to enter this desolate of riches and false luxury at all. the 
unsightly picture of the late samuel franklyn, esq., stare down upon me 
from the farther end of the room above the mighty mantelpiece. 

he looked, i thought, like some pompous heavenly butler who deny to 
all the world, and to us in particular, the right of entry without 
presentation cards sign by his hand as proof that we belong to his 
own exclusive set. the majority, to his deep grief, and in spite of all 
his prayer on their behalf, must burn and "perish everlastingly." 




chapter iv 


with the instinct of the healthy bachelor i always try to make myself a 
nest in the place i live in, be it for long or short. whether visiting, 
in lodging-house, or in hotel, the first essential is this nest--one's 
own things built into the wall as a bird build in its feathers. it may 
look desolate and uncomfortable enough to others, because the central 
detail is neither bed nor wardrobe, sofa nor armchair, but a good solid 
writing-table that do not wriggle, and that has wide elbowroom. 

and the tower is vivid describe for me by the single fact that i 
could not "nest" there. 

i took several days to discover this, but the first impression of 
impermanence was true than i knew. the feather of the mind refuse 
here to lie one way. they ruffled, pointed, and grew wild. 

luxurious furniture do not mean comfort; i might as well have try to 
settle down in the sofa and armchair department of a big shop. my 
bedroom was easily managed; it was the private workroom, prepared 
especially for my reception, that made me feel alien and outcast. 

externally, it was all one could desire: an antechamber to the great 
library, with not one, but two generous oak tables, to say nothing of 
small one against the wall with capacious drawers. 

there were reading desks, mechanical device for holding books, perfect 
light, quiet as in a church, and no approach but across the huge 
adjoin room. yet it did not invite. 

"i hope you'll be able to work here," said my little hostess the next 
morning, as she took me in--her only visit to it while i stay in the 
house--and show me the ten-volume catalogue. 

"it's absolutely quiet and no one will disturb you." 

"if you can't, bill, you're not much good," laugh frances, who was on 
her arm. "even i could write in a study like this!" 

i glance with pleasure at the ample tables, the sheet of thick 
blot paper, the rulers, sealing wax, paper knives, and all the other 
immaculate paraphernalia. "it's perfect," i answer with a secret 
thrill, yet feeling a little foolish. this was for gibbon or carlyle, 
rather than for my potboile insignificancies. "if i can't write 
masterpiece here, it's certainly not your fault," and i turn with 
gratitude to mrs. franklyn. she was look straight at me, and there 
was a question in her small pale eyes i did not understand. was she 
note the effect upon me, i wondered? 

"you'll write here--perhaps a story about the house," she said, 
"thompson will bring you anything you want; you only have to ring." she 
pointed to the electric bell on the central table, the wire running 
neat down the leg. "no one has ever work here before, and the 
library has been hardly use since it was put in. so there's no previous 
atmosphere to affect your imagination--er--adversely." 

we laughed. "bill isn't that sort," said my sister; while i wish they 
would go out and leave me to arrange my little nest and set to work. 

i thought, of course, it was the huge listen library that made me 
feel so inconsiderable--the fifteen thousand silent, staring books, the 
solemn aisles, the deep, eloquent shelves. but when the women had gone 
and i was alone, the beginning of the truth crept over me, and i felt 
that first hint of disconsolate which later became an imperative no. 
the mind shut down, image cease to rise and flow. i read, made copious 
notes, but i wrote no single line at the towers. 

nothing complete itself there. nothing happened. 

the morning sunshine pour into the library through ten long narrow 
windows; bird were singing; the autumn air, rich with a faint aroma of 
november melancholy that stung the imagination pleasantly, fill my 
antechamber. i look out upon the undulate wooded landscape, hem 
in by the sweep of distant downs, and i taste a whiff of the sea. rook 
caw as they float above the elms, and there were lazy cow in the 
near meadows. a dozen times i try to make my nest and settle down to 
work, and a dozen times, like a turning fastidious dog upon a hearth 
rug, i rearrange my chair and books and papers. the temptation of the 
catalogue and shelves, of course, was accountable for much, yet not, i 
felt, for all. that was a manageable seduction. my work, moreover, was 
not of the creative kind that require absolute absorption; it was the 
mere readable presentation of data i had accumulated. my notebook were 
charged with fact ready to tabulate--facts, too, that interested me 
keenly. a mere effort of the will was necessary, and concentration of no 
difficult kind. yet, somehow, it seem beyond me: something forever 
pushed the fact into disorder ... and in the end i sat in the sunshine, 
dip into a dozen books select from the shelves outside, vex with 
myself and only half-enjoying it. i felt restless. i want to be 
elsewhere. 

and even while i read, attention wandered. frances, mabel, her late 
husband, the house and grounds, each in turn and sometimes all together, 
rose uninvited into the stream of thought, hinder any consecutive 
flow of work. in disconnected fashion came these pictures that 
interrupt concentration, yet present themselves as broken fragment 
of a big thing my mind already grope for unconsciously. they 
flutter round this hidden thing of which they were aspects, fugitive 
interpretations, no one of them bring complete revelation. there was 
no adjective, such as pleasant or unpleasant, that i could attach to 
what i felt, beyond that the result was unsettling. vague as the 
atmosphere of a dream, it yet persisted, and i could not dissipate it. 

isolated words or phrase in the lines i read sent question scour 
across my mind, sure sign that the deep part of me was restless and 
ill at ease. 

rather trivial question too--half-foolish interrogations, as of a 
puzzle or curious child: why was my sister afraid to sleep alone, and 
why did her friend feel a similar repugnance, yet seek to conquer it? 
why was the solid luxury of the house without comfort, its shelter 
without the sense of permanence? why had mrs. franklyn ask us to come, 
artists, unbelieving vagabonds, type at the farthest possible remove 
from the save sheep of her husband's household? had a reaction set in 
against the hysteria of her conversion? i had seen no sign of religious 
fervor in her; her atmosphere was that of an ordinary, high-minded 
woman, yet a woman of the world. lifeless, though, a little, perhaps, 
now that i came to think about it: she had made no definite impression 
upon me of any kind. and my thought ran vague after this fragile 
clue. 

close my book, i let them run. for, with this chance reflection came 
the discovery that i could not see her clearly--could not feel her soul, 
her personality. her face, her small pale eyes, her dress and body and 
walk, all these stood before me like a photograph; but her self evade 
me. she seem not there, lifeless, empty, a shadow--nothing. the 
picture was disagreeable, and i put it by. instantly she melt out, as 
though light thought had conjure up a phantom that had no real 
existence. and at that very moment, singularly enough, my eye caught 
sight of her moving past the window, go silent along the gravel 
path. i watch her, a sudden new sensation gripping me. "there go a 
prisoner," my thought instantly ran, "one who wish to escape, but 
cannot." 

what brought the outlandish notion, heaven only knows. the house was of 
her own choice, she was twice an heiress, and the world lay open at her 
feet. yet she stayed--unhappy, frightened, caught. all this flash over 
me, and made a sharp impression even before i had time to dismiss it as 
absurd. but a moment later explanation offer itself, though it seem 
as far-fetched as the original impression. my mind, being logical, was 
oblige to provide something, apparently. for mrs. franklyn, while 
dress to go out, with thick walking-boots, a pointed stick, and a 
motor-cap tie on with a veil as for the windy lanes, was obviously 
content to go no farther than the little garden paths. the costume was a 
sham and a pretence. it was this, and her lithe, quick movements that 
suggest a cage creature--a creature tame by fear and cruelty that 
cloak themselves in kindness--pacing up and down, unable to realize 
why it got no farther, but always met the same bar in exactly the same 
place. the mind in her was barred. 

i watch her go along the path and down the steps from one terrace to 
another, until the laurels hid her altogether; and into this mere 
imagine of a moment came a hint of something slightly disagreeable, 
for which my mind, search as it would, found no explanation at all. i 
remember then certain other little things. they drop into the 
picture of their own accord. in a mind not deliberate hunting for 
clues, pieces of a puzzle sometimes come together in this way, bring 
revelation, so that for a second there flash across me, vanish 
instantly again before i could consider it, a large, distressing 
thought. i can only describe vague as a shadow. 

dark and ugly, oppressive certainly it might be described, with 
something torn and dreadful about the edge that suggest pain and 
strife and terror. the interior of a prison with two row of occupy 
condemn cells, seen years ago in new york, sprang to memory after it-- 
the connection between the two impossible to surmise even. but the 
"certain other little things" mention above were these: that mrs. 
franklyn, in last night's dinner talk, had always refer to "this 
house," but never call it "home"; and had emphasize unnecessarily, 
for a well-bred woman, our "great kindness" in coming down to stay so 
long with her. another time, in answer to my futile compliment about the 
"stately rooms," she said quietly, "it is an enormous house for so small 
a party; but i stay here very little, and only till i get it straight 
again." the three of us were go up the great staircase to bed as this 
was said, and, not knowing quite her meaning, i drop the subject. it 
edge delicate ground, i felt. frances add no word of her own. it now 
occur to me abrupt that "stay" was the word made use of, when 
"live" would have been more natural. how insignificant to recall! yet 
why did they suggest themselves just at this moment ...? 

and, on go to frances's room to make sure she was not nervous or 
lonely, i realize abruptly, that mrs. franklyn, of course, had talk 
with her in a confidential sense that i, as a mere visiting brother, 
could not share. frances had told me nothing. i might easily have worm 
it out of her, had i not felt that for us to discuss further our hostess 
and her house merely because we were under the roof together, was not 
quite nice or loyal. 

"i'll call you, bill, if i'm scared," she had laugh as we parted, my 
room being just across the big corridor from her own. i had fallen 
asleep, thinking what in the world was meant by "getting it straight 
again." 

and now in my antechamber to the library, on the second morning, sitting 
among piles of foolscap and sheet of spotless blotting-paper, all 
useless to me, these slight hint came back and help to frame the big, 
vague shadow i have mentioned. up to the neck in this shadow, almost 
drowned, yet just tread water, stood the figure of my hostess in her 
walking costume. frances and i seem swimming to her aid. the shadow 
was large enough to include both house and grounds, but farther than 
that i could not see.... dismiss it, i fell to reading my purloin 
book again. before i turn another page, however, another startle 
detail leap out at me: the figure of mrs. franklyn in the shadow was 
not living. it float helplessly, like a doll or puppet that has no 
life in it. it was both pathetic and dreadful. 

any one who sit in reverie thus, of course, may see similar ridiculous 
pictures when the will no long guide construction. the incongruity 
of dream are thus explained. i merely record the picture as it came. 
that it remain by me for several days, just as vivid dream do, is 
neither here nor there. i did not allow myself to dwell upon it. the 
curious thing, perhaps, is that from this moment i date my inclination, 
though not yet my desire, to leave. i purposely say "to leave." 

i cannot quite remember when the word change to that aggressive, 
frantic thing which is escape. 




chapter v 


we were left delightful to ourselves in this pretentious country 
mansion with the soul of a villa. frances took up her painting again, 
and, the weather being propitious, spent hour out of doors, sketch 
flowers, tree and nook of woodland, garden, even the house itself 
where bit of it peer suggestive across the orchards. mrs. franklyn 
seem always busy about something or other, and never interfere with 
us except to propose motoring, tea in another part of the lawn, and so 
forth. she flit everywhere, preoccupied, yet apparently do 
nothing. the house engulf her rather. no visitor called. for one 
thing, she was not supposed to be back from abroad yet; and for another, 
i think, the neighborhood--her husband's neighborhood--was puzzle by 
her sudden cessation from good works. brigade and temperance society 
did not ask to hold their meeting in the big hall, and the vicar 
arrange the school-treats in another's field without explanation. the 
full-length portrait in the dine room, and the presence of the 
housekeeper with the "burnt" back hair, indeed, were the only reminder 
of the man who once had live here. mrs. marsh retain her place in 
silence, well-paid sinecure as it doubtless was, yet with no hint of 
that suppress disapproval one might have expect from her. indeed 
there was nothing positive to disapprove, since nothing "worldly" 
enter grounds or building. in her master's lifetime she had been 
another "brand snatch from the burning," and it had then been her 
custom to give vociferous "testimony" at the revival meeting where he 
adorn the platform and led in stream of prayer. i saw her sometimes 
on the stairs, hovering, wandering, half-watching and half-listening, 
and the idea came to me once that this woman somehow form a link with 
the departed influence of her bigoted employer. she, alone among us, 
belong to the house, and look at home there. when i saw her talk 
--oh, with such correct and respectful mien--to mrs. franklyn, i had the 
feeling that for all her unaggressive attitude, she yet exert some 
influence that sought to make her mistress stay in the building forever 
--live there. she would prevent her escape, prevent "getting it straight 
again," thwart somehow her will to freedom, if she could. the idea in me 
was of the most fleeting kind. but another time, when i came down late 
at night to get a book from the library antechamber, and found her 
sitting in the hall--alone--the impression left upon me was the reverse 
of fleeting. i can never forget the vivid, disagreeable effect it 
produce upon me. what was she do there at half-past eleven at night, 
all alone in the darkness? she was sitting upright, stiff, in a big 
chair below the clock. it gave me a turn. it was so incongruous and odd. 
she rose quiet as i turn the corner of the stairs, and ask me 
respectfully, her eyes cast down as usual, whether i had finished with 
the library, so that she might lock up. there was no more to it than 
that; but the picture stay with me--unpleasantly. 

these various impression came to me at odd moments, of course, and not 
in a single sequence as i now relate them. i was hard at work before 
three days were past, not writing, as explained, but reading, making 
notes, and gathering material from the library for future use. it was in 
chance moments that these curious flash came, catching me unawares 
with a touch of surprise that sometimes made me start. for they prove 
that my under-mind was still conscious of the shadow, and that far away 
out of sight lay the cause of it that left me with a vague unrest, 
unsettled, seek to "nest" in a place that did not want me. only when 
this deep part know harmony, perhaps, can good brainwork result, and 
my inability to write was thus explained. 

certainly, i was always seek for something here i could not find--an 
explanation that continual evade me. nothing but these trivial hint 
offer themselves. lump together, however, they had the effect of 
define the shadow a little. i became more and more aware of its very 
real existence. and, if i have made little mention of frances and my 
hostess in this connection, it is because they contribute at first 
little or nothing towards the discovery of what this story try to 
tell. our life was wholly external, normal, quiet, and uneventful; 
conversation banal--mrs. franklyn's conversation in particular. they 
said nothing that suggest revelation. 

both were in this shadow, and both knew that they were in it, but 
neither betray by word or act a hint of interpretation. they talk 
privately, no doubt, but of that i can report no details. 

and so it was that, after ten days of a very commonplace visit, i found 
myself look straight into the face of a strange that defy 
capture at close quarters. "there's something here that never happens," 
were the words that rose in my mind, "and that's why none of us can 
speak of it." 

and as i look out of the window and watch the vulgar blackbirds, 
with toe turn in, bore out their worms, i realize sharp that 
even they, as indeed everything large and small in the house and 
grounds, share this strangeness, and were twist out of normal 
appearance because of it. life, as express in the entire place, was 
crumpled, dwarfed, emasculated. god's meaning here were crippled, his 
love of joy was stunted. nothing in the garden dance or sang. 

there was hate in it. "the shadow," my thought hurried on to completion, 
"is a manifestation of hate; and hate is the devil." and then i sat back 
frightened in my chair, for i knew that i had partly found the truth. 

leave my books i went out into the open. the sky was overcast, yet the 
day by no means gloomy, for a soft, diffuse light ooze through the 
cloud and turn all things warm and almost summery. but i saw the 
grounds now in their naked because i understood. hate means strife, 
and the two together weave the robe that terror wears. have no 
so-called religious belief myself, nor belong to any set of dogma 
call a creed, i could stand outside these feelings and observe. yet 
they soaked into me sufficient for me to grasp sympathetic what 
others, with more cabin soul (i flatter myself), might feel. that 
picture in the dine room stalk everywhere, hid behind every tree, 
peer down upon me from the peaked ugly of the bourgeois towers, 
and left the impress of its powerful hand upon every bed of flowers. 
"you must not do this, you must not do that," went past me through the 
air. "you must not leave these narrow paths," said the rigid iron 
railing of black. "you shall not walk here," was written on the lawns. 
"keep to the steps," "don't pick the flowers; make no noise of laughter, 
singing, dancing," was placard all over the rose-garden, and 
"trespassers will be--not prosecute but--destroyed" hung from the crest 
of monkey tree and holly. guard the end of each artificial terrace 
stood gaunt, implacable policemen, warders, jailers. "come with us," 
they chanted, "or be damn eternally." 

i remember feeling quite pleased with myself that i had discover this 
obvious explanation of the prison feeling the place breathe out. that 
the posthumous influence of heavy old samuel franklyn might be an 
inadequate solution did not occur to me. by "getting the place straight 
again," his widow, of course, meant forget the glamour of fear and 
foreboding his depress creed had temporary forced upon her; and 
frances, delicate minded being, did not speak of it because it was the 
influence of the man her friend had loved. i felt lighter; a load was 
lift from me. "to trace the unfamiliar to the familiar," came back a 
sentence i had read somewhere, "is to understand." it was a real relief. 
i could talk with frances now, even with my hostess, no danger of 
tread clumsily. for the key was in my hands. i might even help to 
dissipate the shadow, "to get it straight again." it seemed, perhaps, 
our long invitation was explained! 

i went into the house laughing--at myself a little. "perhaps after all 
the artist's outlook, with no hard and fast dogmas, is as narrow as the 
others! how small humanity is! and why is there no possible and true 
combination of all outlooks?" 

the feeling of "unsettling" was very strong in me just then, in spite of 
my big discovery which was to clear everything up. and at the moment i 
ran into frances on the stairs, with a portfolio of sketch under her 
arm. 

it came across me then abrupt that, although she had work a great 
deal since we came, she had shown me nothing. it struck me sudden as 
odd, unnatural. the way she try to pass me now confirmed my newborn 
suspicion that--well, that her result were hardly what they ought to 
be. 

"stand and deliver!" i laughed, step in front of her. "i've seen 
nothing you've done since you've been here, and as a rule you show me 
all your things. i believe they are atrocious and degrading!" then my 
laughter froze. 

she made a sly gesture to slip past me, and i almost decided to let her 
go, for the expression that flash across her face shock me. she 
look uncomfortable and ashamed; the color came and went a moment in he 
cheeks, making me think of a child detect in some secret naughtiness. 
it was almost fear. 

"it's because they're not finished then?" i said, drop the tone of 
banter, "or because they're too good for me to understand?" for my 
criticism of painting, she told me, was crude and ignorant sometimes. 
"but you'll let me see them later, won't you?" 

frances, however, did not take the way of escape i offered. she change 
her mind. she drew the portfolio from beneath her arm instead. "you can 
see them if you really want to, bill," she said quietly, and her tone 
remind me of a nurse who say to a boy just grown out of childhood, 
"you are old enough now to look upon horror and ugliness--only i don't 
advise it." 

"i do want to," i said, and made to go downstairs with her. but, 
instead, she said in the same low voice as before, "come up to my room, 
we shall be undisturbed there." so i guess that she had been on her 
way to show the painting to our hostess, but did not care for us all 
three to see them together. my mind work furiously. 

"mabel ask me to do them," she explain in a tone of submissive 
horror, once the door was shut, "in fact, she beg it of me. you know 
how persistent she is in her quiet way. i--er--had to." 

she flushed and open the portfolio on the little table by the window, 
standing behind me as i turn the sketch over--sketches of the 
grounds and tree and garden. in the first moment of inspection, 
however, i did not take in clearly why my sister's sense of modesty had 
been offended. for my attention flash a second elsewhere. another bit 
of the puzzle had drop into place, define still further the nature 
of what i call "the shadow." mrs. franklyn, i now remembered, had 
suggest to me in the library that i might perhaps write something 
about the place, and i had taken it for one of her banal sentence and 
paid no further attention. i realize now that it was said in earnest. 
she want our interpretations, as express in our respective 
"talents," painting and writing. her invitation was explained. she left 
us to ourselves on purpose. 

"i should like to tear them up," frances was whisper behind me with a 
shudder, "only i promised--" she hesitate a moment. 

"promised not to?" i ask with a queer feeling of distress, my eyes 
glue to the papers. 

"promised always to show them to her first," she finished so low i 
barely caught it. 

i have no intuitive, immediate grasp of the value of paintings; result 
come to me slowly, and though every one believe his own judgment to be 
good, i dare not claim that mine is worth more than that of any other 
layman, frances had too often convict me of gross ignorance and error. 
i can only say that i examine these sketch with a feeling of 
amaze that contained revulsion, if not actually horror and disgust. 
they were outrageous. i felt hot for my sister, and it was a relief to 
know she had move across the room on some pretence or other, and did 
not examine them with me. her talent, of course, is mediocre, yet she 
has her moments of inspiration--moments, that is to say, when a view of 
beauty not normally her own flame divine through her. and these 
interpretation struck me forcibly as being thus "inspired"--not her 
own. they were uncommonly well done; they were also atrocious. the 
meaning in them, however, was never more than hinted. there the unholy 
skill and power came in: they suggest so abominably, leave most to 
the imagination. to find such significance in a bourgeois villa garden, 
and to interpret it with such delicate yet legible certainty, was a kind 
of symbolism that was sinister, even diabolical. the delicacy was her 
own, but the point of view was another's. 

and the word that rose in my mind was not the gross description of 
"impure," but the more fundamental qualification--"un-pure." 

in silence i turn the sketch over one by one, as a boy hurry 
through the page of an evil book lest he be caught. 

"what do mabel do with them?" i ask presently in a low tone, as i 
near the end. "does she keep them?" 

"she make note about them in a book and then destroy them," was the 
reply from the end of the room. i heard a sigh of relief. "i'm glad 
you've seen them, bill. i want you to--but was afraid to show them. 
you understand?" 

"i understand," was my reply, though it was not a question intended to 
be answered. all i understood really was that mabel's mind was as sweet 
and pure as my sister's, and that she had some good reason for what she 
did. she destroy the sketches, but first made notes! it was an 
interpretation of the place she sought. brother-like, i felt resentment, 
though, that frances should waste her time and talent, when she might be 
do work that she could sell. naturally, i felt other things as 
well.... 

"mabel pay me five guinea for each one," i heard. "absolutely 
insists." 

i stare at her stupid a moment, bereft of speech or wit. "i must 
either accept, or go away," she went on calmly, but a little white. 
"i've try everything. there was a scene the third day i was here--when 
i show her my first result. i want to write to you, but hesitated--" 

"it's unintentional, then, on your part--forgive my ask it, frances, 
dear?" i blundered, hardly knowing what to think or say. "between the 
lines" of her letter came back to me. "i mean, you make the sketch in 
your ordinary way and--the result come out of itself, so to speak?" 

she nodded, throw her hand out like a frenchman. "we needn't keep 
the money for ourselves, bill. we can give it away, but--i must either 
accept or leave," and she repeated the shrug gesture. she sat down 
on the chair facing me, staring helpless at the carpet. 

"you say there was a scene?" i went on presently, "she insisted?" 

"she beg me to continue," my sister reply very quietly. "she 
thinks--that is, she has an idea or theory that there's something about 
the place--something she can't get at quite." frances stammer badly. 
she knew i did not encourage her wild theories. 

"something she feels--yes," i help her, more than curious. 

"oh, you know what i mean, bill," she said desperately. "that the place 
is saturate with some influence that she is herself too positive or too 
stupid to interpret. she's try to make herself negative and 
receptive, as she call it, but can't, of course, succeed. haven't you 
notice how dull and impersonal and insipid she seems, as though she had 
no personality? she think impression will come to her that way. but 
they don't--" 

"naturally." 

"so she's try me--us--what she call the sensitive and impressionable 
artistic temperament. she say that until she is sure exactly what this 
influence is, she can't fight it, turn it out, 'get the house straight', 
as she phrase it." 

remember my own singular impressions, i felt more lenient than i 
might otherwise have done. i try to keep impatience out of my voice. 

"and this influence, what--whose is it?" 

we use the pronoun that follow in the same breath, for i answer my 
own question at the same moment as she did: 

"his." our head nod involuntary towards the floor, the dine room 
being directly underneath. 

and my heart sank, my curiosity die away on the instant; i felt bored. 
a commonplace haunt house was the last thing in the world to amuse or 
interest me. the mere thought exasperated, with its suggestion of 
imagination, overwrought nerves, hysteria, and the rest. 

mingle with my other feelings was certainly disappointment. to see a 
figure or feel a "presence," and report from day to day strange 
incident to each other would be a form of weary i could never 
tolerate. 

"but really, frances," i said firmly, after a moment's pause, "it's too 
far-fetched, this explanation. a curse, you know, belong to the ghost 
story of early victorian days." and only my positive conviction that 
there was something after all worth discovering, and that it most 
certainly was not this, prevent my suggest that we terminate our 
visit forthwith, or as soon as we decent could. "this is not a haunt 
house, whatever it is," i conclude somewhat vehemently, bring my 
hand down upon her odious portfolio. 

my sister's reply revive my curiosity sharply. 

"i was wait for you to say that. mabel say exactly the same. he is 
in it--but it's something more than that alone, something far big and 
more complicated." her sentence seem to indicate the sketches, and 
though i caught the inference i did not take it up, have no desire to 
discuss them with her just them indeed, if ever. 

i merely stare at her and listened. questions, i felt sure, would be of 
little use. it was better she should say her thought in her own way. 

"he is one influence, the most recent," she went on slowly, and always 
very calmly, "but there are others--deeper layers, as it were-- 
underneath. if his were the only one, something would happen. but 
nothing ever do happen. the other hinder and prevent--as though each 
were struggle to predominate." 

i had felt it already myself. the idea was rather horrible. i shivered. 

"that's what is so ugly about it--that nothing ever happens," she said. 
"there is this endless anticipation--always on the dry edge of a result 
that never materializes. it is torture. mabel is at her wits' end, you 
see. and when she beg me--what i felt about my sketches--i mean--" 

she stammer badly as before. 

i stop her. i had judge too hastily. that queer symbolism in her 
paintings, pagan and yet not innocent, was, i understood, the result of 
mixture. i did not pretend to understand, but at least i could be 
patient. i consequently held my peace. we did talk on a little longer, 
but it was more general talk that avoid successful our hostess, the 
paintings, wild theories, and him--until at length the emotion frances 
had hitherto so successful kept under burst vehement forth again. 

it had hidden between her calm sentences, as it had hidden between the 
lines of her letter. it swept her now from head to foot, packed tight in 
the thing she then said. 

"then, bill, if it is not an ordinary haunt house," she asked, "what 
is it?" 

the words were commonplace enough. the emotion was in the tone of her 
voice that trembled; in the gesture she made, leaning forward and 
clasp both hand upon her knees, and in the slight blanch of her 
cheek as her brave eyes ask the question and search my own with 
anxiety that border upon panic. in that moment she put herself under 
my protection. i winced. 

"and why," she added, lower her voice to a still and furtive whisper, 
"does nothing ever happen? if only,"--this with great emphasis-- 
"something would happen--break this awful tension--bring relief. it's 
the wait i cannot stand." and she shiver all over as she said it, a 
touch of wild in her eyes. 

i would have given much to have made a true and satisfactory answer. my 
mind search frantic for a moment, but in vain. there lay no 
sufficient answer in me. i felt what she felt, though with differences. 
no conclusive explanation lay within reach. nothing happened. eager as i 
was to shoot the entire business into the rubbish heap where ignorance 
and superstition discharge their poisonous weeds, i could not honestly 
accomplish this. to treat frances as a child, and merely "explain away" 
would be to strain her confidence in my protection, so affectionate 
claimed. it would further be dishonest to myself--weak, besides--to deny 
that i had also felt the strain and tension even as she did. while my 
mind continue searching, i return her stare in silence; and frances 
then, with more honesty and insight than my own, gave sudden the 
answer herself--an answer whose truth and adequacy, so far as they went, 
i could not readily gainsay: 

"i think, bill, because it is too big to happen here--to happen 
anywhere, indeed, all at once--and too awful!" 

to have toss the sentence aside as nonsense, argue it away, prove 
that it was really meaningless, would have been easy--at any other time 
or in any other place; and, had the past week brought me none of the 
vivid impression it had brought me, this is doubtless what i should 
have done. my narrow again was proved. we understand in other only 
what we have in ourselves. but her explanation, in a measure, i knew was 
true. it hint at the strife and struggle that my notion of a shadow 
had seem to cover thinly. 

"perhaps," i murmur lamely, wait in vain for her to say more. "but 
you said just now that you felt the thing was 'in layers', as it were. 
do you mean each one--each influence--fighting for the upper hand?" 

i use her phraseology to conceal my own poverty. terminology, after 
all, was nothing, provided we could reach the idea itself. 

her eyes said yes. she had her clear conception, arrive at 
independently, as was her way. 

and, unlike her sex, she kept it clear, unsmothered by too many words. 

"one set of influence get at me, another get at you. it's according 
to our temperaments, i think." she glance significant at the vile 
portfolio. "sometimes they are mixed--and therefore false. there has 
always been in me, more than in you, the pagan thing, perhaps, though 
never, thank god, like that." 

the frank confession of course invite my own, as it was meant to do. 
yet it was difficult to find the words. 

"what i have felt in this place, frances, i honestly can hardly tell 
you, because--er--my impression have not arrange themselves in any 
definite form i can describe. the strife, the agony of vainly-sought 
escape, and the unrest--a sort of prison atmosphere--this i have felt at 
different times and with vary degree of strength. but i find, as 
yet, no final label to attach. i couldn't say pagan, christian, or 
anything like that, i mean, as you do. as with the blind and deaf, you 
may have an intensify of certain senses deny to me, or even 
another sense altogether in embryo--" 

"perhaps," she stop me, anxious to keep to the point, "you feel it as 
mabel does. she feel the whole thing complete." 

"that also is possible," i said very slowly. i was thinking behind my 
words. her odd remark that it was "big and awful" came back upon me as 
true. a vast sensation of distress and discomfort swept me suddenly. 
pity was in it, and a fierce contempt, a savage, bitter anger as well. 
fury against some sham authority was part of it. 

"frances," i said, caught unawares, and drop all pretence, "what in 
the world can it be?" i look hard at her. for some minutes neither of 
us spoke. 

"have you felt no desire to interpret it?" she ask presently, "mabel 
did suggest my writing something about the house," was my reply, "but 
i've felt nothing imperative. that sort of writing is not my line, you 
know. my only feeling," i added, notice that she wait for more, "is 
the impulse to explain, discover, get it out of me somehow, and so get 
rid of it. not by writing, though--as yet." and again i repeated my 
former question: 

"what in the world do you think it is?" my voice had become 
involuntary hushed. there was awe in it. her answer, given with slow 
emphasis, brought back all my reserve: the phraseology provoke me 
rather:--"whatever it is, bill, it is not of god." 

i got up to go downstairs. i believe i shrug my shoulders. "would you 
like to leave, frances? shall we go back to town?" i suggest this at 
the door, and hearing no immediate reply, i turn back to look. frances 
was sitting with her head bowed over and bury in her hands. the 
attitude horrible suggest tears. no woman, i realized, can keep back 
the pressure of strong emotion as long as frances had done, without 
ending in a fluid collapse. i wait a moment uneasily, longing to 
comfort, yet afraid to act--and in this way discover the existence of 
the appalling emotion in myself, hitherto but half guessed. at all costs 
a scene must be prevented: it would involve such exaggeration and 
overstatement. brutally, such is the weakness of the ordinary man, i 
turn the handle to go out, but my sister then raise her head. the 
sunlight caught her face, frame untidi in its auburn hair, and i saw 
her wonderful expression with a start. pity, tenderness, and sympathy 
shone in it like a flame. it was undeniable. there shone through all her 
features the imperishable love and yearning to sacrifice self for other 
which i have seen in only one type of human being. it was the great 
mother look. 

"we must stay by mabel and help her get it straight," she whispered, 
making the decision for us both. 

i murmur agreement. abash and half ashamed, i stole soft from the 
room and went out into the grounds. and the first thing clearly realize 
when alone was this: that the long scene between us was without definite 
result. the exchange of confidence was really nothing but hint and 
vague suggestion. we had decided to stay, but it was a negative decision 
not to leave rather than a positive action. all our words and questions, 
our guesses, inferences, explanations, our most subtle allusion and 
insinuations, even the odious painting themselves, were without 
definite result. nothing had happened. 




chapter vi 


and instinctively, once alone, i made for the place where she had 
paint her extraordinary pictures; i try to see what she had seen. 
perhaps, now that she had open my mind to another view, i should be 
sensitive to some similar interpretation--and possibly by way of 
literary expression. if i were to write about the place, i ask myself, 
how should i treat it? i deliberate invite an interpretation in the 
way that came easiest to me--writing. 

but in this case there came no such revelation. look close at the 
tree and flowers, the bit of lawn and terrace, the rose-garden and 
corner of the house where the flaming creeper hung so thickly, i 
discover nothing of the odious, unpure thing her color and grouping 
had unconscious revealed. at first, that is, i discover nothing. the 
reality stood there, commonplace and ugly, side by side with her 
distort version of it that lay in my mind. it seem incredible. i 
try to force it, but in vain. my imagination, plough less deep 
than hers, or to another pattern, grew different seed. where i saw the 
gross soul of an overgrown suburban garden, inspired by the spirit of a 
vulgar, rich revivalist who love to preach damnation, she saw this rush 
of pagan liberty and joy, this strange license of primitive flesh which, 
taint by the other, produce the adulterated, vile result. 

certain things, however, gradual then became apparent, force 
themselves upon me, willy-nilly. they came slowly, but overwhelmingly. 
not that fact had changed, or natural detail alter in the grounds-- 
this was impossible--but that i notice for the first time various 
aspect i had not notice before--trivial enough, yet for me, just then, 
significant. some i remember from previous days; other i saw now as i 
wander to and fro, uneasy, uncomfortable,--almost, it seemed, watch 
by some one who took note of my impressions. the detail were so 
foolish, the total result so formidable. i was half aware that other 
try hard to make me see. it was deliberate. 

my sister's phrase, "one layer got at me, another get at you," flashed, 
undesired, upon me. 

for i saw, as with the eyes of a child, what i can only call a goblin 
garden--house, grounds, trees, and flower belong to a goblin world 
that children enter through the page of their fairy tales. and what 
made me first aware of it was the whisper of the wind behind me, so that 
i turn with a sudden start, feeling that something had move closer. 
an old ash tree, ugly and ungainly, had been artificial train to 
form an arbor at one end of the terrace that was a tennis lawn, and the 
leaves of it now went rustling together, swish as they rose and fell. 
i look at the ash tree, and felt as though i had pass that moment 
between door into this goblin garden that crouch behind the real one. 
below, at a deep layer perhaps, lay hidden the one my sister had 
entered. 

to deal with my own, however, i call it goblin, because an odd aspect of 
the quaint in it yet never quite achieve the picturesque. grotesque, 
probably, is the true word, for everywhere i noticed, and for the first 
time, this slight alteration of the natural due either to the 
exaggeration of some detail, or to its suppression, generally, i think, 
to the latter. life everywhere appear to me as block from the full 
delivery of its sweet and lovely message. some counter influence stop 
it--suppression; or sent it awry--exaggeration. the house itself, mere 
expression, of course, of a narrow, limited mind, was sheer ugliness; it 
require no further explanation. with the grounds and garden, so far as 
shape and general plan were concerned, this was also true; but that 
tree and flower and other natural detail should share the same 
deficiency perplexed my logical soul, and even dismay it. i stood and 
stared, then move about, and stood and stare again. everywhere was 
this mockery of a sinister, unfinished aspect. i sought in vain to 
recover my normal point of view. my mind had found this goblin garden 
and wander to and fro in it, unable to escape. 

the change was in myself, of course, and so trivial were the detail 
which illustrate it, that they sound absurd, thus mention one by one. 
for me, they prove it, is all i can affirm. the goblin touch lay 
plainly everywhere: in the form of the trees, plant at neat interval 
along the lawns; in this twist ash that rustle just behind me; in the 
shadow of the gloomy wellingtonias, whose sweeping skirt obscure the 
grass; but especially, i noticed, in the tops and crest of them. for 
here, the delicate, graceful curve of last year's growth seem to 
shrink back into themselves. none of them pointed upwards. their life 
had fail and turn aside just when it should have become triumphant. 
the character of a tree reveal itself chiefly at the extremities, and 
it was precisely here that they all droop and achieve this hint of 
goblin distortion--in the growth, that is, of the last few years. what 
ought to have been fairy, joyful, natural, was instead uncome to the 
verge of the grotesque. spontaneous expression was arrested. my mind 
perceive a goblin garden, and was caught in it. the place grimace at 
me. 

with the flower it was similar, though far more difficult to detect in 
detail for description. i saw the small vegetable growth as impish, 
half-malicious. even the terrace slope ill, as though their end had 
sag since they had been so lavish constructed; their vary angle 
gave a queer bewilder aspect to their sequence that was unpleasant 
to the eye. one might wander among their deceptive length and get lost 
--lost among open terraces!--with the house quite close at hand. unhome 
seem the entire garden, unable to give repose, restless in it 
everywhere, almost strife, and discord certainly. 

moreover, the garden grew into the house, the house into the garden, and 
in both was this idea of resistance to the natural--the spirit that say 
no to joy. all over it i was aware of the effort to achieve another end, 
the struggle to burst forth and escape into free, spontaneous expression 
that should be happy and natural, yet the effort forever frustrate by 
the weight of this dark shadow that render it abortive. life crawl 
aside into a channel that was a cul-de-sac, then turn horrible upon 
itself. instead of blossom and fruit, there were weeds. this approach of 
life i was conscious of--then dismal failure. there was no fulfillment. 
nothing happened. 

and so, through this singular mood, i came a little near to understand 
the unpure thing that had stammer out into expression through my 
sister's talent. for the unpure is merely negative; it has no existence; 
it is but the cramped expression of what is true, stammer its way 
broken over false boundary that seek to limit and confine. great, 
full expression of anything is pure, whereas here was only the 
incomplete, unfinished, and therefore ugly. there was a strife and pain 
and desire to escape. i found myself shrink from house and grounds as 
one shrink from the touch of the mental arrested, those in whom life 
has turn awry. there was almost mutilation in it. 

past items, too, now flock to confirm this feeling that i walked, 
liberty capture and half-maimed, in a monstrous garden. i remember 
days of rain that refresh the countryside, but left these grounds, 
cracked with the summer heat, unsatisfy and thirsty; and how the big 
winds, that clean the wood and field elsewhere, crawl here with 
difficulty through the dense foliage that protect the tower from the 
north and west and east. they were ineffective, sluggish currents. there 
was no real wind. nothing happened. i began to realize--far more clearly 
than in my sister's fanciful explanation about "layers"--that here were 
many contrary influence at work, mutual destructive of one another. 
house and grounds were not haunt merely; they were the arena of past 
thinking and feeling, perhaps of terrible, impure beliefs, each strive 
to suppress the others, yet no one of them achieve supremacy because 
no one of them was strong enough, no one of them was true. each, 
moreover, try to win me over, though only one was able to reach my 
mind at all. for some obscure reason--possibly because my temperament 
had a natural bias towards the grotesque--it was the goblin layer. with 
me, it was the line of least resistance.... 

in my own thought this "goblin garden" revealed, of course, merely my 
personal interpretation. i felt now objective what long ago my mind 
had felt subjectively. my work, essential sign of spontaneous life with 
me, had stop dead; production had become impossible. 

i stood now considerably close to the cause of this sterility. the 
cause, rather, turn bolder, had step insolent nearer. nothing 
happen anywhere; house, garden, mind alike were barren, abortive, torn 
by the strife of frustrate impulse, ugly, hateful, sinful. yet behind it 
all was still the desire of life--desire to escape--accomplish. hope--an 
intolerable hope--i became startling aware--crowned torture. 

and, realize this, though in some part of me where reason lost her 
hold, there rose upon me then another and a dark thing that caught me 
by the throat and made me shrink with a sense of revulsion that touched 
actual loathing. i knew instantly whence it came, this wave of 
abhorrence and disgust, for even while i saw red and felt revolt rise in 
me, it seem that i grew partially aware of the layer next below the 
goblin. i perceive the existence of this deep stratum. one open the 
way for the other, as it were. there were so many, yet all 
inter-related; to admit one was to clear the way for all. if i linger 
i should be caught--horribly. they struggle with such violence for 
supremacy among themselves, however, that this latest uprising was 
instantly smother and crush back, though not before a glimpse had 
been reveal to me, and the red in my thought transfer itself 
to color my surroundings thick and appallingly--with blood. this lurid 
aspect drench the garden, smear the terraces, lent to the very soil 
a tinge as of sacrificial rites, that choke the breath in me, while it 
seem to fix me to the earth my feet so long to leave. it was so 
revolting that at the same time i felt a dreadful curiosity as of 
fascination--i wish to stay. between these contrary impulse i think i 
actually reel a moment, transfix by a fascination of the awful. 
through the lighter goblin veil i felt myself sink down, down, down 
into this turgid layer that was so much more violent and so much more 
ancient. the upper layer, indeed, seem fairy by comparison with this 
terror born of the lust for blood, thick with the anguish of human 
sacrificial victims. 

upper! then i was already sinking; my feet were caught; i was actually 
in it! what atavistic strain, hidden deep within me, had been touched 
into vile response, give this flash of intuitive comprehension, i 
cannot say. the coating laid on by civilization are probably thin 
enough in all of us. i made a supreme effort. the sun and wind came 
back. i could almost swear i open my eyes. something very atrocious 
surge back into the depths, carry with it a thought of tangle 
woods, of big stone standing in a circle, motionless, white figures, 
the one form bound with ropes, and the ghastly gleam of the knife. like 
smoke upon a battlefield, it roll away.... 

i was standing on the gravel path below the second terrace when the 
familiar goblin garden dance back again, doubly grotesque now, doubly 
mocking, yet, by way of contrast, almost welcome. my glimpse into the 
depths was momentary, it seems, and had pass utterly away. 

the common world rush back with a sense of glad relief, yet ominous 
now forever, i felt, for the knowledge of what its past had built upon. 
in street, in theater, in the festivity of friends, in music-room or 
play field, even indeed in church--how could the memory of what i had 
seen and felt leave its hideous trace? the very structure of my thought, 
it seem to me, was stained. 

what has been thought by other can never be obliterate until.... 

with a start my reverie broke and fled, scattered by a violent sound 
that i recognize for the first time in my life as wholly desirable. the 
return motor meant that my hostess was back. 

yet, so urgent had been my temporary obsession, that my first 
presentation of her was--well, not as i knew her now. floating along 
with a face of anguished torture i saw mabel, a mere effigy capture by 
others' thinking, pass down into those depths of fire and blood that 
only just had closed beneath my feet. she dip away. she vanished, her 
fade eyes turn to the last towards some savior who had fail her. 
and that strange intolerable hope was in her face. 

the mystery of the place was pretty thick about me just then. it was the 
fall of dusk, and the ghost of slant sunshine was as unreal as though 
badly painted. the garden stood at attention all about me. i cannot 
explain it, but i can tell it, i think, exactly as it happened, for it 
remains vivid in me forever--that, for the first time, something almost 
happened, myself apparently the combine link through which it pressed 
towards delivery: 

i had already turn towards the house. in my mind were pictures--not 
actual thoughts--of the motor, tea on the verandah, my sister, mabel-- 
when there came behind me this tumultuous, awful rush--as i left the 
garden. the ugliness, the pain, the strive to escape, the whole 
negative and suppress agony that was the place, focus that second 
into a concentrated effort to produce a result. it was a blind 
tempest of long-frustrate desire that heave at me, surge appalling 
behind me like an anguished mob. i was in the act of crossing the 
frontier into my normal self again, when it came, catching fearful at 
my skirts. i might use an entire dictionary of descriptive adjective 
yet come no near to it than this--the conception of a huge assemblage 
determined to escape with me, or to snatch me back among themselves. my 
leg tremble for an instant, and i caught my breath--then turn and 
ran as fast as possible up the ugly terraces. 

at the same instant, as though the clang of an iron gate cut short 
the unfinished phrase, i thought the beginning of an awful thing: 

"the damn ..." 

like this it rush after me from that goblin garden that had sought to 
keep me: 

"the damned!" 

for there was sound in it. i know full well it was subjective, not 
actually heard at all; yet somehow sound was in it--a great volume, 
roaring and boom thunderously, far away, and below me. the sentence 
dip back into the depths that gave it birth, unfinished. its 
completion was prevented. as usual, nothing happened. but it drove 
behind me like a hurricane as i ran towards the house, and the sound of 
it i can only liken to those terrible undertone you may hear standing 
beside niagara. they lie behind the mere crash of the fall flood, 
within it somehow, not audible to all--felt rather than definitely 
heard. 

it seem to echo back from the surface of those sag terrace as i 
flew across their slope ends, for it was somehow underneath them. it 
was in the rustle of the wind that stir the skirt of the droop 
wellingtonias. the bed of formal flower pass it on to the creepers, 
red as blood, that crept over the unsightly building. into the structure 
of the vulgar and forbidding house it sank away; the tower took it 
home. the uncome door and window seem almost like mouth that had 
utter the words themselves, and on the upper floor at that very 
moment i saw two maid in the act of close them again. 

and on the verandah, as i arrive breathless, and shaken in my soul, 
frances and mabel, standing by the tea table, look up to greet me. in 
the face of both were clearly legible the sign of shock. they watch 
me coming, yet so full of their own distress that they hardly notice 
the state in which i came. in the face of my hostess, however, i read 
another and a big thing than in the face of frances. mabel knew. she 
had experienced what i had experienced. she had heard that awful 
sentence i had heard but heard it not for the first time; heard it, 
moreover, i verily believe, complete and to its dreadful end. 

"bill, did you hear that curious noise just now?" frances ask it 
sharp before i could say a word. her manner was confused; she look 
straight at me; and there was a tremor in her voice she could not hide. 

"there's wind about," i said, "wind in the tree and sweeping round the 
walls. it's risen rather suddenly." my voice falter rather. 

"no. it wasn't wind," she insisted, with a significance meant for me 
alone, but badly hidden. "it was more like distant thunder, we thought. 
how you ran too!" she added. "what a pace you came across the terraces!" 

i knew instantly from the way she said it that they both had already 
heard the sound before and were anxious to know if i had heard it, and 
how. my interpretation was what they sought. 

"it was a curious deep sound, i admit. it may have been big gun at 
sea," i suggested, "forts or cruiser practicing. the coast isn't so 
very far, and with the wind in the right direction--" 

the expression on mabel's face stop me dead. 

"like huge door closing," she said soft in her colorless voice, 
"enormous metal door shut against a mass of people clamor to get 
out." the gravity, the note of hopeless in her tones, was shocking. 

frances had gone into the house the instant mabel began to speak. "i'm 
cold," she had said; "i think i'll get a shawl." mabel and i were alone. 
i believe it was the first time we had been really alone since i 
arrived. she look up from the teacups, fix her pallid eyes on mine. 
she had made a question of the sentence. 

"you hear it like that?" i ask innocently. i purposely use the 
present tense. 

she change her stare from one eye to the other; it was absolutely 
expressionless. my sister's step sound on the floor of the room behind 
us. 

"if only--" mabel began, then stopped, and my own feelings leap out 
instinctive complete the sentence i felt was in her mind: 

"--something would happen." 

she instantly correct me. i had caught her thought, yet somehow 
phrase it wrongly. 

"we could escape!" she lower her tone a little, saying it hurriedly. 
the "we" amaze and horrify me; but something in her voice and manner 
struck me utterly dumb. there was ice and terror in it. it was a die 
woman speaking--a lost and hopeless soul. 

in that atrocious moment i hardly notice what was said exactly, but i 
remember that my sister return with a grey shawl about her shoulders, 
and that mabel said, in her ordinary voice again, "it is chilly, yes; 
let's have tea inside," and that two maids, one of them the grenadier, 
speedy carry the loaded tray into the morning-room and put a match 
to the log in the great open fireplace. it was, after all, foolish to 
risk the sharp evening air, for dusk was fall steadily, and even the 
sunshine of the day just fade could not turn autumn into summer. i was 
the last to come in. just as i left the verandah a large black bird 
swoop down in front of me past the pillars; it drop from overhead, 
swerve abrupt to one side as it caught sight of me, and flap 
heavy towards the shrubbery on the left of the terraces, where it 
disappear into the gloom. it flew very low, very close. and it 
startle me, i think because in some way it seem like my shadow 
materialized--as though the dark horror that was rising everywhere from 
house and garden, then settle back so thick yet so imperceptible 
upon us all, were incarnate in that whirr creature that pass 
between the daylight and the coming night. 

i stood a moment, wonder if it would appear again, before i follow 
the other indoors, and as i was in the act of close the window after 
me, i caught a glimpse of a figure on the lawn. it was some distance 
away, on the other side of the shrubberies, in fact where the bird had 
vanished. but in spite of the twilight that half magnified, half 
obscure it, the identity was unmistakable. i knew the housekeeper's 
stiff walk too well to be deceived. "mrs. marsh taking the air," i said 
to myself. i felt the necessity of saying it, and i wonder why she was 
do so at this particular hour. if i had other thought they were so 
vague, and so quick and utterly suppressed, that i cannot recall them 
sufficient to relate them here. 

and, once indoors, it was to be expect that there would come 
explanation, discussion, conversation, at any rate, regarding the 
singular noise and its cause, some utter evidence of the mood that had 
been strong enough to drive us all inside. yet there was none. each of 
us purposely, and with various skill, ignore it. we talk little, and 
when we did it was of anything in the world but that. personally, i 
experienced a touch of that same bewilder which had come over me 
during my first talk with frances on the evening of my arrival, for i 
recall now the acute tension, and the hope, yet dread, that one or other 
of us must soon or later introduce the subject. it did not happen, 
however; no reference was made to it even remotely. it was the presence 
of mabel, i felt positive, that prohibited. as soon might we have 
discuss death in the bedroom of a die woman. 

the only scrap of conversation i remember, where all was ordinary and 
commonplace, was when mabel spoke casual to the grenadier ask why 
mrs. marsh had omit to do something or other--what it was i forget-- 
and that the maid reply respectful that "mrs. marsh was very sorry, 
but her 'and still pained her." i enquired, though so casual that i 
scarcely know what prompt the words, whether she had injure herself 
severely, and the reply, "she upset a lamp and burnt herself," was said 
in a tone that made me feel my curiosity was indiscreet, "but she always 
has an excuse for not do things she ought to do." the little bit of 
conversation remain with me, and i remember particularly the quick way 
frances interrupt and turn the talk upon the delinquency of 
servant in general, telling incident of her own at our flat with a 
voluble that perhaps seem forced, and that certainly did not 
encourage general talk as it may have been intended to do. we lapsed 
into silence immediately she finished. 

but for all our care and all our calculate silence, each knew that 
something had, in these last moments, come very close; it had brush us 
in passing; it had retired; and i am inclined to think now that the 
large dark thing i saw, riding the dusk, probably bird of prey, was in 
some sense a symbol of it in my mind--that actually there had been no 
bird at all, i mean, but that my mood of apprehension and dismay had 
form the vivid picture in my thoughts. it had swept past us, it had 
retreated, but it was now, at this moment, in hiding very close. and it 
was watch us. 

perhaps, too, it was mere coincidence that i encounter mrs. marsh, his 
housekeeper, several times that evening in the short interval between 
tea and dinner, and that on each occasion the sight of this gaunt, 
half-saturnine woman fed my prejudice against her. once, on my way to the 
telephone, i ran into her just where the passage is somewhat jam by a 
square table carry the china gong, a grandfather's clock and a box 
of croquet mallets. we both gave way, then both advanced, then again 
gave way--simultaneously. it seemed, impossible to pass. we step with 
decision to the same side, finally collide in the middle, while saying 
those futile little things, half apology, half excuse, that are 
inevitable at such times. in the end she stood upright against the wall 
for me to pass, taking her place against the very door i wish to open. 
it was ludicrous. 

"excuse me--i was just go in--to telephone," i explained. and she 
sidle off, murmur apologies, but opening the door for me while she 
did so. our hand met a moment on the handle. 

there was a second's awkwardness--it was too stupid. i remember her 
injury, and by way of something to say, i enquire after it. she thank 
me; it was entire heal now, but it might have been much worse; and 
there was something about the "mercy of the lord" that i didn't quite 
catch. while telephoning, however--london call, and my attention focus 
on it--realized sharp that this was the first time i had spoken with 
her; also, that i had--touched her. 

it happen to be a sunday, and the lines were clear. i got my 
connection quickly, and the incident was forgotten while my thought 
went up to london. on my way upstairs, then, the woman came back into my 
mind, so that i recall other things about her--how she seem all over 
the house, in unlikely place often; how i had caught her sitting in the 
hall alone that night; how she was forever coming and go with her 
lugubrious visage and that untidy hair at the back that had made me 
laugh three years ago with the idea that it look singe or burnt; and 
how the impression on my first arrival at the tower was that this woman 
somehow kept alive, though its evidence was outwardly suppressed, the 
influence of her late employer and of his somber teachings. somewhere 
with her was associate the idea of punishment, vindictiveness, revenge. 
i remember again sudden my odd notion that she sought to keep her 
present mistress here, a prisoner in this bleak and comfortless house, 
and that really, in spite of her obsequious silence, she was intense 
oppose to the change of thought that had reclaim mabel to a happy 
view of life. 

all this in a passing second flash in review before me, and i 
discovered, or at any rate reconstructed, the real mrs. marsh. she was 
decidedly in the shadow. more, she stood in the forefront of it, 
stealthy leading an assault, as it were, against the tower and its 
occupants, as though, conscious or unconsciously, she labor 
incessant to this hateful end. 

i can only judge that some state of nervous in me permit the 
series of insignificant thought to assume this dramatic shape, and that 
what had gone before prepared the way and led her up at the head of so 
formidable a procession. i relate it exactly as it came to me. my nerves 
were doubtless somewhat on edge by now. otherwise i should hardly have 
been a prey to the exaggeration at all. i seem open to so many 
strange, impressions. 

nothing else, perhaps, can explain my ridiculous conversation with her, 
when, for the third time that evening, i came sudden upon the woman 
half-way down the stairs, standing by an open window as if in the act of 
listening. she was dress in black, a black shawl over her square 
shoulder and black glove on her big, broad hands. two black objects, 
prayer books apparently, she clasped, and on her head she wore a bonnet 
with shake bead of jet. at first i did not know her, as i came 
running down upon her from the landing; it was only when she stood aside 
to let me pass that i saw her profile against the tapestry and 
recognize mrs. marsh. and to catch her on the front stairs, dress 
like this, struck me as incongruous--impertinent. i pause in my 
dangerous descent. through the open window came the sound of bells-- 
church bells--a sound more depress to me than superstition, and as 
nauseating. though the action was ill judged, i obey the sudden 
prompting--was it a secret desire to attack, perhaps?--and spoke to her. 

"been to church, i suppose, mrs. marsh?" i said. "or just going, 
perhaps?" 

her face, as she look up a second to reply, was like an iron doll that 
move its lip and turn its eyes, but made no other imitation of life 
at all. 

"some of us still goes, sir," she said unctuously. 

it was respectful enough, yet the imply judgment of the rest of the 
world made me almost angry. a deferential insole lay behind the 
affected meekness. 

"for those who believe no doubt it is helpful," i smiled. "true religion 
bring peace and happiness, i'm sure--joy, mrs. marsh, joy!" i found 
keen satisfaction in the emphasis. 

she look at me like a knife. i cannot describe the implacable thing 
that shone in her fixed, stern eyes, nor the shadow of felt dark 
that stole across her face. she glittered. i felt hate in her. i knew-- 
she knew too--who was in the thought of us both at that moment. 

she reply softly, never forget her place for an instant: 

"there is joy, sir--in 'eaven--over one sinner that repenteth, and in 
church there go up prayer to gawd for those 'oo--well, for the others, 
sir, 'oo--" 

she cut short her sentence thus. the gloom about her as she said it was 
like the gloom about a hearse, a tomb, a dark of great hopeless 
dungeons. my tongue ran on of itself with a kind of bitter satisfaction: 

"we must believe there are no others, mrs. marsh. salvation, you know, 
would be such a failure if there were. no merciful, all-foreseeing god 
could ever have devise such a fearful plan--" 

her voice, interrupt me, seem to rise out of the bowels of the 
earth: 

"they reject the salvation when it was offer to them, sir, on 
earth." 

"but you wouldn't have them torture forever because of one mistake in 
ignorance," i said, fix her with my eye. "come now, would you, mrs. 
marsh? no god worth worship could permit such cruelty. think a 
moment what it means." 

she stare at me, a curious expression in her stupid eyes. it seem to 
me as though the "woman" in her revolted, while yet she dare not suffer 
her grim belief to trip. that is, she would willing have had it 
otherwise but for a terror that prevented. 

"we may pray for them, sir, and we do--we may 'ope." she drop her 
eyes to the carpet. 

"good, good!" i put in cheerfully, sorry now that i had spoken at all. 
"that's more hopeful, at any rate isn't it?" 

she murmur something about abraham's bosom, and the "time of salvation 
not being forever," as i try to pass her. then a half gesture that she 
made stop me. there was something more she wish to say--to ask. she 
look up furtively. in her eyes i saw the "woman" peer out through 
fear. 

"per'aps, sir." she faltered, as though lightning must strike her dead, 
"per'aps, would you think, a drop of cold water, given in his name, 
might moisten--?" 

but i stop her, for the foolish talk had last long enough. "of 
course," i exclaimed, "of course. for god is love, remember, and love 
means charity, tolerance, sympathy, and sparing other pain," and i 
hurried past her, determined to end the outrageous conversation for 
which yet i knew myself entire to blame. behind me, she stood 
stock-still for several minutes, half bewildered, half alarmed, as i 
suspected. i caught the fragment of another sentence, one word of it, 
rather--"punishment"--but the rest escape me. her arrogance and 
condescend tolerance exasperate me, while i was at the same time 
secret pleased that i might have touched some string of remorse or 
sympathy in her after all. her belief was iron; she dare not let it go; 
yet somewhere underneath there lurk the germ of a wholesome revulsion. 
she would help "them"--if she dared. her question prove it. 

half ashamed of myself, i turn and cross the hall quick lest i 
should be tempt to say more, and in me was a disagreeable sensation as 
though i had just left the incurable ward of some great hospital. a 
reaction caught me as of nausea. ugh! i want such people cleanse by 
fire. they seem to me as center of contamination whose vicious 
thought flow out to stain god's glorious world. i saw myself, 
frances, mabel too especially, on the rack, while that odious figure of 
cruelty and dark stood over us and ordered the awful handle turn 
in order that we might be "saved"--forced, that is, to think and believe 
exactly as she thought and believed. 

i found relief for my somewhat childish indignation by letting myself 
loose upon the organ then. the flood of bach and beethoven brought back 
the sense of proportion. it proved, however, at the same time that there 
had been this growth of distortion in me, and that it had been provided 
apparently by my close contact--for the first time--with that funereal 
personality, the woman who, like her master, believe that all holding 
view of god that differ from her own, must be damn eternally. it 
gave me, moreover, some faint clue perhaps, though a clue i was unequal 
of following up, to the nature of the strife and terror and frustrate 
influence in the house. that housekeeper had to do with it. she kept it 
alive. her thought was like a spell she wave above her mistress's head. 




chapter vii 


that night i was waken by a hurried tap at my door, and before i 
could answer, frances stood beside my bed. she had switch on the light 
as she came in. her hair fell straggle over her dressing gown. her 
face was deathly pale, its expression so distraught it was almost 
haggard. 

the eyes were very wide. she look almost like another woman. 

she was whisper at a great pace: "bill, bill, wake up, quick!" 

"i am awake. what is it?" i whisper too. i was startled. 

"listen!" was all she said. her eyes stare into vacancy. 

there was not a sound in the great house. the wind had dropped, and all 
was still. only the tap seem to continue endless in my brain. 
the clock on the mantelpiece pointed to half-past two. 

"i heard nothing, frances. what is it?" i rub my eyes; i had been 
very deep asleep. 

"listen!" she repeated very softly, holding up one finger and turning 
her eyes towards the door she had left ajar. her usual calm had 
desert her. she was in the grip of some distressing terror. 

for a full minute we held our breath and listened. then her eyes roll 
round again and met my own, and her skin went even white than before. 

"it woke me," she said beneath her breath, and moving a step near to 
my bed. "it was the noise." even her whisper trembled. 

"the noise!" the word repeated itself dul of its own accord. i would 
rather it had been anything in the world but that--earthquake, foreign 
cannon, collapse of the house above our heads! "the noise, frances! are 
you sure?" i was play really for a little time. 

"it was like thunder. at first i thought it was thunder. but a minute 
later it came again--from underground. it's appalling." she mutter the 
words, her voice not properly under control. 

there was a pause of perhaps a minute, and then we both spoke at once. 
we said foolish, obvious things that neither of us believe in for a 
second. the roof had fallen in, there were burglar downstairs, the 
safe had been blown open. it was to comfort each other as children do 
that we said these things; also it was to gain further time. 

"there's some one in the house, of course," i heard my voice say 
finally, as i sprang out of bed and hurried into dressing gown and 
slippers. "don't be alarmed. i'll go down and see," and from the drawer 
i took a pistol it was my habit to carry everywhere with me. i loaded it 
careful while frances stood stock-still beside the bed and watched. i 
move towards the open door. 

"you stay here, frances," i whispered, the beating of my heart making 
the words uneven, "while i go down and make a search. lock yourself in, 
girl. nothing can happen to you. it was downstairs, you said?" 

"underneath," she answer faintly, point through the floor. 

she move sudden between me and the door. 

"listen! hark!" she said, the eyes in her face quite fixed; "it's coming 
again," and she turn her head to catch the slightest sound. i stood 
there watch her, and while i watch her, shook. 

but nothing stirred. from the hall below rose only the whirr and quiet 
ticking of the numerous clocks. the blind by the open window behind us 
flap out a little into the room as the draught caught it. 

"i'll come with you, bill--to the next floor," she broke the silence. 
"then i'll stay with mabel--till you come up again." the blind sank down 
with a long sigh as she said it. 

the question jump to my lip before i could repress it: 

"mabel is awake. she heard it too?" 

i hardly know why horror caught me at her answer. all was so vague and 
terrible as we stood there play the great game of this sinister house 
where nothing ever happened. 

"we met in the passage. she was on her way to me." 

what shook in me, shook inwardly. frances, i mean, did not see it. i had 
the feeling just that the noise was upon us, that any second it would 
boom and roar about our ears. but the deep silence held. i only heard my 
sister's little whisper coming across the room in answer to my question: 

"then what is mabel do now?" 

and her reply prove that she was yielding at last beneath the dreadful 
tension, for she spoke at once, unable long to keep up the pretence. 
with a kind of relief, as it were, she said it out, look helpless 
at me like a child: 

"she is weeping and gna--" 

my expression must have stop her. i believe i clap both hand upon 
her mouth, though when i realize things clearly again, i found they 
were covering my own ear instead. it was a moment of unutterable 
horror. the revulsion i felt was actually physical. it would have given 
me pleasure to fire off all the five chambers of my pistol into the air 
above my head; the sound--a definite, wholesome sound that explain 
itself--would have been a positive relief. other feelings, though, were 
in me too, all over me, rush to and fro. it was vain to seek their 
disentanglement; it was impossible. i confess that i experienced, among 
them, a touch of paralyze fear--though for a moment only; it pass as 
sharp as it came, leave me with a violent flush of blood to the face 
such as burst of anger bring, follow abrupt by an icy perspiration 
over the entire body. yet i may honestly avow that it was not ordinary 
personal fear i felt, nor any common dread of physical injury. it was, 
rather, a vast, impersonal shrinking--a sympathetic shrinking--from the 
agony and terror that countless others, somewhere, somehow, felt for 
themselves. the first sensation of a prison overwhelm me in that 
instant, of bitter strife and frenzied suffering, and the fiery torture 
of the yearning to escape that was yet hopeless uttered.... it was of 
incredible power. it was real. the vain, intolerable hope swept over me. 

i master myself, though hardly knowing how, and took my sister's hand. 
it was as cold as ice, as i led her firm to the door and out into the 
passage. apparently she notice nothing of my so near collapse, for i 
caught her whisper as we went. "you are brave, bill; splendid brave." 

the upper corridor of the great sleep house were bright lit; on 
her way to me she had turn on every electric switch her hand could 
reach; and as we pass the final flight of stairs to the floor below, i 
heard a door shut soft and knew that mabel had been listening--waiting 
for us. i led my sister up to it. she knocked, and the door was open 
cautious an inch or so. the room was pitch black. i caught no glimpse 
of mabel standing there. frances turn to me with a hurried whisper, 
"billy, you will be careful, won't you?" and went in. i just had time to 
answer that i would not be long, and frances to reply, "you'll find us 
here" when the door closed and cut her sentence short before its end. 

but it was not alone the close door that took the final words. 
frances--by the way she disappear i knew it--had made a swift and 
violent movement into the dark that was as though she sprang. she 
leap upon that other woman who stood back among the shadows, for, 
simultaneous with the clipping of the sentence, another sound was also 
stopped--stifled, smothered, choke back lest i should also hear it. yet 
not in time. i heard it--a hard and horrible sound that explain both 
the leap and the abrupt cessation of the whisper words. 

i stood irresolute a moment. it was as though all the bone had been 
withdrawn from my body, so that i must sink and fall. that sound pluck 
them out, and pluck out my self-possession with them. i am not sure 
that it was a sound i had ever heard before, though children, i half 
remembered, made it sometimes in blind rage when they knew not what 
they did. in a grown-up person certainly i had never known it. i 
associate it with animal rather--horribly. in the history of the 
world, no doubt, it has been common enough, alas, but fortunately today 
there can be but few who know it, or would recognize it even when heard. 
the bone shot back into my body the same instant, but red-hot and 
burning; the brief instant of irresolute passed; i was torn between 
the desire to break down the door and enter, and to run--run for my life 
from a thing i dare not face. 

out of the horrid tumult, then, i adopt neither course. without 
reflection, certainly without analysis of what was best to do for my 
sister, myself or mabel, i took up my action where it had been 
interrupted. i turn from the awful door and move slow towards the 
head of the stairs. 

but that dreadful little sound came with me. i believe my own teeth 
chattered. it seem all over the house--in the empty hall that open 
into the long passage towards the music-room, and even in the grounds 
outside the building. from the lawn and barren garden, from the ugly 
terrace themselves, it rose into the night, and behind it came a 
curious driving sound, incomplete, unfinished, as of wail for 
deliverance, the wail of desperate soul in anguish, the dull and dry 
beseech of hopeless spirits in prison. 

that i could have taken the little sound from the bedroom where i 
actually heard it, and spread it thus over the entire house and grounds, 
is evidence, perhaps, of the state my nerves were in. 

the wail assured was in my mind alone. but the long i hesitated, 
the more difficult became my task, and, gathering up my dressing gown, 
lest i should trip in the darkness, i pass slow down the staircase 
into the hail below. i carry neither candle nor matches; every switch 
in room and corridor was known to me. the covering of dark was 
indeed rather comfort than otherwise, for if it prevent seeing, it 
also prevent being seen. the heavy pistol, knock against my thigh 
as i moved, made me feel i was carry a child's toy, foolishly. i 
experienced in every nerve that primitive vast dread which is the thrill 
of darkness. merely the child in me was comfort by that pistol. 

the night was not entire black; the iron bar across the glass front 
door were visible, and, equally, i discern the big, stiff wooden 
chair in the hall, the gape fireplace, the upright pillar support 
the staircase, the round table in the center with its books and 
flower-vases, and the basket that held visitors' cards. there, too, was 
the stick and umbrella stand and the shelf with railway guides, 
directory, and telegraph forms. clock tick everywhere with sound 
like quiet footfalls. light fell here and there in patch from the 
floor above. i stood a moment in the hall, letting my eyes grow more 
accustomed to the gloom, while decide on a plan of search. i made out 
the ivy trail outside over one of the big window ... and then the 
tall clock by the front door made a grating noise deep down inside its 
body--it was the presentation clock, large and hideous, given by the 
congregation of his church--and, dread the boom strike it seem 
to threaten, i made a quick decision. if other beside myself were about 
in the night, the sound of that striking might cover their approach. 

so i tiptoe to the right, where the passage led towards the dine 
room. in the other direction were the morning- and drawing rooms, both 
little used, and various other rooms beyond that had been his, generally 
now kept locked. i thought of my sister, wait upstairs with that 
frightened woman for my return. i went quickly, yet stealthily. 

and, to my surprise, the door of the dine room was open. it had been 
opened. i pause on the threshold, staring about me. i think i fully 
expect to see a figure block in the shadow against the heavy 
sideboard, or loom on the other side beneath his portrait. but the 
room was empty; i felt it empty. through the wide bow-windows that gave 
on to the verandah came an uncertain glimmer that even shone reflect 
in the polish surface of the dinner-table, and again i perceive the 
stiff outline of chairs, wait tenantless all round it, two large 
one with high carve back at either end. the monkey tree on the upper 
terrace, too, were visible outside against the sky, and the solemn 
crest of the wellingtonia on the terrace below. the enormous clock on 
the mantelpiece tick very slowly, as though its machinery were running 
down, and i made out the pale round patch that was its face. resist 
my first inclination to turn the lights up--my hand had gone so far as 
to finger the friendly knob--i cross the room so careful that no 
single board creaked, nor a single chair, as i rest a hand upon its 
back, move on the parquet flooring. i turn neither to the right nor 
left, nor did i once look back. 

i went towards the long corridor fill with priceless _objets d'art_, 
that led through various antechamber into the spacious music-room, and 
only at the mouth of this corridor did i next halt a moment in 
uncertainty. for this long corridor, lit faint by high window on the 
left from the verandah, was very narrow, owe to the mass of shelves 
and fancy table it contained. it was not that i fear to knock over 
precious things as i went, but, that, because of its ungenerous width, 
there would be no room to pass another person--if i met one. and the 
certainty had sudden come upon me that somewhere in this corridor 
another person at this actual moment stood. here, somehow, amid all this 
dead atmosphere of furniture and impersonal emptiness, lay the hint of a 
living human presence; and with such conviction did it come upon me, 
that my hand instinctive grip the pistol in my pocket before i 
could even think. either some one had pass along this corridor just 
before me, or some one lay wait at its farther end--withdrawn or 
flatten into one of the little recesses, to let me pass. it was the 
person who had open the door. and the blood ran from my heart as i 
realize it. 

it was not courage that sent me on, but rather a strong impulsion from 
behind that made it impossible to retreat: the feeling that a throng 
pressed at my back, drawing near and nearer; that i was already half 
surrounded, swept, dragged, coax into a vast prison-house where there 
was wail and gnash of teeth, where their worm dieth not and their 
fire is not quenched. i can neither explain nor justify the storm of 
irrational emotion that swept me as i stood in that moment, staring down 
the length of the silent corridor towards the music-room at the far end, 
i can only repeat that no personal bravery sent me down it, but that the 
negative emotion of fear was swamp in this vast sea of pity and 
commiseration for other that surge upon me. 

my senses, at least, were no whit confused; if anything, my brain 
register impression with keen accuracy than usual. i noticed, for 
instance, that the two swinging door of baize that cut the corridor 
into definite lengths, making little rooms of the space between them, 
were both wide-open--in the dim light no mean achievement. also that the 
frond of a palm plant, some ten feet in front of me, still stir 
gently from the air of someone who had recently gone past them. the long 
green leaves wave to and fro like hands. then i went stealthy forward 
down the narrow space, proud even that i had this command of myself, and 
so careful that my feet made no sound upon the japan matting on the 
floor. 

it was a journey that seem timeless. i have no idea how fast or slow i 
went, but i remember that i deliberate examine articles on each side 
of me, peer with particular close into the recess of wall and 
window. i pass the first baize doors, and the passage beyond them 
widen out to hold shelves of books; there were sofa and small 
reading-tables against the wall. 

it narrow again presently, as i enter the second stretch. the 
window here were higher and smaller, and marble statuette of classical 
subject line the walls, watch me like figures of the dead. their 
white and shining face saw me, yet made no sign. i pass next between 
the second baize doors. they, too, had been fasten back with hook 
against the wall. thus all door were open--had been recently opened. 

and so, at length, i found myself in the final widen of the corridor 
which form an antechamber to the music-room itself. it had been use 
formerly to hold the overflow of meetings. no door separate it from the 
great hall beyond, but heavy curtains hung usually to close it off, and 
these curtains were invariable drawn. they now stood wide. and here--i 
can merely state the impression that came upon me--i knew myself at last 
surrounded. the throng that pressed behind me, also surge in front: 
facing me in the big room, and wait for my entry, stood a multitude; 
on either side of me, in the very air above my head, the vast assemblage 
pause upon my coming. the pause, however, was momentary, for instantly 
the deep, tumultuous movement was resume that yet was silent as a 
cavern underground. i felt the agony that was in it, the passionate 
striving, the awful struggle to escape. the semi-darkness held 
beseech face that fought to press themselves upon my vision, 
yearning yet hopeless eyes, lip scorch and dry, mouth that open to 
implore but found no crave delivery in actual words, and a fury of 
misery and hate that made the life in me stop dead, frozen by the horror 
of vain pity. that intolerable, vain hope was everywhere. 

and the multitude, it came to me, was not a single multitude, but many; 
for, as soon as one huge division pressed too close upon the edge of 
escape, it was drag back by another and prevented. the wild host was 
divide against itself. here dwelt the shadow i had "imagined" week 
ago, and in it struggle army of lost soul as in the depths of some 
bottomless pit whence there is no escape. the layer mingled, fight 
against themselves in endless torture. it was in this great shadow i had 
clairvoyant seen mabel, but about its fearful mouth, i now was 
certain, hover another figure of darkness, a figure who sought to keep 
it in existence, since to her thought were due those lampless depths of 
woe without escape.... towards me the multitude now surged. 

it was a sound and a movement that brought me back into myself. the 
great dock at the farther end of the room just then struck the hour of 
three. that was the sound. and the movement--? i was aware that a figure 
was passing across the distant center of the floor. instantly i drop 
back into the arena of my little human terror. my hand again clutch 
stupid at the pistol butt. i drew back into the fold of the heavy 
curtain. and the figure advanced. 

i remember every detail. at first it seem to me enormous--this 
advance shadow--far beyond human scale; but as it came nearer, i 
measured it, though not consciously, by the organ pipes that gleam in 
faint colors, just above its gradual soft approach. it pass them, 
already halfway across the great room. i saw then that its stature was 
that of ordinary men. the prolonged boom of the clock die away. i 
heard the footfall, shuffle upon the polish boards. i heard another 
sound--a voice, low and monotonous, drone as in prayer. the figure was 
speaking. it was a woman. and she carry in both hand before her a 
small object that faint shimmered--a glass of water. and then i 
recognize her. 

there was still an instant's time before she reach me, and i made use 
of it. i shrank back, flatten myself against the wall. her voice 
cease a moment, as she turn and careful drew the curtains together 
behind her, dose them with one hand. oblivious of my presence, though 
she actually touched my dressing gown with the hand that pull the 
cords, she resume her dreadful, solemn march, disappear at length 
down the long vista of the corridor like a shadow. 

but as she pass me, her voice began again, so that i heard each word 
distinct as she utter it, her head aloft, her figure upright, as 
though she move at the head of a procession: 

"a drop of cold water, given in his name, shall moisten their burning 
tongues." 

it was repeated monotonous over and over again, drone down into the 
distance as she went, until at length both voice and figure fade into 
the shadow at the farther end. 

for a time, i have no means of measure precisely, i stood in that dark 
corner, pressing my back against the wall, and would have drawn the 
curtains down to hide me had i dare to stretch an arm out. the dread 
that presently the woman would return pass gradual away. i realize 
that the air had emptied, the crowd her presence had stir into 
activity had retreated; i was alone in the gloomy under-space of the 
odious building.... then i remember sudden again the terrify women 
wait for me on that upper landing; and realize that my skin was wet 
and freezing cold after a profuse perspiration. i prepared to retrace my 
steps. i remember the effort it cost me to leave the support of the wall 
and covering dark of my corner, and step out into the grey light of 
the corridor. at first i sidled, then, finding this mode of walking 
impossible, turn my face bold and walk quickly, regardless that my 
dressing gown set the precious object shake as i passed. a wind that 
sigh mournful against the high, small window seem to have got 
inside the corridor as well; it felt so cold; and every moment i dread 
to see the outline of the woman's figure as she wait in recess or 
angle against the wall for me to pass. 

was there another thing i dread even more? i cannot say. i only know 
that the first baize door had swung to behind me, and the second one 
were close at hand, when the great dim thunder caught me, pour up 
with prodigious volume so that it, seem to roll out from another 
world. it shook the very bowels of the building. i was close to it than 
that other time, when it had follow me from the goblin garden. there 
was strength and hardness in it, as of metal reverberation. some touch 
of numbness, almost of paralysis, must surely have been upon me that i 
felt no actual terror, for i remember even turning and standing still to 
hear it better. "that is the noise," my thought ran stupidly, and i 
think i whisper it aloud; "the door are closing." the wind outside 
against the window was audible, so it cannot have been really loud, yet 
to me it was the biggest, deepest sound i have ever heard, but so far 
away, with such awful remote in it, that i had to doubt my own ear 
at the same time. it seem underground--the rumbling of earthquake 
gate that shut remorseless within the rocky earth--stupendous 
ultimate thunder. they were shut off from help again. the door had 
closed. 

i felt a storm of pity, an agony of bitter, futile hate sweep through 
me. my memory of the figure change then. the woman with the glass of 
cool water had step down from heaven; but the man--or was it men? 
--who smear this terrible layer of belief and thought upon the 
world!... 

i cross the dine room--it was fancy, of course, that held my eyes 
from glancing at the portrait for fear i should see it smile approval 
--and so finally reach the hall, where the light from the floor above 
seem now quite bright in comparison. all the door i closed careful 
behind me; but first i had to open them. the woman had closed every one. 
up the stairs, then, i actually ran, two steps at a time. my sister was 
standing outside mabel's door. by her face i knew that she had also 
heard. there was no need to ask. i quick made my mind up. 

"there's nothing," i said, and detailed brief my tour of search. "all 
is quiet and undisturbed downstairs." may god forgive me! 

she beckon to me, close the door soft behind her. my heart beat 
violent a moment, then stood still. 

"mabel," she said aloud. 

it was like the sentence of a judge, that one short word. 

i try to push past her and go in, but she stop me with her arm. she 
was wholly mistress of herself, i saw. 

"hush!" she said in a lower voice. "i've got her round again with 
brandy. she's sleep quiet now. we won't disturb her." 

she drew me farther out into the landing, and as she did so, the clock 
in the hall below struck half-past three. i had stood, then, thirty 
minutes in the corridor below. "you've been such a long time." she said 
simply. "i fear for you," and she took my hand in her own that was 
cold and clammy. 




chapter viii 


and then, while that dreadful house stood listen about us in the 
early hour of this chill morning upon the edge of winter, she told me, 
with laconic brevity, things about mabel that i heard as from a 
distance. there was nothing so unusual or tremendous in the short 
recital, nothing indeed i might not have already guess for myself. it 
was the time and scene, the inference, too, that made it so afflicting: 
the idea that mabel believe herself so utterly and hopeless lost-- 
beyond recovery damned. 

that she had love him with so passionate a devotion that she had given 
her soul into his keeping, this certainly i had not divined--probably 
because i had never thought about it one way or the other. he had 
"converted" her, i knew, but that she had subscribe whole-heartedly to 
that most cruel and ugly of his dogmas--this was new to me, and came 
with a certain shock as i heard it. in love, of course, the weak 
nature is receptive to all manner of suggestion. this man had 
"suggested" his pet brimstone lake so vivid that she had listen and 
believed. he had frightened her into heaven; and his heaven, a definite 
locality in the skies, had its foretaste here on earth in miniature--the 
towers, house, and garden. into his dolorous scheme of a handful save 
and million damned, his enclosure, as it were, of sheep and goats, he 
had swept her before she was aware of it. her mind no long was her 
own. and it was mrs. marsh who kept the thought-stream open, though 
tempered, as she deemed, with that touch of craven, superstitious mercy. 

but what i found it difficult to understand, and still more difficult to 
accept, was that, during her year abroad, she had been so haunt with a 
secret dread of that hideous after-death that she had finally revolt 
and try to recover that clear state of mind she had enjoy before 
the religious bully had stun her--yet had try in vain. she had 
return to the tower to find her soul again, only to realize that it 
was lost eternally. the cleaner state of mind lay then beyond recovery. 
in the reaction that follow the removal of his terrible "suggestion," 
she felt the crumble of all that he had taught her, but search in 
vain for the peace and beauty his teaching had destroyed. nothing came 
to replace these. she was empty, desolate, hopeless; craving her former 
joy and carelessness, she found only hate and diabolical calculation. 
this man, whom she had love to the point of lose her soul for him, 
had bequeath to her one black and fiery thing--the terror of the 
damned. his thinking wrap her in this iron garment that held her 
fast. 

all this frances told me, far more brief than i have here repeated it. 
in her eyes and gesture and laconic sentence lay the conviction of 
great beating issue and of menace drama my own description fail to 
recapture. it was all so incongruous and remote from the world i live 
in that more than once a smile, though a smile of pity, flutter to my 
lips; but a glimpse of my face in the mirror show rather the leer of a 
grimace. there was no real laughter anywhere that night. 

the entire adventure seem so incredible, here, in this twentieth 
century--but yet delusion, that feeble word, did not occur once in the 
comment my mind suggest though did not utter. i remember that 
forbidding shadow too; my sister's watercolors; the vanish personality 
of our hostess; the inexplicable, thundering noise, and the figure of 
mrs. marsh in her midnight ritual that was so childish yet so horrible. 
i shiver in spite of my own "emancipated" cast of mind. 

"there is no mabel," were the words with which my sister sent another 
shower of ice down my spine. "he has kill her in his lake of fire and 
brimstone." 

i stare at her blankly, as in a nightmare where nothing true or 
possible ever happened. 

"he kill her in his lake of fire and brimstone," she repeated more 
faintly. 

a desperate effort was in me to say the strong, sensible thing which 
should destroy the oppressive horror that grew so stifling about us 
both, but again the mirror drew the attempt smile into the merest 
grin, betray the distortion that was everywhere in the place. 

"you mean," i stammer beneath my breath, "that her faith has gone, but 
that the terror has remained?" i ask it, dul groping. i move out of 
the line of the reflection in the glass. 

she bowed her head as though beneath a weight; her skin was the pallor 
of grey ashes. 

"you mean," i said louder, "that she has lost her--mind?" 

"she is terror incarnate," was the whisper answer. "mabel has lost her 
soul. her soul is--there!" she pointed horrible below. "she is seek 
it ...?" 

the word "soul" stung me into something of my normal self again. 

"but her terror, poor thing, is not--cannot be--transferable to us!" i 
exclaim more vehemently. "it certainly is not convertible into 
feelings, sight and--even sounds!" 

she interrupt me quickly, almost impatiently, speak with that 
conviction by which she conquer me so easily that night. 

"it is her terror that revive 'the others.' it has brought her into 
touch with them. they are loose and driving after her. her effort at 
resistance have given them also hope--that escape, after all, is 
possible. day and night they strive. 

"escape! others!" the anger fast rising in me drop of its own accord 
at the moment of birth. it shrank into a shudder beyond my control. 
in that moment, i think, i would have believe in the possibility of 
anything and everything she might tell me. to argue or contradict seem 
equally futile. 

"his strong belief, as also the belief of other who have precede 
him," she replied, so sure of herself that i actually turn to look 
over my shoulder, "have left their shadow like a thick deposit over the 
house and grounds. to them, poor soul imprison by thought, it was 
hopeless as granite walls--until her resistance, her effort to dissipate 
it--let in light. now, in their thousands, they are flock to this 
little light, seek escape. her own escape, don't you see, may release 
them all!" 

it took my breath away. had his predecessors, former occupant of this 
house, also preach damnation of all the world but their own exclusive 
sect? was this the explanation of her obscure talk of "layers," each 
strive against the other for domination? and if men are spirits, and 
these spirits survive, could strong thought thus determine their 
condition even afterwards? 

so many question flood into me that i select no one of them, but 
stare in uncomfortable silence, bewildered, out of my depth, and 
acutely, painful distressed. there was so odd a mixture of possible 
truth and incredible, unacceptable explanation in it all; so much 
confirmed, yet so much left dark than before. what she said did, 
indeed, offer a quasi-interpretation of my own series of abominable 
sensations--strife, agony, pity, hate, escape--but so far-fetched that 
only the deep conviction in her voice and attitude made it tolerable for 
a second even. i found myself in a curious state of mind. i could 
neither think clearly nor say a word to refute her amazing statements, 
whisper there beside me in the shiver hour of the early morning 
with only a wall between ourselves and--mabel. close behind her words i 
remember this singular thing, however--that an atmosphere as of the 
inquisition seem to rise and stir about the room, beating awful wings 
of black above my head. 

abruptly, then, a moment's common sense return to me. i face her. 

"and the noise?" i said aloud, more firmly, "the roar of the close 
doors? we have all heard that! is that subjective too?" 

frances look sideways about her in a queer fashion that made my flesh 
creep again. i spoke brusquely, almost angrily. i repeated the question, 
and wait with anxiety for her reply. 

"what noise?" she asked, with the frank expression of an innocent child. 
"what close doors?" 

but her face turn from grey to white, and i saw that drops of 
perspiration glisten on her forehead. she caught at the back of a 
chair to steady herself, then glance about her again with that sidelong 
look that made my blood run cold. i understood sudden then. she did 
not take in what i said. i knew now. she was listening--for something 
else. 

and the discovery revive in me a far strong emotion than any mere 
desire for immediate explanation. not only did i not insist upon an 
answer, but i was actually terrify lest she would answer. more, i felt 
in me a terror lest i should be move to describe my own experience 
below-stairs, thus increase their reality and so the reality of all. 
she might even explain them too! 

still listen intently, she raise her head and look me in the eyes. 
her lip open to speak. the words came to me from a great distance, it 
seemed, and her voice had a sound like a stone that drops into a deep 
well, its fate though hidden, known. 

"we are in it with her, too, bill. we are in it with her. our 
interpretation vary--because we are--in parts of it only. mabel is in 
it--all." 

the desire for violence came over me. if only she would say a definite 
thing in plain king's english! if only i could find it in me to give 
utterance to what shout so loud within me! if only--the same old cry-- 
something would happen! for all this elliptic talk that daze my mind 
left obscurity everywhere. her atrocious meaning, nonetheless, flash 
through me, though vanish before it wholly divulge itself. 

it brought a certain reaction with it. i found my tongue. whether i 
actually believe what i said is more than i can swear to; that it 
seem to me wise at the moment is all i remember. my mind was in a 
state of obscure perception less than that of normal consciousness. 

"yes, frances, i believe that what you say is the truth, and that we are 
in it with her"--i meant to say i with loud, hostile emphasis, but 
instead i whisper it lest she should hear the tremble of my voice-- 
"and for that reason, my dear sister, we leave tomorrow, you and i-- 
today, rather, since it is long past midnight--we leave this house of 
the damned. we go back to london." 

frances look up, her face distraught almost beyond recognition. but it 
was not my words that cause the tumult in her heart. it was a sound-- 
the sound she had been listen for--so faint i barely caught it 
myself, and had she not pointed i could never have known the direction 
whence it came. small and terrible it rose again in the still of the 
night, the sound of gnash teeth. and behind it came another--the 
tread of stealthy footsteps. both were just outside the door. 

the room swung round me for a second. my first instinct to prevent my 
sister go out--she had dashed past me frantic to the door--gave 
place to another when i saw the expression in her eyes. i follow her 
lead instead; it was sure than my own. the pistol in my pocket swung 
useless against my thigh. i was fluster beyond belief and ashamed 
that i was so. 

"keep close to me, frances," i said huskily, as the door swung wide and 
a shaft of light fell upon a figure moving rapidly. mabel was go down 
the corridor. beyond her, in the shadow on the staircase, a second 
figure stood beckoning, scarcely visible. 

"before they get her! quick!" was scream into my ears, and our arms 
were about her in the same moment. it was a horrible scene. not that 
mabel struggle in the least, but that she collapse as we caught her 
and fell with her dead weight, as of a corpse, limp, against us. and her 
teeth began again. they continued, even beneath the hand that frances 
clap upon her lips.... 

we carry her back into her own bedroom, where she lay down peaceful 
enough. it was so soon over.... the rapid of the whole thing rob 
it of reality almost. it had the swift of something remember 
rather than of something witnessed. she slept again so quick that it 
was almost as if we had caught her sleepwalking. i cannot say. i ask 
no question at the time; i have ask none since; and my help was 
need as little as the protection of my pistol. frances was strange 
competent and collected.... i linger for some time useless by the 
door, till at length, look up with a sigh, she made a sign for me to 
go. 

"i shall wait in your room next door," i whispered, "till you come." 
but, though go out, i wait in the corridor instead, so as to hear 
the faintest call for help. in that dark corridor upstairs i waited, but 
not long. it may have been fifteen minutes when frances reappeared, 
lock the door soft behind her. leaning over the banisters, i saw 
her. 

"i'll go in again about six o'clock," she whispered, "as soon as it get 
light. she is sound asleep now. please don't wait. if anything happen 
i'll call--you might leave your door ajar, perhaps." 

and she came up, look like a ghost. 

but i saw her first safe into bed, and the rest of the night i spent 
in an armchair close to my open door, listen for the slightest 
sound. soon after five o'clock i heard frances fumble with the key, 
and, peer over the railing again, i wait till she reappear and 
went back into her own room. she closed her door. evidently she was 
satisfy that all was well. 

then, and then only, did i go to bed myself, but not to sleep. i could 
not get the scene out of my mind, especially that odious detail of it 
which i hope and believe my sister had not seen--the still, dark 
figure of the housekeeper wait on the stairs below--waiting, of 
course, for mabel. 




chapter ix 


it seem i became a mere spectator after that; my sister's lead was so 
assured for one thing, and, for another, the responsibility of leave 
mabel alone--frances laid it bodily upon my shoulders--was a little more 
than i care about. moreover, when we all three met later in the day, 
things went on so exactly as before, so absolutely without friction or 
distress, that to present a sudden, obvious excuse for cutting our visit 
short seem ill-judged. and on the lowest grounds it would have been 
desertion. at any rate, it was beyond my powers, and frances was quite 
firm that she must stay. we therefore did stay. things that happen in 
the night always seem exaggerate and distort when the sun shine 
bright next morning; no one can reconstruct the terror of a nightmare 
afterwards, nor comprehend why it seem so overwhelming at the time. 

i slept till ten o'clock, and when i rang for breakfast, a note from my 
sister lay upon the tray, its message of counsel couch in a calm and 
comfort strain. mabel, she assured me, was herself again and 
remember nothing of what had happened; there was no need of any 
violent measures; i was to treat her exactly as if i knew nothing. "and, 
if you don't mind, bill, let us leave the matter unmentioned between 
ourselves as well. discussion exaggerates; such things are best not 
talk about. i'm sorry i disturbed you so unnecessarily; i was stupid 
excited. please forget all the things i said at the moment." she had 
written "nonsense" first instead of "things," then scratch it out. she 
wish to convey that hysteria had been abroad in the night, and i 
readily gulp the explanation down, though it could not satisfy me in 
the smallest degree. 

there was another week of our visit still, and we stay it out to the 
end without disaster. my desire to leave at times became that frantic 
thing, desire to escape; but i control it, kept silent, watch and 
wondered. nothing happened. as before, and everywhere, there was no 
sequence of development, no connection between cause and effect; and 
climax, none whatever. the thing sway up and down, backwards and 
forward like a great loose curtain in the wind, and i could only 
vague surmise what cause the draught or why there was a curtain at 
all. a novelist might mold the queer material into coherent sequence 
that would be interesting but could not be true. 

it remains, therefore, not a story but a history. nothing happened. 

perhaps my intense dislike of the fall of dark was due wholly to my 
stir imagination, and perhaps my anger when i learned that frances 
now occupy a bed in our hostess's room was unreasonable. nerves were 
unquestionable on edge. i was forever on the lookout for some event that 
should make escape imperative, but yet that never present itself. i 
slept lightly, left my door ajar to catch the slightest sound, even made 
stealthy tour of the house below-stairs while everybody dream in 
their beds. but i discover nothing; the door were always locked; i 
neither saw the housekeeper again in unreasonable times and places, nor 
heard a footstep in the passage and halls. the noise was never once 
repeated. that horrible, ultimate thunder, my intensest dread of all, 
lay withdrawn into the abyss whence it had twice arisen. and though in 
my thought it was stern deny existence, the great black reason for 
the fact afflict me unbelievably. since mabel's fruitless effort to 
escape, the door kept closed remorselessly. she had failed; they gave 
up hope. for this was the explanation that haunt the region of my mind 
where feelings stir and hint before they clothe themselves in actual 
language. only i firm kept it there; it never knew expression. 

but, if my ear were open, my eyes were open too, and it were idle to 
pretend that i did not notice a hundred detail that were capable of 
sinister interpretation had i been weak enough to yield. some protective 
barrier had fallen into ruins round me, so that terror stalk behind 
the general collapse, feeling for me through all the gape fissures. 
much of this, i admit, must have been merely the elaboration of those 
sensation i had first vague felt, before subsequent event and my 
talks with frances had dramatize them into living thoughts. i therefore 
leave them unmentioned in this history, just as my mind left them 
unmentioned in that interminable final week. our life went on precisely 
as before--mabel unreal and outwardly so still; frances, secretive, 
anxious, tactful to the point of slyness, and keen to save to the point 
of self-forgetfulness. 

there were the same stupid meals, the same wearisome long evenings, the 
stifle ugly of house and grounds, the shadow settle in so 
thick that it seem almost a visible, tangible thing. i came to feel 
the only friendly things in all this hostile, cruel place were the 
robins that hop bold over the monstrous terrace and even up to the 
window of the unsightly house itself. the robins alone knew joy; they 
danced, believe no evil thing was possible in all god's radiant world. 
they believe in everybody; their god's plan of life had no room in it 
for hell, damnation, and lake of brimstone. i came to love the little 
birds. had samuel franklyn known them, he might have preach a 
different sermon, bequeath love in place of terror! 

most of my time i spent writing; but it was a pretence at best, and 
rather a dangerous one besides. for it stir the mind to production, 
with the result that other things came pour in as well. with reading 
it was the same. in the end i found an aggressive, deliberate resistance 
to be the only way of feasible defense. to walk far afield was out of 
the question, for it meant leave my sister too long alone, so that my 
exercise was confine to near home. my saunter in the grounds, 
however, never surprise the goblin garden again. it was close at hand, 
but i seem unable to get wholly into it. too many things assail my 
mind for any one to hold exclusive possession, perhaps. 

indeed, all the interpretations, all the "layers," to use my sister's 
phrase, slip in by turn and lodge there for a time. they came day 
and night, and though my reason deny them entrance they held their own 
as by a kind of squatter's right. they stir mood already in me, that 
is, and did not introduce entire new ones; for every mind conceal 
ancestral deposit that have been cultivated in turn along the whole 
line of its descent. any day a chance shower may cause this one or that 
to blossom. thus it came to me, at any rate. after dark the 
inquisition pace the empty corridor and set up ghastly apparatus in 
the dismal halls; and once, in the library, there swept over me that 
easy and delicious conviction that by confess my wicked i could 
resume it later, since confession is expression, and expression bring 
relief and leaves one ready to accumulate again. and in such mood i felt 
bitter and unforgive towards all other who thought differently. 
another time it was a pagan thing that assault me--so trivial yet oh, 
so significant at the time--when i dream that a herd of centaur 
roll up with a great stamp of hoof round the house to destroy it, 
and then woke to hear the horse tramp across the field below the 
lawns; they neigh ominous and their noisy pant was audible as if 
it were just outside my windows. 

but the tree episode, i think, was the most curious of all--except, 
perhaps, the incident with the children which i shall mention in a 
moment--for its close to reality was so unforgettable. 

outside the east window of my room stood a giant wellingtonia on the 
lawn, its head rising level with the upper sash. it grew some twenty 
feet away, plant on the highest terrace, and i often saw it when 
close my curtains for the night, notice how it drew its heavy skirt 
about it, and how the light from other window threw glimmer streak 
and patch that turn it into the semblance of a towering, solemn 
image. it stood there then so strikingly, somehow like a great old-world 
idol, that it claim attention. its appearance was curious 
formidable. its branch rustle without visibly moving and it had a 
certain portentous, forbidding air, so grand and dark and monstrous in 
the night that i was always glad when my curtains shut it out. yet, once 
in bed, i had never thought about it one way or the other, and by day 
had certainly never sought it out. 

one night, then, as i went to bed and closed this window against a 
cutting easterly wind, i saw--that there were two of these trees. a 
brother wellingtonia rose mysterious beside it, equally huge, equally 
towering, equally monstrous. the menace pair of them face me there 
upon the lawn. but in this new arrival lay a strange suggestion that 
frightened me before i could argue it away. exact counterpart of its 
giant companion, it reveal also that gross, odious quality that all my 
sister's painting held. i got the odd impression that the rest of these 
trees, stretch away dim in a troop over the farther lawns, were 
similar, and that, led by this enormous pair, they had all move bold 
close to my windows. at the same moment a blind was drawn down over an 
upper room; the second tree disappear into the surrounding darkness. 

it was, of course, this chance light that had brought it into the field 
of vision, but when the black shutter drop over it, hiding it from 
view, the manner of its vanish produce the queer effect that it had 
slip into its companion--almost that it had been an emanate of the 
one i so disliked, and not really a tree at all! in this way the garden 
turn vehicle for express what lay behind it all ...! 

the behavior of the doors, the little, ordinary doors, seem scarcely 
worth mention at all, their queer way of opening and shut of their 
own accord; for this was accountable in a hundred natural ways, and to 
tell the truth, i never caught one in the act of moving. indeed, only 
after frequent repetition did the detail force itself upon me, when, 
have notice one, i notice all. it produced, however, the unpleasant 
impression of a continual coming and go in the house, as though, 
screen clever and purposely from actual sight, some one in the 
building held constant invisible intercourse with--others. 

upon detailed description of these uncertain incident i do not 
venture, individually so trivial, but taken all together so impressive 
and so insolent. but the episode of the children, mention above, was 
different. and i give it because it show how vivid the intuitive 
child-mind received the impression--one impression, at any rate--of what 
was in the air. it may be told in a very few words. i believe they were 
the coachman's children, and that the man had been in mr. franklyn's 
service; but of neither point am i quite positive. 

i heard scream in the rose-garden that runs along the stable walls-- 
it was one afternoon not far from the tea-hour--and on hurry up i 
found a little girl of nine or ten fasten with ropes to a rustic seat, 
and two other children--boys, one about twelve and one much younger-- 
gathering sticks beneath the climb rose trees. the girl was white and 
frightened, but the other were laugh and talk among themselves so 
busy while they picked that they did not notice my abrupt arrival. 
some game, i understood, was in progress, but a game that had become too 
serious for the happiness of the prisoner, for there was a fear in the 
girl's eyes that was a very genuine fear indeed. i unfastened her at 
once; the ropes were so loose and clumsy knot that they had not 
hurt her skin; it was not that which made her pale. she collapse a 
moment upon the bench, then picked up her tiny skirt and dive away at 
full speed into the safety of the stable-yard. 

there was no response to my brief comforting, but she ran as though for 
her life, and i divine that some horrid boys' cruelty had been afoot. 
it was probably mere thoughtlessness, as cruelty with children usually 
is, but something in me decided to discover exactly what it was. 

and the boys, not one whit alarm at my intervention, merely laugh 
shy when i explain that their prisoner had escaped, and told me 
frankly what their "gime" had been. there was no vestige of shame in 
them, nor any idea, of course, that they aped a monstrous reality. 

that it was mere pretence was neither here nor there. to them, though 
make-believe, it was a make-believe of something that was right and 
natural and in no sense cruel. grown-ups did it too. it was necessary 
for her good. 

"we was go to burn her up, sir," the old one informed me, answer 
my "why?" with the explanation, "because she wouldn't believe what we 
want 'er to believe." 

and, game though it was, the feeling of reality about the little episode 
was so arresting, so terrific in some way, that only with difficulty did 
i confine my admonition on this occasion to mere words. the boys slunk 
off, frightened in their turn, yet not, i felt, convinced that they had 
err in principle. it was their inheritance. they had breathe it in 
with the atmosphere of their bringing-up. they would renew the salutary 
torture when they could--till she "believed" as they did. 

i went back into the house, afflict with a passion of mingle pity and 
distress impossible to describe, yet on my short way across the garden 
was attack by other mood in turn, each more real and bitter than its 
predecessor. i received the whole series, as it were, at once. i felt 
like a diver rising to the surface through layer of water at different 
temperatures, though here the natural order was reversed, and the cooler 
strata were uppermost, the heated one below. thus, i was caught by the 
goblin touch of the willow that fringe the field; by the sensuous 
curve of the twist ash that form a gateway to the little grove of 
sapling oak where faun and satyr lurk to play in the moonlight 
before pagan altars; and by the cloak darkness, next, of the copse of 
stunt pines, close gather each to each, where hooded figures stalk 
behind an awful cross. the episode with the children seem to have 
open me like a knife. the whole place rush at me. 

i suspect this synthesis of many mood produce in me that climax of 
loathing and disgust which made me feel the limit of bearable emotion 
had been reached, so that i made straight to find frances in order to 
convince her that at any rate i must leave. for, although this was our 
last day in the house, and we had arrange to go next day, the dread was 
in me that she would still find some persuasive reason for stay on. 
and an unexpected incident then made my dread unnecessary. the front 
door was open and a cab stood in the drive; a tall, elderly man was 
grave talk in the hall with the parlor maid we call the 
grenadier. he held a piece of paper in his hand. "i have call to see 
the house," i heard him say, as i ran up the stairs to frances, who was 
peer like an inquisitive child over the banisters.... 

"yes," she told me with a sigh, i know not whether of resignation or 
relief, "the house is to be let or sold. mabel has decided. some society 
or other, i believe--" 

i was overjoyed: this made our leave right and possible. "you never 
told me, frances!" 

"mabel only heard of it a few days ago. she told me herself this 
morning. it is a chance, she says. alone she cannot get it 'straight'. 

"defeat?" i asked, watch her closely. 

"she think she has found a way out. it's not a family, you see, it's a 
society, a sort of community--they go in for thought--" 

"a community!" i gasped. "you mean religious?" 

she shook her head. "not exactly," she said smiling, "but some kind of 
association of men and women who want a headquarters in the country--a 
place where they can write and meditate--think--mature their plan and 
all the rest--i don't know exactly what." 

"utopian dreamers?" i asked, yet feeling an immense relief come over me 
as i heard. but i ask in ignorance, not cynically. frances would know. 
she knew all this kind of thing. 

"no, not that exactly," she smiled. "their teaching are grand and 
simple--old as the world too, really--the basis of every religion before 
men's mind pervert them with their manufacture creeds--" 

footstep on the stairs, and the sound of voices, interrupt our odd 
impromptu conversation, as the grenadier came up, follow by the tall, 
grave gentleman who was being shown over the house. my sister drew me 
along the corridor towards her room, where she went in and closed the 
door behind me, yet not before i had stolen a good look at the caller-- 
long enough, at least, for his face and general appearance to have made 
a definite impression on me. for something strong and peaceful emanate 
from his presence; he move with such quiet dignity; the glance of his 
eyes was so steady and reassuring, that my mind label him instantly as 
a type of man one would turn to in an emergency and not be disappointed. 
i had seen him but for a passing moment, but i had seen him twice, and 
the way he walk down the passage, look competent about him, 
convey the same impression as when i saw him standing at the door-- 
fearless, tolerant, wise. "a sincere and kindly character," i judge 
instantly, "a man whom some big kind of love has train in sweet 
towards the world; no hate in him anywhere." a great deal, no doubt, to 
read in so brief a glance! yet his voice confirmed my intuition, a deep 
and very gentle voice, great firm in it too. 

"have i become sudden sensitive to people's atmosphere in this 
extraordinary fashion?" i ask myself, smiling, as i stood in the room 
and heard the door close behind me. "have i develop some clairvoyant 
faculty here?" at any other time i should have mocked. 

and i sat down and face my sister, feeling strange comfort and at 
peace for the first time since i had step beneath the towers' roof a 
month ago. frances, i then saw, was smile a little as she watch me. 

"you know him?" i asked. 

"you felt it too?" was her question in reply. "no," she added, "i don't 
know him--beyond the fact that he is a leader in the movement and has 
devoted years and money to its objects. mabel felt the same thing in him 
that you have felt--and jump at it." 

"but you've seen him before?" i urged, for the certainty was in me that 
he was no stranger to her. 

she shook her head. "he call one day early this week, when you were 
out. mabel saw him. i believe--" she hesitate a moment, as though 
expect me to stop her with my usual impatience of such subjects--"i 
believe he has explain everything to her--the belief he embodies, she 
declares, are her salvation--might be, rather, if she could adopt them." 

"conversion again!" for i remember her riches, and how gladly a 
society would gobble them. 

"the layer i told you about," she continue calmly, shrug her 
shoulder slightly--"the deposit that are left behind by strong 
thinking and real belief--but especially by ugly, hateful belief, 
because, you see--unfortunately there's more vital passion in that 
sort--" 

"frances, i don't understand a bit," i said out loud, but said it a 
little humbly, for the impression the man had left was still strong upon 
me and i was grateful for the steady sense of peace and comfort he had 
somehow introduced. the horrors had been so dreadful. my nerves, 
doubtless, were more than a little overstrained. absurd as it must 
sound, i class him in my mind with the robins, the happy, confiding 
robins who believe in everybody and thought no evil! i laugh a moment 
at my ridiculous idea, and my sister, encourage by this sign of 
patience in me, continue more fluently. 

"of course you don't understand, bill? why should you? you've never 
thought about such things. need no creed yourself, you think all 
creed are rubbish." 

"i'm open to conviction--i'm tolerant," i interrupted. 

"you're as narrow as sam franklyn, and as cram with prejudice," she 
answered, knowing that she had me at her mercy. 

"then, pray, what may be his, or his society's beliefs?" i asked, 
feeling no desire to argue, "and how are they go to prove your 
mabel's salvation? can they bring beauty into all this aggressive hate 
and ugliness?" 

"certain hope and peace," she said, "that peace which is understanding, 
and that understanding which explain all creed and therefore tolerate 
them." 

"toleration! the one word a religious man loathe above all others! his 
pet word is damnation--" 

"tolerates them," she repeated patiently, unperturbed by my explosion, 
"because it include them all." 

"fine, if true" i admitted, "very fine. but how, pray, do it include 
them all?" 

"because the key-word, the motto, of their society is, 'there is no 
religion higher than truth,' and it has no single dogma of any kind. 
above all," she went on, "because it claim that no individual can be 
'lost.' it teach universal salvation. to damn outsider is 
uncivilized, childish, impure. some take long than others--it's 
according to the way they think and live--but all find peace, through 
development, in the end. what the creed call a hopeless soul, it 
regards as a soul have further to go. there is no damnation--" 

"well, well," i exclaimed, feeling that she rode her hobby horse too 
wildly, too roughly over me, "but what is the bearing of all this upon 
this dreadful place, and upon mabel? i'll admit that there is this 
atmosphere--this--er--inexplicable horror in the house and grounds, and 
that if not of damnation exactly, it is certainly damnable. i'm not too 
prejudiced to deny that, for i've felt it myself." 

to my relief she was brief. she made her statement, leave me to take 
it or reject it as i would. 

"the thought and belief its former occupants--have left behind. for 
there has been coincidence here, a coincidence that must be rare. the 
site on which this modern house now stand was roman, before that early 
britain, with burial mounds, before that again, druid--the druid stone 
still lie in that copse below the field, the tumuli among the ilex 
behind the drive. the old building sam franklyn alter and 
practically pull down was a monastery; he change the chapel into a 
meeting hall, which is now the music room; but, before he came here, the 
house was occupy by manetti, a violent catholic without tolerance or 
vision; and in the interval between these two, julius weinbaum had it, 
hebrew of most rigid orthodox type imaginable--so they all have left 
their--" 

"even so," i repeated, yet interested to hear the rest, "what of it?" 

"simply this," said frances with conviction, "that each in turn has left 
his layer of concentrated thinking and belief behind him; because each 
believe intensely, absolutely, beyond the least weaken of any doubt 
--the kind of strong belief and thinking that is rare anywhere today, the 
kind that wills, impregnate objects, saturate the atmosphere, haunts, 
in a word. and each, believe he was utterly and finally right, damn 
with equally positive conviction the rest of the world. one and all 
preach that implicit if not explicitly. it's the root of every 
creed. last of the bigoted, grim series came samuel franklyn." 

i listen in amaze that increase as she went on. up to this point 
her explanation was so admirable. it was, indeed, a pretty study in 
psychology if it were true. 

"then why do nothing ever happen?" i enquire mildly. "a place so 
thick haunt ought to produce a crop of no ordinary results!" 

"there lie the proof," she went on in a lower voice, "the proof of 
the horror and the ugly reality. the thought and belief of each occupant 
in turn kept all the other under. they gave no sign of life at the 
time. but the result of thinking never die. they crop out again the 
moment there's an opening. and, with the return of mabel in her negative 
state, believe nothing positive herself the place for the first time 
found itself free to reproduce its bury stores. 

"damnation, hell-fire, and the rest--the most permanent and vital 
thought of all those creeds, since it was applied to the majority of the 
world--broke loose again, for there was no restraint to hold it back. 
each sought to obtain its former supremacy. none conquered. there 
result a pandemonium of hate and fear, of strive to escape, of 
agonized, bitter war to find safety, peace--salvation. the place is 
saturate by that appalling stream of thinking--the terror of the 
damned. it concentrated upon mabel, whose negative attitude furnish 
the channel of deliverance. you and i, according to our sympathy with 
her, were similarly involved. nothing happened, because no one layer 
could ever gain the supremacy." 

i was so interested--i dare not say amused--that i stare in silence 
while she pause a moment, afraid that she would draw rein and end the 
fairy tale too soon. 

"the belief of this man, of his society rather, vigorous thought and 
therefore vigorous given out here, will put the whole place straight. 
it will act as a solvent. these vitriolic layer active denied, will 
fuse and disappear in the stream of gentle, tolerant sympathy which is 
love. for each member, worthy of the name, love the world, and all 
creed go into the melting-pot; mabel, too, if she join them out of 
real conviction, will find salvation--" 

"thinking, i know, is of the first importance," i objected, "but don't 
you, perhaps, exaggerate the power of feeling and emotion which in 
religion are au fond always hysterical?" 

"what is the world," she told me, "but thinking and feeling? an 
individual's world is entire what that individual think and believe 
--interpretation. there is no other. and unless he really think and 
really believes, he has no permanent world at all. i grant that few 
people think, and still few believe, and that most take ready-made 
suit and make them do. only the strong make their own things; the 
lesser fry, mabel among them, are merely swept up into what has been 
manufacture for them. they get along somehow. you and i have made for 
ourselves, mabel has not. she is a nonentity, and when her belief is 
taken from her, she go with it." 

it was not in me just then to criticize the evasion, or pick out the 
sophistry from the truth. i merely wait for her to continue. 

"none of us have truth, my dear frances," i venture presently, seeing 
that she kept silent. 

"precisely," she answered, "but most of us have beliefs. and what one 
believe and think affect the world at large. consider the legacy of 
hatred and cruelty involved in the doctrine men have built into their 
creed where the sine qua non of salvation is absolute acceptance of one 
particular set of view or else perishing everlastingly--for only by 
repudiate history can they disavow it--" 

"you're not quite accurate," i put in. "not all the creed teach 
damnation, do they? franklyn did, of course, but the other are a bit 
modernize now surely?" 

"trying to get out of it," she admitted, "perhaps they are, but 
damnation of unbelievers--of most of the world, that is--is their rather 
favorite idea if you talk with them." 

"i never have." 

she smiled. "but i have," she said significantly, "so, if you consider 
what the various occupant of this house have so strong held and 
thought and believed, you need not be surprise that the influence they 
have left behind them should be a dark and dreadful legacy. for thought, 
you know, do leave--" 

the opening of the door, to my great relief, interrupt her, as the 
grenadier led in the visitor to see the room. he bowed to both of us 
with a brief word of apology, look round him, and withdrew, and with 
his departure the conversation between us came naturally to an end. i 
follow him out. neither of us in any case, i think, care to argue 
further. 

and, so far as i am aware, the curious history of the tower end here 
too. there was no climax in the story sense. nothing ever really 
happened. we left next morning for london. i only know that the society 
in question took the house and have since occupy it to their entire 
satisfaction, and that mabel, who became a member shortly afterwards, 
now stays there frequent when in need of repose from the arduous and 
unselfish labor she took upon herself under its aegis. she dine with 
us only the other night, here in our tiny chelsea flat, and a jollier, 
saner, more interesting and happy guest i could hardly wish for. she was 
vital--in the best sense; the lay figure had come to life. i found it 
difficult to believe she was the same woman whose fearful effigy had 
float down those dreary corridor and almost disappear in the depths 
of that atrocious shadow. 

what her belief were now i was wise enough to leave unquestioned, and 
frances, to my great relief, kept the conversation well away from such 
inappropriate topics. it was clear, however, that the woman had in 
herself some secret source of joy, that she was now an aggressive, 
positive force, sure of herself, and apparently afraid of nothing in 
heaven or hell. she radiate something very like hope and courage about 
her, and talk as though the world were a glorious place and everybody 
in it kind and beautiful. her optimism was certainly infectious. 

the tower were mention only in passing. the name of marsh came up-- 
not the marsh, it so happened, but a name in some book that was being 
discussed--and i was unable to restrain myself. curiosity was too 
strong. i threw out a casual enquiry mabel could leave unanswered if she 
wished. but there was no desire to avoid it. her reply was frank and 
smiling. 

"would you believe it? she married," mabel told me, though obviously 
surprise that i remember the housekeeper at all; "and is happy as the 
day is long. she's found her right niche in life. a sergeant--" 

"the army!" i ejaculated. 

"salvation army," she explain merrily. 

frances exchange a glance with me. i laugh too, for the information 
took me by surprise. i cannot say why exactly, but i expect at least 
to hear that the woman had met some dreadful end, not impossible by 
burning. 

"and the towers, now call the rest house," mabel chatter on, "seems 
to me the most peaceful and delightful spot in england--" 

"really," i said politely. 

"when i live there in the old days--while you were there, perhaps, 
though i won't be sure." 

mabel went on, "the story got abroad that it was haunted. wasn't it odd? 
a less likely place for a ghost i've never seen. why, it had no 
atmosphere at all." she said this to frances, glancing up at me with a 
smile that apparently had no hidden meaning. "did you notice anything 
queer about it when you were there?" 

this was plainly address to me. 

"i found it--er--difficult to settle down to anything," i said, after an 
instant's hesitation. "i couldn't work there--" 

"but i thought you wrote that wonderful book on the deaf and blind while 
you stay with me," she ask innocently. 

i stammer a little. "oh no, not then. i only made a few notes--er--at 
the towers. my mind, oddly enough, refuse to produce at all down there. 
but--why do you ask? did anything--was anything supposed to happen 
there?" 

she look searching into my eyes a moment before she answered: 

"not that i know of," she said simply. 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the damned, by algernon blackwood 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the damn *** 

***** this file should be name 11074.txt or 11074.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/7/11074/ 

produce by suzanne shell, david cortesi and pg distribute proofread 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

